@@@@@


doc= 9321


Ferguson, James Frederic (1806-1855), antiquary, was born at Charleston, South Carolina. His father was Jacques Frederic Jaquemain of Cambrai, who left France during the revolution and assumed the name Ferguson in 1793. Six years later he went to America, and in 1800 he became deputy postmaster at Beaufort, South Carolina, where he remained until 1812. He was also a professor at the local college. After the death of his English wife, Ferguson senior became a teacher of languages in London and subsequently established a school in St Stephen's Green, Dublin. James Frederic Ferguson, the son, accompanied Samuel Cooke of Sunderland, a relative by marriage, to Dublin in 1821, having returned from Charleston to London in 1814, and was engaged with Cooke on behalf of Lord Kingsland in endeavouring to recover for that nobleman the Kingsland estates. His efforts were partially successful through his extensive research in the records of the courts of exchequer and common pleas. He next became a collaborator with William Lynch, a former clerk to the Irish record commission and author of 'Feudal Dignities in Ireland', in arranging the voluminous series 'Irish Records', perhaps after Lynch had finished his work on 'Inquisitionum in officio rotulorum cancellariae Hiberniae asservatarum repertorium' (1826). Valuable and extensive collections of documents were formed, some of which afterwards passed into the library of Sir William Betham. In 1843 he published 'Remarks on the Limitations of Actions Bill intended for Ireland; Together with Short Extracts from Ancient Records Relating to Advowsons of Churches in Ireland'. 
Ferguson's most important work was the indexing of the entire body of exchequer records in Ireland, which he completed unassisted. The indexes were purchased by the government in order to be permanently deposited in the court of exchequer. In 1850 Ferguson was appointed clerk and secretary to a commission for arranging the records of the Irish courts, and this office he held until its abolition two years later. However, by direction of the chief baron, he continued in charge of the records until his death. In 1853 he went, at his own expense, to Switzerland and Germany in order to recover some Irish records from the collection of a Swabian baron. These records proved to belong mostly to the Irish court of king's bench in the reign of Edward III, with one membrane from the reign of Edward I for the court of common pleas, and some later rolls from the reigns of Henry VI and James I; it was surmised that they had been stolen in the reign of George I, before Addison became keeper of the records in the Bermingham Tower. Ferguson bought them at his own cost, and after his death they were purchased by the government and lodged in a Dublin repository. They were subsequently placed in the Public Record Office of Ireland. A report of Ferguson's actions is contained in 'Transactions of the Kilkenny Archaeological Society' (2, 1852-3, 387-9), of which society Ferguson was Dublin corresponding member. To the same publication in 1854-5 he communicated a calendar of the contents of the 'red book' of the Irish exchequer, and in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (2nd ser., 43, 1855) he published a description of an ancient drawing of the court of exchequer contained in this manuscript calendar. To 'The Topographer and Genealogist' he communicated an account of Sir Toby Caulfeild relative to the earl of Tyrone and other fugitives from Ulster in 1616; a curious series of notes on the exactions incident to tenures in Ireland in ancient times; a list of the castles in Ireland in 1676, with a note on hearth-money; and a remarkable document of '3 Edward II' concerning a contest between the king's purveyors and the secular clergy of co. Meath. Ferguson also contributed two important articles to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' on the neglected state of Irish records (1853-4), and a paper on the unpublished statutes of Ireland (1855). At his death he left incomplete a translation of the 'Norman-French chronicle of the conquest of Ireland', which Francisque Michel edited from a manuscript in Lambeth Palace Library. It was hoped that the translation would be completed by J. P. Prendergast, but there is no evidence that it was ever published. Ferguson was also commissioned by Charles Haliday to research the earlier city assembly rolls and also the records of the court of exchequer for information on the port and harbour of Dublin. 
Ferguson died on 26 November 1855 in his lodgings in Rathmines, Dublin, and was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 9322


Ferguson, John (1787-1856), benefactor, was born at Irvine, Ayrshire, on 28 February 1787, the son of William Ferguson, a shipmaster of that port, and his wife, Mary, only daughter of John Service of Holms of Caaf. The Services were an Ayrshire family, whose main profession, including that of Mary's father, was moneylending. Ferguson was educated at Ayr, and served for some time in a banker's office before going to America on business for one of his maternal uncles. He returned after four years, and in 1810 settled with his mother at Irvine. She inherited large sums of money on the deaths of her brother George and her father; two more brothers, who died in 1828 and 1842, left $200,000 and $400,000 respectively. Ferguson, by his knowledge of the money market, increased this fortune, until at his death it amounted to $1,247,514 14's'. 5died An unremarkable individual, Ferguson never married, and spent the last few years of his life in comparative seclusion. 
After consulting with the philanthropist John Henderson (1780-1867) of Park, who was his intimate friend and acted as his private banker, and Matthew Montgomery of Kelvinside, Ferguson left the residue of his property, after family legacies and other provisions, to establish the Ferguson Bequest Fund, one of the largest mixed endowment bequests in Victorian Scotland. The sum available was at least $400,000, and the trustees were instructed to devote the interest to 'the maintenance and promotion of religious ordinances and education and missionary operations; in the first instance in the county of Ayr, stewartry of Kirkcudbright, and counties of Wigtown, Lanark, Renfrew, and Dumbarton'. Funds were to be provided for the building and support of churches and schools in Scotland, other than parish churches and schools. The Church of Scotland, the Free Church, the United Presbyterian church, the Reformed Presbyterian church, and the Congregationalists were all to benefit from the bequest, and the composition of the permanent body of trustees was to include members of all those denominations. The Ferguson trustees devoted another part of Ferguson's estate to the founding of six two-year scholarships of $80 p.a. each at Scottish universities -- one in classics, another in mathematics, and a third in philosophy. The scholarships were to be competed for by students of any of the Scottish universities who had taken the degree of MA, or had qualified for that degree within the two years preceding. However, by 1875 the fund seems to have been used primarily to supplement ministers' and missionaries' salaries, and to maintain church buildings. 
Ferguson signed his will at Glasgow on 22 September 1855, and soon afterwards his health began to fail. He died in Irvine on 8 January 1856, and was buried in Irvine churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 9323


Ferguson, Patrick (1744-1780), army officer, was the second son of James Ferguson (1700-1777) of Pitfour, a senator of the college of justice and lords commissioners of justiciary in Scotland, and Anne Murray (died 2 Jan 1793), daughter of Alexander Murray, fourth Baron Elibank. He attended a private military academy in London and was gazetted cornet in the Royal North British Dragoons on 12 July 1759. After one campaign in Germany he was struck down by sickness which kept him from the service between 1762 and 1768. Gazetted captain in the 70th regiment of foot on 1 September 1768, his whereabouts in the early 1770s cannot be confirmed, although a number of writers state that, before being invalided home, he served in the West Indies and participated with a detachment of the 70th in putting down the Carib uprising on St Vincent in 1772-3. 
Tradition has it that Ferguson was experimenting with various designs of breech-loading rifles in the years prior to the outbreak of the American War of Independence in 1775. He did submit a design for such a rifle to the adjutant-general in March 1776, and after the design had been considered by the Board of Ordnance Ferguson was allowed to patent it, being granted patent number 1139 on 2 December 1776. There was nothing new in Ferguson's design, nothing which had not been produced by a number of other English and continental gunmakers as far back as the late seventeenth century; in fact, the basic feature of Ferguson's system, a double-start rapid-pitch threaded cylindrical breechplug, had been patented by the French engineer (and subsequent Huguenot emigre) Isaac de la Chaumette in France in 1704 and in England under patent number 434 of 12 August 1721. 
It was decided to form an experimental rifle corps for service in North America, to be armed exclusively with Ferguson's breech-loading rifle and commanded by Ferguson. One hundred rifles were manufactured to Ferguson's design, under his occasional supervision, by four Birmingham ordnance gunmakers during the summer and autumn of 1776, the same firms who had previously produced 800 muzzle-loading rifles for the Ordnance. Selected recruits from the 6th, 14th, 16th, and 25th regiments of foot were trained by Ferguson in the use of the new weapon and in light infantry tactics. By January 1776 the unit was being trained in marksmanship at Chatham barracks. After sailing from Portsmouth, Ferguson and his men, with only a portion of their rifles, arrived in New York on 24 May 1777. They received their baptism of fire just a month later, on 23 June, at Short Hills, New Jersey, in a minor skirmish. Shortly afterwards Ferguson's corps (also referred to as 'Ferguson's riflemen' and 'the British rifle men') embarked as part of Howe's Philadelphia campaign, and landed at Turkey Point, Maryland, on 24 August 1777. By then they wore green uniforms, the conventional colour for rifle companies on the continent. The 100-man unit acted with the British light infantry and Hessian riflemen in the march which culminated in the battle of Brandywine and the British occupation of Philadelphia. There were minor skirmishes throughout the move towards Philadelphia, and Ferguson's men were particularly active in those at Iron Hill and Christiana Bridge. Ferguson's corps formed part of the right wing of the British forces under General Wilhelm von Knyphausen, which crossed Chadd's Ford of Brandywine Creek late in the afternoon of 11 September 1777. Ferguson was commended in Knyphausen's report of the battle to General Howe. Ferguson described how, during the battle, he had in his sights an officer subsequently identified as Washington, and how he felt it would be unsporting and ungentlemanly to shoot at such a simple target. Ferguson also mentioned that during the battle: 'I had only 28 men with me, a few have been disabled by the Enemy and the rest from fatigue' (Peckham, 2.300), so it would appear that, by Ferguson's own statement only days after the event, of the 100 rifles only 28 were used during the battle of Brandywine. The balance of his men were with the baggage train. During the battle Ferguson's right arm was shattered, and he never recovered full use of it; he later received $182 10's'. compensation. On the day after the battle Ferguson's corps was officially disbanded, the men returning to their parent regiments; their weapons were recalled to the ordnance stores of New York in the summer of 1778. 
Ferguson's arm took a long time to heal, and until the Carolina campaign in early 1780 he was employed as an intelligence-gathering agent by General Sir Henry Clinton, with whom he became perhaps as much a favourite as Major John Andre. He also occasionally commanded small 'ad hoc' units (generally composed of detachments of the 71st regiment) in small-scale harassing raids against rebel targets such as the Little Egg Harbour (New Jersey) raid in October 1778. From July to November 1779 he served as military governor of the fortifications at Stony Point, on the Hudson River above New York city. 
Ferguson was gazetted major in the 71st regiment of foot on 25 October 1779, and given rank as lieutenant-colonel in America effective only from 1 December 1779. The 71st was the most active British regiment to serve in America and was widely employed in company strength and in light infantry detachments for special services. Late in 1779, possibly while still stationed at Stony Point, Ferguson began to recruit for a unit of his own, sometimes referred to as 'Ferguson's Scottish corps' or more generally as the 'American volunteers'. Composed of 150 loyalist volunteers, the corps accompanied Ferguson on the Carolina campaign, arriving outside Charleston, South Carolina, on 11 January 1780; they operated with the light infantry, the 71st, German riflemen, Tarleton's British Legion, and the New York volunteers, under the command of General James Paterson. On 22 May 1780 Clinton appointed Ferguson inspector of militia in North and South Carolina and Georgia, with orders to enlist as many men as possible in the British interest. Some 4000 men rallied to the colours. It is likely that men from the American volunteers were used as a training cadre for these recruits. Some time before the end of May 1780 Ferguson's southern militia unit (also confusingly referred to as Ferguson's corps) was armed with 300 captured French muskets and bayonets, and 50 swords, all issued to them from the ordnance stores in Charles Town. 
When General Earl Cornwallis, commander of the British forces in the south after the return of the commander-in-chief, Sir Henry Clinton, to New York, began his northward march towards Virginia in September 1780, Ferguson commanded a detachment composed of his American volunteers, and about 800 loyalist militia. In allowing his command to become isolated and beyond effective reach of the rest of Cornwallis's force in the foothills of South Carolina, Ferguson was probably influenced by his own enthusiasm and dedication, by his contempt for the fighting capabilities of the rebel militias he had encountered, his rivalry with Banastre Tarleton, and his misplaced belief that succour was readily available. There is evidence to suggest that the favouritism shown by Clinton to Ferguson and the antagonism between Clinton and Cornwallis may have caused Cornwallis to withhold aid from Ferguson until it was too late, and that in rendering such aid Tarleton may not have moved as quickly as was his wont. There is also some doubt whether Ferguson was fully aware of the nature and number of the 'over-mountain men' who moved against him, and against whom he made his stand on the South Carolina side of King's Mountain on the border of the Carolinas, on 5 October 1780. In the action, which lasted sixty-five minutes, and which resulted in Ferguson's death, his men charged the surrounding rebel militia with their bayoneted muskets several times. After all the lessons which the British army had learned in five years of war in America, it is ironic that the position chosen by Ferguson, atop a nearly bald-topped eminence surrounded with tree- and boulder-covered slopes, forced on him a European linear formation while his woods-wise attackers, firing individually from behind cover, were able to employ their conventional form of Indian fighting. After his wounding at Brandywine in 1777 Ferguson was unable to use a long arm, which is presumably why he was armed with a pair of pistols and a knife when he died. 
From his correspondence Ferguson comes across as intelligent, considerate, humane, and totally dedicated to the cause of his king and country. Contemporaries in age and rank considered him one of the best officers in the army and several of his superiors thought highly of him; he was well liked by his commander-in-chief, Sir Henry Clinton, who described him as 'a very zealous, active, intelligent officer' ('American Rebellion', 175-6). Clinton's predecessor, Sir William Howe, seems to have had some reservations, but these appear to have had more to do with his not having been consulted on the use of Ferguson's experimental corps. 
Much has been written about how the American War of Independence might have evolved if a weapon such as Ferguson's breech-loader had been the standard British weapon. In fact, the design of Ferguson's rifle made it useless as a military weapon. The moving part of the breech mechanism, which rendered it supposedly rapid-loading and reloadable from cover, was completely exposed to the deposits created by the burning of the gunpowder and became inoperable after fewer than ten shots. Deposits also accumulated at the front of the area in which the ball and powder were contained, which progressively prevented the ball from seating in the same position as for the previous shot: therefore the point of impact of the bullet would vary with each shot, and the shooting become increasingly inaccurate. The mechanism was mounted in the stock such that much wood was removed and the stock was made very fragile for a military weapon. All of the known surviving examples of the military rifle are broken and crudely repaired at this point. Finally, and by no means least, there would have had to be a complete revolution in military attitudes towards weapons technology and the need for a weapon with the supposed attributes of the Ferguson rifle. That revolution did not take place until after the self-contained metallic cartridge had been successfully introduced during the last quarter of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 9324


Ferguson, Richard Saul (1837-1900), antiquary, born on 28 July 1837 at his parents' home in Abbey Street, Carlisle, was the elder son of Joseph Ferguson (1794-1880), cotton merchant and manufacturer, and his wife, Margaret (died 1841), daughter of Silas Saul of Carlisle. The Ferguson family had settled in Carlisle in the 1740s, founding the cotton industry in the city and becoming prominent members of the civic elite. Educated at Carlisle grammar school and, from 1853, Shrewsbury School, Ferguson was admitted at St John's College, Cambridge, as a scholar on 14 March 1856; he graduated BA in 1860, and proceeded MA in 1863 and LLM in 1874. He was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 11 October 1858, and was called to the bar on 13 June 1862, when he began to practise in London as an equity draftsman and conveyancer, and joined the northern circuit. He was examiner of civil law for Cambridge University in 1868-9. 
In August 1867 Ferguson married, at Kew, Georgiana Fanny, eldest daughter of Spencer Shelley of Richmond House, Kew, principal clerk of the Treasury. The marriage did not last: the couple separated in 1872, and he divorced her in December 1877. They had one son and one daughter. The failure of his marriage coincided with a breakdown in health for which travel to warmer climes was prescribed. From January 1871 to June 1872 he travelled in Egypt, Australia, and America, and he subsequently published an account of his experiences in 'Moss Gathered by a Rolling Stone' (1873). 
In 1874 Ferguson settled in Carlisle and devoted himself to the study of local antiquities and to public service in his native city. While living in London he had already written an account of Lanercost Priory (with his brother, Charles John Ferguson) and two biographical works, of Cumbrian Quakers and of Cumberland and Westmorland members of parliament. In 1866 he had also played a leading role in the foundation of the Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian and Archaeological Society. He was the founding editor of the society's 'Transactions' and, from 1886, served as its president, and was remembered as 'the heart and soul of the Society' ('Transactions', old ser., 16, 1900, x). Ferguson possessed the means and leisure to pursue with vigour his interest in the antiquities and history of Cumberland and Westmorland. His trained mind, organizational powers, energy, and 'enthusiastic affection' (ibid.) for the counties were central to the late nineteenth-century renaissance of antiquarian study in present-day Cumbria. 
Ferguson published extensively, contributing volumes for Cumberland (1890) and Westmorland (1894) to Elliot Stock's 'Popular County Histories'. Of lasting importance were his editions of manuscript sources, published by the Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian and Archaeological Society. These included William Nicolson's 'Miscellany Accounts of the Diocese of Carlisle' (1877), the descriptions of Cumberland by the seventeenth-century antiquaries John Denton, Sir Daniel Fleming, and Edmund Sandford, Hugh Todd's accounts of Carlisle city and diocese, urban records of Carlisle and Kendal, and 'Testamenta Karleolensia' (1893), a volume of early wills proved at Carlisle. He had been commissioned to act as editor of the projected 'Victoria county history' of Cumberland shortly before his death. 
Ferguson was made a magistrate of the county of Cumberland in 1872, and a member of the Carlisle city bench in 1881. In 1886 he was elected chairman of quarter sessions. He was elected a member of the Carlisle city council in 1878, and used his position to gain access to the muniments of the city, many of which he published. He was mayor in 1881-2 and was re-elected in the following year. A staunch Conservative and a strong supporter of the city privileges, he lost no opportunity of championing the rights of the city when county councils were instituted in 1889 and he was elected to the new body to represent Carlisle. He took the leading role in the project by which Tullie House was acquired by the city and developed into a museum, public library, school of science and art, and art gallery. Under his influence, the collection of Roman antiquities at Tullie House Museum became extensive and valuable, and the city was bequeathed the Jackson collection, which remains the core of Carlisle's local studies library. Ferguson was also prominent in local efforts to preserve the appearance and fabric of Carlisle Castle, then still occupied by the military, and his advice was both sought and heeded by the army authorities. In 1891, for instance, he was in the forefront of opposition to War Office plans for married soldiers' quarters, which would have blocked the view of the castle from the city, and he helped to secure a change of policy. In recognition of his services the corporation conferred upon him the honorary freedom of the city in 1896. 
In 1887 the bishop of Carlisle, Harvey Goodwin, appointed Ferguson chancellor of the diocese, an office which had not hitherto been held by a layman. Ferguson was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 1 March 1877, member of the Royal Archaeological Institute about 1878, and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland in 1880. In 1895 he was admitted an honorary member of the Glasgow Archaeological Association. He was a vice-president of the Royal Archaeological Institute and of the Surtees Society. Latterly, Chancellor Ferguson, a portly, patriarchal figure with a flowing beard, suffered seriously from asthma, which was blamed for straining his heart. He died at Carlisle on 3 March 1900, at his home, 74 Lowther Street, and was buried on 7 March 1900 in the family vault in Stanwix churchyard, Carlisle. 


@@@@@


doc= 9325


Ferguson, Robert (d. 1714), pamphleteer and conspirator, was the son of William Ferguson of Badifurrow in Aberdeenshire. He received a liberal education in his native land, probably at the University of Aberdeen, where in 1650 the name 'Robertus Fergusone Aberdonensis' is entered in the record (Ferguson, 13). He moved to England some time in the 1650s. For a time he supported himself teaching 'university learning' in Islington, near London ('Nonconformist's Memorial', 60), and, according to Calamy, he was an assistant to John Owen, Independent preacher and chaplain to Oliver Cromwell. In a 'solemn meeting' with Owen, Ferguson supposedly renounced his communion with the Church of Scotland, declaring that 'Presbytery was a head too big for the body' (Wodrow, 2.270-71). Ferguson began preaching with Owen to large congregations at Moorfields, London. 
In the early years of the Restoration Ferguson was active in the underground world of protestant dissenters in London, particularly around Cheapside and Moorfields. On 16 January 1663 a warrant was issued for his arrest for raising money in support of ejected ministers and other treasonable practices. He spent a few months in the Gatehouse and was liberated on 12 May when he entered a bond for $3000 for his good behaviour ('CSP dom.', '1663-4', 15, 20, 135). Shortly thereafter he seems to have begun informing on his own friends. His name appears in the 'spy book' of the secretary of state, Sir Joseph Williamson, a list of the disaffected in and around London who were watched by the secretary's spies. One informant reports that 'the said Ferguson did inform me at several times that Mr Calamy and Mr Jenkins had a public stock for the encouragement of those ministers turned out [of the] city and country. And that the said Ferguson is one of their pensioners and he can inform of the rest and of their meetings at several places.' Ferguson also warned the government of proposed insurrection led by presbyterians and Independents ('Williamson's spy book', 'Transactions of the Congregational Historical Society', ed. T. G. Crippen, vol. 5, repr. 1969, spelling modernized, 306; also 'CSP dom.', '1663-4', 12). 
Despite his double dealing Ferguson remained an intimate of Owen. In the late 1660s he turned to writing religious tracts that supported nonconformity. His first treatise, 'Justification Onely upon Satisfaction... of Christ, as the Alone Ground of Remission of Sin' (1668), was a precise and thoughtful defence of the doctrine of atonement. Under Owen's tutelage Ferguson published 'The Interest of Reason in Religion, with the Import and Use of Scripture Metaphors' (1675), in which he defended nonconformists against the oft-made charge that they denied the place of reason in religious practice and belief. The treatise was a complex and sophisticated defence of revelation as supported by natural reason. It betrayed a great deal of learning and was not ignored by the opposition. Among those whom Ferguson attacked was the Anglican divine William Sherlock who, along with Joseph Glanvill, penned a response, claiming that Ferguson had plagiarized much of his text from various religious authorities. 'I can scarce open an English author of any account', wrote Sherlock, 'without making some new discovers of Mr. Ferguson's pilfering humor' (Sherlock's response in Joseph Glanvill's 'An Account of Mr Ferguson's Commonplace Book', 28). But in truth Ferguson had not so much plagiarized as collected and collated various arguments. Ferguson was a quick student and his ability to compile and interweave various lines of argument became the hallmark of his later political writing. 
Not satisfied with religious controversy alone, Ferguson became active in London whig politics by the late 1670s. He was initially attached to the household of the prominent merchant Thomas Papillon, to whom he had dedicated 'The Interest of Reason in Religion'. But by 1679 Ferguson was a 'constant consulter and advisor with [the earl of] Shaftesbury', and his first pieces of propaganda were written in collaboration with Shaftesbury and the earl's circle of friends, supporters, and whig hacks ('Autobiography', 182). Ferguson's early forays into political polemic were Exclusion-era pieces that championed Shaftesbury, supported the duke of Monmouth's ambitions for the throne, and demonized the Catholic duke of York. The central premise of Ferguson's first two tracts, 'A Letter to a Person of Honour Concerning the Black Box' and 'A Letter to a Person of Honour Concerning the King's Disavowing having been Married to the Duke of Monmouth's Mother', both published in 1680, was that the 'Protestant duke', Monmouth, was the true heir to the royal succession, the 'black box' reputedly containing proofs of the king's marriage to Lucy Walters, Monmouth's mother. He also accused the 'popish successor' of approving 'the burning of London and combining with papists in all the part of the late [popish] plot'. These crimes 'make him liable to the ax, while his is aspiring to a sceptre' ('A Letter to a Person of Honour Concerning the King's Disavowing'; reprinted in 'Scarce and Valuable Tracts... Lord Somers', 8.191). During 1681 and 1682, Ferguson published three tracts (entitled 'No Protestant Plot', parts 1, 2, and 3) praising Shaftesbury, who 'by his courage, wisdom, and intelligence hath both withstood and defeated so many of their [papist] designs against our religion and the safety of the nation'. They also recounted a long history of popish conspiracy and treason and warned Charles II that he was losing his subjects' fidelity by allowing his brother 'to rival him in his authority' ('No Protestant Plot', pt 1, 1681, 8). Although his 'black box' and 'protestant plot' tracts were published anonymously, Ferguson's authorship was widely suspected. He was vigorously attacked in the royalist press. In satiric verse, pamphlets, and weeklies he was portrayed as a dangerous incendiary. John Dryden immortalized him in 'The Second Part of Absalom and Achitophel' as Judas, Shaftesbury's paymaster of whig hacks, who 'keeps the Rebels Pension-purse' (Dryden, lines 321-3). Ferguson's most persistent critic was Roger L'Estrange, who used the pages of 'The Observator' to create a larger-than-life image of Ferguson as the man at the bottom of every seditious libel and every plot, consorting with rebels and fugitives, skulking about back alleys and smoky taverns. According to L'Estrange, Ferguson could turn a 'lawful congregation into a common sanctuary for renegades and fugitives', his nature as well as his principles 'fierce, bloody and rebellious'. He was the 'son of thunder', a 'Lucifer', the 'mouth of the Party' ('The Observator', no. 398, 5 Sept 1683; no. 396, 1 Sept 1683). 
Ferguson earned his sobriquet the Plotter for his part in numerous conspiracies of the 1680s and 1690s, from the summer of 1682 onward, when Shaftesbury and several prominent whig leaders, including William, Lord Russell, Colonel Algernon Sidney, and the duke of Monmouth, began discussing plans to lead a general insurrection against Charles II's government. Ferguson acted as Shaftesbury's envoy between the whig lords and a cabal of conspirators that included lawyers, artisans, and soldiers. Throughout the autumn of 1682 Shaftesbury urged his fellow conspirators to act. In November he learned that the government was preparing new charges against him and he sought refuge in Amsterdam. He took Colonel John Rumsey, Captain Thomas Walcot, and Robert Ferguson with him. Shaftesbury died two months later in the arms of a servant, possibly Ferguson. Back in London the remaining whig conspirators soon realized that it was 'impossible for us to act, they [Shaftesbury and Ferguson] having managed the greater part of our city affairs, knew all those considerable gentlemen'. Ferguson was sent for in order to explain Shaftesbury's connections with the City, and with his return the planning of the conspirators resumed (Ford, Lord Grey, 'The Secret History of the Rye House Plot and Monmouth's Rebellion', 1754, 41). At one point the lower cabal of plotters decided to assassinate the king and his brother on their return from Newmarket; they would ambush the royal carriage as it passed Rye House Mill ['see also 'Rye House plotters]. But the conspirators' plans were exposed to Secretary Jenkins on 12 June and soon became public. Their designs discovered, several conspirators met one last time. The barrister Nathaniel Wade proposed that they immediately lead a rising in the west, but Colonel Rumsey declared that their situation was hopeless. Feeling dejected, they finally decided that each man should 'shift for himself'. But Ferguson did not share their fears: he 'laughed at us all and gave us his parting complement, Gentlemen, you are all strangers to this kind of exercise; I have been used to flight and I will never be out of a plot so long as I live, and yet I hope to meet some of you at Dunbar before Michaelmas. (BL, Add. MS 38847, fol. 119; 'State trials', 9.409)' Ferguson fled to Scotland and eventually took ship to the continent. From Amsterdam he continued to author whig polemic. His elaborate 'An Enquiry into and Detection of the Barbarous Murther of the Late Earl of Essex' (1684) argued that Essex had not committed suicide in the Tower, where he was awaiting trial for his part in the Rye House plot, but was actually murdered by the duke of York's supporters. 'An Enquiry' played on popular anti-popery and already widely circulated rumours about the earl's seemingly suspicious death. Ferguson ascribed Essex's murder to part of the ongoing worldwide Catholic conspiracy. Those who had fired London in 1666 now slaughtered the 'virtuous', 'heroic and generous' Essex. The 'Vatican, Louvre, and St. James [the duke of York's residence]' conspired to ruin Essex because he had sought to expose the Popish Plot, defend the protestant religion and the English people against popery and slavery ('An Enquiry into and Detection of the Barbarous Murther', 1689 edn, 5-12). Translated into Dutch and Flemish and later republished during the revolution of 1688, Ferguson's 'Enquiry' was widely read and commented on. 
With the death of Charles II and accession of James II, the duke of Monmouth and the earl of Argyll decided to launch joint invasions of England and Scotland from Holland in June 1685. Lord Grey of Warke and Ferguson were Monmouth's principal advisers. Ferguson also drew up the 'Declaration' that accompanied Monmouth's rebellion and acted as his army chaplain. He landed with Monmouth at Lyme Regis on 11 June. Less than a month later he managed to escape from the battlefield at Sedgemoor and, after hiding in a hayloft for several weeks, sailed safely back to Amsterdam. The capture of Ferguson was the first priority of the English spies in the Netherlands, and he lived in constant fear for his life. He was impoverished, observed in tattered clothes, and rumoured to be starving. Yet by the winter of 1687 he was once again churning out whig propaganda, now championing the cause of the prince of Orange. Ferguson re-entered public debate in reaction to James II's declaration of indulgence. In 'A Representation of the Threatening Dangers Impending over Protestants in Great Britain', published in both English and Dutch, Ferguson strove to warn nonconformists of the dangers belying James's promise of liberty of conscience. Although the king 'may hug and carressth' dissenters now, his true intention was to re-establish popery ('A Representation of the Threatening Dangers', 1687, 9). Ferguson also reasserted his claim that the earl of Essex had been murdered in the Tower. When asked by the sea captain who transported copies of 'A Representation of the Threatening Dangers' from Holland to England if he had proof that Essex was murdered, Ferguson supposedly replied: 'Captain, take no thought of that, it doth not concern you or me whether it be true or false. The report is spread and it will have all the effects as true and so serve our end' (N. Salmon, 'Lives of the English Bishops', 1733, 212). Ferguson's next tract, 'Reflexions on Monsieur Fagel's Letter', was written as a companion piece to a tract by Gaspar Fagel, pensionary of Holland, who published a description and defence of the prince and princess of Orange's negative response to the declaration of indulgence. Ferguson's 'Reflexions' was again addressed to dissenters who were tempted to support James's indulgence. If they supported him, he warned, the Church of England would be lost and, in the end, they would have traded their civil liberties away for 'a precarious, pretended liberty of conscience' (ibid., 4). 
In October 1688 Ferguson's assistance may have been enlisted by the prince of Orange's advisers as they prepared William's English and Scottish declarations. Meanwhile propaganda in England promoted the idea that William's cause was supported by 'some loyal Rye-House and Sedgemoor men, true disciples of honest old [Richard] Rumbold and Robin Ferguson' (Ferguson, 257-8). Ferguson sailed to Torbay with the prince and his army and on 10 November he kicked down a church door and with sword in hand proclaiming 'cursed be he who keeps back his sword from blood' (Morrice, 2.320). After the flight of James, Ferguson published 'A Brief Justification of the Prince of Orange's Descent', one of the most influential tracts of the revolution of 1688. It promoted and defended William's claim to the throne and gave the Convention Parliament, which met in January 1689 to solve the current crisis, an interpretative framework in which to place, discuss, and explain the final months of 1688. 'A Brief Justification' set forth a contractarian theory of government which, Ferguson claimed, was the basis of England's ancient constitution. All legal governments have their origins in such 'compacts, stipulations, compromises, and agreements' (R. Ferguson, 'A Brief Justification', 8). He went on to defend the right of popular resistance. James II had subverted the constitution and invaded the people's rights and liberties; he had 'unqualified himself' from his position as king. It was the duty of every protestant and Englishman to take up arms against him. Yet, in the end, force had not been necessary. James II himself had 'abdicated' his throne by 'retiring beyond sea' (ibid., 19, 22). Ferguson concluded by recommending that parliament endow the prince of Orange with 'sovereign and legal power', while allowing his wife, the princess of Orange, to be 'named with him in all laws, gifts, grants, and patents'. By choosing William, the 'nation hath in its whole political body exercised the power belonging unto it' and restored 'the government upon its primitive and original foundation' (ibid., 34-5, 37). 'A Brief Justification' was a significant contribution to the literature of the revolution. It justified the use of force and asserted the concept of devolution of power to the people. Still many of its ideas were consistent with the thinking of the Convention Parliament, which also posited the idea that James had simply 'vacated' the throne and thus abdicated his position. They also adopted the formula that placed both William and Mary on the throne while investing administrative power in William alone. 'That which remains to be done', Ferguson states, bringing his arguments to a close, 'is to declare the Prince of Orange King... His unchangeable adherence to what he promised in his Declaration, as a Prince, shews with what sacredness, he will observe his Oath as King' (ibid., 36). 
Ferguson soon thought himself mistaken, as William III did not uphold his declaration to the satisfaction of many radical whigs. Within eighteen months of William's invasion Ferguson began criticizing the new regime and was suspected of plotting with Jacobites. Ferguson's support during the revolution had been rewarded by William, who appointed him housekeeper of the excise office. Ferguson might naively have hoped for a bishopric; but a more likely explanation for his opposition is that he was truly disillusioned with the new regime, coupled with his restless desire for conspiracy and intrigue. 
As a Scot and an extraordinarily able polemicist, Ferguson was approached by Sir James Montgomery to represent Scottish grievances in the summer of 1689. The result was Ferguson's first critique of William's administration, 'The Late Proceedings and Votes of the Parliament of Scotland', published in that year. Ferguson makes it clear that he still supports the king, but he wonders at William's unwillingness to oblige the Scottish parliament in all their demands. Ferguson squarely lays the blame on William's reliance on James II's former tools, who slander good men by calling them republicans. The king had nothing to fear from republican principles, so long as he preserved his people's 'rights and liberties, esteem parliaments, and make the known laws the measure and standard of your government' ('Late Proceedings', 7). 
Over the next several months Ferguson continued to scheme with the discontented. He also converted to the Church of England. In 1690 he was arrested along with Sir John Cochrane on suspicion of treasonable practices, but released for lack of evidence. Two years later he landed in Newgate again for suspicious activity and was dismissed from his position at the excise. These short imprisonments only seem to have emboldened him and pushed him further into the arms of St Germain. In February 1691 Ferguson received a full pardon for his past deeds from James II. 
In 1694 Ferguson began publishing at breakneck pace. His two tracts of that year, 'A Letter to Mr Secretary Trenchard' and 'A Letter to the Right Honourable Sir John Holt, Kt, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench', which were written in connection with the Lancashire plot, did not directly place the blame on William for the injustices done to harassed Jacobites and nonjurors, but rather on the king's corrupt whig ministers. Ferguson portrayed the Jacobites as still committed to the principles of passive obedience. They had not renounced, Ferguson asserted with great irony, 'all the religious as well as political principles with which your Tillotsons, Burnets, Sherlocks etc imbu'd them' ('Letter to... Holt', 12). Of course this was clearly a lie, if cleverly contrived. Ferguson's tracts underscored his commitment to the 'Ancient English constitution' ('Letter to... Trenchard', 26), which he saw as under siege by the illegal atrocities of William's administration. 
In the following year Ferguson issued three more tracts in which any lingering hope that the current regime would reform itself had evaporated. His virulent 'A Brief Account of Some of the Late Encroachments and Depredations of the Dutch upon the English' accused the Dutch of attempting to 'enslave and impoverish' the English. William had not only 'rapaciously seized' the crown, but set about introducing 'atheism, thralldom, and poverty' (pp. 2, 8, 27). 'A Brief Account' has been called 'one of the most skillful pieces of Jacobite propaganda' (Cruickshanks, 7) and particularly angered William III and his ministers. In addition, Ferguson's two companion pieces of 1695, 'Whether Parliament be not in Law Dissolved by the Death of the Princess of Orange' and 'Whether the Preserving of the Protestant Religion was the Motive... that was Designed in the Late Revolution', both attacked the king and his administration from a constitutionalist position. In many respects he made the same arguments as in his whig days: 'our whole government was founded upon the supposal and concession, that it was to be a government of and over freemen... And the Great Charter, and other Laws... did not create and give us a Right to the Freedom of our Persons; but they did only assert, vindicate, and fence it about. They were not laws of manumission from Bondage, but declaratory of our antecedent and inherent title to liberty. ('Whether Parliament be not in Law Dissolved', 14)' He did, however, renounce his former position that resistance to James II in 1688 was justified. 'Salus populi' was still the supreme law, but the ancient constitution never contained any 'stipulatory agreement by which it is provided that if princes do not as they should, they do either forfeit their sovereign authority or that we may lawfully rebel against and dethrone them' (ibid., 17-18). 
While the use of force may not have been permitted within the framework of the original contract between the people and the sovereign, the ancient English constitution had been completely subverted by the convention in 1689. 'Whatever there was of an 'Original Contract' between former Kings and the free People of these Kingdoms, yet it is undeniable, there is a very 'formal' and 'explicit One' between K. 'William' and them' ('Letter to... Trenchard', 3). This formal contract established the prince of Orange as a 'de facto' king only. His rule had become tyrannical and thus force was necessary to oppose force, to defend British lives and liberties, and the laws established; thus the Jacobite cause was utterly justified. Ferguson never resorted to tory arguments of divine right, Filmerian patriarchalism, or the right of conquest. He used instead the constitutionalist arguments he had forwarded as a whig, which were similar to those put forward by such other whiggish Jacobites as Sir James Montgomery and Charlwood Lawton. 
Ferguson probably participated in the Jacobite schemes of Sir George Barclay and was arrested in connection with the Barclay plot in March 1696 and not released until January of the following year. By the late 1690s Ferguson seems to have become increasingly involved with Robert Harley and the country opposition. During Anne's reign it was rumoured that Ferguson had converted to Catholicism. Burnet claimed that Ferguson pretended to be 'high church, but many believed him a papist' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 5.126). Similarly an informant for Anne's government reported that Ferguson, who was known as Uncle among the Jacobites, was feigning to be a protestant, when in fact he was an 'old Roman agent wrapt up in a Geneva Charter' (M. Smith, 'Private Memoirs', 1718, 3). None the less, Ferguson usually aligned himself with protestant Jacobites and churned out violent anti-Catholic polemic. Just as Ferguson's whig tracts were replete with tales of Catholic barbarism and protestant sacrifice, so Ferguson as a Jacobite could not restrain himself from more lurid tales of worldwide Catholic conspiracy, despite his support of James II and his son. Ferguson began developing his story of the revolution as part of the Catholic plotting in 1695 and brought it to fruition in 1706 with his 'History of the Revolution', where he argued that it was 'neither K. James's intent to destroy nor the Prince of Orange's to protect the Protestant religion'. Because James II would not support the supremacy of the pope over England, Rome 'pitched' (p. 5) upon the ambitious prince of Orange to invade England, divide the Church of England, and make war on France to bring an end to the 'Gallican' church's ancient liberties (p. 10). Prince William was more than happy to comply and was reconciled to Rome. Though the anti-Catholic rhetoric was nothing new for Ferguson, he also added a virulent anti-sectarianism along with a new devotion to the Church of England, Charles I, and the entire Stuart dynasty (with the exception of Mary II). In this respect he sounded like other high church propagandists, including Mary Astell, and Jacobites like Charles Leslie. His 'An Account of the Obligations the States of Holland have to Great Britain' (1711) vehemently attacked whigs, mercantile interests, the Dutch and all foreigners, and especially the war and those like the duke and duchess of Marlborough who profited from it. Ferguson was also in communication with Robert Harley's government and went from judiciously leaking the names of his Jacobite friends to betraying them outright, hoping to be rewarded for his services. Most likely, Ferguson was telling tales to both sides, as he had as an informant in the 1660s. 
Ferguson was probably a double agent for most of his career; but he was an exceptional propagandist and whigs, Jacobites, and country tories benefited from his extraordinarily capable pen. In 1713 Robert Wodrow wrote that Ferguson 'is yet alive, in great want, and upwards of ninety years, and hath nothing but what he begs' (Wodrow, 2.270-71). Despite his long career of intrigue, sedition, and espionage, he died in his bed in 1714. Ferguson had a wife, Hannah (formerly Brindley), and two children, one of whom was reported to be a priest in Genoa ('Private Memoirs', 12). A physical description of Ferguson is given in the proclamation for apprehending him in 1683: 'a tall lean man, dark-brown hair, a great Roman nose, thin-jawed, heat in his face, speaks in a Scotch tone, a sharp piercing eye, stoops a little in the shoulders. He has a shuffling gate that differs from all men; wears his periwig down almost over his eyes' (Ferguson, 115). 


@@@@@


doc= 9326


Ferguson, Robert (1799-1865), physician and accoucheur, was born in India on 15 November 1799, the son of Robert Ferguson of Glen Islay, Perthshire, of the Indian Civil Service, and great-nephew of the historian Adam Ferguson. He went to school in Croydon under Alexander Crombie (1762-1840) and later began to study medicine as a pupil of George Ricketts Nuttall, with whom he lived in Dean Street, Soho. He attended lectures at the famous Hunterian School of Anatomy in Great Windmill Street, before spending some time studying in Heidelberg where among other things he gained a good knowledge of German. Returning to Edinburgh he joined the medical classes there and obtained his MD degree on 1 August 1823. While in Edinburgh, through his family connections, he became friendly with Sir Walter Scott. When Ferguson decided to settle in London as a medical practitioner Scott's son-in-law Dr John Gibson Lockhart gave him an introductory letter to the publisher John Murray, of Albemarle Street, through whom he became familiar with many in the London literary world. 
Ferguson was next appointed as a resident medical officer at the Marylebone Infirmary before becoming physician to the Westminster Lying-In Hospital. He was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 22 December 1824 and concentrated on the practice of midwifery, aided by the patronage of Robert Gooch. In 1829 King's College, London, was founded by a royal charter under the patronage of George IV for the purpose of maintaining the connection between sound religion and useful learning. According to its original constitution, a department of medicine was to be included. Accordingly in 1831 the new department was established and, among the first professors appointed, Ferguson became professor of midwifery. He played an active role in the development of the new school and in 1836 gave the inaugural lecture at the beginning of the term entitled 'The method of induction and its results in medical science'. The need for a hospital where students could obtain their clinical training and experience was obvious, and so in 1839 the first King's College Hospital was founded and established on the site of the old St Clement Danes workhouse in Portugal Street close to Lincoln's Inn Fields and adjacent to the Royal College of Surgeons. Ferguson became the first professor of midwifery and diseases of women and children. He attended regularly to teach students and to attend patients who came from one of the poorest areas of London. 
Ferguson was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1837 and later councillor and censor. In 1840 he was appointed physician accoucheur to Queen Victoria. The queen's first child was born on 10 November 1840 and Ferguson acted as second in command to Charles Locock. The queen had expressed a wish that as few people as possible should be present in the room during her labour so that only Locock, Prince Albert, and Mrs Lilley were present. It was only when the baby was about to be born that a door opened and Ferguson, together with Sir James Clark and Dr Blagdon, was allowed in. It is recorded that for his services Ferguson received a fee of $800. In the following year he resigned his appointment as professor of midwifery at King's and in 1844 he was appointed consultant physician. 
In spite of developing an extensive obstetric practice and having contributed extensively to obstetric literature, in 1857 Ferguson took the bold step of becoming a general physician and resigned his position as physician accoucheur. His patients were to include many of the leaders in the politics and literature of his day. Many of them became his personal friends; apart from Sir Walter Scott, they included William Wordsworth, Henry Taylor, Washington Irving, Lord Palmerston, and Lord Derby. According to a contemporary Ferguson: 'was extremely fastidious and courtly in manner, and throughout life looked upon his own profession as one that was hardly good enough for him; his heart was with the army, and he deeply felt the annoyances to which a mere 'doctor' was subjected to by exclusion from the higher ranks and dignities of the realm. ('Lancet', 1865, 25)' Earlier in his career Ferguson compiled two volumes in Murray's family library entitled 'The Natural History of Insects' (1829-35) and for the 'Quarterly Review' he wrote ten articles from 1829 to 1854. Most of these were medical but one or two of a philosophico-religious kind. His first publication, in 1825, was a letter to Sir Henry Halford proposing a combination of the old inoculation of smallpox with vaccination. He founded the 'London Medical Gazette' in 1827 and two of his most distinguished obstetric contributions were on diseases of the uterus and ovaria and puerperal fever. He wrote an introductory essay for the New Sydenham Society in 1859. 
Ferguson was married twice, first in 1830 to a lady of the French family of Labalmondiere and second, on 15 May 1846, to Mary Lowther, daughter of Macleod of Dunvegan, with whom he had five children. On retirement from medical practice he lived in a cottage at Winkfield, Berkshire, where he died on 25 June 1865. He was survived by his wife. Ferguson's library was sold by Messrs Puttick and Simpson in March 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 9327


Ferguson, Sir Ronald Craufurd (1773-1841), army officer and politician, was born in Edinburgh on 8 February 1773, the second son of William Ferguson of Raith, Fife, and Jane, second daughter of Ronald Craufurd of Restalrig, sister of Margaret, countess of Dumfries. Ferguson attended Edinburgh high school (1787-8). He entered the army as an ensign in the 53rd regiment on 3 April 1790, and was promoted lieutenant on 24 January 1791. He then made a long visit to Berlin during which he attended the Berlin military academy (1791-3), and studied the Prussian military system. On 19 February 1793, after his return to England, he was promoted captain; and on the outbreak of war with France his regiment was sent to Flanders, where it was brigaded with the 14th and 37th under the command of Major-General Ralph Abercromby, who quickly recognized Ferguson's ability. 
Ferguson served throughout the campaign of 1793, at the siege of Valenciennes, and in the battles which precipitated the duke of York's retreat from Dunkirk. In October 1793 the 53rd formed part of the garrison of Nieuport under the command of Lieutenant-General Sir Charles Grey. The regiment was heavily engaged in the fighting in front of the town. Ferguson, who was wounded in the knee, was mentioned in dispatches. He left Flanders on being promoted major into the 84th regiment on 31 May 1794. On 18 September 1794, though still only twenty-one, he was promoted lieutenant-colonel and appointed to command the newly raised 2nd battalion of the 84th. He was immediately ordered to India, and in 1795 his regiment was one of those from India which, under Major-General Sir Alured Clarke, captured the Cape of Good Hope. 
On his return to India, Ferguson was stationed at Cawnpore, and there, on 4 January 1798, he married Jean, the illegitimate daughter of General Sir Hector Munro; they had one surviving son. This marriage greatly increased his wealth and importance, enabling Ferguson to gain further employment. He returned to England and was promoted colonel on 1 January 1800; later that year he held a command in Major-General Thomas Maitland's attack on Belle Ile, and during Sir James Pulteney's expedition against Ferrol. He was one of the officers who returned home disgusted by Pulteney's refusal to attack Ferrol. In 1804 Ferguson was appointed brigadier-general commanding York district, and in the following year he took command of the Highland brigade, consisting of the 71st, 72nd, and 93rd highlanders, in the expedition commanded by Sir David Baird to recapture the Cape of Good Hope. He performed the difficult task of landing his brigade in the face of Dutch resistance and covering the disembarkation of the rest of the army. His conduct during the ensuing engagements won him the thanks of Baird. 
Ferguson was forced to leave the Cape by illness brought on by a liver complaint. On his return to Britain he was elected MP for Kirkcaldy burghs in 1806, a seat which he held for twenty-four years, and on 25 April 1808 he was promoted major-general. In that year Ferguson was appointed to command a brigade in the army under Sir Arthur Wellesley (later duke of Wellington), destined to assist the Portuguese, and at the landing of the expedition at the mouth of the River Mondego he was placed in command of a brigade consisting of the 42nd and 78th regiments. At the battle of Rolica, Ferguson's brigade was employed upon the extreme left, and twice turned Laborde's right, after an advance along a difficult mountain road. William Warre, an aide-de-camp to Ferguson, observed that the whole brigade worshipped its leader 'for his bravery and skill and coolness in fire like hail about him' (L. James). At the battle of Vimeiro (21 August) the brigade was posted on the left of the British army, and Ferguson had just begun to pursue Junot when he was checked by Sir Harry Burrard. Ferguson received praise of the highest order in Wellesley's dispatch, and was thanked in his place in the House of Commons for his services. He also received a gold medal and was gazetted colonel of the Sicilian regiment on 25 January 1809. 
Ferguson was nominated to a command in the force sent under Sir David Baird to join Sir John Moore in the Peninsula. However, it reached Corunna too late to be of any assistance. He returned home on February 6, and during the following months distinguished himself with his speeches in parliament against the duke of York during the debates on the Clarke scandal. Ferguson's obvious liberalism was also apparent in other episodes, notably his criticism of the convention of Cintra and Wellesley's part in it, a view he was later forced to retract. 
On 4 June 1813 Ferguson was promoted lieutenant-general. In 1814 he acted for a short time as second in command to Sir Thomas Graham in the Netherlands, and in the following year he was made a KCB. Ferguson never again saw service, but he continued to represent Kirkcaldy burghs until 1830. Throughout this period of tory ascendancy Ferguson distinguished himself in the House of Commons by his radicalism. He supported measures of civil and religious liberty, Catholic emancipation, the ballot, and triennial parliaments. In 1819 he protested against the government's coercive measures. 
Though he remained a whig partisan, Ferguson was disposed to give an independent support to Wellington in 1827, for which he obtained a crack regiment: he was transferred to the colonelcy of the 79th Cameron Highlanders on 24 March 1828. He was promoted general on 22 July 1830, and made a GCB at the coronation of William IV in 1831. In 1830 he was defeated at the election for Kirkcaldy burghs by the tory candidate, Lord Loughborough. However, he was immediately elected for Nottingham, a seat he held until his death. In December 1840 he succeeded to the family estate of Raith, on the death of his elder brother, Robert, who had also for many years been a radical MP. He died at Bolton Row, Piccadilly, London on 10 April 1841, and was succeeded in his Scottish estates by his only son, Colonel Robert Ferguson, who sat for Kirkcaldy burghs from 1841 to 1862, and took the additional name of Munro on succeeding to some of the estates of his grandfather, Sir Hector Munro, of Novar, Ross, and Cromarty. 


@@@@@


doc= 9328


Ferguson, Sir Samuel (1810-1886), poet and archivist, was born on 10 March 1810, in High Street, Belfast, the youngest of the six children of John Ferguson (died 1845) and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Knox (died 1861), daughter of John Knox, a clockmaker, in whose house the birth took place. His father, whose Scottish forebears had settled in Ulster in the seventeenth century, had inherited property in co. Antrim, but this was improvidently managed and there were no great resources to fund Ferguson's education and youthful years. Samuel Ferguson went to the Belfast Academical Institution, where he attended some extra-curricular classes in the Irish language; this was an early indication of his lifelong enthusiasm for the history, legends, and poetry preserved in Irish, but there is no evidence that he became a proficient speaker of the language. 
Ferguson's earliest verses appeared in 1830 and 1831 in the Belfast monthly 'Ulster Magazine'. When his poem 'The Forging of the Anchor' was enthusiastically included in the 'Noctes ambrosianae' section of 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' in February 1832, it gave him an entree into what was one of the leading literary and political journals of the day. The poem's success dogged him throughout a poetic career which concentrated on specifically Irish lyric and narrative poetry. In 1833 the 'Dublin University Magazine' commenced publication in Dublin and, while not one of its founders, Ferguson was a contributor from the earliest numbers. In 1834 he published in its pages a series of four review articles on James Hardiman's 'Irish Minstrelsy' (2 vols., 1831), which gathered Irish songs and poems from earlier centuries with translations into English by various hands. Ferguson took issue with Hardiman's presentation of these songs and poems as representative exclusively of Catholic and nationalist or Jacobite sentiment; he vigorously argued that such material was part of the cultural inheritance of all in Ireland and as such should be recognized and claimed by 'the Protestant wealth and intelligence of the country'. He also deprecated the quality of the English translations, and supplied nineteen versions of his own as an appendix to the final paper. The review was a signal document, appearing as it did in a publication reflecting tory and unionist interests in Ireland. It marked the beginning of a critical engagement with popular Irish writing, and so is one of the founding documents of the Anglo-Irish literary resurgence later in the century. Meanwhile, the translations Ferguson made here and elsewhere initiated the development of a distinctively Irish poetry in English. 
Ferguson continued writing for the 'University' and 'Blackwood's' during the 1830s; they provided an outlet for his literary and scholarly interests, and were also a source of income while he was a student. Among his contributions was a series of tales woven around events and characters drawn from Irish legend and history. For 'Blackwood's' he also wrote 'The Involuntary Experimentalist', a sensation tale noticed and parodied by Poe, and 'Fr Tom and the Pope', a burlesque targeting Fr Thomas Maguire, a contemporary preacher and controversialist. It was frequently reprinted in the nineteenth century, because it is richly comic and also as an anti-Catholic squib; in spite of its success, Ferguson was wary of admitting authorship. 
Ferguson commenced study of the law, and also enrolled as an undergraduate at Trinity College, Dublin. After keeping a number of terms at Lincoln's Inn in London, in early 1834 he suffered a severe illness, and there were also unspecified family difficulties. These factors evidently interrupted his studies, and he never graduated from Trinity. He resumed his study of the law at the beginning of 1836, enrolling at King's Inns, Dublin, and was called to the Irish bar in Trinity term 1838. Thereafter based in Dublin, he practised on the north-east circuit, which regularly took him back to his native region around Belfast. As a newly qualified barrister in the early 1840s he published less, but his poetry kept his name before the public. His poems featured prominently in the popular anthology 'The Ballad Poetry of Ireland' (1845), edited by Charles Gavan Duffy. Ferguson's work was valuable to Duffy as an example of how a protestant unionist might participate in a specifically Irish cultural manifestation. 
In 1846, following the death of his father and a breakdown of his health, Ferguson spent the greater part of the year travelling through France and Italy, visiting sites and libraries of antiquarian interest. Yet Ferguson's involvement with nationalism was also reaching its peak in February 1847 when the 'University' published his obituary article and poetic lament for the Young Ireland leader Thomas Davis, who had died in September 1845. In 1848 he became active with the Protestant Repeal Movement, of which he was a founder member. The movement sought repeal of the 'Act of Union' of Great Britain and Ireland. His brief involvement with nationalist politics ended soon after he became engaged to Mary Catherine Guinness ['see 'Ferguson, Mary Catherine (1823-1905)] of Stillorgan, co. Dublin, in May of that year, as her family disapproved. They were married on 16 August 1848. 
Ferguson's two long verse essays on contemporary Ireland, 'Inheritor and Economist' and 'Dublin' were printed in the 'University' in May and July 1849 respectively. In 1850 he and his wife acquired 20 North Great George's Street, Dublin, which was to be their home for the rest of their lives. The marriage gave Ferguson an entry to Dublin society, and he gravitated towards the Church of Ireland rather than the Presbyterian tradition of his background. In September 1857, following the meeting of the British Association in Dublin, he was a member of a group which included George Petrie, John O'Donovan, and William Wilde on a visit to the Aran Islands. Ferguson was called to the inner bar in 1859, and received an honorary LLD from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1865, but his career as a barrister was not particularly distinguished. He maintained a lively interest in antiquarianism, chiefly through his membership of the Royal Irish Academy; nearly every summer he and his wife journeyed in Europe or through Ireland to visit sites of archaeological interest. 
Ferguson now focused his attention instead on writing verse narratives on subjects drawn from Irish legend and history. The activities of the Irish Archaeological Society and of scholars such as John O'Donovan in editing, translating, and publishing Gaelic manuscripts were making available material which could serve as the basis of a specifically Irish literature. In 1865, already in his mid-fifties, Ferguson published his first book, 'Lays of the Ancient Gael and other Poems'. The 'lays', owing something to Macaulay's 'Lays of Ancient Rome' and to Tennyson's Arthurian poems, were the core of the book. The 'other poems' were principally translations and shorter poems written thirty years before, a number of which had already been republished in anthologies, and these attracted the more favourable comment. Ferguson had hoped that the lays would pave the way for a long verse epic, 'Congal', on which he had been working since the 1840s. This drew on an old Irish prose text, 'The banquet of Dun na nGedh and the battle of Magh Rath' (1842), edited and translated by John O'Donovan. 
In November 1867 Ferguson obtained congenial and prestigious employment when he was appointed first deputy keeper of the records in Ireland. He brought energy and efficiency to the position, which he occupied for the remainder of his life. The post carried a salary of $800 a year, but was not pensionable. 'Congal', with a bulky apparatus of notes and additional material, was published in 1872. In 1878 Ferguson was knighted in a ceremony at Dublin Castle on St Patrick's day, principally in recognition of his archival work. Among his achievements as deputy keeper during the 1870s was the bringing together in the Public Record Office at the Four Courts in Dublin many of the documentary records held in doubtfully secure locations in parishes throughout Ireland. Many of these records were later to be destroyed in the fire at the Four Courts during the civil war in 1922. 
Ferguson's 'Poems' appeared in 1880. Here, among negligible devotional and occasional pieces, were further narrative poems, notably 'Conary', probably the most successful of all the 'lays'. There was also 'Deirdre', a monodrama in the Tennysonian manner which anticipates the verse plays of Synge and Yeats. This was his last book of poetry. His lifelong contribution to the Royal Irish Academy was recognized in 1881 when he was elected its president. He also published 'Shakespearian Breviates' (1882); this set out how twenty-four of Shakespeare's plays might be abridged so as cut the number of characters and the overall length, and remove any passages considered too indelicate for a nineteenth-century drawing-room, and it supplied linking verses to make good the continuity. It is a book which evidently derived from Shakespearian evenings with friends, where the guests included Ferguson's neighbour Edward Dowden, the Shakespearian scholar. In April 1884, as president of the Royal Irish Academy, he was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of Edinburgh. 
During the summer of 1886 Ferguson's health was failing, and on 9 August he died of heart failure at Strand Lodge in Howth, a seaside resort north of Dublin where his wife's family had a house. Following a service in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, on 12 August, he was buried at Donegore in co. Antrim. He had no children. 
As an antiquarian Ferguson concentrated principally on ogham stone inscriptions. Towards the end of his life he wrote a dissertation for the Royal Irish Academy on documents associated with Saint Patrick; this, together with his verse translation of the 'Confession' and the 'Epistle to Coroticus', was published in book form in 1888 by his wife. Lady Ferguson also oversaw editions of the 'Hibernian Nights' Entertainments' and 'Congal' (1887), and 'Lays of the Western Gael' (1888), and subsequently prepared 'Lays of the Red Branch' (1897) which assembled the narrative lays in sequence. These publications, and her biography of him published in 1896, helped to keep Ferguson's reputation current in the two or three decades following his death so that, although neglected in the middle years of the nineteenth century, his writing was seen retrospectively as an important tributary of the Irish literary revival as the century turned. 


@@@@@


doc= 9329


Ferguson, William (1820-1887), surveyor and naturalist, was born in late July 1820. Nothing is known of his early life or education. He arrived in Ceylon in December 1839 and entered the Ceylon civil service as a surveyor. A keen observer of nature, his position allowed him to explore many forms of plant and animal life on the island. Botany was his chief interest, but he also devoted attention to reptiles, amphibians, birds, and insects. He did not examine closely the anatomical structures of individual specimens, but he was extremely knowledgeable about their taxonomic history and sent his observations and material collected to other naturalists, notably Sir Joseph Hooker of the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew and Dr George Henry Kendrick Thwaites of the Peradeniya Botanic Garden in Ceylon. There are more than eighty letters from Ferguson, many to Hooker, preserved in the archives at Kew. His scientific papers and monographs, such as 'The Palmyra palm of Ceylon and its products' (1850), were published by such periodicals as the 'Ceylon Observer', 'Tropical Agriculturist', 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History', and 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society'; other significant work includes 'Scripture Botany of Ceylon' (1859), 'Descriptive List of Ceylon Timber Trees' (1863), 'Ceylon Ferns and their Allies' (1880), and his contributions to Thwaites's 'Enumeratio planterum Zeylaniae'. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1862. In 1878 Hooker named a herbaceous Ceylon rubiacea, 'Fergusonia', in his honour. Ferguson died in Ceylon, still in post as a surveyor, on 31 July or 1 August 1887; he was buried at the general cemetery there on 1 August. The Ceylon algae he collected is preserved in the herbarium of the Natural History Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 9330


Ferguson, William Gouw (b. 1632/3, d. in or after 1689), painter, was probably born in Scotland. Of his parents nothing is known. He specialized largely in paintings of dead game in the style of Willem van Aelst, and achieved considerable proficiency in this field; works by Ferguson have been honoured with the false signatures of Cornelis van Lelienbergh and Jan Weenix. Of his early works in public collections, a 'Still Life with Birds' is in the Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam. Other early works are in the Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg. He is said to have trained in his native country, but his style is so Dutch that a partial Netherlandish training seems probable. He was certainly in Holland by 1660, when he hired a house at The Hague, and in 1668 he was still there. Part of the rental contract said that he should paint a picture a year for the owner of the house. In 1681 he was living in the Batavierstraat in Amsterdam, and on 28 June his betrothal to Sara van Someren of Stockholm is recorded in the city archives; the artist was said on this occasion to be forty-eight. According to Walpole 'he lived long in Italy and France' (Walpole, 574), and this has generally been given credence on the basis of a series of dramatically, often eerily, lit landscapes containing classical remains -- though the possibility that he worked at home from prints after the antique is surely open. Two of these pictures were made as over-doors for the duchess of Lauderdale in 1673, and are still 'in situ' at Ham House, Surrey. Walpole claimed that 'he worked very cheap, and died here' (ibid., 574), but his place and date of death have yet to be established. His last dated painting bears the year 1689 (Christies, London, 10 November 1967). In 1692 a sale in the Lawnmarket in Edinburgh contained eight works by Ferguson, and four further works were sold in Edinburgh on 3 March 1693. These sales suggest that his last years were spent in his homeland. Three later still lifes and a 'Ruined Altar and Figures' signed by Ferguson are in the National Gallery, Edinburgh. Other examples of works by Ferguson are in Glasgow Art Gallery, Brodie Castle, Manchester City Galleries, Berlin Art Gallery, and the Kunsthalle, Hamburg. 


@@@@@


doc= 9331


Fergusson, Sir Charles Dalrymple-, of Kilkerran, fifth baronet (1800-1849), landowner, was the eldest son of Sir James Fergusson of Kilkerran, fourth baronet (1765-1838), and his first wife (and first cousin), Jean (died 6 May 1803), second daughter of Sir David Dalrymple, third baronet (Lord Hailes). He was born at Fort George, Inverness-shire, on 26 August 1800. He was educated at Harrow School (1814-17), and at Edinburgh University, though he did not graduate. He became an advocate in 1822, practising at the Scottish bar until his father's death (14 April 1838). He was a member of the Speculative Society, and at its meetings read two essays, 'Origin and progress of criminal jurisprudence' and 'History of painting'. He was an active promoter of almost every scheme of improvement throughout Scotland. Ayrshire, in which his seat was situated, was especially indebted to his aid in its agricultural, charitable, and religious institutions. He initiated the Ayrshire Educational Association, and at his own expense built schools and churches. He was returned to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland as a lay representative for Ayr. He did much to extend the church's usefulness and efficiency, and his advice influenced its legislative body. A decided conservative in his political principles, in both church and state, Fergusson disliked the strife of political life, and was tolerant in his sentiments. Though repeatedly urged by his friends he refused to seek election for his native county. He continued a zealous protectionist. A colonial proprietor, he condemned Peel's free trade legislation as injurious to the colonies. On 1 June 1829 he married Helen (died 26 June 1869), daughter of David Boyle, Lord Shewalton (1772-1853), lord justice-general of Scotland, and they had eight children. In 1837 he succeeded to the estates of his grandfather, Lord Hailes, in East Lothian and Midlothian, and in 1838 to those of his father in Ayrshire, on which he resided. In 1838, on inheriting the Newhailes estate from his aunt Christian Dalrymple, he assumed the name Dalrymple-Fergusson. He died at Inveresk, Midlothian, on 18 March 1849. His Ayrshire tenants erected a monument to him. Fergusson's estate of Hailes in East Lothian and Midlothian descended to his second son, Charles, who assumed the name of Dalrymple, as representing his great-grandfather, Lord Hailes, but the baronetcy of Hailes was extinct; in 1887 he was created baronet, of Newhailes. In the title and estates of Fergusson of Kilkerran, Fergusson was succeeded by his eldest son, Sir James Fergusson (1832-1907), politician and colonial governor. 


@@@@@


doc= 9332


Fergusson, George, Lord Hermand (1743-1827), judge, was born on 25 August 1743 at Kilkerran, near Dailly, Ayrshire, the thirteenth of the fourteen children of Sir James Fergusson of Kilkerran, second baronet (bap. 1688, d. 1759), senator of the college of justice as Lord Kilkerran, and his wife, Jean Maitland (1703-1766), only child of James, Viscount Maitland, and granddaughter of John Maitland, fifth earl of Lauderdale. The Fergussons belonged to the ancient native gentry of south-west Scotland, and had been established at Kilkerran since at least the fifteenth century. 
After private tuition in Ayrshire and Edinburgh and a year at school in Edinburgh (1755-6), Fergusson went to the University of Edinburgh, to study logic and metaphysics, humanity, and Greek (1756-8), and then law (1763-5). Like his father and his grandfather he pursued a legal career, being admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates in December 1765. He had a successful career at the bar, and was appointed a commissary of Edinburgh in November 1775, a position which he retained until his elevation to the court of session in July 1799 as Lord Hermand. He, rather than his eldest brother, Adam, was probably responsible for editing and publishing his father's collection of decisions of the court of session from 1738 to 1752 ('Kilkerran's Decisions', 1775). He also made a valuable collection of the decisions of the commissary court of Edinburgh from 1684 to 1777 which, though not published until 1940, when it was edited by F. P. Walton for the Stair Society as 'Lord Hermand's Consistorial Decisions', was consulted in manuscript, and relied on by James Fergusson for his 'Reports of some Recent Decisions by the Consistorial Courts of Scotland' (1817). 
Lord Hermand was a strong advocate of agricultural improvement, and took his judicial title from his country estate of Hermand (formerly Herdmansheills) at West Calder in Linlithgowshire. He also maintained a keen interest in Ayrshire politics, and supported his brother, Sir Adam Fergusson, MP for Ayrshire (and later for Edinburgh), a tory in the Dundas interest. Lord Hermand was also appointed a lord of justiciary in August 1808, and he held both his judicial offices until his resignation in 1826. 
It is, however, for his eccentricities of behaviour, and his legendary capacity for drink, as memorialized by Lord Cockburn, that Lord Hermand is now best remembered. Cockburn describes Hermand as having 'a sincere respect for drinking, indeed a high moral approbation, and a serious compassion for the poor wretches who could not indulge in it; with due contempt for those who could, but did not' ('Memorials', 134). One anecdote told by Cockburn relates to an informal supper held after a day's judicial proceedings at Inveraray in 1808. Lords Hermand and Cullen, not on the best of terms socially, had been the judges. 'They were cold to each other at first, but at last liquor soldered them, and by two in the morning... they were embracing and vowing eternal friendship, and toasting each other's wives, and giving us young ones imitations of the old lawyers. I scarcely ever saw such a scene. But it was not unjudicial in those days. Cullen was in bed all next day, and never saw his own Circuit Court, but the immortal head of Hermand was clear and cool next morning at six, and after a few hours of business and a long sail, he returned to the charge at dinner with a picturesque and cordial exuberance of spirits which the concentrated kindness and gaiety of all Argyleshire could not have equalled. (Cockburn, 'Circuit Journeys', 88)' No doubt Cockburn gilded the lily, but there is ample evidence of Hermand's eccentricities from other sources. Lord Hermand was a man of intense temperament and restless energy. His accent was distinctively Scottish, and his style of argument was direct and innocent of affectation. 
Lord Hermand married late, on 23 December 1793, Graham (died 1834), daughter of William MacDowall of Garthland. There were no children of the marriage. He died at Hermand on 9 August 1827, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 9333


Fergusson, Sir James, second baronet, Lord Kilkerran (bap. 1688, d. 1759), judge, was baptized on 17 July 1688 at Old Machair, Aberdeen, the eldest son of Sir John Fergusson, first baronet (died 1729), of Kilkerran, Ayrshire. He studied law, possibly at Leiden, and was admitted advocate in 1711. He entered parliament in 1734 as member for Sutherland and sat for that county until he was appointed a lord of session on 7 November 1735, taking the courtesy title Lord Kilkerran. He was made a lord of justiciary on 3 April 1749. 
Fergusson had married, in September 1726, Jean (1703-1766), daughter of James Maitland, Lord Maitland. They raised a large family, among whom their eldest son, Adam, became a lawyer and MP; a daughter, Helen, was the second wife of Sir David Dalrymple, Lord Hailes, and a younger son was George Fergusson, later Lord Hermand (1743-1827). It was probably this son who published in 1775 his father's 'Decisions of the Court of Session from the Year 1738 to the Year 1752', a volume much admired for its clarity, and as a model for the most useful form of law reports. 
Though considered to be abstemious, Kilkerran was a devotee of claret and afflicted by gout. He was nevertheless considered to be one of the ablest lawyers of his day. His knowledge was founded on a thorough acquaintance with Roman jurisprudence, and a familiarity with the best commentaries on Scots law. He died at his residence near Edinburgh on 20 January 1759. 


@@@@@


doc= 9334


Fergusson, James (1769-1842), judge and legal writer, was born in Ayr on 10 September 1769, the eldest son of James Fergusson jun. (1735-1816), of Bank, and afterwards of Monkwood, Ayrshire, and Margaret Hutchison (1746-1821). He studied in the University of Edinburgh in the 1780s, and was admitted an advocate on 5 July 1791. Fergusson married Mary Home (died 1845), daughter of John Home of Bassendean, on 1 November 1806. Two daughters were born from the marriage. In 1809 Fergusson was appointed an advocate-depute, and on 4 March 1811 he became one of the four commissaries of Edinburgh. He held this office until he was appointed one of the principal clerks of session on 5 June 1826. To this last post he added that of keeper of the general register of entails, by 1830. 
In 1806 Fergusson published 'Letters upon the establishment of the volunteer corps and domestic military arrangements of Great Britain'. He himself held the office of major in a volunteer corps, and the pamphlet was concerned with the proper organization of the military to defend Britain from the threat of invasion. His 'Observations upon the proposed reform in the administration of civil justice in Scotland' (1807) debated the controversial topic of the introduction of jury trial, then under consideration during the brief whig administration of Lord Grenville, and his 'Observations upon the provisions of the bill presented to parliament relative to the trial in a separate tribunal of issues of fact arising in actions instituted before the supreme civil court of Scotland' (1824) dealt with the issue of the separate jury court created in 1816. These two publications showed his grasp of issues of procedure and indicated an independence of mind about the advantages of trial by jury. The second may have influenced his appointment as a principal clerk of session. Fergusson also published 'Observations on entails, and entries of heirs apparent, cum beneficio inventarii, with an index of the register of Tailzies from AD' 1685 to 1830 (1830), and 'Additional observations on entails... with an index of the register of tailzies... alphabetically arranged' (1831). These publications grew directly from his office as keeper. 
Fergusson's most interesting publications, arising from his work as a commissary, were 'Reports of some recent decisions by the consistorial courts of Scotland in actions of divorce' (1817), and 'A treatise on the present state of the consistorial law in Scotland, with reports of decided cases' (1829). What inspired Fergusson in these works were the conflicts between Scots and English law over judicial dissolution of marriage on the grounds of adultery, which was possible in Scotland but not in England. These works exerted considerable influence on Joseph Story's discussion of conflicts of law in the area of family law in his great 'Commentaries on the Conflict of Laws', first published in Boston in 1834. Fergusson thus had an observable impact on the first treatise in English written on this important topic. 
Fergusson sold his estate of Monkwood to his brother John H. Fergusson of Trochraigue. He died at his home, 40 Heriot Row, Edinburgh, on 3 May 1842, and was buried on 10 May at the new church, Greyfriars, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 9335


Fergusson, Sir James (1787-1865), army officer, the son of Charles Fergusson and his wife and cousin, the daughter of Alexander Fergusson of Craigdarroch in Dumfriesshire (and maternal grandniece of the second earl of Stair), was born on 17 March 1787. He entered the army as an ensign in the 18th Royal Irish regiment on 20 August 1801. From the 18th he was soon transferred to the 43rd Monmouthshire light infantry, then training under Sir John Moore at Shorncliffe with the 52nd and 95th. These regiments formed the light division in the Peninsular War. Under the patronage of Moore, Fergusson was promoted lieutenant on 9 February 1804 and captain on 1 December 1806, and in 1808 accompanied the 43rd in the expedition under Sir Arthur Wellesley to Portugal. He was at Rolica, at Vimeiro (where he was wounded), and in the retreat of Moore to Corunna, where the 43rd was in the reserve division. 
Fergusson next served in the Walcheren expedition in 1809. In March 1810 he again arrived with the 43rd in Portugal, and served through the Peninsular War without taking leave, except for wounds. He was with the 43rd, and shared in the forced march before Talavera, in Craufurd's action on the Coa, at the battle of Busaco, in the retreat before Massena, in the pursuit after Massena (including the engagements of Pombal, Redinha, Foz d'Aronce, and Sabugal), and at the battle of Fuentes de Onoro. In the two assaults on Badajoz and the assault on Ciudad Rodrigo Fergusson accompanied the storming parties of the 43rd as a volunteer, and was wounded at both places. He received a gold medal for the capture of Badajoz as senior surviving officer of the light division storming party, and after being present at the battle of Salamanca he was for his bravery promoted major without purchase into the 79th regiment on 3 December 1812. He at once exchanged into the 85th, and served in the 4th division in the passage of the Bidassoa, the battles of the Nivelle and the Nive, and the investment of Bayonne. 
On 16 May 1814 Fergusson was promoted without purchase lieutenant-colonel of the 2nd battalion 3rd regiment, the Buffs; his battalion was reduced in 1816, and he had to go on half pay, but he obtained leave to study at the Royal Military College at Farnham for three years. In 1819 he was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the 88th regiment, from which he was removed in 1825 to the 52nd. He commanded it, until 1839, in England, Ireland, Nova Scotia, Gibraltar, and the West Indies. 
While with the 52nd Fergusson was appointed an aide-de-camp to William IV, promoted colonel on 22 July 1830, and made a CB in September 1831; on 23 November 1841, two years after his retirement from the 52nd, he was promoted major-general. His health suffered from his Peninsular wounds, which prevented him from accepting any command abroad, but he was colonel of the 62nd foot from 9 March to 26 March 1850, of the 43rd from 26 March 1850, and lieutenant-general from 11 May 1851. In 1853 he accepted the post of general commanding the troops at Malta. For his services there to troops going to and from the Crimean War, and his zeal in forwarding medical comforts, he was publicly thanked by the duke of Newcastle, the secretary of state, and made a KCB on 5 July 1855. On 28 August 1855 he was appointed governor and commander-in-chief at Gibraltar (salary $5000), from which post he resigned in 1859. He was promoted general on 21 February 1860, and made a GCB on 21 May 1860. He took up his residence at 14 Marlborough Buildings, Bath, where he died on 4 September 1865. He was buried in Locksbrook cemetery, Bath, where a handsome monument was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 9336


Fergusson, James (1808-1886), architectural historian, was born in Ayr, Scotland, in late 1808, the second son of Dr William Fergusson (1773-1846), an army surgeon with an interest in engineering as applied to military hospitals. Fergusson's family eventually settled in Windsor, and James was educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, and at a private school at Hounslow. 
After leaving school Fergusson went to India, where he was briefly employed in the mercantile firm of Fairlie, Fergusson & Co. of Calcutta before going into business as an indigo planter in Bengal. According to his obituary in 'The Athenaeum', Fergusson made his fortune in this business in ten years and was able to retire, and as 'an expert draughtsman with a camera-lucida' he explored India 'chiefly on a camel's back, from end to end and from side to side' exploring the rock-cut temples of Ajanta, Ellora, and elsewhere ('The Athenaeum'). In the preface to his 'An historical inquiry into the true principles of beauty in art, more especially with reference to architecture' (1849) -- on the title-page of which he styles himself 'Architect' -- Fergusson is less clear about either his financial independence or his ability to undertake a career as an architectural historian. He wrote there that 'few men have, either from education or the professional pursuits of their life, been less prepared for such a work as this. From boyhood I was destined to the desk. From school I passed to the counting-house; from that to an indigo factory... from this to becoming an acting and active partner in a large mercantile establishment, from the trammels of which, in spite of every endeavour, I have never been able to free myself. (Fergusson, 'Historical Inquiry', xi)' However, he subsequently explains that although not well educated for the task, he had travelled extensively in the East, where he had 'had leisure to see a great deal of art; and, what is of far more importance, I have had time to think over and reflect on what I saw. For months together I lived among buildings and the works of art they contain, and I have looked on them long and steadfastly, and until I could read in the chisel marks on the stone the idea that guided the artist in his design, till I could put myself by his side, I never felt satisfied. (ibid., xiv)' But at the same time he lamented, 'Another disadvantage of my mercantile pursuits has been the practical exclusion it entails from the best class of intellectual or artistic society... At one time I hoped that my previous publications might have remedied this last defect, and given me that introduction to literary society which might have entitled me to ask advice and assistance. They, however, have failed in this as in other respects. (ibid., xii)' In 1840 he became a member of the Royal Asiatic Society, with whom he maintained a lifelong contact; at his death he was one of the society's vice-presidents. 
Fergusson's earliest published works were on the architecture of India: 'Illustrations of the Rock-Cut Temples of India' (1845), 'Picturesque Illustrations of Ancient Architecture in Hindostan' (1848), and the above-noted 'An Historical Inquiry', of which he wrote, 'The theory of art which runs through every page of it was elaborated from a study of Indian, Mahomedan, and Gothic architecture' (Fergusson, 'Historical Inquiry', xiii). Through these books Fergusson had by the early 1850s made a name for himself as one of the leading architectural historians, at least of the East. Indeed, John Ruskin wrote to his father on 18 February 1852, 'If Fergusson and [Charles] Cockerell were both at work in Venice, I should not be; but the one works in India, the other in Greece' (J. L. Bradley, ed., 'Ruskin's Letters from Venice, 1851-1852', 1955, 185). Fergusson had made his last visit to India in 1845, and did not subsequently confine himself to Eastern historic architecture. Throughout his career he pursued a new, modern architectural style that would fully reflect what he considered to be the great achievements of the Victorian age. On the whole he considered his peers to have failed in this task, and was dismissive of modern Western architecture. He declared in his 'An Historical Inquiry' that at that time Western architects 'have ceased to think, and can only copy' (Fergusson, 'Historical Inquiry', xv). He saw contemporary Britain as standing at a moral crossroads as her empire brought wealth and luxury: in one direction lay the sensuality and corruption of ancient Rome, in the other lay Athens, which was 'throughout all antiquity, and is now, an object of such unbounded admiration; and this though neither her polity nor her morals were perfect, but merely because she had cultivated the sciences and arts' (ibid., 7). He declared: 'We are fast verging to a state of wealth and luxury almost equal to that of Rome before she fell under the dominion of her emperors.... The path of Athens is as open to us as that of Rome' (ibid., 8). 
Despite his interest in architectural history, and though he praised the achievements of British architecture in the middle ages, Fergusson sought a modern native architecture that would build upon these achievements and result in something 'that will be worthy of our nation, and worthy of engaging and employing the highest class of intellects that exists among us' (Fergusson, 'Historical Inquiry', 14). This greatness did not lie in the sorry emulation which Fergusson saw in either Greek or Gothic revivalism. At the conclusion of his long introduction to 'An Historical Inquiry' he observed that many public buildings and mansions were being built in Britain of greater dimensions and ornaments than those of ancient Greece or the middle ages, and that 'the elements of architectural excellence are in our hands' (ibid., 169). Britons could either attempt to surpass these achievements and 'clothe the land with beauty; or... go on erecting edifices which are merely monuments of our servility and ignorance, till we have filled the land with dried specimens of past civilisations, as if only to tell posterity that we had no art of our own, and dared not think for ourselves. (ibid.)' Fundamentally, he believed that 'we have no Style of architecture' and considered the Gothic revival to be 'a standing insult to the age we live in' (J. Fergusson, 'History of the Modern Styles of Architecture', 1863, 129). In his opinion it was industrial architecture and engineering that really incorporated the achievements of the modern age, because they were strictly contemporary; thus 'the great steam-engine factories' were 'among the most remarkable triumphs of mind over matter that the world has yet witnessed', and lighthouses were 'the most perfect specimens of modern architecture' ('QR', 114, 1823, 289-331). With certain qualifications, the Crystal Palace built to house the Great Exhibition of 1851 (and for which he was for a time a secretary) was the type of modern architecture he praised. An anonymous letter possibly written by Fergusson in 'The Ecclesiologist' praised this building: 'the construction is almost invariably real, and all its beauty depends on the development of that construction' (Hitchcock, 1.546). It has been suggested that it was Fergusson who introduced this catchword 'real', which was popular with critics in the 1850s as a descriptive for contemporary architecture. But, all told, Fergusson did not particularly propose a new style himself: it was enough for him to suggest that the Royal Institute of British Architects 'must write over its doors, 'Archaeology is not Architecture'' (Crook, 105). 
This general viewpoint was reiterated throughout Fergusson's published works, as well as in the critical essays he wrote for contemporary journals such as 'The Builder'. The architectural style and buildings designed and built by Pugin, William Burges, Gilbert Scott, and Benjamin Woodward were all targets for attack. He entered into the great debate of 1850-51 surrounding 'copyism', sparked off by Pugin's restatement of his position which demanded the most humble emulation of the past. Fergusson condemned the 'servile doctrines of copying' and stated his position that 'truth in [architectural] art consists of representing faithfully the wants and feelings of the people who use [buildings] and of the age which gave birth to [them]' (Hitchcock, 1.605-6). In the early 1870s, as a member of the executive committee for the completion of St Paul's, Fergusson strongly (and sensibly) opposed the appointment of Burges, a notorious Gothicist, to complete the work of Christopher Wren's baroque cathedral. In 1874 he was one of four architects who headed an attack on Burges's designs for the cathedral as being against Wren's style, leading to Burges's suspension from the project. In a strong piece in the 'Contemporary Review' Fergusson wrote that Burges's scheme was 'one of the most fantastic proposals... ever submitted in seriousness to any body of men' ('Contemporary Review', 24, 1874, 750-51). Burges in turn described Fergusson's comments as 'personal and scurrilous' (Crook, 164). Such sparks flew in the argument between them that 'The Architect' described the two men as being 'like flint and steel' ('The Architect', 12, 1874, 297). But in Fergusson's no less ambitious proposal, the cathedral would have a completely reconstructed choir with a second, octagonal dome decorated with Ravenna mosaics. 'The Athenaeum' later noted of Fergusson's contribution to this committee that 'opinion differs widely as to the soundness of his views' ('The Athenaeum'). 
Fergusson's greatest published achievement was what became his four-volume 'A History of Architecture in All Countries'. Volumes 1 and 2 were first published in London in 1865 and 1867; volume 3 was eventually represented by his 'History of Indian and Eastern Architecture' (1876) and volume 4 by 'History of the Modern Styles of Architecture' (1862). These volumes went through a number of revised editions, and according to 'The Athenaeum' became 'an established manual on the subject for students' ('The Athenaeum'). This was the first book actually to make him money: the previous ones had been published at his own expense. Despite sometimes calling himself an architect, Fergusson never actually practised in this capacity, though he did make designs for his factory in Bengal, his own house at 20 Langham Place, west London, and the country mansion at Wimbledon built for his friend John Murray. He also designed the gallery at Kew for Miss North's collection of pictures of plants. 
Fergusson's critical writings and researches brought him various official appointments. He was interested in military construction and in 1849 proposed a 'new system of fortification by earthworks'; in 1852 he noted the defenceless state of Portsmouth. Though his suggestions were not generally adopted, he was appointed in 1857 as a member of the royal commission to inquire into the defences of the United Kingdom. In the early 1860s Fergusson was appointed as one of the judges to the committee for the Crimea Memorial Church in Constantinople, a building intended to be a national memorial for the Crimean War. The competition was won in 1857 by Burges, but there followed a long process of change and compromise. In 1867 Fergusson arranged the collection of photographs and casts in the Indian court of the Universal Exhibition at Paris, and in 1869 he was appointed by Sir Henry Layard, the chief commissioner of works, to be his assistant, but he only held the position for the eight months until Layard's retirement. Fergusson was also active on the council of the Royal Geographical Society, while in 1871 the Royal Institute of British Architects awarded him its gold medal 'for his great merits'. 
Despite his aphorism 'archaeology is not architecture', Fergusson remained keenly interested in archaeology after his return from India. He published proposals for the possible reconstruction of the palaces of Nineveh and Persepolis (1851), the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus (1862), and the temple of Diana at Ephesus (1883). He made suggestions to Heinrich Schliemann in his excavations of the cities of Troy, Mycenae, and Tiryns, and Schliemann credited Fergusson in the dedication to 'Tiryns', where he described him as 'eminent alike for his knowledge of art and for the original genius which he has applied to the solution of some of its most difficult problems' ('The Athenaeum'). A particular interest was the topography and temples of ancient Jerusalem, which stimulated a number of short books, lectures, and articles between 1847 and 1878. His confident assertion of the site of the holy sepulchre in 1860 helped prompt an accurate survey of the city carried out by Captain C. W. Wilson of the Royal Engineers, and his strong pursuit of his views was said to have helped prompt the establishment of the Palestine Exploration Fund ('DNB'). Prehistoric remains were also the subject of a number of papers and a book ('Rude Stone Monuments in All Countries', 1872), though against general scholarly opinion he argued that Stonehenge was a post-Roman monument and his work on ancient tree and serpent worship was fanciful. A particular interest in his final years was attempting to explain how Greek and Roman temples were lit by natural light: a book on this subject was published in 1883. 
Fergusson continued writing and publishing on architecture and antiquities almost right up to December 1885, when he suffered a paralytic attack. He died at his home at Langham Place on 9 January 1886 and was buried at Highgate cemetery. He had never married. His insecurity at his lack of a university education perhaps explains some of the vehemence of opinion that characterized Fergusson's long career as a critic of Victorian architecture. The president of the Royal Asiatic Society, Henry Yule, reflected that 'he held original views, and strong ones... on most subjects.... His convictions on all subjects were intense.... Even those who gave and took hard knocks in strife with him ache, we trust, no longer' (Yule, iv). 'The Athenaeum' summed up his career with the observation that, although he was 'not so great an authority, nor so profoundly versed in design, as many of his admirers assumed, he was undoubtedly a man of note' who deserved to be remembered for his great histories of architecture ('The Athenaeum', 109). 'His acute analysis and criticism, always intended to illustrate the perfection of common sense, did not invariably carry conviction, and such subjects as 'Rude Stone Monuments' were scarcely suited to his powers, yet his clear, laborious, and searching methods commanded attention, and never failed to gain respect. (ibid.)' 



@@@@@


doc= 9337


Fergusson, Robert (1750-1774), poet, was born on 5 September 1750 in the Cap-and-Feather Close (now demolished), off the High Street, Edinburgh, the fourth of the five children of William Fergusson (1714-1767), a clerk from Tarland in Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Forbes ('b'. 1714), daughter of John Forbes of Templeton in the parish of Kildrummy, Aberdeenshire, and descended from the family of the Forbeses of Tolquhon. While his father was working as clerk to Walter Fergusson, writer to the signet in Edinburgh, the sickly seven-year-old Robert was sent for six months to Mr Philp's private school in Niddry's Wynd. From 1758 for four yours he went to Edinburgh's high school, getting a good grounding in Latin, before moving to Dundee's grammar school. There in 1762 he was awarded the David Fergusson mortification, a scholarship for those with his surname. Having spent the summer of 1764 with his mother on his uncle John Forbes's farm at Roundlichnot, near Old Meldrum, Aberdeenshire, the sometimes ailing Robert progressed on the same scholarship to St Andrews University. 
The St Andrews arts curriculum of the period let Fergusson study Greek and Latin throughout his course, along with mathematics and logic in the second year, mathematics and moral philosophy in the third year, and natural philosophy in the fourth. An unusual aspect of St Andrews at this time was the teaching of rhetoric by Robert Watson, professor of logic, whose lectures dealt with the study of English literary texts, emphasizing the importance of Anglocentric politeness, while ignoring the Scottish vernacular. Fergusson was perhaps the first significant poet to study English literary texts at a university. Considered the best singer at St Andrews, he was often asked to officiate as clerk at morning and evening prayers. An excellent student mathematician, he became the favoured pupil of the farmer-poet William Wilkie, professor of mathematics. Best known as 'the Scottish Homer' for his English-language 'Epigoniad', Wilkie also wrote in Scots during Fergusson's student days. Fergusson's later memorial, 'Eclogue', praised Wilkie's ability to inspire 'Scholars and bards' ('Poems', 2.85). Employed for two summers to make a fair copy of Wilkie's lectures, Fergusson also celebrated other St Andrews University figures. His serio-comic 'Elegy' on the death of the mathematician David Gregory is remarkable for its presentation of Euclidean geometry in Scots verse, relishing such expressions as 'surd roots' ('Poems', 2.1). Some years later, in 1773, he wrote another elegy in the 'Standard Habbie' Scots verse form on John Hogg, the university porter, and in his 'To the principal and professors of the University of St Andrews, on their superb treat to Dr Samuel Johnson' Fergusson attacked his alma mater for its sycophantic reception of Johnson on his visit to St Andrews in 1773, and for failing to champion Scottish vernacular culture. Towards the end of his time as a St Andrews student, Fergusson is said to have begun work on a tragedy dealing with the death of William Wallace. The poet was involved in a St Andrews student 'riot' in 1768 and offered up a mock prayer for one of his friends in front of the assembled professors, an act which almost led to his expulsion. Fergusson was a lively student, but not universally popular. Eighteenth-century marginalia in St Andrews University Library describe him as 'a stinking fairy' and 'a snake in human form stain'd with infamy and wickedness' (Crawford, 27). 
Fergusson, who appears to have had Jacobite and anti-unionist sentiments, left St Andrews in May 1768, without graduating (an omission common at the time), but would not settle to a profession. Early in 1769 he spent six months on his uncle's farm at Roundlichnot, leaving under a cloud. In September 1769 he took a job as clerk in the commissary office, Edinburgh, copying legal documents at the rate of a penny a page. He became a friend to Edinburgh singers and musicians, including the visiting Italian singer Giusto Ferdinando Tenducci, who performed some songs by him. A friend of several actors, Fergusson relished Edinburgh's theatre life. In 1771 'The Weekly Magazine, or Edinburgh Amusement' published three 'Pastorals' by Fergusson, written in the manner of Shenstone. These were followed by other poems in English, and the poet appears to have enjoyed a passionate friendship with a young woman, designated 'Stella' in a series of poems. In 1772 Fergusson published several poems in Scots in 'The Weekly Magazine'. Poems such as 'The death of Scots music', 'Caller Oysters', and 'To the Tron Kirk Bell' celebrated in racily sophisticated vernacular language the pleasures of Edinburgh. Fergusson was hailed by his actor friend Frederick Guion as 'The Laureate' of that city, while another commentator praised him for reviving the tradition of Allan Ramsay ('Poems', 1.33). By the end of 1772 he was planning the publication of his poems in book form, and was reported as hoping to follow in the footsteps of the great Scots translator Gavin Douglas by translating Virgil's 'Eclogues' and 'Georgics'. Walter Ruddiman, editor of the 'Weekly Magazine', encouraged the impoverished Fergusson, and gifted to him two suits of clothes. 
In early January 1773 Fergusson's volume of 'Poems' was published in Edinburgh under the imprint of Walter and Thomas Ruddiman. Fergusson is known to have inscribed copies to James Boswell, to the earl of Glencairn (later a patron of Burns), to the ballad collector David Herd, and to several others. Soon after, in 1773, he published 'Auld Reekie, a Poem' which, though it attracted little immediate notice, ranks as the supreme vernacular Scots celebration of Edinburgh's bustling streetlife and convivial delights: '
On stair wi' TUB, or PAT in hand, 

The barefoot HOUSEMAIDS looe to stand, 

That antrin Fock may ken how SNELL 

Auld Reekie will at MORNING SMELL. 
('Poems', 2.110)' A poem by 'Philanthropus' in the 'Weekly Magazine' in December 1772 presented Fergusson as charming Edinburgh society with his 'quick and lively fancy', as singing lustily, but also as a slovenly youth who 'Wears dirty shirts, nor combs his hair' and who needs to behave more prudently ('Poems', 1.46-7). Fergusson's friend and early biographer Thomas Sommers recalled him as 'about five feet, six inches high, and well shaped. His complexion fair, but rather pale. His eyes full, black, and piercing. His nose long, his lips thin, his teeth well set and white'. Narrow-shouldered and long-limbed, Fergusson had a voice, Sommers remembered, 'strong, clear, and melodious... when speaking, he was quick, forcible, and complaisant. In walking, he appeared smart, erect, and unaffected' ('Poems', 1.59). 
In October 1772 Fergusson joined the Cape Club, which met in several Edinburgh taverns 'to pass the evening socially' ('Poems', 1.50). Delighting in its quasi-masonic rituals, Fergusson took on the nickname 'Sir Precenter' (as a result of his St Andrews exploits), and hymned the Cape's activities. A drawing of him survives in the club's minute book (National Library of Scotland). At the Cape he mixed with ordinary tradesmen as well as with artistic figures such as David Herd and Alexander Runciman, who painted Fergusson's portrait, now in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, and to whom Fergusson addressed some comic verses. Brought up in a protestant milieu, Fergusson knew the 'Bible' well, but appears to have had difficulties accepting some of the tenets of Christianity. 
In October 1773 Fergusson published 'A Poem to the Memory of John Cunningham', elegizing a poet who had died in Newcastle's madhouse. The same month he wrote to a friend, complaining how 'that fancy which has so often afforded me pleasure, almost denies to operate but on the gloomiest subjects'; in November, he signed a letter 'Yours, in the horrors' ('Poems', 1.67-8). At the end of the year Fergusson had to give up his work at the commissary office, and was seriously ill; possibly he had contracted syphilis. His last poems, in English, include a paraphrase of part of the book of 'Job', and an 'Ode to Horror'. Severely depressed, Fergusson sought quiet in the village of Restalrig, near Edinburgh, but soon returned to the city, burning many of his poems, and constantly reading the 'Bible'. One recollection has Fergusson telling a friend near the North Bridge, Edinburgh, that he had just spotted one of the men who crucified Christ ('Poems', 1.74). On 2 July 1774 the Cape Club took up a collection to aid Fergusson who, after showing some signs of recovery, fell downstairs, became delirious, and was committed to a cell in Edinburgh's Darien House Asylum where he lay weeping fully-clothed on a bed of straw. He died there on 17 October 1774 and was buried on 19 October in the Canongate churchyard in an unmarked grave. 
In 1779 Walter and Thomas Ruddiman issued a further volume by Fergusson, 'Poems on Various Subjects'; in 1782 and 1785 fuller, collected editions of Fergusson's work appeared from the same publisher. The standard modern edition is by Matthew McDiarmid for the Scottish Text Society (2 vols., 1954-6). Fergusson was Robert Burns's favourite Scottish poet, and, though they never met, they had friends in common. When Burns was awaiting the publication of the Edinburgh edition of his own work in 1787 he complained about the lack of a headstone at Fergusson's grave; eventually he paid for and composed the inscription for such a memorial. Burns addressed several poems to Fergusson, calling him 'Heaven-taught Fergusson' and '
my elder brother in Misfortune 

By far my elder Brother in the muse. 
('Poems and Songs', 258)' Several of Burns's poems, including 'The Cottar's Saturday Night', are modelled on works by Fergusson, who has continued to be revered by Scottish poets. His fame rests largely on his thirty-five poems in Scots, including 'Leith Races', 'The Farmer's Ingle', and those mentioned above. In the nineteenth century Robert Louis Stevenson regarded him as 'so clever a boy, so wild... so like myself' and planned to add words to his tombstone 'as the gift of one Edinburgh lad to another' ('Letters', 8.290-91). In the twentieth century Sydney Goodsir Smith edited 'Robert Fergusson, 1750-1774: Essays by Various Hands' (1952) in which Hugh MacDiarmid, Robert Garioch, and other Scottish poets paid tribute to him and bonded his work to their own. In 2000, commissioned by the University of St Andrews, ten poets, including Douglas Dunn, W. N. Herbert, Kathleen Jamie, Edwin Morgan, Les Murray, and Don Paterson, continued the tradition of paying poetic homage to Fergusson. 


@@@@@


doc= 9338


Fergusson, Robert Cutlar (1768-1838), judge, was the eldest son of Alexander Fergusson of Craigdarroch, Dumfriesshire, Scotland. He was said to have been well educated, and Mrs Riddell of Glen Riddell, a friend of the poet Robert Burns, thought him in 1793 'everything that is elegant and accomplished'. Fergusson had by then published a tract, 'The proposed reform of the counties of Scotland, impartially examined, with observations on the conduct of the delegates' (1792), which argued for a widening of the franchise. He went on to study English law at Lincoln's Inn, and was called to the bar on 4 July 1797. 
Fergusson's acquaintance with reformers led to his employment as counsel for John Allen, a personal friend, who was tried with James O'Coigly, Arthur O'Connor, and others for high treason at Maidstone on 21 and 22 May 1798. At the trial a number of leading whigs (Erskine, Charles James Fox, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, the duke of Norfolk, Lord John Russell, and others) came forward as witnesses for O'Connor. The jury retired at 12.50 a.m. and returned at 1.25 a.m. O'Coigly was found guilty, and the others not guilty. Towards the end of the trial some Bow Street runners were seen in court ready to re-arrest O'Connor on another charge of high treason if he were acquitted. Immediately after Mr Justice Buller had sentenced O'Coigly, and before he had formally discharged the others, O'Connor stepped out of the dock and made a dash for the door. A free fight ensued with the constables trying to seize their man, while friends of the prisoners tried to help him escape. In the confusion lights were overthrown, and sticks brandished. However, O'Connor was seized and brought back. 
Fergusson, along with the earl of Thanet and others, was tried for his alleged part in this riot and rescue attempt at the bar of the king's bench on 25 April 1799. Although the evidence against him was tenuous, he was found guilty, fined $100, and ordered to be imprisoned for a year and to find sureties for his good behaviour for seven years. In the same year, he published an account of the proceedings with his own commentary, entitled 'The whole proceedings... by the king's attorney-general against the Rt. Hon. Sackville, earl of Thanet, Robert Fergusson, esq....'. 
Soon after his release Fergusson emigrated to Calcutta, where he practised as a barrister, acting as standing counsel to the government from 1813 to 1818 and as king's advocate from 1818 to 1825. Having amassed a large fortune in India, he returned to Scotland in 1826, where he stood as a Liberal candidate for the stewartry of Kirkcudbright against General Dunlop of Dunlop, and squeaked home by a majority of one. He was a vigorous supporter of all Liberal policies, and was particularly energetic and eloquent in promoting the Liberal position on Poland. In 1834 he was made judge advocate-general, and on 16 July was sworn of the privy council. He went out of office but returned with Lord Melbourne's government. He was director of the East India Company from 1830 to 1835. On 17 May 1832 he married Marie Josephine Auger de Beauchamp, a French aristocrat; they had two children. 
Fergusson died in Paris on 16 November 1838, and was buried in the family vault in Craigdarroch in Scotland. He was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 9339


Fergusson, William (1773-1846), inspector-general of army hospitals, was born in Ayr, Scotland, on 19 June 1773. After an education at the Ayr Academy he attended medical classes at Edinburgh University, where he graduated MD; he afterwards trained at various London hospitals. In 1794 he became assistant surgeon in the army, and served in the Netherlands, the West Indies, the Baltic, and Spain, and in the expedition against Guadeloupe in 1815. 
After retiring from the service in 1817, Fergusson settled in Edinburgh where he continued to practise medicine. Four years later, he moved to Windsor on the invitation of the duke of Gloucester, on whose staff he had been for twenty years. There Fergusson acquired a lucrative practice both in the town and the surrounding country, which he carried on until 1843, when he was disabled by paralysis. He died on 2 January 1846, at Grove End Road, St John's Wood, London. His 'Notes and Recollections of a Professional Life' (1846), a collection of his papers on various subjects, was published by his son, James Fergusson (1808-1886), an architectural historian. The papers comprising this informative work are not all strictly medical, one considerable section of the book being on military tactics. There is an essay on syphilis in Portugal and its effect on both the British troops and the local inhabitants, which was originally published in 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions' (1813). However, his most important essay is on the 'Nature and history of marsh poison' (1821), reprinted from the 'Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh' (January 1820). Contemporaries praised the work and its author for his pronouncements on the subject of malaria, gained from experience with British troops in the Netherlands, Portugal, and the West Indies. Fergusson was probably the first to do justice, in a professional sense, to the fact that malarial fevers often occur on dry and barren soils, where rotting vegetation cannot possibly exist. The publication of this work was an important step towards widening and rationalizing the understanding of malaria. 


@@@@@


doc= 9340


Fergusson, Sir William, first baronet (1808-1877), surgeon, was born at Prestonpans on 20 March 1808, one of the five children of James Fergusson (1766-1834) and his wife, Elizabeth (1766/7-1818), daughter of Andrew Hodge, of Anstruther, Fife. He was educated first at Prestonpans School and afterwards at Edinburgh, at the high school and then at the medical school. At the age of fifteen and against his father's wishes he took a position in a lawyer's office, but at seventeen he exchanged law for medicine. He became a pupil of Robert Knox, the anatomist, who appointed Fergusson at the age of twenty as demonstrator to his class of four hundred pupils. In 1828 Fergusson became a licentiate, and in 1829 a fellow, of the Edinburgh College of Surgeons. He continued to study anatomy, often spending from twelve to sixteen hours a day in the dissecting room. Two of his preparations were for many years preserved in the museum of the Edinburgh College of Surgeons. Soon after qualifying Fergusson began to deliver lectures on general anatomy with Knox, and to demonstrate surgical anatomy. In 1831 he was elected surgeon to the Edinburgh Royal Dispensary. In the same year he tied the subclavian artery for an aneurysm, which had then been done in Scotland only twice. On 10 October 1833 he married Helen Hamilton (died 1861), daughter and heir of William Ranken of Spittlehaugh, Peeblesshire; they had two sons and three daughters. This marriage made him financially comfortable, but he did not relinquish operative surgery, and by 1836, when he was elected surgeon to the Royal Infirmary and fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, he shared with James Syme the best surgical practice in Scotland. 
In 1840 Fergusson accepted the professorship of surgery at King's College, London, with the surgeoncy to King's College Hospital, and he established himself at Dover Street, Piccadilly; he moved to George Street, Hanover Square, in 1847. He became MRCS in 1840 and FRCS in 1844. Fergusson's 'System of Practical Surgery' was published in 1842 and reached a fifth edition in 1870. He continued to publish papers on surgical operations and cases throughout his career. Fergusson's practice grew rapidly, and the fame of his operative skill brought many students and visitors to King's College Hospital. In 1849 he was appointed surgeon-in-ordinary to the prince consort, and in 1855 surgeon-extraordinary, as well as in 1867 sergeant-surgeon, to the queen. 
For many years Fergusson was the leading operator in London. He was elected to the council of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1861, became examiner in 1867, and was president of the college in 1870. As professor of human anatomy and surgery he delivered two courses of lectures before the Royal College of Surgeons in 1864 and 1865 which were later published. He was president of the Pathological Society in 1859-60, and of the British Medical Association in 1873. In 1875 he received the honorary degree of LLD from Edinburgh University. He resigned the professorship of surgery at King's College in 1870, but until his death he was clinical professor of surgery and senior surgeon to King's College Hospital. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1848. He was created a baronet on 23 January 1866, an honour which led to his receiving a presentation from three hundred old pupils of a silver dessert service worth $400. Fergusson died at his home, 16 George Street, Hanover Square, London, from Bright's disease, on 10 February 1877, and was buried with his wife at West Linton, Peeblesshire. He was succeeded by his son, Sir James Ranken Fergusson. 
Fergusson's reputation was that of a brilliant operator and a great 'conservative' surgeon, a term first applied by Fergusson in 1852 to operations for the preservation of parts of the body which would otherwise have been sacrificed. Other operators, for example James Syme, had already been very successful in this line of procedure. But Fergusson extended the principle from the operation of excision of the elbow joint -- no portion of the body which could be usefully preserved was too small for him to make efforts to save. His name is especially identified with operations for harelip and cleft palate, operations on the jaws, the excision of joints -- notably the hip, knee, and elbow -- lithotomy and lithotrity, and amputations of limbs. In his lectures at the Royal College of Surgeons he was able to speak of having performed 300 successful operations of his own for harelip. He revived the neglected operation for cleft palate. His manipulative and mechanical skill was evidenced by the new instruments he devised: the bulldog forceps, the mouth gag for cleft palate, and various bent knives. Fergusson planned every detail of an operation beforehand; no emergency was unprovided for. He operated at remarkable speed and in silence, himself applying every bandage and plaster, and leaving, as far as possible, no traces of his operation. So silently were most of his operations conducted that he was often imagined to be on bad terms with his assistants. His punctuality and his hatred of unnecessary waste of time were very marked. 
Although Fergusson was not esteemed as a lecturer, his remarks on cases in the operating theatre were regarded as valuable and instructive. He was said to be kind and generous to his students. Fergusson met much opposition, especially from Syme, but apparently he did not imitate his opponent's pugnacious manner. Fergusson also did not endear himself to some other sections of the profession. His presidential address to the BMA in 1873 upset sanitary reformers. His evidence at a trial in Norwich in 1874, and before the royal commission on animal experimentation which reported in 1876, was sympathetic to the anti-vivisectionist movement. He also showed sympathy for homoeopathy. 
Fergusson was an excellent carpenter, a good violinist, and an expert fly-fisher. He was also very fond of drama. He was renowned for his endurance and scarcely had a day's illness until attacked by Bright's disease. Tall, dignified, and with a genial expression, fond of a joke, and very hospitable, Fergusson financially assisted large numbers of clergymen, actors, authors, and governesses. He helped many of his pupils in starting their careers and a large number of them later attained eminence as surgeons. It was said he never forgot the face of a pupil. 


@@@@@


doc= 9341


Ferings, Richard of (b. in or before 1253, d. 1306), archbishop of Dublin, belonged to a family originating either in Feering, Essex, or Ferring, Sussex, to judge from his name. He studied for a doctorate in canon law at Oxford and in November 1267 his name appears as one of the northern scholars who signed the terms of peace between Irish and northern scholars at Oxford. His early ecclesiastical career was spent in the Canterbury province and as official of Canterbury he won the friendship of Archbishop Pecham. In 1279 he was present at the Council of Reading. In 1280 he was also for a short time official of Winchester, having been appointed by Pecham during a vacancy of the bishopric; but before long Pecham found him so indispensable that he brought him back to Canterbury, and put Adam of Hales into the post at Winchester. He is found as archdeacon of Canterbury early in 1282 although no record of his appointment survives. In 1284 Pecham gave him the rectory of Tunstall, near Sittingbourne, to be held 'in commendam' with the archdeaconry. Following Pecham's death in 1292 Ferings was involved in a dispute over the administration of the province and diocese of Canterbury 'sede vacante' which involved his presence in Rome. In 1299 he was provided to a prebend in Lincoln by Pope Boniface VIII who called him papal chaplain. In the same year this pontiff appointed him to the archbishopric of Dublin. The feuds of the two rival chapters of Holy Trinity and St Patrick's had long made the elections to that see constant subjects of disputes. In 1297 William Hothum, himself a nominee of the pope after a contested election, died soon after his consecration. Early in 1298 Holy Trinity elected Adam of Belsham, and St Patrick's chose their dean, Thomas Chadworth, for whom the canons had previously tried to secure the archbishopric. In their hurry neither body had secured the royal licence to elect. Both were accordingly summoned to answer for the contempt, and the temporalities of Holy Trinity were for a time seized by King Edward. Ferings's appointment by the pope was consequently not opposed by the king. His consecration probably took place abroad, as it is not noticed in the English authorities, though the date is given as 1299 in the annals of Ireland (Gilbert, 2.291). It was not until June 1300, however, that Ferings received from the crown the temporalities of his see, after a renunciation of all the words in the bull of appointment that were prejudicial to the royal authority. 
Ferings spent little of his time in Ireland. His conciliatory temper led him to several attempts to make peace with disappointed candidates and angry chapters. Even before his consecration he had appointed his old rival, Thomas Chadworth, his vicar, though he subsequently feared lest the infirmities of age made him unfit for the post, and urged the canons of St Patrick's and Chadworth himself to recommend a fit substitute if he were incapable. In 1301 he confirmed the composition of peace agreed between the canons of St Patrick's and the monks of Holy Trinity which, while recognizing that both churches were of metropolitical and cathedral rank, gave Holy Trinity, as the elder foundation, a certain honorary precedence. He continued to make Chadworth his vicar-general during his frequent absences abroad. While resident in his diocese Ferings concerned himself particularly with the administration of his secular cathedral. The first known visitation of St Patrick's occurred during his episcopacy and he issued a charter concerning future visitations. These were to be conducted through the dean who alone would be responsible for making correction. Procurations were to be limited to 10 marks. In 1304 from his manor at Swords, Ferings issued an ordinance exempting the prebendal churches from the visitations of dean and archdeacon. In 1303 he endowed St Patrick's with the two new prebends of Stagonil and Tipperkevin, the latter of which supported two prebendaries. He incurred the king's displeasure for removing a royal clerk from the church of Tipperkevin because he was not ordained, and was summoned before the justiciar to answer. The result of this case is not known. In 1302 he resigned to Edmund Butler the manor of Hollywood, near Dublin, which had for some time been in the possession of the see. In 1303 Ferings was summoned to the English parliament in his capacity as archbishop of Dublin. His absence from Ireland was so far recognized by the king that he gave Ferings special permission to have the revenues of his see sent to England for his support. In July 1304 he was granted protection for two years to visit the Roman curia. He died on 17 October 1306. 


@@@@@


doc= 9342


Ferme, Charles (1565/6-1617), Church of Scotland minister and university principal, was born in Edinburgh of unknown parents. He was brought up in the family of Alexander Guthrie, town clerk of Edinburgh, and entered the university there in 1584. In 1588 he graduated MA, and in October that year was an unsuccessful candidate for a regency. He studied Hebrew and theology, and was elected regent in 1589, in which capacity he graduated a class of nineteen on 12 August 1593, and another of thirty-five on 30 July 1597. Among his students were John Adamson (died 1653), Edward Brice, David Calderwood, Oliver Colt, professor of Latin at Saumur, and William Craig, professor of theology there. 
On 13 December 1589 Ferme was authorized by the presbytery to preach, when necessary, in the second charge of St Giles, Edinburgh. In 1596 and again in 1597 he was called to the proposed second charge at Haddington, but chose to remain at the college of Edinburgh. On 12 September 1598 he was still in Edinburgh, preaching in St Giles, but later in the same year he had gone north. He accepted the charge of Philorth, Aberdeenshire (which town changed its name to Fraserburgh in 1613). 
The intention of the patron Sir Alexander Fraser (died 1623) was that Ferme should be the head of a university which he was attempting to establish. Fraser obtained a royal grant on 1 July 1592, confirming his possession of the lands of Philorth, and giving him powers to erect and endow a college and university. A 'spacious quadrangular building' was erected, of which Lewis traced the remains at the west end of Fraserburgh (Lewis, 454-5). In 1594 the project was approved by parliament, which in 1597 appropriated to the university the revenues of the parishes of Philorth, Tyrie, Crimond, and Rathen. In the same year the general assembly endorsed the appointment of Ferme as principal, but it appears that he expected to have no pastoral responsibilities. In March 1600, Fraser having 'refusit to intertaine a Pastour... vnlesse he vndertake both the said charges', the assembly enjoined Ferme to fill both offices (Thomson, 3.958). 
Ferme's opinions on royal ecclesiastical policy caused him trouble. In October 1600, when Peter Blackburn was appointed bishop of Aberdeen, with a seat in parliament, Ferme denounced this innovation. In February 1605 he appeared before the privy council with John Forbes to justify the excommunication of the earl of Huntly. He attended the general assembly which met at Aberdeen on 2 July, in defiance of a royal command. For this irregularity he was imprisoned on 3 October in Doune Castle, Perthshire, at his own expense. On 24 October he was summoned to appear before the privy council, but declined its authority in causes spiritual, and made his escape, returning north where he attended presbytery meetings. He was again cited for 24 February 1607, appeared before the council on 20 May, and again escaped, hiding himself for four days in Edinburgh. 
Accounts of what happened next are confused. Although it has been assumed that Ferme was confined on Bute for some time, the register of the presbytery of Deer shows that he was never absent for more than three months between 1607 and 1610. He appears to have received the stipend of Philorth ($82 17's'. 9died) in 1607, but not in 1608. After 1609 he was restored to his livings, and the university may have maintained a tenuous existence until his death. He died on 24 September 1617, aged fifty-one, and was buried in his church. Although he was married his wife's name is not recorded, nor are any dates of her birth or death. They had one daughter, Agnes. 
Ferme published nothing, but after his death two of his manuscripts were given to his former student John Adamson by a student, William Rires. Adamson intended to publish both, but the 'Lectiones in Esterem' were not published, and are lost. The 'Analysis logica in epistolam apostoli Pauli ad Romanos' (1651), is all that remains of Ferme's classwork at Fraserburgh. A translation by William Skae was issued by the Wodrow Society in 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 9343


Fermor, Henrietta Louisa, countess of Pomfret (1698-1761), letter writer and diarist, was born on 15 November 1698 at Lisle Street, Leicester Square, London, the only surviving child of John Jeffreys, second Baron Jeffreys (bap. 1673, d. 1702) ['see under 'Jeffreys, George, first Baron Jeffreys], and his wife, Lady Charlotte Herbert (1674/5-1733), daughter and heir of Philip, seventh earl of Pembroke and fourth earl of Montgomery. 
Henrietta's drunkard father's death in 1702, her mother's remarriage to Thomas, Lord Windsor, fifteen months later (which produced five children), and her own attentive mothering of ten offer insight into an otherwise under-documented childhood. Her diaries do report that, though baptized by Bishop Thomas Sprat, she 'unwillingly' attended Roman Catholic mass with her mother until Lady Charlotte 'renounced the errors of the Church of Rome' in 1718 (Finch MS DG7/D4 ii, entered after her mother's death in 1733). One apparent outcome was Henrietta's active concern with convents and churches both Anglican and Roman, during extended continental sojourns with her own family. 
On 14 July 1720 in London, Henrietta married Thomas Fermor, second Baron Leominster (1698?-1753), and travelled next day to his home at Easton Neston, Northamptonshire. Their first child, Sophia, was born on 29 May 1721 at their new London home in Hanover Square; Thomas was created earl of Pomfret, or Pontefract, Yorkshire, on 27 December 1721. The prince and princess of Wales were godparents to their second child, George, and Henrietta herself was named lady of the bedchamber to the princess in May 1725, her husband KB the next month and master of the horse to Queen Caroline on 28 October 1727. In 1732 their two eldest children starred with other titled pre-teens reciting Dryden in that 'Performance of The Indian Emperor, or, The Conquest of Mexico' painted by Hogarth. Other courtly functions -- accompanying Princess Amelia to Bath and Tunbridge Wells, waiting as lady of the bedchamber on Princess Augusta of Wales at her 1736 wedding -- allowed the Pomfrets, under assumed names, a month's appetizing tour of Leiden, Brussels, and sundry attractions of the Low Countries, during June and July 1736. 
On Caroline's death in 1737 the Pomfrets and Henrietta's friend Frances, countess of Hertford, retired from court. With three sons surviving and six daughters, a reduced income, and some debts, financial prudence prompted the Pomfrets to begin in September 1738 a three-year continental residence with their eldest daughters, Sophia and Charlotte. This initiated a correspondence which created a closer rapport between Henrietta and Lady Hertford and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. Sojourns of several months each at Monts near Paris, at Siena, and then Florence, enabled the family to exchange hospitality with local as well as touring celebrities -- notably Lady Mary, Lord Lincoln, and Horace Walpole, at the Pomfrets' leased Florentine residence, the Palazzo Ridolfi, via della Scala 75. Unknown to Lady Henrietta, her friendship at this uncertain period in Lady Mary's relationship with Algarotti seems (for Pomfret letters are lost) to have proved steadying. Pomfret's letters to Hertford assumed fresh energy and keenness for details from March to July 1741, as her family and entourage returned via Rome, Venice, Bolsano, Augsburg, the Rhine, and Brussels, to their home in New Bond Street, London. Her diaries record a briefer trip to France for her health in 1749. 
Her husband's death on 8 July 1753 enabled their spendthrift son George, as second earl of Pomfret, so to reduce his estate that Lady Henrietta bought from him the 135 statues or fragments of the Arundelian collection purchased by his paternal grandfather. Her gift of these to Oxford University in 1755 occasioned a warm response. On her death, in Marlborough, Wiltshire, on 17 December 1761, 'en route' for Bath, she was buried on 2 January 1762 not with her husband at Easton Neston, as she requested in her will, but in St Mary's Church, Oxford. 
During the 1730s Lady Pomfret's diary had named, by rank, some 230 female acquaintances, describing the auspices of each introduction (DG7/D4 ii). That circle was enlarged by the publication in 1772 of two of her letters, then in 1805 by three volumes of the 'Correspondence between Frances, countess of Hartford... and Henrietta Louisa... between... 1738 and 1741'. Well-bred posturings and Sevigne-esque banter wane as this epistolary relationship palpably warms, both women confronting their ageing. Walpole's constant scorn (even after her burial) for Pomfret's humourless intellectual pretensions merits measurement against these two correspondents' candid respect for non-aristocratic women achievers they had met: Elizabeth Carter, the Bolognese philosophy professor Dr Laura Bassi, the Venetian painter Rosalba Carriera. Pomfret's concern about her own ancestry and her daughters' marriages, and Walpole's mockery of that, may both stem from the brutalities of her grandfather Judge Jeffreys. Her diary's library inventory, and straightforward accounts of taking leave of Queen Caroline in 1736, with her own stormy channel crossing thereafter, exemplify an intelligence that can readily be reconciled with Walpole's unverifiable attributions to her of unpublished work on a translation of Froissart, and a study of Van Dyck's life and art. 


@@@@@


doc= 9344


Sir John Fermor (b. in or before 1516, d. 1571), who studied at the Inner Temple, was knighted in October 1553, elected MP for Northamptonshire in October 1553 and in 1555, became sheriff in 1557, served as JP, and died at Easton Neston on 20 December 1571. He remained a Catholic, and only under Mary was he important in public life. He occupied himself with his estates, purchased the manor of Towcester, and was unscrupulous in his attempted eviction of unwanted tenants. He married by 1544 Maud, the daughter of the first Lord Vaux of Harrowden. 


@@@@@


doc= 9345


Fermor, Richard (1480x84-1551), merchant, was born between 1480 and 1484, the younger son of Thomas Fermor (died 1485), alias Richardes, of Witney, Oxfordshire, a wool merchant, and his second wife, Emma, the daughter of Simkins Harvey of Hertfordshire. He inherited property in Oxfordshire from both his parents. Having followed his father and grandfather into the wool trade, by 1505 he was a merchant of the staple at Calais. He married (by 1515) Anne, the daughter of Sir William Browne, lord mayor of London, and had five sons (two died in infancy) and five daughters. In 1518 he was admitted to the Inner Temple. Generally described as a grocer, he was warden of the Grocers' Company from 1520 to 1523. 
Fermor was given a share in the contract for victualling the royal army during the Tournai campaign of 1513, and he exported large quantities of wheat, flour, beer barrels, cannonballs, harness, and saltpetre. As a reward he was given licences to export wool direct to Italy. In 1515 the 'Crist', a ship of which Fermor was the chief owner, was captured by the Moors after being shipwrecked on the coast of Zeeland. He suffered further losses in 1538 through depredations by the emperor's subjects. On both occasions the king ordered his envoys to ask for compensation. In 1524 Fermor was in Florence and gave financial assistance there to John Clerk, Wolsey's agent, who was negotiating for the cardinal's election to the papacy. At the time of his fall (1529), Wolsey owed Fermor $125 for various silks. 
By 1509, when he was named one of the jurors for the trial of Sir Richard Empson, Fermor was living at Isham, Northamptonshire. He purchased considerable property in the southern part of the county, in particular the manor of Easton Neston from Empson's descendants. He also acquired manors in Bedfordshire (including Luton Hoo) and was nominated as sheriff (1532-4) -- twice for Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire and once for Northamptonshire -- but not selected. In the early 1530s he was the earl of Derby's chief steward for Northamptonshire, and his subsidy assessment of $1000 in 1536 attests to his wealth. Having helped to victual the royal troops raised to put down the northern rising, he was appointed a juror to try the rebels in 1537. 
In 1540 Fermor's world fell apart. He was attainted for defying the act that ended papal authority in England. Ostensibly he had supported Nicholas Thayne, his Catholic chaplain, who had publicly maintained the pope's headship of the English church, shouted down a neighbouring reformist vicar, and merely waxed over the pope's name in service books instead of erasing it completely. Fermor had visited him in prison and given him two shirts and 8died But Marillac, the French ambassador, in a letter to Montmorency, suggested that Fermor was rather being punished for boldly attacking royal rights and prerogatives in parliament. There is no mention elsewhere of Fermor's role as an MP, so his return for London in 1539 can only be inferred. He was convicted of misprision of treason and sentenced on 9 May 1540 to life imprisonment and forfeiture. He was committed to the Marshalsea prison, but in August 1540 he was allowed to retire to Wappenham, Northamptonshire. Although excluded from the general pardon of 1540, he was pardoned the following year, and grants of land in Warwickshire, Essex, and Somerset helped relieve his penury. It is said that Will Somers, the king's jester, was instrumental in securing the rehabilitation of Fermor, who was his former master. Certainly in 1547 Fermor recovered some of his goods, and in 1550 he acquired eleven manors with an annual value of $386. He died a wealthy man at Easton Neston on 17 November 1551. His tomb of Purbeck marble in Easton Neston church has palimpsest brasses of Fermor and his wife. 
Fermor's eldest son, 
Richard Fermor's fourth son, Thomas ('b'. in or before 1523, died 1580) was a merchant of the staple and of the Grocers' Company and, by his first marriage, to the heiress Frances Horde, of Horde Park, Shropshire, became an important figure in that county, of which he was a knight in the 1558 parliament and where he favoured a restoration of Roman Catholicism. He was removed from the commission of the peace after Bishop Scory of Hereford reported him as unfavourable to the established church. He sheltered the Marian priest John Felton and, in 1580, had a Catholic chaplain at Somerton, Oxfordshire, as well as retaining a rector instituted before the Elizabethan settlement. Yet his will and inventory both suggest loyalty to the crown. Thomas Fermor had extensive estates in Oxfordshire and several other counties; after the death of his first wife he married Bridget, daughter of Henry Bradshaw of Halton, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 9346


Fermor, Thomas William, fourth earl of Pomfret (1770-1833), army officer, was born on 22 November 1770 at Sunbury, Middlesex, the second son of George, second earl of Pomfret (1722-1785), a soldier and privy councillor, and Anna Maria Draycott, formerly Delagard ('c'.1736-1787), the sister of William Delagard of Bombay. Fermor attended Christ Church, Oxford, from 1788 to 1791, where he obtained his BA. Early in 1791 he was made an ensign in the 3rd guards. He served in Flanders in 1793, being present at the battles of Famars and Lincelles, and at the sieges of Valenciennes and Dunkirk. In 1794 he was promoted lieutenant. 
Fermor served in Ireland during the uprising of 1798, and took part in the expedition to The Helder. On 16 March 1800 he was appointed to a company, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. He served with the guards in the Peninsula, receiving a medal for participating in the battle of Salamanca. On 11 May 1813 he was granted permission to be made a knight of the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword. He was promoted major-general on 4 June 1813, and obtained his last commission, as lieutenant-general, on 27 May 1825. On 13 January 1823 he married Amabella Elizabeth (1802-1889) the eldest daughter of Sir Richard Borough, baronet, at St George's Church, Hanover Square, London. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Fermor succeeded his brother George as the fourth earl on 7 April 1830. Pomfret, who was also FRS and FSA, died of paralysis on 29 June 1833. He was buried at Easton Neston on 7 July. Lady Pomfret remarried in May 1834. Her second husband was William Thorpe DD, of Belgrave Chapel, Pimlico. Pomfret was succeeded by his eldest son, George William Richard, fifth earl, who died unmarried on 8 June 1867, on which date the earldom, barony, and baronetcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 9347


Fermor, Sir William, first baronet (1621-1661), royalist army officer, was born at Cokayne House, Old Broad Street, London, and baptized on 7 November 1621 at St Peter-le-Poer, London, the eldest son of Sir Hatton Fermor ('c'.1580-1640), landowner of Easton Neston, Northamptonshire, and his second wife, Anne, daughter of Sir William Cokayne of Rushton, Northamptonshire, and sister of Charles, first Viscount Cullen. He matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford in 1636 but did not take a degree. When Sir Hatton Fermor died in 1640 Lady Fermor successfully applied for wardship of her son. William was created a baronet on 6 September 1641 by the king, who also gave him the command of a troop of horse, and afterwards made him a privy councillor to Prince Charles. 
Fermor was appointed a commissioner of array for Northamptonshire in 1642, but was omitted from the revised 1643 list. He was a cavalry captain at the battle of Edgehill in October 1642 and although he later told parliamentarian authorities that he had served for six months only he was still in the royalist cavalry in 1645. 
Fermor lived modestly at Easton Neston after the first civil war. He compounded for $1400 for his estates in August 1646, being allowed, however, to collect his rents provided he paid them in to the government's use. He married, on 8 September 1646 at North Luffenham, Rutland, Mary ('bap'. 25 March 1628, died 1670), daughter of Hugh Perry, alias Hunter, of London, and widow of Henry Noel, second son of Viscount Campden. Mary brought him an estate of $300 in Rutland. They had six sons and two daughters. In 1651 the authorities discovered the Rutland estate and compelled Fermor to compound for it. In 1653 Fermor may have been suspected of royalist activity, being summoned, with the royalist Sir Charles Compton before the council. In a rather obscure incident in 1654 two Northamptonshire men, John Digby and John Willoughby, it seems separately, came into conflict with Fermor. Digby and Fermor were prevented by the council of state from fighting a duel, Willoughby was found to have distributed libellous papers against Fermor and was sent to the Tower, and both Digby and Willoughby were ordered to apologize to Fermor. Fermor was commended for his behaviour 'as a man of honour' ('CSP dom.', '1654', 224). In the tense atmosphere of 1655 Fermor, among others, was charged with assembling riotously, destroying the protector's deer, and encouraging poaching, but, though summoned again before the council, no punishment is recorded. He was listed in 1658 as a Northamptonshire royalist without military rank. A Major Farmer was sent in 1659 with a troop of horse on a failed mission to secure Carlisle for General Monck. 
At the Restoration Fermor's fortunes, for a short time, revived. In May 1660 he took his seat on the privy council. On 2 April 1661 he was involved in a double return for the parliamentary seat of Brackley, Northamptonshire. He was also deputy lieutenant for the county. He was created a knight of the Bath on 18 April, and on the 23rd took part in the coronation, his last appearance in public. He was too ill to petition for his seat in the Cavalier Parliament and died on 14 May in the company of his mother at the house of Mr Hill a tailor, at the Sign of the Lyons Head in Covent Garden, London. Collins claims he died of smallpox caught during the coronation ceremonies, though there seems no contemporary evidence for this. He was buried on 22 May at Easton Neston. In his will he entrusted the management of his estate to his wife (who died on 18 July 1670), and mother. His heir, William Fermor, became Baron Leominster in 1692. His younger sons received $2500 each, and his daughters $400 each per annum. 


@@@@@


doc= 9348


Fermor, William, Baron Leominster (1648-1711), art connoisseur, was born on 3 August 1648 at Easton Neston, Northamptonshire, the second son of Sir William Fermor, first baronet (1621-1661), and Mary (died 1670), daughter of Hugh Perry, sometime sheriff of London, and widow of Henry Noel, second son of Edward, Viscount Campden. Fermor succeeded as second baronet in 1661, and was later educated at Magdalen College, Oxford (1664-7). He served as MP for Northampton in the tory interest (1670-79), and was elevated to the peerage on 12 April 1692, with the title Baron Leominster. Fermor was thrice married: first, on 21 February 1671, to Jane (died 1673), daughter of Andrew Barker of Fairford, Gloucestershire, with whom he had a daughter, Elizabeth; second, in June 1682, to the Hon. Catherine Poulett (1664-1687), with whom he had a daughter, Mary, who married Sir John Wodehouse, fourth baronet, of Kimberley, Norfolk; and third, on 5 March 1692 to Lady Sophia (died 1746), daughter of Thomas Osborne, first duke of Leeds, and widow of Donogh O'Brien, Lord Ibrackan, grandson and heir of Henry, seventh earl of Thomond. She brought him $10,000 and the duke got him the barony of Leominster within six weeks of the wedding. Sophia survived until 8 December 1746, and with her he had two sons, Thomas and William, and three daughters. 
Fermor built the house and planned the gardens and plantations at Easton Neston. The house was completed by Nicholas Hawksmoor in 1702, on the recommendation of Sir Christopher Wren, a distant kinsman. He adorned the whole with part of the Arundel marbles which he had purchased in 1691 for $300 and which his son restored with the assistance of Giovanni Battista Guelfi, 'a scholar of Camillo Rusconi' (Bridges, 1.289). The restoration was said to be 'misconceived', and Guelfi to have 'ruined the greater number of [the statues] he was permitted to touch' (Dallaway, 237). The collection was afterwards greatly neglected. 'Coming back', wrote Horace Walpole to George Montagu on 20 May 1736, 'we saw Easton Neston... where in an old greenhouse is a wonderful fine statue of Tully, haranguing a numerous assembly of decayed emperors, vestal virgins with new noses, Colossuses, Venuses, headless carcasses, and carcassless heads, pieces of tombs, and hieroglyphics. (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.5)' The marbles were presented in 1755 to the University of Oxford by Henrietta Louisa, countess of Pomfret. A description of Easton Neston and its art treasures is included in the 'Catalogue of the Duke of Buckingham's Pictures' (1758) by George Vertue, and the house, gardens, and sculpture are illustrated in drawings by Peter Tillemans. Fermor died on 7 December 1711 at Easton Neston and was buried there on 15 December. He was succeeded by his elder son, Thomas. 


@@@@@


doc= 9349


Ferne, Henry (1602-1662), bishop of Chester and controversialist, was probably born at York, the eighth and youngest surviving son of Sir John Ferne (d. 1609) of Temple Belwood in the parish of Belton within the Isle of Axholme, Lincolnshire, and Elizabeth, daughter of John Needham of Wymondley Priory, in Hertfordshire. 
Shortly after Sir John's death his widow married Sir Thomas Nevill Smyth (died 1636) of Holt in Leicestershire and Cressing Temple in Essex. She was his second wife, and Henry and at least one of his sisters joined their household. In 1613 Smyth, who had numerous children of his own, was obliged to mortgage his Holt estate, where he usually lived, for sixty years to Thomas, Lord Darcy, and other Essex friends, but, perhaps helped by a provision in Sir John Ferne's will, he made sure that Ferne had an extended education. After schooling locally at Uppingham he spent two years at St Mary Hall, Oxford, before being admitted in 1620 as a gentleman pensioner to Trinity College, Cambridge, where one of his stepbrothers, Clement Nevill Smyth, soon followed him. Ferne graduated BA in 1623, was elected fellow in 1624, and proceeded MA in 1626. He took his BD in 1632 and became chaplain to Thomas Morton, translated that summer from the bishopric of Lichfield to that of Durham. Trinity College subsequently bestowed on Ferne the adjacent benefices of Masham and Kirby Lazeard in the North Riding of Yorkshire. In 1639, however, his eldest stepbrother, Henry Nevill Smyth, presented him to the rectory of Medbourne, close by Holt; and in 1641, the year in which he proceeded DD at Cambridge, he became archdeacon of Leicester through the good offices of his bishop, John Williams of Lincoln. 
Advancement within the church had come just as serious political questions were beginning to claim Ferne's attention. Shortly after publishing his 'Answer to the Petition of the Lords and Commons' on 19 July 1642 while at Beverley, Charles I embarked on a brief rally southwards. Ferne preached before him at Leicester, probably on Sunday 24 July; and did so again, at Nottingham, immediately before the outbreak of war. The king so liked what he heard that he made Ferne one of his extraordinary chaplains, soon promoting him to chaplain-in-ordinary, with his waiting month in November. For a time at least he seems to have kept close to the royalist forces in Yorkshire, repaying his debt to Williams (now archbishop of York) by riding through the night of 3 October to Cawood, the archbishop's skimpily protected castle to the south of York, to warn him of the angry approach of Captain John Hotham, at the head of a parliamentarian raiding party from Hull. 
Even before war started Ferne had begun actively to consider what more he might do to support the king's 'Answer' of 19 July, in which Charles had, among much else, protested at the way that the petitioning Lords and Commons were encouraging hostile writing. He had singled out Henry Parker's 'Observations upon Some of his Majesty's Late Answers and Expresses' (July 1642), in which Parker had bluntly, if anonymously, declared that 'power is originally inherent in the people' and which the king condemned as 'against his Crown and against monarchy itself' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.232-7, especially 235). Ferne's background had already given him, at second hand, an awareness of the threat which popular pretensions might pose to established order. Social stability was considered at length in his father's 'The Blazon of Gentrie' (1586). His stepbrother Henry Nevill Smyth had been recruited in 1637 by the bishop of London's commissary, Robert Aylett, a family friend, to search the studies of dissident clergy in Essex, including John Dodd and others in his circle. But these men had the support of Robert Rich, second earl of Warwick, and when Nevill Smyth made a bold stand against Warwick's candidates in 1640 at the Essex election to the Short Parliament he suffered a bruising defeat. As he afterwards reported, 'it was said amongst the people that if [he] had the day they would have the gentlemen to peeces' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/449/48). The outdated 40-shilling freehold franchise had enabled Warwick and others to make freeholders for the day, drawing them from sympathetic parliamentary boroughs and encouraging them to participate violently in county hustings which were none of their business. 
Such views and experiences may well have helped to shape Ferne's thinking. By the summer of 1642 he had come to believe that, while all might not be well with the king's government, there were no grounds for parliament to resort to force against him in the name of the people. That autumn he published his first work, 'The resolving of conscience upon this question: Whether upon such a supposition or case, as is now usually made, [that] the king will not discharge his trust but is bent or seduced to subvert religion, lawes and liberties, subjects may take up arms and resist? And whether that case be now?'. It opened by denying that there was either scriptural or legal authority for armed resistance to the sovereign and firmly rejected parliament's claim to represent the people, arguing that the people's power had come from God and had long since been freely bestowed on God's anointed monarch, who had been limited thereafter by laws founded on that consent. Thus Parker was wrong to argue in his 'Observations' that parliament, rather than the monarchy, was the best defender of the public interest. Published in the autumn of 1642 'The Resolving of Conscience' represented the first clear statement of the king's case from outside his inner circle, the more effective for its moderate and conservative thinking and, unlike some well-known anti-Calvinist works, for being presented in a tone which was never strident. Presses at Cambridge, York, and London encouraged its dissemination that winter, and a second edition was produced by the university printer at Oxford, Leonard Lichfield, early in 1643. Before the year was out the Commons at Westminster had resolved that the book was seditious and that its author should be sent for as a delinquent for composing and publishing it. 
The impact of Ferne's book may be measured by the degree of criticism that it received from parliament's supporters, most notably from Charles Herle and Philip Hunton. Ferne responded in two further works, written after he had joined other royalist divines at Oxford, and both printed during 1643 at Lichfield's press: 'Conscience Satisfied' in the spring and 'A Reply unto Several Treatises Pleading for the Armes' later in the year. In the earlier work he addressed Charles Herle's 'Fuller Answer to a Treatise Written by Dr Ferne' (1642), and clarified his own thinking on the three estates: to say they were mixed was not to regard them as equal; and while he still agreed that the estates were in some senses co-ordinate, and that they combined in law making, he now argued that the king remained supreme, with powers outside the reach of the two houses, such as 'the power of the sword and the defending of arms'. Even so, he accepted that the king was still restrained by the laws of the constitution, and hoped that it might be possible to reach a compromise between the contending parties without an outright victory by either. In his 'Reply' he was prepared to concede that conquest could be a legitimate means of taking a throne, but emphasized that it never could be when there was an heir apparent in waiting; and, as he told Hunton, it was always preferable to bear with the arbitrary actions of a legitimate king than to resort to violent action. 
Taken together Ferne's three earliest works established him as a peaceably inclined and lucid contributor on the royalist side to the debate about the fundamental nature of sovereignty within the state; and he was soon to show himself a stout supporter of the Church of England. In all he was to have eleven books or pamphlets and two sermons published between 1642 and 1660, some in more than one edition. Until 1644 his printer continued to be Leonard Lichfield, but later publications, from 1647 onwards, when he was at a distance from Oxford, were invariably printed by or for Richard Royston, who had a press at Oxford but who had acquired a reputation for publishing what the parliamentary side regarded as scandalous books and papers in London. While still at Oxford Charles I promised Ferne the mastership of his old college, Trinity College, Cambridge, when it became available. Meanwhile Ferne proved himself to be a frequent preacher, and a sermon at St Mary's, Oxford, before the Commons at a public fast on 12 April 1644, subsequently published, confirmed his commitment to a peaceful outcome of the war. He was one of the learned clergy, led by Richard Steward, who attended the peace negotiations at Uxbridge in 1644-5, during which he wrote 'Episcopacy and Presbytery Considered' (1644), which arguably contributed more to the defence of the Church of England than it did to Charles's efforts to draw closer to the Scots. 
In May 1645 Ferne accompanied the king when he left Oxford for the siege of Leicester, perhaps in hope of recovering his old living at Medbourne. He went from Leicester to Naseby in June and subsequently was quartered at the garrison at Newark until it was ordered by the king to surrender in May 1646. He had been finally replaced at Medbourne only on 19 March, when Thomas Doughty was instituted by order of the Lords, a week before the parish was ransacked by a party of royalist horse. Ferne retired to his native Yorkshire, where he remained with friends until parliament gave him and five other divines permission late in 1648 to attend the king on the Isle of Wight; they arrived on 17 November. He was chosen to preach on 29 November 1648 at Carisbrooke the last sermon Charles heard before his trial, taking his text from 'Habukkuk' 2: 3. It was published in 1649, after the king's death. 
In the 1650s Ferne seems again to have turned to his Yorkshire roots, spending much of his time peaceably enough with friends and relatives in an area between Doncaster, where his family had held local office in the late sixteenth century, and York, where there is evidence that he had a claim, relinquished in 1660, to the precentorship of the minster, and in various houses in the West Riding and beyond, several of them in the vicinity of Temple Belwood. It was helpful that Trinity College had a number of Yorkshire livings, and in addition to Masham, Ferne held the vicarage of Whitkirk near Leeds, which he surrendered at the Restoration; he had clergy friends in other Trinity vicarages in the county. The Nevill Smyths, too, had northern interests, having in 1631 bought property in Leeds, as well as associations with the duchy of Lancaster, notably through Henry Nevill Smyth's marriage to the daughter of Sir John Dacombe. One of Henry Ferne's kinsmen was schoolmaster at Tickhill, close to Sandbeck, where in August 1659 he made his will, preparatory to his journey to London to wait on the turn of events. 
Meanwhile Ferne continued to protect the interests of the Church of England with his pen. With Henry Hammond and John Bramhall he engaged with continental Catholic commentators intent on presenting its current plight as a judgement of God on a schismatical people, a contention they hoped might draw the young Charles Stuart into the Church of Rome. In the early 1650s Ferne published three widely read works: 'Of the Division between the English and the Romish Church' (1652), 'Certain Considerations of Present Concernment Touching the Reformed Church of England' (1653), which pays tribute to Henry Hammond's defence of episcopacy, and 'A Compendious Discourse' (1655). Between them they drove home the message that there was neither licence nor infallibility in the Church of England, but a willingness to allow its members to use their own minds and powers of reasoning in much the same way as Christ and his apostles had done. Carefully, Ferne also maintained that the protestant sects did not have the same justification for abandoning the Church of England as the Church of England had had in breaking away from Rome. Soon afterwards he found himself entangled with the republican James Harrington, after Harrington's sister had sent him an early copy of 'Oceana' (1656). So restrained was his criticism, however, that Harrington, desperate to stir a reaction to his work, was goaded into publishing their exchange of letters in 'Pian Piano' (1656), accompanied by what Brian Duppa subsequently condemned as a proud and insolent commentary directed against Ferne. 
As the Restoration approached Ferne joined an expectant group of leading divines in London. John Evelyn dined with them one night in December 1659, and later noted that most had since become bishops. Ferne was thought to be in line for the see of Bristol, but he evidently preferred the mastership of Trinity College, Cambridge. Backed by Charles I's promise in 1643, he petitioned Charles II while he was still at Breda; and, despite an understandable reluctance to make grants until he reached England, the new king proved ready to honour his father's undertaking. Ferne was granted the mastership of Trinity on 29 April 1660; but the going soon turned out to be hard. As late as July 1660 a group of its fellows petitioned enthusiastically for the retention of the popular John Wilkins, who had been appointed less than a year earlier, commending his 'prudent government and sweet conversation', and it was not until 3 August that Wilkins vacated his post ('CSP dom.', '1660-61', 101). Even then a hard core of interregnum appointees survived among the fellows. Ferne did what he could to restore the old order to the college, his task made easier when he became vice-chancellor, finding time that September to preach what Samuel Pepys thought 'a good honest sermon' before Charles II in the chapel of Whitehall Palace (Pepys, 1.237). Rivalries were everywhere apparent, however, and, as vice-chancellor, on 9 March 1661 he made the quickest return of any constituency in England and Wales of the candidates his university elected to the Cavalier Parliament. So swift was it that one of them, Sir Richard Fanshawe, had not been aware of his participation until Ferne wrote belatedly to congratulate him. Fanshawe, a client of Edward Hyde, who had been at Breda and quite possibly helped Ferne to secure the mastership, was surprised but gratified at an election that had cost him no more than 'a letter of thanks, a brace of bucks and twenty broad pieces of gold to buy [his electors] wine' (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 1.149). 
Ferne served as prolocutor for the province of Canterbury in the lower house of convocation in 1661, and during the Savoy conference was in touch with the committee investigating the possibility of a compromise settlement with Richard Baxter, compiling a useful account of its dealings that July. He had been installed as dean of Ely on 12 March 1661, and on 3 December was nominated to the see of Chester, vacant on the death of Brian Walton five days earlier, shortly after he had paid it his first visit. Ferne was given leave to hold the mastership and bishopric 'in commendam' for at least a year, and was consecrated in London on 9 February 1662, but he never reached his diocese, dying on 16 March 1662 at the house of one of his Nevill Smyth kinsmen in St Paul's Churchyard. As a mark of the Stuarts' gratitude his funeral was held in Westminster Abbey on 25 March, with the king represented, as Sir John Ferne might have allowed, by two of his heralds. He was buried in St Edmund's Chapel alongside relatives of kings and queens, and above his tomb a memorial brass displayed his family's arms and recorded his loyal service. 
Ferne had never been well funded in his younger days, and he died too soon after the Restoration to have much improved his substance. His will, which he had not changed since 1659, revealed how limited were his means at the end of his life. He had never married, and left no landed estate. Apart from his books there were numerous small monetary bequests to friends and family. His sole executor, his stepbrother Thomas Nevill Smyth, a London draper, may have had difficulty in fulfilling them, and as late as November 1664 was granted exemption from supplying the usual gifts to the king made by executors of a bishop of Chester. Ferne's sole bequest to Trinity College was of $10, which was to be unattributable, 'by way of restitution, rather fearing I did not discharge those petty Stewardshipps which I sometimes bore there soe faythfullie as I should' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/311, fol. 96'r'). Yet despite several changes of location during the 1640s and 1650s he had evidently managed to keep track of his books and their whereabouts. The bulk of them went to another stepbrother, Clement Nevill Smyth, for many years a fellow of Trinity; but to George Barry, his successor at Medbourne in 1661 and another fellow of Trinity, he left his copies of David Paraeus's works, which in their student days had suffered public burnings at Paul's Cross, Oxford, and Cambridge after a misplaced bout of Arminian indignation at their supposed support of resistance in the cause of religion. 
Ferne was not a man to get heated or to take extreme positions. His value to the king's cause in the war years rested largely on his readiness to state, and then defend, a conventional case reasonably, readably, and with moderation. No original thinker, he became a prominent contributor to contemporary debate as his quickness into print made him a familiar target for critics as varied as Herle and Hunton, Sir Robert Filmer and Edward Gee, Henry Parker and James Harrington. Like other royalists he failed to dispose of the awkward proposition that if the king was supreme and parliament had no right to rebel against him, then it followed that in a context where parliament was none the less opposing him, the king's supremacy, as expressed in his right to determine public policy, mattered very little without legislative power. But although too few of the king's subjects were persuaded to think as he did, Ferne's aim was always to look towards a lasting settlement. To that end he played his part, after Charles I's execution, in maintaining the integrity of the reformed Church of England against opportunist attacks from continental Catholics and over twenty years he proved himself to be a resolute exponent of constitutional royalism. 


@@@@@


doc= 9350


Ferne, Sir John (c.1560-1609), administrator and writer on heraldry, was the son of William Ferne (died 1592) of Temple Belwood in the Isle of Axholme, Lincolnshire, and Anne, daughter of John Sheffield of Beltoft, Lincolnshire. Admitted to the Inner Temple in 1576/7, when he was probably in his late teens, Ferne devoted much of his time to the study of heraldry, and was commissioned to compose a history of the medieval de Lacy family based on that written by a foreign adventurer called Albertus a Lasco. His patron, who claimed to be a Polish nobleman and aimed to use this work to establish a distinguished pedigree for himself, vanished within a few months, but Ferne sought to gain some benefit from his labours by publishing his researches as 'The Blazon of Gentrie' in 1586. This work refuted a Lasco's pretensions to any relationship with the Lacys, but made much of the ancestry of the earls of Lincoln, who were among the leading landowners in Ferne's own county. However, the more significant part of the treatise comprised a debate on the nature of gentility, couched as a dialogue between a herald, a knight, a clergyman, a lawyer, an antiquary, and a ploughman. Ferne proclaimed his volume to be 'for the sole instruction of the armigerous gentry', and insisted that Christ himself was eligible to have borne arms because of his mother's descent from Shem. However, he qualified this remarkable claim with the humanist observation that true gentility was acquired through education, service, and, most of all, by virtue, without which lineage was a mere shadow of nobility. These claims are most interesting in light of the fact that his own lineage was anything but ancient: his father had only acquired the family's Lincolnshire estates in the 1570s, and the pedigree Ferne registered with the heralds artfully concealed the fact that his grandfather had been a yeoman from Uttoxeter, Staffordshire. 
Ferne was called to the bar of the Inner Temple in 1587, and in the following year his father, then mayor of Doncaster, secured John's appointment as recorder of the town. However, in 1592 Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury, coerced the town into displacing Ferne in favour of his own nominee, Edward Stanhope, and Ferne did not recover the post until after Stanhope's death in 1603. This was only a temporary reverse for Ferne, as in 1595, despite stiff competition, he succeeded his brother-in-law Ralph Rokeby as deputy secretary to the council in the north at York. One of a zealous coterie of officials who considered the north to be more at risk from recusancy than from puritanism, he devoted his energies to the persecution of the adherents of the exiled rebel Charles Neville, sixth earl of Westmorland, who constituted a focus for the Catholic networks in north-eastern England. 
The accession of King James in 1603 brought an end to official approval for Ferne's pressure on Catholics, but the new reign also brought a new president of the council in the north in the shape of Edmund, third Lord Sheffield, who promoted Ferne and another northern lawyer, William Gee, to hold the secretaryship in tandem, a post that yielded them perhaps $700 a year in fees. Sheffield's influence also found Ferne a parliamentary seat at Boroughbridge in 1604, and towards the end of the session of that year he was one of four council officials knighted by the king at Whitehall. He left little trace on the Commons' proceedings, and at the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot in November 1605 he was sent to York post-haste to co-ordinate the arrest of suspects; characteristically, he blamed the conspiracy on the abuse of the king's mercy and the negligence of the ecclesiastical establishment. Ferne's efforts in pursuit of the plotters were ignored by the government in the following year, when the courtier John Lepton obtained a grant of the fees that formed the mainstay of the secretaries' livelihood. Vigorous protests eventually forced Lepton to a compromise with the incumbents, but Ferne was allowed little time to savour his success, as he died on 20 June 1609, probably at York. 
Ferne was survived by his wife, Elizabeth, whom he had married by 1583. She was the daughter of John Needham of Wymondley Priory, Hertfordshire; with her Ferne had ten sons and two daughters. The youngest of his sons, Henry Ferne, was briefly bishop of Chester after the Restoration. He should not be confused with a cousin, also Sir John Ferne, who was knighted in 1603 and was a partner of Sir Arthur Ingram in the controversial export of English ordnance to the continent. 


@@@@@


doc= 9351


Ferneley, John (1782-1860), sporting painter, was born on 18 May 1782 in the village of Thrussington, 6 miles from Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire. He was the ninth of ten children born to William Ferneley, wheelwright and wagon builder, and his wife, Ann. He received only minimal schooling, and to the end of his days his spelling was eccentric and his punctuation non-existent. At the age of twenty, although still working for his father, he was showing an increasing interest in decorating farm carts with his paintings and making primitive sketches of fox-hunting. His naive efforts came to the attention of the young John Henry Manners, fifth duke of Rutland (1778-1857), whose seat was 15 miles away at Belvoir Castle and who, since coming of age, had taken control of his family pack of hounds. With the duke's encouragement Ferneley began in 1801 a three-year apprenticeship to the Leicestershire-born sporting artist Ben Marshall (1768-1835), then living in Beaumont Street, London. As part of the agreement he was to be enrolled as a student at the Royal Academy; he never was. 
In 1804, his apprenticeship completed and his friendship with Marshall intact, Ferneley received on the duke of Rutland's recommendation commissions from the officers of the Leicestershire yeomanry, then stationed at Dover under the duke's command. Moving on, he painted the young Thomas Assheton Smith (1776-1856), his first sitter in a scarlet hunting coat. Smith was one of the foremost fox-hunters of his time who in 1806 was to take the Quorn hounds, in whose country lay Thrussington, and he became one of Ferneley's leading patrons. Two Irish noblemen also ordered paintings: Lord Lismore in 1805 and the Hon. George O'Callaghan in 1806; both were to employ him again when owing to ill health he visited Ireland in 1809. He made subsequent visits to that country in 1810 and 1812. 
Within ten years of starting his apprenticeship Ferneley was earning in excess of $200 a year, and he married Sarah (Sally) Kettle in 1809. The centre of the sporting world, the 'queen of the shires' (Brownlow), was Melton Mowbray, with its four adjacent hunts -- the Quorn, the Cottesmore, the Belvoir, and the South Nottinghamshire -- providing sport six days a week over fine country and with ample accommodation in its four clubs and neighbouring country houses. In 1813 John Ferneley took lodgings there and in the following year he built in the town first a studio and then a substantial house that he called Elgin Lodge in praise of the Elgin marbles (acquired by Lord Elgin in 1801-3). From 1818 onwards he proudly signed his paintings 'John Ferneley, Melton Mowbray' and never lacked commissions. Both husband and wife fitted perfectly into the ambience of the hunting set. In a society with few women, Sarah was good company, and John was a sportsman who kept his own hunter and enjoyed fishing, shooting, stalking, and yachting. He remained a modest, conservative countryman, not seduced by the high life around him. Unlike his richer and better-connected contemporaries Francis Grant, his one-time pupil, and Lorraine Smith, godfather of his son Claude Lorraine, he never wore a red coat (in his Quorn hunt painting of 1825 he is the only one of fourteen riders not wearing one) and was content to lodge with the huntsman when working away. In his letters home he worried about leading in the hay and feeding his hunter. On one occasion he accepted two bacon pigs in exchange for a painting. In 1810 he had increased his charge for a painting of a single horse from 5 guineas to 10, and this he never altered. The most he ever charged was 200 guineas for the large, imaginative 'Council of Horses', inspired by Gay's fables, now hanging in Calke Abbey. 
John and Sally Ferneley had eight children, two of whom died in infancy and three of whom showed artistic ability. Sarah (1811-1903) engraved some of her father's paintings and worked mainly in watercolours; John junior (1814-1862) executed a rather weaker version of his father's style and settled in York about 1839; Claude Lorraine (1822-1891), although a better artist than John junior, preferred music to art. Both Ferneley's letters to his wife and two paintings by him in Leicester Art Gallery ('The Ferneley Family Pew, Melton Mowbray Parish Church', 1826, and 'Portrait of the Artist and his Family in his Studio', 'c'.1822), attest to his love of his wife and children. Sally died in 1836 and Ferneley married second, in July 1838 at Ecclesfield, Ann Allen, with whom he had a son, Charles Allen, in 1844. Ann Ferneley died in 1854, after which Ferneley's widowed favourite daughter, Sarah, looked after him. 
Ferneley made an annual pilgrimage to London and periodic expeditions to Scotland, Yorkshire, and other parts of England. He died at his home, Elgin Lodge, on 3 June 1860, having caught a chill on the coach journey from Sleaford, where he had just finished a painting for Sir Thomas Whichcote, bt. He was buried in Thrussington. 
Ferneley was a prolific painter. Although there are probably no more than a handful of his pictures that do not contain either a horse or a dog, nevertheless there is within these limits a wide range of subjects: hunting, racing, shooting, stalking, horse and cattle fairs, portraits of dogs and farm animals. His definitive works were, however, his 'scurries', and hunting portraits. The 'hunt scurry' was a panoramic view, up to 120 cm by 212 cm (the proportions deriving from his early work on farm carts), of a number of identifiable riders galloping at splittercokation pace across the large, recently enclosed, pastures of the midlands. In his portraits the relaxed rider is invariably immaculately turned out and sitting on a horse of some presence. Ferneley's images recreate for us a uniquely English lifestyle. 
Between 1806 and 1853 Ferneley exhibited twenty-two pictures at the Royal Academy, four at the British Institution, and thirteen at Suffolk Street. Paget transcribed Ferneley's account book (now lost) which, with a few gaps, covers his working life; his average earnings were about $400 a year. Ferneley's will was proved at less than $300. Ten of his paintings are in Leicester Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 9352


Ferrabosco, Alfonso (bap. 1543, d. 1588), composer, was born at Bologna and baptized in the cathedral of San Petronio there on 18 January 1543, the eldest son of Domenico Maria Ferrabosco (1513-1574), a singer and composer, and Giulia Novelli dall'Arpa (died 'c'.1578). On 5 August 1552 he was appointed overseer of the office of immigration taxes in Bologna (a sinecure). By 1559 he was in the service of Charles of Guise, cardinal of Lorraine, and, together with two younger brothers, participated in Du Bellay's 'Epithalame' intended for the wedding of Princess Marguerite of France and Emanuele Filiberto, duke of Savoy. 
A reward on 28 March 1562 shows Ferrabosco to be at the English court, where he was paid an annual pension of $66 13's'. 4died between 1562 and 1567. As a groom or gentleman of the privy chamber (both descriptions are given) he had direct contact with the queen, unlike an ordinary court musician. For want of evidence it is assumed he was a lutenist and singer. Ferrabosco was briefly absent in the service of Cardinal Farnese in Rome, and in June 1564 wished to return to England. The cardinal refused to release him, but he escaped. Back at the English court, Ferrabosco was granted a life annuity in 1567 at $100 p.a. on condition that he should remain in Elizabeth's service. This did not prevent him from travelling (perhaps on occasion as a spy). Setting out with his brother to settle his affairs in Italy, he wrote from Paris on 25 June 1569 with news that he had been robbed, but planned to return to England forthwith. Further letters of 30 October 1569 and 28 September 1570, from Bologna, indicated he had been unable to obtain the necessary travel licence. Meanwhile his father had arranged for him another sinecure in Bologna. 
In England again, Ferrabosco collected his annuity in 1571. In June 1572 he participated in a masque at Whitehall. On 23 October 1574 he asked permission to return to Bologna to attend to family affairs; in 1575 he was stated to be travelling in France, but by the following November he was in London again delivering messages from the queen to a diplomatic mission from Venice. On 27 February 1576 he performed in Ubaldino's Italian comedy at Whitehall. 
Difficulties soon arose in Ferrabosco's relations with queen and court, though the circumstances are unclear. For some reason he petitioned for his annuity to be halved to $50 and for numerous leases to be granted to a William Fysher. This took effect from midsummer 1576. In a letter of 23 September 1577 Ferrabosco reveals that he had recently returned to London to find himself in some disgrace and without his accustomed access to the queen. One reason bandied about was that he had attended mass in the house of the French ambassador. Writing to Lord Burghley on 26 September 1577, Ferrabosco described other visits he had made there, suggesting that his enemies used these to discredit him. On 13 October he denied robbing and murdering a servant of Sir Philip Sidney, and in a third letter of 29 December he asked the earl of Sussex to intercede for him at court. 
Because of these troubles Ferrabosco seems to have decided to leave England. Perhaps in part to smooth forthcoming travel arrangements, he married Susanna Symons at St Botolph, Aldgate, on 2 May 1578; she is presumed to be the mother of Alfonso Ferrabosco (c.1575-1628) and an unnamed daughter, whom the couple left in the care of Gommar van Oosterwijck, a court flautist. They were in Paris by 23 June 1578, when Anselmo Dandino, papal nuncio in France, wrote to Rome that Ferrabosco had come as musician to the cardinal of Lorraine and that he suspected that Ferrabosco was a spy. Ferrabosco left Paris for Italy on 30 September 1578, with plans for his wife to join him there later. On arrival he was imprisoned on the pope's orders on suspicion of disloyalty to the Roman Catholic church; Queen Elizabeth persuaded Catherine de' Medici to intercede for Ferrabosco's release and he was free by October 1580. His English annuity ceased at Lady day 1582. He was in Turin by February 1582, having taken up service there with Carlo Emanuele I, duke of Savoy. 
Ferrabosco published two collections of madrigals (1587), and vocal works by him appear in some fifteen other collections published between 1572 and 1613. In all about two hundred vocal pieces (rather more madrigals than motets) and some thirty instrumental works survive. He was highly regarded by his English contemporaries (there are tributes by John Baldwin, Thomas Morley, Thomas Campion, Henry Peacham, and Charles Butler); most extant manuscript copies of his music are in English libraries. No example has been found of a publication -- listed by the Stationers' Company (15 October 1603) and mentioned by Morley -- of a friendly competition between Ferrabosco and William Byrd in making forty two-part pieces on the plainsong 'Miserere'. A fire in 1904 destroyed the bulk of the holograph literary manuscript 'Dell'historia D'Altimauro composta per Alfonso Ferrabosco' in the university library at Turin. 
In 1584, according to Gommar van Oosterwijck, 'Alfonso did send commission... to bring him his children' (Charteris, 'Thematic Catalogue', 36-7), but the queen intervened to prevent this. In 1585 Ferrabosco attended the duke of Savoy when he travelled to Spain to marry Catherine of Austria. He was appointed 'gentiluomo ordinario di nostra bocca' and granted a life pension on 6 March 1586. He died on 12 August 1588 in Bologna and was buried in the church of Sant' Isaja. The duke made provision for Ferrabosco's widow and his two children born in Italy, Carlo Emanuele and Caterina. 


@@@@@


doc= 9353


Ferrabosco, Alfonso (c.1575-1628), composer and viol player, was the eldest and illegitimate son of Alfonso Ferrabosco (bap. 1543, d. 1588); Anthony Wood said Ferrabosco was born at Greenwich (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood D.19(4)). His mother was probably Susanna Symons, who married the elder Alfonso on 2 May 1578. The couple left England within a month, leaving the son and a daughter in the care of Gommar van Oosterwijck, a flautist at court. In 1584 Queen Elizabeth refused the elder Alfonso's request to allow the children to join him in Italy, and soon after van Oosterwijck's death in 1592 granted the younger Alfonso an annuity of $26 13's'. 4died as 'musitian for the violles'. This continued until 1601, although he claimed he had been 'hid' from service at court. Rallying after illness, in 1602 he petitioned for 'a reasonable stipend by the yeare, & something to pay my debtes,... if once her Ma[jes]tie please to use my most humble s[er]vice' (Hatfield House, Cecil papers, 98/94). In response a court place was granted him from June 1601 at an annual salary of $50. 
After the arrival of James I and his family, Ferrabosco gained an additional post from Christmas 1604 as extraordinary groom of the privy chamber, specifically 'in regard of his attendance upon the Prince [Henry] and instructing him [in] the art of musick' (TNA: PRO, C66/1640). This gave him privileged access to the private apartments. On twelfth night 1605 was performed 'The Masque of Blackness', the first of numerous court masques in which he collaborated with Ben Jonson. He also wrote the songs for Jonson's 'Volpone', performed at the Globe in 1606. Jonson paid warm tribute to him following the performance of 'Hymenaei' (6 January 1606): 'And here, that no mans Deservings complain of injustice... I doe for honours sake, and the pledge of our Friendship, name Ma. ALPHONSO FERRABOSCO, a man, planted by himselfe, in that divine Spheare; & mastring all the spirits of Musique: to whose judiciall care, and as absolute Performance, were committed all those Difficulties both of Song and otherwise. Wherein, what his Merit made to the Soule of our Invention, would aske to be esprest in Tunes, no lesse ravishing than his. (Jonson, 'Hymenaei', 1606)' In 1609 Ferrabosco published a book of 'Ayres', containing songs and dialogues with lute and bass viol to texts by Jonson, Campion, and Donne. Some of these were extracted from previous masques, but it is a shame that much of his original masque music is lost. Nevertheless, enough remains to show his skill in the genre. In the songs a balance is struck between the newly emerging declamatory style and dance rhythms, allied to imaginative and extensive harmonic progressions. The extant sacred music is mostly on dolorous texts, some seemingly for Catholic use and some for Anglican, contrasting sharply with a secular group of 'madrigalette' for four high voices. Later in 1609 was published his 'Lessons for 1. 2. and 3. Viols', printed in tablature for performance on lyra viol(s) -- allowing the instrument to be tuned in different ways. This technique seems to have been popular at court, especially within the establishment of Queen Anne of Denmark, and Ferrabosco's volume is the most important published collection of its kind. In the 1620s the violist Andre Maugars praised 'Farabosco d'Angleterre' as a player of 'la Lyre' above any he had heard in Italy. Throughout his court career Ferrabosco oversaw payments for purchase of viols and lyra viols and for repairs to them. Whereas he was listed as 'the violle' early in James I's reign, he was one of a group of four named violists by the end of it. 
Ferrabosco was not named among the musicians of Henry when he was appointed prince of Wales in 1610, but continued as groom. Curiously there is no record of his involvement with the obsequies of Henry's death in 1612. At some time before 28 January in that year he had married Ellen (died 1638), daughter of Nicholas Lanier ('c'.1523-1612), a flautist colleague of van Oosterwijck's, probably at Greenwich. John Aubrey named Ferrabosco as lutenist to Philip Herbert (later lord chamberlain), with lodgings in Baynard's Castle, Herbert's London home. He also mentioned that he served Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, visiting Amesbury and Wolfhall in Wiltshire. 
There is a gap in the records of Ferrabosco's collaborations with Jonson between 1611 and 1622, but this does not appear to denote any personal animosity. In 1617 he was appointed at the head of seventeen musicians in the household of Charles, prince of Wales, gaining a third salary of $40. Here he was involved with the cream of English musical talent, including Thomas Lupo, Orlando Gibbons, and later John Coprario. Ferrabosco himself was not a contributor to the new music emanating from the group (such as the works now termed 'fantasia-suites' and mixing violins and viols with obbligato organ); rather he expanded the repertory of the viol consort, with more than fifty superb fantasias, pavans, and 'In nomines' in four, five, and six parts. Evidently these were extremely popular, for some of the compositions each survive in more than twenty manuscript sources. Where many of Ferrabosco's contemporaries mirrored the structure and textures of vocal models -- madrigals in particular -- built from a succession of imitations each on a different theme, Ferrabosco tended to work in larger spans. Many of his fantasias fall into two distinct parts, but some concentrate on a single theme. Longer sections led to subtle variations in repetitions of themes, the opportunity for a wider exploration of 'key' relationships, and the tendency to engage in technical feats where several principal themes were brought together at climaxes, or were presented in longer or shorter notes. In all this his music served as a model for later consort composers, especially John Jenkins and William Lawes. His 'hexachord' fantasia and 'In nomine through all Parts' are extraordinary advanced experiments in modulating round the key circle, another procedure also explored by Jenkins. 
In 1618 Ferrabosco joined with his brother-in-law Innocent Lanier (a court flautist) and Hugh Lydiard (a sea captain) to petition for the privilege of removing sandbanks in the Thames. Rights were granted to them on 14 October 1619 to sell sand and gravel so removed, to receive a levy on imports and exports from the port of London, and to collect fines imposed on those causing annoyance on the river. There was much friction and disturbance between the partners, and Ferrabosco seems to have withdrawn from the venture in the early 1620s, once he and Lanier had sold their share to William Burrell, an official of the commission for the navy. Financial records at court suggest that he remained impoverished. In 1620 he was among a group of named musicians invited to provide music for a proposed amphitheatre in London (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 89). 
On 13 January 1626 Ferrabosco assigned three years' wages to another brother-in-law, Andrea Lanier, to whom he owed $200, perhaps taking this action because he was proposing to travel abroad and was uncertain of his return. There is no evidence that the journey took place, and in July 1626 Ferrabosco received a further $40 fee as 'Composer of musicke in ordinary' following the death of John Coprario. Ferrabosco was buried at St Alfege, Greenwich, on 11 March 1628. 
Ferrabosco's court places were shared between his sons Alfonso Ferrabosco (d. 1652) and Henry Ferrabosco ['see under 'Ferrabosco, John], both of whom served in the court wind band, while his infant son John Ferrabosco received a livery allowance. Two of his daughters also married musicians: Elizabeth married George Bunckley, and Catherine married Edward Coleman, a court musician after the Restoration. Catherine and Edward both sang in theatre productions and were friends of Samuel Pepys. 


@@@@@


doc= 9354


Alfonso Ferrabosco (d. 1652) was sworn at court on 19 March 1628 as a musician 'for the viols and wind instruments', but seems to have served even earlier, having received a new year's gift in 1627. He performed among the wind players, 'in the Chapel and at his Majesty's table'. Both he and his brother Henry played in the processions through London before the masque 'The Triumph of Peace' in 1634. A 'Mr Ferrabosco', perhaps this man, was in the service of Lord Cranborne, eldest son of the earl of Salisbury, in the late 1640s. Alfonso Ferrabosco was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 14 July 1652. His brother 


@@@@@


doc= 9355


Ferrabosco, John (bap. 1626, d. 1682), organist and composer, was baptized on 9 October 1626 at St Alfege, Greenwich, youngest son of Alfonso Ferrabosco (c.1575-1628) and his wife, Ellen (died 1638), daughter of Nicholas Lanier ('c'.1523-1612) and his second wife, Lucretia. His father died in March 1628 and was succeeded at court by two other sons, Henry and Alfonso ['see below']. No doubt they were instrumental in arranging that a livery allowance of $16 2's'. 6died due to Henry was transferred to John in 1631. He is not known to have served at court before 1642, but two payments to him as musician (on 30 July 1646 and 26 April 1649) suggest that later he may have attended Charles I, perhaps at Oxford. 
In 1662 Ferrabosco became organist and master of the choristers at Ely Cathedral. Three music books mainly in his hand are extant (CUL, Ely MSS 1, 4, 28); in June 1663 the dean and chapter paid him $10 'in consideration of his pains in pricking out of Bookes'. They also paid him for assisting with 'several music meetings' between 1663 and 1665. His anthem 'The king shall rejoice' may have been written for Charles II's visit to Ely in 1669. At the king's request he was awarded the MusB degree at Cambridge, conferred in 1671. He relinquished the duties of master of the choristers in 1669, but continued as organist, although it is believed he lost his sight in his last years. Unfortunately, much of Ferrabosco's surviving music -- mostly services and anthems -- is now incomplete, but it shows a solid and conservative style. Ferrabosco married Anne Burton at Trinity Church, Ely, on 28 June 1679; their son John was baptized there on 12 August following, but died in May 1682. John senior was buried in the same church on 15 October 1682, survived by his wife. 
His brother 


@@@@@


doc= 9356


Ferrar, Nicholas (1593-1637), religious writer and administrator, was born in the city of London on 22 February 1593 and was baptized on 28 February at St Mary's, Stayning Lane. He was the fifth of six surviving children of Nicholas Ferrar (1544/5-1620), a successful merchant adventurer and master of the Skinners' Company, and his wife, Mary (1553/4-1634), daughter of Lawrence Wodenoth of Shavington Hall, Cheshire. As a sickly child he relied heavily on his mother, who was known as a woman of piety and who raised him on Foxe's 'Actes and Monuments', from which he traced the history of the martyr Bishop Robert Ferrar (d. 1555), though there is no evidence that they were related. At the age of seven Nicholas was sent to a school at Enborne, near Newbury in Berkshire. As a precocious pupil he proceeded to Clare College, Cambridge, as a pensioner once he became a teenager, 'when yet his deportment was such as spake him more a man than many are at foure and twenty' (Forbes, 2.397), as his contemporary Dr Robert Byng recalled of him in September 1654. There his tutor was Augustine Lindsell, later bishop of Peterborough and of Hereford. Within a year Ferrar was a fellow-commoner, so widely appreciated was his scholarly mien. In 1610 he graduated BA and according to Byng made the oration to the university on the anniversary of the coronation (25 July 1610). He was elected a fellow of the college that year, with a view to studying medicine. Life in Cambridge seems to have been agreeable, with his only sister living 10 miles west of the university at Bourn with her husband, John Collett, and their nine or ten children. 
Soon after his twentieth birthday Ferrar left Cambridge, largely on the medical advice of the celebrated Clare physician, William Butler, who had also prescribed Ferrar with tobacco to cure his insomnia. He spent the years 1613-17 out of England, travelling on the continent and learning Dutch, German, Italian, French, and Spanish. Initially he was part of the retinue of the newly married Princess Elizabeth and Frederick, elector palatine. Ferrar had been introduced to Frederick in 1613 during the latter's visit to Cambridge with his brother-in-law, Charles, duke of York, by Robert Scot, master of Clare College. Scot had been sub-almoner to James VI and I, serving in the Chapel Royal, and would have known members of the court. Before setting out Ferrar was granted his MA, although he was not of sufficient standing in the university. He travelled with the retinue to the Netherlands, but he soon left them and travelled independently to Hamburg, Leipzig, and Prague before entering Italy by way of southern Germany. He spent time in Padua, where he continued his studies in medicine and could have had firsthand experience of the congregation of the oratory of St Philip Neri, and around Venice, where the English ambassador, Sir Dudley Carleton, welcomed him, but he also travelled to Rome and the Vatican as well as to Malta, and perhaps also to Vienna. He returned through France (where he nearly died of a severe fever at Marseilles in April 1616) before going to Spain. Without money, and motivated by a revelation that his family were in need, he walked the 450 kilometres from Madrid to the coast to take ship at San Sebastian. 
When Ferrar reached England in 1617 he intended to resume his fellowship, but his elderly parents requested he remain with them in London. In 1619 he turned down the offer of a professorship of geometry at the newly founded Gresham College, and instead became closely involved with the Virginia Company. Ferrar's father was a member, as he was also, of the East India Company; his elder brother William had emigrated to Virginia in 1619 (but died either 'en route' or soon after his arrival) and his other brother John Ferrar (c.1588-1657) became deputy of the company in the same year. It is possible that Ferrar himself may have co-written, with Thomas Winston, his successor as physic fellow at Clare, 'A Declaration of the State of the Colonie and Affaires in Virginia'. Issued by the king's council for Virginia in June 1620, the book contained a series of pamphlets and declarations relating to shipping and supplies as well as for the better governance of the colony. In May 1621 Ferrar was admitted to the company's council and was made treasurer of a glass company in the colony, and on 22 May 1622, when John Ferrar's three-year fixed term appointment expired, he succeeded his brother as deputy of the company. Throughout 1622 and 1623 Ferrar was regularly summoned to the privy council, where he vigorously defended the interests of the leadership of the Virginia Company, headed by Sir Edwin Sandys and the earl of Southampton, against the great London merchants led by Sir Thomas Smythe, whose party was later accused by John Ferrar of being pro-Spanish. In May 1623 he was even put under house arrest 'for a contempt of an order at the Council Table against the use of bitter invective' (Kingsbury, 1.108). The Virginia Company, after much political machination, lost its patent in May 1624, following a writ of 'quo warranto' in November 1623 and the records of the company from 1619 onwards survive only because Ferrar undertook to pay for their attested transcription before they were seized (November 1623-June 1624). In reward for his service, particularly his auditing of its accounts, the company granted him (4 February 1624) twenty shares of land in Virginia as his reward. Ferrar wrote an attack on Sir Thomas Smythe, explaining the woes of the company as arising from Smythe's misgovernment when treasurer before 1619 and his subsequent attempts to regain power. Though probably intended for pamphlet publication it did not see print until 1990. 
Following in the steps of his brother John, who had sat for Tamworth in 1621 under the patronage of Lord Paget, Ferrar was returned to parliament for Lymington in 1624, on the nomination of the earl of Southampton, in order to promote the company's interests and to support the fledgeling colony. When 'the Lower House entered, though reluctantly, upon the case of the Virginia Company, the disensions in which threaten its ruin' (Francis Nethersole to Sir Dudley Carleton, 6 May 1624, TNA: PRO, SP 14/164/46), Ferrar himself listed no fewer than fifty-two MPs who were freemen of the company, 'yett have not had [any parte 'erased'] nor followde the buisinesse for sundry yeares' (BL microfilm, RP 420, Manchester MSS, item 371). At least another fifty members of that parliament were either freemen or the kinsmen of freemen, and no fewer than fourteen members of the upper house were also adventurers or councillors. Ferrar played a very public role in parliament in the prosecution of Lionel Cranfield, first earl of Middlesex, the lord treasurer, at his impeachment. Middlesex had been the chief critic of the policies of the Virginia Company and as deputy it was only to be supposed that Ferrar would speak out against him. Ferrar joined Lord Cavendish, Sir John Danvers, and Sir Edwin Sandys on 28 April in opening the proceedings against the beleaguered Middlesex; the following day Middlesex told the king that they did 'yesterday make invective oration against me four hours together about the Virginia business... all which they laid wholly upon me' (Prestwich, 437n.). Forty-three unnumbered folios of Ferrar's parliamentary diary survive (Magdalene College, Cambridge, Ferrar MSS 1433), but they cover only the first month of the sitting and so do not give more than a glimpse of how active the Virginians would become in the house under Sir Edwin Sandys or reveal how open to criticism the role of Ferrar and of other senior company figures was found to be. After the dissolution of parliament Ferrar chose to concentrate on family matters and did not stand for parliament again. Apart from a brief three-year period from 1631, when he and his brother John were both again appointed commissioners of the Virginia Company, he held no public office. 
In 1625 Ferrar, using his mother's dower, bought a small manor at Little Gidding in Huntingdonshire ['see 'Little Gidding community] from John Ferrar's bankrupt business partner, Thomas Sheppard, thereby protecting John from financial ruin. It was there that the unmarried Nicholas moved with her the following year, to be joined by brother John, John's wife and children, and his sister's household from Cambridgeshire. Little Gidding itself was a 'dispopulated' (Muir and White, para. 69) village and the arrival of an extended family (including servants) of forty helped to revive it. While his mother put the church repair in order, Ferrar set about preparing himself for ordination, to better lead the spiritual life of his family and emphasize his distance from worldly concerns. In February 1626 he was duly ordained deacon at Westminster Abbey at the hands of William Laud, bishop of St David's, his old tutor Lindsell being present. Ferrar refused a range of benefices offered him by his former Virginia associates as well as George Herbert's offer of the prebend of Leighton Bromswold. With his brother John acting as a site manager and clerk of works Ferrar instead, partly funded by Leighton Bromswold's landowner, Katherine, duchess of Lennox, set about refurbishing Herbert's church, a project for which he was well suited. 
The life of the household, subsequently caricatured as 'the Arminian nunnery' in the 1641 pamphlet of that name, was dedicated to the daily reading and discussion of scripture, rigorous education (including household accounting and basic medical skills for Ferrar's nieces) and to the craft of bookbinding. Ferrar continued to work as a scholar; the family, at first under his direction, produced at least six harmonies of the gospels, while Ferrar himself translated Valdes and Lessius, on temperance, and made a translation (now lost) of Carbone. He also worked on editing Herbert's 'The Temple' after his friend's death, and was much visited by Cambridge friends and others. Charles I borrowed a biblical harmony in 1633, and visited in 1642 and 1646, after Ferrar's death. Early in December 1637 Ferrar determined that his grave should be 7 feet west of the church door, in order to leave room for the tomb of his brother John, and when he died at Little Gidding on 4 December he was duly interred there on 7 December without a monument. The intended inscription, in Latin, has been attributed to another Cambridge poet, Richard Crashaw, with puns on his 'virginal purity' (Forbes, 2.584). Ferrar's life, including the history of the community at Little Gidding, was written subsequently by his brother John. It is ironic that it should have been the attacks on the household by puritan detractors, most notably 'The Arminian Nunnery' of 1641, which fuelled, in reaction, the enthusiasm of pious Victorians, who interpreted Little Gidding as a precedent for Anglican monasticism, and secured for Ferrar eventual inclusion in the Anglican cycle of prayer. 
The family at Little Gidding was gradually reduced by death and marriage. After 1643 most of the family were in exile in the Low Countries, but were back to welcome Charles I on his secret visit on his flight to the Scots in 1646. The Ferrars' detractors were concerned both by the beauty of holiness, condemning 'their 'Crosses' on the outside and inside of the 'Chappell'' and 'an 'Altar' richly decked with 'Tapestry', 'Plate' and 'Tapers'' ('The Arminian Nunnery', 2), and the liturgical style of ''Adorations', 'genuflections', and 'geniculations'' (ibid.), as well as by the emphasis given to prayer rather than to the hearing of sermons. The local ministers of Great and Steeple Gidding came in to preach and administer communion but it is clear that the daily recitation of the psalter, saying the litany and praying twice a day (morning and evening prayer were said according to Cranmer's rubric, publicly) in the chapel and four times in the house, using prayers for the family, and monthly communion, predominated. Ferrar's own reputation for holiness, fostered by Isaak Walton and later writers, in part derived from his long-term weakening illnesses and his scholarly mien, but also from his reputation as a teacher and administrator. While not a monastic community, despite the idealizations of eighteenth-century nonjurors and nineteenth-century Anglo-Catholics, nor congregationalist in the strict sense, given Ferrar's regard for episcopal authority and his friendship with bishops, none the less Ferrar's Little Gidding drew heavily on the early church model recorded in the second chapter of the 'Acts of the Apostles'. 


@@@@@


doc= 9357


Ferrar, Robert (d. 1555), bishop of St David's and protestant martyr, was born at Ewood in Midgley in the parish of Halifax, Yorkshire. In the early 1520s he found a living at the Augustinian priory of St Oswald in Nostell, Yorkshire, where he was ordained an acolyte and subdeacon on 21 May 1524. On 24 September 1524 he was ordained a deacon at York, and was probably priested later at Cambridge. He was a student at Cambridge from 1524 to 1528 and at Oxford, where he graduated BTh on 14 October 1533, from 1528 to 1534-5. At Oxford he fell under the influence of Thomas Garrett in 1528 and became one of a group of students engaged in selling protestant books, for which offence he was imprisoned twice. In 1535 he was invited by a fellow Augustinian, William Barlow, to join him in an embassy to James V of Scotland, and in 1536 Barlow obtained from Thomas Cromwell a general licence for Ferrar to preach. In June 1538 he was installed as the new prior of Nostell, worth $600 a year. An ardent reformer, he preached extensively in the neighbourhood, but complained bitterly of the scarcity of preachers and schoolmasters there. To remedy this he proposed the conversion of his priory into a college of preachers but without success. In 1539 he surrendered his priory to the crown and was awarded a pension of $80 a year. Between 1540 and 1547 he virtually drops from sight, although a lease dated 31 May 1545 shows that he engaged in commercial and agricultural activity in Yorkshire. 
Following the accession of Edward VI, however, in August 1547 Ferrar was appointed a preacher to accompany the group of royal visitors entrusted with the visitation of the dioceses of Hereford and Worcester and the four Welsh ones. In the following year, when Barlow was translated from St David's to Bath and Wells, he recommended Ferrar as his successor in the former see. Since Ferrar was also chaplain and protege to the duke of Somerset, he was duly appointed there in July 1548, the first bishop to be appointed by royal letters patent instead of being elected by the canons. His temporalities were restored on 31 July, and he was consecrated bishop on 9 September 1548 by Archbishop Cranmer and other bishops at the archbishop's house at Chertsey, the first bishop to be consecrated according to the rites of the new English ordinal. On 11 November he preached at Paul's Cross in markedly reforming vein and wearing only the vestments of a priest, giving scandal to the conservatively-minded. From then until March 1549 he was a regular attender at the House of Lords. At some time between 1547 and January 1549 he took a wife, whose name was Elizabeth. Three children were born to them: Samuel, Griffith, and Sage. 
Later in 1549 Ferrar came down to his diocese for the first time. St David's had long been divided sharply by disputes between its previous bishop and his chapter, not only over doctrine but also over the rights that Barlow claimed over his chapter. These quarrels continued into Ferrar's episcopate, even though most of the chapter were no longer conservative in sympathy as they had earlier been. The leading figures among them were the precentor, Thomas Young, to be bishop of St David's (1560-61) and archbishop of York (1561-8), and Rowland Meyrick, later bishop of Bangor (1559-66). George Constantine, registrar of St David's and friend of Ferrar since his Oxford days, was at first well disposed towards him but soon changed his stance. The first encounter between Ferrar's chancellor, Edmund Farley, and the chapter in April 1549 led to a serious disagreement, in the course of which the canons accused Farley of being guilty of 'praemunire'. From then until 1553 relations between bishop and chapter remained extremely strained, though because of the confused state of the manuscript left by the chief authority for the events in question, John Foxe (BL, Harley MS 420), it is very difficult to trace clearly the course of these dissensions. What does emerge, however, is that both sides took advantage of every opportunity to thwart and annoy one another. Relations between Ferrar and Constantine deteriorated to such an extent that, for eighteen months, the diocese was virtually without a registrar until the council in the marches obliged Ferrar to return Constantine to that office. 
During this time Ferrar was not only at loggerheads with many of his canons but also with a number of prominent laymen in his diocese, mainly over their respective rights to some of the more important temporal possessions of the see. In his attempts to make good some of the losses caused by his predecessor, Ferrar aroused fierce opposition from Bishop Barlow's eldest brother, Roger, from Dorothy, widow of Richard Devereux, and from Gruffydd Dwn, one of the most influential landowners in south Carmarthenshire, who was acting as Dorothy Devereux's attorney. Other powerful laymen opposed to him were Arnold Butler, William Owen of Henllys, and William Philips of Picton. A particularly serious dispute, which Ferrar seems to have lost, was one with Robert Birt of Llandygwydd. 
In September 1550, tiring of what he considered to be obstructionism and neglect of duty by the precentor and canons, Ferrar took out a writ of 'quo warranto' proceedings against them from the court of king's bench. In reply the canons submitted a series of fifty-six accusations against him, which were probably drawn up in the spring or summer of 1551. Although they were presented in the names of Thomas Lee, a Carmarthen merchant, and Hugh Rawlins, vicar of Tenby, neither Ferrar nor anyone else seems to have had any illusions concerning the real instigators. Ferrar protested with great bitterness that the complainants were the tools of the chapter and, in particular, of Young, Meyrick, and Constantine, 'his mortal enemies and the very devisers and procurers of the informations and bolsterers and bearers... hereof' ('Acts and Monuments', 7.17). The accusations were grouped under the five headings of abuse of authority, maintenance of superstition, covetousness, wilful negligence, and folly. Many of them were directed at least as much at his friends and servants as at Ferrar himself. 
One of the consequences of these quarrels was their unfortunate effect upon worship and belief among the populace of the diocese. Clearly, there existed a small group of reformers who were keen to see protestant changes being pushed through. The altar at St Peter's Church, Carmarthen, was taken down at an early date, and the replacement communion table was moved several times thereafter. There were controversies about the maintenance of traditional practices at the time of communion services. Ferrar was criticized for his cautious attitudes in these matters, but ardent protestant though he was, he seems to have been hesitant, less from any sympathy towards Catholic usage than because he feared that rebellion and tumult might spread from Cornwall and Devon to his own diocese. Similarly, in spite of being an enthusiastic preacher, he admitted that he encountered difficulties because many of his congregations spoke only Welsh, but he claimed that he had preached frequently and with success in English-speaking towns like Carmarthen. He also confessed that he was sympathetic to Welsh speakers and the ancient prophecies cherished by them. 
Between January and April Ferrar again attended parliament, but was forbidden to leave London until July. He was not, however, imprisoned during Edward VI's reign, as has often been claimed. He remained at liberty in St David's diocese and even continued to exercise his episcopal functions after the accession of Mary I in July 1553. He appears to have remained in his diocese until as late as September of that year. He was then summoned to London and imprisoned, along with other protestants, probably in the queen's bench prison at Southwark. There he seems to have been humanely treated. On 4 March 1554 steps were taken to ensure that every married bishop was deprived of his diocese and on 13 March 1554 a further commission was issued for the deprivation of Ferrar and three other bishops. A successor to him, Henry Morgan, a canon lawyer of Llandaff diocese, was quickly elected on 28 March, but it was not until 22 January 1555 that Ferrar appeared before Bishop Gardiner to answer for his reforming opinions. He was then sent to Wales where, on 20 February 1554, he was arraigned at Carmarthen before his successor, Henry Morgan, and his former registrar, Constantine, to answer whether or not he believed in the lawfulness of clerical matrimony and the validity of transubstantiation. He was examined again on 7 March, when he refused to subscribe to articles described by him as devised and drawn up by men. At last, on 13 March, after he had appealed in vain from Morgan to Archbishop Pole, the final sentence was passed on him. On 30 March 1555 he was burnt at the stake 'on the south side of the market cross' at the town of Carmarthen, according to Foxe. He endured his sufferings with great courage. All his former antagonists, except Rowland Meyrick, were said to have been reconciled to him. He is commemorated with a plaque in St Peter's Church and a tablet in Nott Square on the reputed site of his burning. 


@@@@@


doc= 9358


Ferrers, Benjamin (d. 1732), portrait painter, was deaf and mute from birth and appears to have lived in Westminster. He subscribed to Sir Godfrey Kneller's academy when it was established in 1711. His earliest known work of 'c'.1695, is a still life, 'Plant in a China Pot', which is in Newbattle Abbey, Scotland. He painted, in 1708, a portrait of his relative William Beveridge, bishop of St Asaph, which was taken from the body of the dead bishop, who died at Westminster on 5 March 1707; the portrait is now in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. A three-quarter length version was engraved by W. Sherwin, by Michael van der Gucht (both in mezzotint and line), as a frontispiece to the bishop's sermons, and by (Mary Ann?) Trotter. Ferrers also painted a picture of the court of chancery under Lord Chancellor Macclesfield, which includes portraits of Macclesfield, Sir Philip Yorke, afterwards Lord Chancellor Hardwicke, and Sir Thomas Pengelly, afterwards chief baron of the exchequer. This picture was in the possession of Dr Lort of Cambridge, who gave it to the earl of Hardwicke, and at the sale of the Wimpole pictures in 1888 it was purchased by the trustees of the National Portrait Gallery. 
Ferrers died in 1732; a Latin panegyric on him was written by his friend Vincent Bourne of Westminster School. 


@@@@@


doc= 9359


Edward Ferrers (1524x7-1564), was the only son of Henry Ferrers (died 1526) and Katherine, the daughter and coheir of Sir John Hampden of Hampden, Buckinghamshire. Edward's grandfather Edward Ferrers (died 1535) had acquired the manor of Baddesley Clinton, Warwickshire, through marriage to Constance (died 1551), younger daughter and coheir of Nicholas Brome, and established it as the family seat. Edward succeeded to his grandfather's estate as a child and his wardship was acquired by Elizabeth, the widow of Sir Thomas Englefield and daughter of Sir Robert Throckmorton; he had probably come of age by 1545. The royal marriage of Katherine Parr, a kinswoman to the Throckmortons, led Edward Ferrers into court circles, and he attended the funerals of both Edward VI and Mary as a gentleman pensioner. In 1548 he married Bridget (died 1582), the daughter of William Windsor, second Baron Windsor; they had six sons and three daughters. Ferrers represented Warwick in Mary's first parliament, but otherwise played little part in public affairs. The last years of his life were dogged by financial troubles, and by the time of his death his estates were in the control of his brother-in-law Edward, third Baron Windsor. He died at the latter's home, Hewell Grange, and was buried at Tardebigge church on 10 August 1564. Anthony Wood records a man of his name as a playwright, thereby perpetuating the error of Richard Puttenham and Francis Meres in attributing to Edward Ferrers the works of the Hertfordshire poet and MP George Ferrers. 


@@@@@


doc= 9360


Ferrers, George (c.1510-1579), courtier and poet, was born about 1510 in St Albans, the first son of Thomas Ferrers of St Albans and his wife, Alice, the daughter of John Cockworthy of Cockworthy, Devon. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 22 November 1534; he was a frequent litigant, and praised by John Leland for his oratory at the bar, yet he is not known to have followed a legal career. 
Ferrers's literary interests were initially legal and antiquarian. About 1533 he seems to have been responsible for the editing and translation of 'The Great Boke of Statutes' covering the period from the first year of Edward III's reign to the twenty-fifth of Henry VIII's: the work was reprinted in an updated edition about 1542. His translation of 'Magna Carta' and other statutes was printed in 1534 and reprinted in a revised form about 1541 and again in 1542. He may be the George Ferras and the Mr. Ferrares who supplied Leland with information about the poet John Gower and a judge of the same name in the time of Edward II. 
By 1538 Ferrers had become, with Thomas Chaloner, a servant of Thomas Cromwell; the following year he attended the reception of Anne of Cleves, and by 10 December 1541 he had married Elizabeth, the widow of his friend Humphrey Bourchier of Markyate, Hertfordshire. On Cromwell's fall in 1540 Ferrers was taken into the king's service, and from at least 1542 to 1547 he was a page of the chamber; in 1544 he attended Henry VIII in France. The king remembered him in his will. Ferrers was member of parliament for Plymouth in 1542 and 1545 and for Cirencester in 1547. He may have owed his first parliamentary seat at Plymouth to Sir John Russell, Baron Russell, and later first earl of Bedford: Ferrers accepted a satin doublet worth 24's'. in lieu of wages. Thomas Seymour, the lord admiral, probably arranged his return for Cirencester, perhaps with the help of Thomas Sternhold. 
The most notable episode in Ferrers's political career was his arrest for a debt of about 200 marks while on his way to the House of Commons in 1542. He was placed in the Counter in Bread Street and the serjeant-at-arms was able to secure his release only on a second visit. The man to whom he owed the debt, Weldon, with the city sheriffs Rowland Hill and Henry Suckley, and others, were summoned to appear before the house on 28 March 1542 to answer charges of breach of privilege: they were committed to the Tower for two days. The matter was referred to the privy council and the king claimed privilege for his own but also for his servants' attendance upon the business of parliament: the affair, which established the immunity of members of the House of Commons from civil arrest during session and the right of the Commons to release members arrested in this way, became known as Ferrers's case. 
In 1546 Ferrers married Jane, the daughter of John Southcote of St Albans, with whom he had a son, Julius. On 29 July 1548 he received the extensive lands of Markyate Priory once held under lease by his first wife's late husband. He acted as a commissioner for transport in the Scottish campaign of 1547, and according to one contemporary witness was instrumental in the suffocation of some Scots who were hiding in a cave near Leith. In the campaign he was described as 'a gentleman of my lord Protectors' (W. Patten, 'The Late Expedicion in Scotlande', 1548, sig. D5'r'); nevertheless, he survived Somerset's fall in October 1549 and execution in January 1552. The king gave him a manuscript copy of the account of the 1547 expedition to Scotland written by Jean, le sieur Berteville, which Ferrers annotated and inscribed 'Liber Georgij Ferrers ex dono Regis Edouardi' (BL, Cotton MS Cleopatra A. XI). It was printed for the Bannatyne Club in 1825. 
Ferrers served as a justice of the peace for Hertfordshire from 1547 to 1554, as MP for Barnstaple, and then, through the influence of Sir Thomas Knyvett, as the member for Brackley in 1554-5. The decision to appoint Ferrers -- hitherto known as a lawyer, courtier, MP, and servant of Somerset -- to preside over the Christmas festivities of 1551-2 at Greenwich, which John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, in part intended to divert attention from the fall of Somerset, has not been convincingly explained. Nevertheless, Ferrers is reported by Grafton to have eclipsed the efforts of his predecessors: 'in shew of sundry sightes and devises of rare invention, and in act of divers enterludes and matters of pastime, played by persons, as not onely satisfied the common sorte, but also were very well liked and allowed by the counsayle and other of skill in the like pastimes. (Anglo, 303)' The nature of the entertainments can be only partially reconstructed, but some important material relating to their preparation survives among the revels accounts in the Loseley manuscripts (now in the Folger Shakespeare Library) and in other documents. The master of the revels, Sir Thomas Cawarden (who, like Ferrers, had been a page of the chamber to Henry VIII), was told by Northumberland of Ferrers's appointment as lord of misrule and instructed to assist him promptly. Further correspondence relates to the provision of garments and furnishings for the devices. The entertainments, especially the visit to the city of London, were clearly of great importance to the authorities, and Cawarden had to be pushed into making them as spectacular as possible: the visit 'was not of our device', Ferrers told him, 'but of the Counseills appoyntement' (Anglo, 305). The success of the events can be judged by an entry in the acts of the privy council recording a payment of $50 from Northumberland to Ferrers. The whole entertainment cost around $500. 
Ferrers presented himself at court by coming 'oute of the mone' (Anglo, 306), and his entourage was extensive. There was a play on Christmas day; on 2 January 1552 the lord of misrule was involved in a 'dronken Maske' (ibid.), and on the next evening took part in a mock midsummer-night revel, which probably included jousting on horseback. The visit to the city took place on 4 January, when Ferrers was accompanied by a great number of young knights, many on horses, and all wearing yellow and green baldricks around their necks: among his attendants were 'Counseilloures' (ibid., 305), among them Sir Robert Stafford and Thomas Wyndham. They landed at Tower wharf and proceeded by way of Tower Hill to a large scaffold by the cross at Cheapside. The lord was accompanied by music and morris dancers, as well as a guard of a hundred men in red and white. At the scaffold the lord of misrule's office and progeny were proclaimed, wine was distributed, and Ferrers rode to the lord mayor, with whom he had dinner: later they visited the lord treasurer at the Austin Friars, went to Bishopsgate, and returned to Greenwich from Tower wharf. The revels accounts reveal that the entertainment involved gaolers, manacles, locks, stocks, a pillory, a gibbet, an executioner's axe and block, and other items for imprisonment and punishment. This was no doubt all related to the execution of the duke of Somerset, which took place on Tower Hill on 22 January. After a play or interlude performed at Epiphany (6 January) there was a dialogue, 'Youth and Riches', which may have been by Ferrers's friend Thomas Chaloner, with whom he collaborated on 'A Mirror for Magistrates'; the dialogue was followed by barriers, masques for men and women, and a banquet. 
Ferrers's role as lord of misrule in the entertainments and in the visit to the city appears to be without precedent, and was sufficiently successful for him to be appointed to the position again the following year. This time he intended to come 'oute of a place caulled 'vastum vacuum'' (Anglo, 309), where he was supposed to have been since last year, in a blue costume. On Christmas day an ambassador and interpreter would prepare the king for his arrival with his even more exotic entourage on the next day by ship at Greenwich. Again there was jousting and a mock midsummer show on new year's day and a visit to the city on 4 January: it reprised the theme of imprisonment and execution. Over the holidays there were various masques, including one of 'covetus men with longe noses' and of 'women of Diana hunting' (ibid., 311). On twelfth night there was a triumph of Cupid, Venus, and Mars, devised by Sir George Howard, master of the henchmen in the royal household, whose realization seems to have been left to Ferrers. A list of those involved in the masque includes 'Ydelnes' and 'Dalyance', 'two Ladies straungely attyred', and 'The herault cuoeur ardant' among the classical roles: the show also involved two dozen tennis balls (Anglo, 313). 
In 'Beware the Cat' (1570) William Baldwin refers to 'certain interludes, which for the King's recreation we had devised and were in learning'. These almost certainly relate to the revels of this Christmas, and included a 'play of Aesop's Crow' which the king's players were learning and which Baldwin did not like (W. Baldwin, 'Beware the Cat', ed. W. A. Ringler jun. and M. Flachmann, 1988, 5). Baldwin and John Heywood wrote plays for Candlemas (2 February) and Shrovetide (14 February), but what part, if any, Ferrers had in them is not known: they were anyway postponed on account of the king's illness. Despite this, Ferrers was rewarded with an estate at Flamstead for his activities over the Christmas of 1552-3 and reappointed by Mary for the following Christmas of 1553-4. Later that year he was rewarded with $100 for his loyalty to the crown during Wyatt's rebellion. 
In spring and early summer 1555 Ferrers, with John Prideaux, accused John Dee and his associates, including Sir Thomas Benger, auditor to Princess Elizabeth and a future master of the revels, of conjuring, casting nativities, plotting on behalf of Elizabeth against the king and queen, and bewitching Ferrers's children. On or about 26 May 1555 Dee was held under arrest at Hampton Court, the week before Elizabeth was taken there from Woodstock; subsequently he and his co-conspirators were imprisoned. Ferrers went on to seek 'thapprehension of oone Stanney', but on 4 June the privy council in turn sought information concerning Ferrers's own whereabouts and ordered that, if not found, he should be sought 'into the counties of Oxon, Stafford, Warwick and Wigorn' (L. B. Campbell, 'Humphrey duke of Gloucester', 'Huntington Library Bulletin', 5, 1934, 147). 
After this episode Ferrers largely disappears from sight; he held no crown office under Queen Elizabeth and was not restored to the commission for the peace. He was appointed escheator for Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire in 1562-3 and for Essex and Hertfordshire in 1566-7. 
William Baldwin was instrumental in the creation of Ferrers's largest surviving literary work, his contributions to 'A Mirror for Magistrates', in which he was also associated with Thomas Chaloner and Thomas Phaer. Ferrers probably wrote several of his pieces for the suppressed edition of about 1554 which survives only in fragments. When the work was published again in 1559 it included his tragedies of Tresilian and Thomas of Woodstock, but those of Elianor Cobham, Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and Edmund, duke of Somerset, were suppressed. The last of these was printed in the edition of 1563, for which Ferrers also brought, among other tragedies, Churchyard's about Jane Shore, written during the reign of Edward VI. The poems about Elianor Cobham and Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, were not printed until 1578. In C. S. Lewis's judgement, 'Ferrers is no poet but he is of curious interest as a metrist' (C. S. Lewis, 'English Literature in the Sixteenth Century Excluding Drama', 1954, 241). 
Little is known of Ferrers's later literary work. According to John Stow, he was the author of the part of Grafton's chronicle (1568-9) recording the events of the reign of Queen Mary: Grafton denied this, but Stow insisted it was the case. In his will, made in August 1560, Thomas Phaer appointed Ferrers to choose passages of scripture for his tomb in Cilgerran church, Pembrokeshire. Ferrers contributed verses to the earl of Leicester's Kenilworth entertainment of 1575 for Queen Elizabeth: he wrote a speech by the Lady of the Lake and verses for the device of her delivery in which his contribution was probably another speech by her. 
In 1569 Ferrers married, thirdly, Margaret Preston, a widow of St Albans, with whom he had at least three sons and two daughters. In 1571 he was returned as MP for St Albans. He supported the claim to the succession of Mary, Queen of Scots, and corresponded with John Lesley, bishop of Ross, who believed he had written a Latin work on her claim. He was not popular with his neighbours and tenants, and died intestate at Flamstead, Hertfordshire, where he was buried on 11 January 1579. He appears to have kept the protestant faith throughout most of his life. 
Describing the poets of the reign of Edward VI, George Puttenham called Ferrers 'the principall man in this profession', and comparing him with his contemporaries said he was 'a man of no lesse mirth & felicitie... but of much more skil, & magnificence in his meeter'. Puttenham went on to say that he 'wrate for the most part to the stage, in Tragedie and sometimes in Comedie or Enterlude, wherein he gave the king so much good recreation, as he had thereby many good rewardes'. Later on he praises Buckhurst and Ferrers as writers of tragedy 'for such doings as I have sene of theirs do deserve the hyest price' (Puttenham, 'The Arte of English Poesie', ed. G. D. Willcock and A. Walker, 1936, 60, 63). Unfortunately, on both occasions Puttenham refers to Ferrers as ''Edward Ferrys'', a confusion perpetuated by Francis Meres in his 'Palladis tamia' and repeated by later historians until it was ended by Sidney Lee in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 


@@@@@


doc= 9361


Ferrers, Henry de (d. 1093x1100), magnate and administrator, was the eldest son of Walkeline de Ferrers (died 'c'.1040), and inherited his father's Norman patrimony, centred on Ferrieres-St Hilaire. It is not known whether Henry de Ferrers fought at Hastings; although it is impossible to arrive at precise dates, he may have begun to acquire lands in England as early as 1066-7. The pattern of Ferrers's tenure by 1086, as revealed in 'Domesday Book', resulted from grants both from the personal holdings of Anglo-Saxon thegns and of old Anglo-Saxon administrative units. Serving William I, perhaps first as castellan of Stafford, Ferrers received the lands of three Anglo-Saxon antecessors. Probably about 1066 or 1067 he was granted the lands in Berkshire and Wiltshire of Goderic, former sheriff of Berkshire. By about the end of 1068 he also held the lands of Bondi the Staller in Buckinghamshire, Berkshire, Northamptonshire, and Essex. Following the dispossession of Siward Barn for his part in the 1071 revolt, Ferrers acquired his substantial estates, comprising lands in Berkshire, Essex, Gloucestershire, and Warwickshire and also in Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire. The latter in particular complemented Ferrers's major territorial acquisition of Appletree wapentake, which stretched from eastern Staffordshire across most of south Derbyshire, and which he probably received in the wake of William I's defeat of the rebellion in the north in 1070-71. It was centred on Tutbury, Staffordshire, previously held by the new earl of Chester, Hugh d'Avranches. This large and compact estate was supplemented by lands in north Derbyshire and western Leicestershire. 
It was two manors from Appletree wapentake which formed Ferrers's original endowment of Tutbury Priory, which he founded with his wife, Bertha, in (probably) 1080. Mid-twelfth-century evidence indicates that from its foundation Tutbury was a dependency of the Norman abbey of St Pierre-sur-Dives. As a key administrator in Derbyshire and Staffordshire, Ferrers appears regularly as a witness to the extant 'acta' of the Conqueror and William Rufus. His particular prominence in English 'acta' confirms his place among the most powerful Anglo-Norman magnates. In 1086 he was a 'legatus' ('commissioner') on the west midland circuit of the Domesday survey. 
Henry de Ferrers had four children with Bertha. The eldest is likely to have been William, who inherited the family's Norman estates and was a firm supporter of Duke Robert Curthose. Engenulph did not long outlive his father and Ferrers's English lands passed to his third son, Robert de Ferrers (d. 1139), whom King Stephen later made an earl. A daughter, Amicia, married Nigel d'Aubigny, probably the brother of Henry I's butler. Ferrers was still alive in September 1093, when he was among the addressees of a royal charter, but had almost certainly died by 14 September 1100 when Engenulph attested an early charter of Henry I; he was buried in Tutbury Priory. 


@@@@@


doc= 9362


Ferrers, Henry (1550-1633), antiquary, came of a family descended from the thirteenth-century earls of Derby through the lords of the barony of Ferrers of Groby. His father, 
Henry Ferrers, who was born on 26 January 1550, was still a minor when his father died; his mother subsequently married Andrew Ognall, who acquired his stepson's wardship. Ferrers was sent to Hart Hall, Oxford, and in 1572 entered the Middle Temple. In 1582 he married Jane White, granddaughter of Sir Thomas White of South Warnborough, Hampshire. Three children -- Joan (who died in infancy), Edward, and Mary -- were born before Jane's death in 1586. Like other lawyers with antiquarian interests Ferrers seems to have used his expertise in preparing legal cases rather than practising as an advocate. A notebook in the Bodleian Library (MS Rawlinson B. 470) shows him consulting the records of James Strangeman and Francis Thynne on behalf of his kinsman Edward Neville during a lawsuit over the barony of Abergavenny. For several years he divided his time between his Warwickshire estates and London before acquiring a house in Westminster in 1589 and letting Baddesley Clinton. This may represent both a retrenchment of expenses and an attempt to pursue a legal and parliamentary career in the capital. He may well have been the Henry Ferrers who represented Cirencester in 1593, as legally minded antiquaries were recognized as useful members of the house. In 1597 he was elected for Callington, Cornwall, through the influence of its mayor, the antiquary Richard Carew of Antony. Ferrers appears to have been prevented from taking his seat by an outlawry for debt, although this did not prevent his being pricked soon afterwards as sheriff of Rutland, where he retained some property until 1601. He retained the house in Westminster until 1604, when he assigned the lease to Thomas Percy, thus becoming indirectly linked to the Gunpowder Plot. Although never convicted as a recusant, his diary (BL, Add. MS 4102) indicates his conservatism in religion and he was close to Catholic circles, as witnessed by the leasing of Baddesley Clinton to Anne Vaux and her sister in the 1590s. 
Like many of his fellow antiquaries Henry Ferrers seems to have first developed an interest in his own pedigree, which expanded to include the genealogy of his kinsmen and neighbours and the history of the neighbourhood of his family seat. In London he made contact with many of the principal antiquaries of the day, such as Carew, William Camden, John Stow, and Richard St George. He provided Camden with material on Warwickshire for the 'Britannia' and was acknowledged in the work as: 'a man both for parentage and for knowledge of antiquity, very commendable and my special friend; who hath at all times courteously shewed me the right way when I was out, and from his candle, as it were, hath lighted mine. ('Britannia', ed. Gibson, 506)' He was thus closely associated with the circle of the Elizabethan Society of Antiquaries, although there is no evidence that he was ever accepted as a member. He amassed a considerable collection of antiquarian material, of which only a fraction survives. His notes indicate that he contemplated writing histories of the kings of England and of the earls of Warwick, while fellow antiquaries such as Sampson Erdeswick undoubtedly encouraged him to write a history of Warwickshire, but there is no surviving evidence of any sustained attempt at authorship. 
The impression gained from his papers is that Henry Ferrers was a collector rather than a synthesizer. He remained an authority on Warwickshire history throughout his life, and in 1617 he was included in the list of proposed members of Edmund Bolton's Academy Royal. Before his death at his manor house at Kingswood, Warwickshire, on 10 October 1633, his kinsman Sir Simon Archer had begun researching the history of the county. Archer was subsequently allowed to make full use of Ferrers's collections by the latter's son and grandson, as is shown by their prominence in the footnotes of William Dugdale's 'Antiquities of Warwickshire' (1656). Much of the anecdotal material in that work is also attributed to Ferrers, which may represent the oral transmission of tradition from the older antiquary to Dugdale through Archer. Although critical of Ferrers's accuracy in his correspondence with Archer, Dugdale acknowledged in his works 'his eminent knowledge in Antiquities' (Dugdale, 711). Ferrers was buried at Baddesley Clinton. 


@@@@@


doc= 9363


Ferrers, John de, first Lord Ferrers of Chartley (1271-1312), magnate, was the son and heir of Robert de Ferrers, earl of Derby (c.1239-1279), and his wife, Eleanor, daughter of Humphrey (V) de Bohun. He was born at Cardiff on 20 June 1271, two years after his father had been dispossessed of his earldom, by a procedure of dubious legality, because of his rebellious activities even after the defeat of Montfort. The bulk of the lands of the earldom of Derby had been given to Henry III's second son, Edmund, earl of Lancaster. From his father John inherited only the manor of Chartley, Staffordshire, which the former had been able to recover in 1275. He also inherited, from his grandmother, Margaret (died 1281), the manors of Southoe, Keyston, and part of Eynesbury, Huntingdonshire, delivered when the king took his homage in 1293. In 1294 he acquired Bugbrooke, Northamptonshire, as the heir of his cousin Cecily, who had married Godfrey de Beaumont. Between 1298 and 1300 he married Hawise, daughter of Sir Robert de Mucegros and widow of William Mortimer, who brought him lands in Somerset, Gloucestershire, Berkshire, and Buckinghamshire. 
Ferrers's early service to Edward I is evident from his attendance on the king's daughters Eleanor and Margaret on their journeys overseas in, respectively, 1294 and 1297. The latter year saw a crisis develop over the king's increasing exactions to pay for his campaign in France, and his summons to military landholders to perform their service overseas. The identification of Ferrers as a leading malcontent stems largely from the fact that he and the earls of Norfolk and Hereford are the only three men specifically named in the document known as 'De tallagio' -- a draft of articles that the king's opponents wished to see added to 'Magna Carta'. His appearance there, however, may simply be due to a continuing recognition of his comital status, and Ferrers 'cannot be shown to have played a particularly active part in the events of 1297' (Prestwich, 'Edward I', 433). 
Ferrers was clearly more concerned with his personal inheritance, and resorted to eccentric methods in his attempt to wrest it from the earls of Lancaster. First, 'c'.1297, he sought permission from Pope Boniface VIII to obtain contributions from the clergy in order to raise $50,000 to redeem his lands from Lancaster. Nothing was ever likely to come of such a scheme, and Ferrers's second gambit, perhaps early in 1300, was an appeal to the same pope against Thomas, earl of Lancaster (who had succeeded his father Edmund in 1296), for $20,000 as loss of income from estates comprising the earldom. On 24 January 1300 the archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Winchelsey, wrote to Cardinal Matteo d'Acquasparta, asking the cardinal to assist Ferrers, whom he described as his 'special friend' (Graham, 566-7). The pope delegated Winchelsey as sole judge of the matter, and the archbishop summoned Lancaster to proceedings that apparently took place on 30 May and 27 June, whereupon the case was referred back to Rome. In the meantime, however, Lancaster had secured a royal writ of prohibition against the hearing in court Christian of a plea concerning lay fees, and this was delivered both to Winchelsey and to Ferrers. Lancaster sued Winchelsey for the notional sum of $100,000, in a case that was adjourned term by term until the end of the reign. Ferrers himself subsequently appeared before the king's court, but suffered no long-term punishment for his imaginative, if fruitless, action. In 1307, with the support of the prince of Wales, Ferrers accused the king's treasurer, Walter Langton, of champerty (supporting a plaintiff in court in return for a share of the profits of successful litigation) in cases concerning Newbottle and Bugbrooke, Northamptonshire. Langton obtained a royal pardon, which Ferrers claimed was a forgery. The cases were eventually subsumed in the wider action against Langton in Edward II's reign. 
Despite these signs of hostility towards the king Ferrers was summoned to parliament from February 1299 to October 1311. He served in Scotland in 1298, 1301, 1303, and 1306, on the latter occasion as constable of the army. According to a letter written by a monk of Westminster in 1308, Ferrers may have been no friend of Edward II's favourite Piers Gaveston. Nevertheless Edward granted him custody of Gloucester Castle for a term in September 1311, and the following January appointed him seneschal of Gascony. He seems to have become embroiled almost immediately in a conflict with the powerful Gascon noble Amanieu d'Albret, the substance of which is unknown. The king was forced to appoint envoys to settle the dispute, and in August 1312 the protagonists were ordered to come before Edward. Ferrers died that September, however: the 'Flores historiarum' attributes his death to poison. His eldest surviving son, John, was still under age in 1321, but had died by 23 July 1324 and was succeeded by his brother Robert (1309-1350), still a minor. 


@@@@@


doc= 9364


Ferrers, Joseph (1725-1797), Carmelite friar, was probably descended from a younger branch of the Ferrers family of Baddesley Clinton in Warwickshire. He was professed in one of the convents of the order of Discalced Carmelites on the continent in 1745, and ordained priest in 1749. From 1774 to 1796 he appears as one of the officiating priests at the Neapolitan Chapel in Bond Street, London. In August 1792, on the death of Father Anthony Firth in Tongres, he was elected vicar-provincial of the English province and, for a short time, superior at Tongres, until forced back to England shortly afterwards. He was invited to preach at the memorial service for Louis XVI held in the Neapolitan Chapel in London on 9 February 1793. The text of his sermon was later published in French and English in London in the same year. He died in London on 29 August 1797 aged seventy-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 9365


Ferrers, Robert de, first Earl Ferrers (d. 1139), magnate, was the third son of Henry de Ferrers (d. 1093x1100), landowner, and his wife, Bertha, who succeeded to their English lands, notably the compact but undeveloped lordship of Tutbury, Staffordshire, around 1100. He is first mentioned, after his brothers, Engenulph and William, and before unnamed sisters, in the foundation charter for Tutbury Priory issued by his father between 1087 and 1100. William joined Robert Curthose and was captured at Tinchebrai; Engenulph is last heard of in 1100, but Robert de Ferrers supported Henry I from an early stage. He played a part in local administration in Derbyshire and elsewhere, chiefly in the midlands, throughout his reign. He also intermittently witnessed the king's charters, being with him at Westminster in 1107, Nottingham in 1122, Winchester in 1123, and in council at Northampton on 8 September 1131, but there is no record of his accompanying Henry I abroad. In 1129/30 he held the farm of Wirksworth soke, Derbyshire, an area rich in lead mines, for $80; around this date he also granted the church of Potterspury, Northamptonshire, to Bernard the Scribe. It is, however, during his last years that he is most in evidence as a leading supporter of King Stephen. 
As baron, Robert de Ferrers was with Stephen, at Reading about 4 January 1136, at York in February, Westminster at Easter (7 April), and Oxford later that month, witnessing many important royal charters, including a celebrated declaration of the liberties of the church. When civil war broke out Ferrers may have been at the siege of Shrewsbury in early August 1138, but his most notable military service was with William, count of Aumale, William Peverel, Geoffrey Aiselin, Walter Espec, and Gilbert de Lacy in the defeat of David, king of Scotland, and his Scandinavian and rebel allies, at the bitterly contested battle of the Standard, fought near Northallerton on 22 August 1138. In gratitude Stephen named Ferrers earl. Charters and chronicles from this point refer to him interchangeably as Earl Ferrers, earl of Nottingham or earl of Derby. But he died in the following year and was succeeded in his earldom by his son, also Robert (died 1159), who continued to play a minor and largely temporizing role in the civil war, only finally throwing in his lot with the future Henry II after Tutbury Castle was besieged in 1153. 
Some authorities claim that Robert de Ferrers married Hawise, or Havisa, daughter of the Breton lord Andre de Vitre, but no convincing proof has been adduced; Walkelin Maminot (died 1170) was a son-in-law, won over to Stephen's cause by Ferrers in 1138; another daughter married Ralph Paynel, lord of Dudley, Worcestershire. Relations were also traditionally close with the Peverel family, hereditary castellans of Nottingham, and the younger Robert de Ferrers married the eventual heir, Maud Peverel, between about 1120 and 1135. The elder Robert de Ferrers remained a generous benefactor of Tutbury Priory, but other surviving charters show that he made gifts to Nostell Priory and settled his disputes with Burton Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 9366


Ferrers, Robert de, sixth earl of Derby (c.1239-1279), magnate and rebel, was the eldest son of William de Ferrers, earl of Derby ('c'.1200-1254), from his second marriage, to Margaret, elder daughter and coheir of Roger de Quincy, earl of Winchester (d. 1264). 
Ferrers's first appearance as a public figure came in 1249, when he married the seven-year-old Mary, daughter of Hugues (XI) de Lusignan, count of La Marche, the eldest of Henry III's half-brothers, at Westminster -- a match that marked Henry's regard for Ferrers's father, who, though prominent at court in the 1230s, was later prevented by incapacitating gout from playing much part in affairs. The death of William de Ferrers in 1254 left his young son already a knight but also a minor. Unable to inherit, he saw the wardship of his estates handed over to Edward, the king's eldest son, and then sold on to the queen and Peter of Savoy for 6000 marks in 1257. Only in 1260 did he do homage and take possession of his lands. 
His preceding wardship was merely one, and perhaps the least important, of the factors that weakened Ferrers's standing at his accession to the earldom. In the two decades preceding his father's death territorial acquisitions and efficient management had combined to enhance the family fortunes. The ancestral holdings of the Ferrers formed a compact block in north Staffordshire, south Derbyshire, and western Nottinghamshire, centred on the castle and borough of Tutbury. But the marriage of Robert's grandfather, William, to Agnes, sister and coheir of Ranulf (III), earl of Chester, had brought in extensive new lands after Ranulf's death in 1232. Chief among them were the castle and manor of Chartley, Staffordshire, all Lancashire between Ribble and Mersey, and other manors in Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire. By additionally developing boroughs and markets, exploiting the forests of Needwood and Duffield, keeping a tight hold on grants, and taking advantage of the rising prices and land values, which benefited all great landowners at this time, Ferrers's grandfather and father had been able to build up an estate worth some $1500 p.a. in the 1250s -- an income that placed the earls of Derby among the half-dozen wealthiest of Henry III's nobles. Ferrers could not maintain this position. His resources were depleted, most damagingly by the dower of his mother, Margaret, who survived until 1281 and was in possession of the widow's traditional third, amounting to land worth some $500 and including, at least for a time, the major asset of Chartley. But the estate also had to provide for Ferrers's younger brother William, for his wife Mary, who held two manors in her own right under the terms of their marriage agreement, and to a lesser extent for Edward, who retained some family land beyond Earl Robert's coming of age. Add to these burdens the debts of nearly $800 which Ferrers took over from his father and for which the exchequer was pursuing him in 1262 -- obligations that probably explain his borrowing from the Jews -- and it becomes clear that the new earl, if not poor, was certainly hard-pressed. During the period of his wardship his only income appears to have been the $100 p.a. that Henry had settled on him and his wife by way of a 'maritagium'. 
Ferrers's financial difficulties, together with a violent waywardness of character that was to mark his whole career, may help to account for his first actions as earl. According to the Burton annals, no sooner had he received his lands in 1260 than he 'destroyed' the priory of Tutbury, of which he was patron. A series of subsequent and sizeable grants to the priory may confirm the story, pointing to a guilty conscience and possible reparations. He made comparably unlawful encroachments on the rights of some leading tenants, while also exploiting more licitly his forests and boroughs, following the lines laid down by his father and grandfather. Derby's involvement with his estates, along with his youth, inexperience, and possibly his disability (he had inherited his family's liability to gout), do much to explain his absence from national politics during these early years. He took no part in the great baronial reforms of royal government in 1258-9, initiated before his majority, and until 1263 he spent much of his time on his lands, especially at Tutbury. Unlike the other earls he witnessed none of Henry III's charters in the early 1260s, though Henry must have reckoned him a royalist, for Derby was among those whom the king summoned in arms to London in October 1261, during his restoration to power. At some point in these early years he also kept company with the leading reformers, two of whom, Richard de Clare, earl of Gloucester, and Simon de Montfort, witnessed an undated charter in favour of his sister. But there is nothing here to indicate any firm commitment to one side or the other. 
That remained true even after Montfort's return to England in April 1263, as the leader of an armed rising against the king's friends, had made an uncommitted stance more difficult to maintain. Ostensibly Derby moved towards Montfort. He first saw action during the disorders of May and June, when the Dunstable annals record his seizure of 'three castles' belonging to Edward: probably the 'Three Castles', often so called, of Grosmont, Skenfrith, and Whitecastle, which lay towards the centre of the disturbances in the southern marches of Wales. He was with Montfort in London in December 1263 and took a leading part in the renewed war along the marches, which followed Louis IX's quashing of the provisions of Oxford in January 1264. His chief exploit came at Worcester, where in February he took the town, sacked the Jewish quarter, killed or imprisoned many Jews, and later carried off to Tutbury the bonds recording Jewish loans: retaliation perhaps by an enraged debtor. He then moved down the Severn to Gloucester, where Edward had taken the castle for the king. But a truce made by Henry de Montfort allowed Edward to slip away from Derby's clutches, much to his anger, and to retreat to his father Henry at Oxford, devastating Derby's valuable Berkshire manor of Stanford in the Vale 'en route'. 
These events clarify Derby's motives during the barons' war: not support for reform, but hatred of Edward. Of no one was Edward more afraid, says Robert of Gloucester, describing their near confrontation at Gloucester. The origins of this explosive feud are unfortunately obscure, but they probably lay in Edward's ancestral claim to the Peverel inheritance in north Derbyshire, including the castle of the Peak, which Derby's grandfather had been made to surrender to the crown in 1222 and which had become part of Edward's apanage in 1254. Edward's wardship of Earl Robert's lands between 1254 and 1257, and his later retention of some holdings, may have compounded these resentments. Whatever its roots, the feud contributed powerfully to the national disorders that marked the spring and summer of 1264. In March Edward's men attacked Derby's lands in Staffordshire, taking Chartley Castle, and after the royalist victory at Northampton in April Edward himself was able to turn against his enemy, destroying Tutbury and extorting money from Derby's tenants. Derby was still regarded as a Montfortian, for Montfort made a long but vain wait for his arrival before setting out from London for the campaign that gave him victory over the king at Lewes in May 1264. But in fact he was solely concerned with his own interests. Edward's capture at Lewes gave those interests free rein for the first time, and Derby was now able to regain and augment all that he had lost. He overran the royal and Edwardian castles of Bolsover, Derbyshire, Horston, Derbyshire, and Tickhill, Yorkshire, joined in Baldwin Wake's attack on the royal castle of Fotheringhay, Northamptonshire, and in late June or early July crowned these successes with the capture of Edward's chief castle of the Peak. In the autumn a westward campaign apparently brought Edward's other great base at Chester into his hands. Having obliterated Edward's power in the north-west midlands, he seemed set to replace it with his own. 
But Derby's achievement had been possible only because of Edward's captivity and the preoccupation of the country's ruler, Simon de Montfort, with a threatened French invasion of southern England; and in the winter of 1264-5 both these circumstances changed. By November 1264 the danger of invasion had receded, leaving Montfort's supremacy unchallenged, and in the following month plans were devised for Edward's release. They entailed the surrender to Montfort of a large part of Edward's apanage, including Chester and the Peak, in exchange for less valuable lands elsewhere. By this scheme Montfort thus replaced Edward as Derby's chief rival, with a new and personal interest in reversing his recent territorial gains. This was accomplished adeptly and with surprising ease. In December Derby was summoned to the parliament arranged for mid-January 1265, and shortly afterwards called on to surrender the Peak. The summons to a parliament that otherwise comprised only staunch Montfortians was an almost blatant device to remove Derby from the scene of his triumphs and to open his lands, new and old, to a Montfortian takeover. It is a mark of Earl Robert's characteristic lack of political cunning that he fell into the trap, with predictable results. In February, during his parliamentary sojourn in London, he was arrested and sent to the Tower of London. The chronicles give differing reasons for his arrest: it was a gesture to Henry, who would have preferred to see him condemned to death for his spoliations, or a punishment for his breaches of the peace after Lewes, or a result of his collusion with the rebellious marchers. But the variety of explanations only shows how well Montfort had covered his tracks. The truth was that Derby's removal was essential to Montfort's territorial ambitions, and that it could be accomplished without much risk because the earl's violent self-seeking had left him friendless. 
Montfort, however, had neither the time nor the opportunity to enjoy his gains. The new territories had probably been intended as an endowment for his eldest son, Henry, but there was local resistance, both from Derby's men and from Edward's, to their appropriation, and Montfort's death at Evesham in August 1265 cut short any hopes of their absorption into a family principality. After the battle Derby was released, and in December 1265 he came to terms with the king, offering the substantial fine of 1500 marks and a gold cup in return for Henry's pardon, his mediation in the earl's quarrel with Edward, and his guarantee of Derby's being spared disinheritance. Given the harsh treatment of the Montfortians, whose disinheritance had already been decided on, Henry's willingness to do more for Derby may seem surprising; but the activities of the earl's associates in thwarting Montfort's territorial schemes had prepared the way for a reconciliation, and the king needed both his money and his support in the north midlands. It was therefore all the more foolish of Derby to turn his back on what he was fortunate to have obtained. In May 1266 he joined a rebellious gathering of disinherited Montfortians under Baldwin Wake and John Deyville at Chesterfield, where they were surprised and routed by a royalist force. Weakened by gout, Derby was taken prisoner while his blood was being let. His reasons for risking all in this way are entirely unclear. He had lost some land, including Chartley, as a result of his recent escapades, but in no sense had he been disinherited. Yet he had now placed himself so much in the wrong as to be as exposed as he had been in February 1265. This time his isolation was the prelude to his ruin. 
The process was a gradual one. After his capture Derby was imprisoned at Windsor, where he remained until 1269. In the meantime, by a series of royal orders and grants made between June and August 1266, Henry's second son, Edmund, was given possession of his lands and goods. Although in July Edmund received a formal grant of the Derby lands in fee, the dictum of Kenilworth, proclaimed in October, continued to hold out the possibility of Earl Robert's restoration. He could have his lands back in return for a redemption payment of seven times their annual value: a multiplier so large that it placed the earl in an almost unique category among the disinherited, a category to match what the king regarded as the enormity of his offences. In this sequence of events there was muddle and confusion, and although Edmund had 'de facto' possession of Derby's lands he could not yet reckon that his position was secure. This was not achieved until 1269, by arrangements that combined an extension of the principles of the dictum of Kenilworth with royal connivance at an illicit piece of private enterprise. On 1 May 1269 Earl Robert appeared before king and council at Windsor. There he received back all his lands, acknowledged a debt of $50,000 to Edmund, and conceded that this sum should be raised from his lands if it had not been paid by 9 July. Disinheritance was not mentioned nor ostensibly intended. Later in the same day, however, he was taken to the manor of Cippenham, Buckinghamshire, the property of Richard, earl of Cornwall, and there, under duress (as he later pleaded) and in the presence of John Chishall, the chancellor, he made over all his lands to eleven manucaptors, all notable royalists, as a security for the payment of his $50,000 debt. He was then taken to Richard of Cornwall's castle at Wallingford and released at the end of May. When the deadline of 9 July passed without payment, as had, of course, been intended, the manucaptors transferred the estate to Edmund, and Ferrers was left virtually landless and deprived of his title. 
For the remaining ten years of his life Ferrers's central interest lay in regaining his inheritance. This was a vain hope, largely because it would have meant dispossessing Henry III's second son and Edward I's brother (and finding other lands for him elsewhere), because king and council had tacitly sanctioned what had been done, and because Edward too had been a party to the Cippenham skullduggery: the last act in the long feud with his midland adversary. After Ferrers's release he could bring no immediate action against Edmund because of his supplanter's departure on crusade, and the legal protection that went with it. In 1273, soon after Edmund's return, Ferrers took the law into his own hands by seizing his old castle at Chartley, but he was soon ejected by Edmund's forces. He prepared more effectively for action by seeking help from the powerful Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester. In May 1273 he made a series of agreements with Clare, by which he promised him extensive lands, including the bulk of the Chester inheritance between Ribble and Mersey, in return for Clare's undertaking to maintain his affairs, to grant him 200 librates of land until his restoration, and to try to secure him a reasonable redemption settlement. The legal case to which this scheme was the preliminary began in October 1274, shortly after Edward I's return to England. It turned on Ferrers's plea that he was willing to stand on the terms of the dictum of Kenilworth -- seven years' redemption -- but that Edmund had refused to countenance this. Edmund responded by producing the Cippenham 'agreement' and invoking Ferrers's failure to meet its terms. The counterplea advanced by Ferrers, that the 'agreement' was made under duress, while he was in prison, availed nothing, for Edmund was able to retort that the chancellor's presence at the making of the 'agreement' gave it the force of record, with full legal validity. Ferrers's case was then dismissed. He found some consolation in 1275, when he brought a successful action for the recovery of his manor of Chartley; though Edmund retained the castle. When he died in 1279 Chartley was all that remained of his inheritance. Foolish though he had been, he had a good case in law, and its failure showed how the interests of the royal family could still take precedence over justice. 
In his later years Ferrers may have derived more satisfaction from his family life than from his standing as a magnate who had fallen on hard times. His first wife, Mary, died some time between 1266 and 1269, and on 26 June 1269, a month after his release from prison, he married Eleanor, daughter of Humphrey (V) de Bohun (who was killed fighting for Montfort at Evesham), and granddaughter of the earl of Hereford. His earlier marriage had been childless, but with Eleanor he had at least two sons: John de Ferrers, born at Cardiff on 20 June 1271, and Thomas, on whom he settled a small sum between 1274 and 1279. John was to be prominent in the baronial opposition to Edward I in 1297, a stance that must have been linked with his continuing attempts to regain his father's lost inheritance. Between 1269 and 1275 the landless Ferrers spent some time on his mother's dower lands in Northamptonshire, but after 1275 he appears to have resided at Chartley. Towards the end of his life he made a number of grants to the neighbouring Augustinian priory of St Thomas, Stafford, which seems to have replaced Tutbury as the family house. There he was probably buried, as he had certainly intended to be. His widow survived until 1314, engaging in her former husband's great cause by bringing a claim against Edmund for dower in his ancestral lands, but settling eventually for the manor of Godmanchester, Huntingdonshire. 
In a short lifetime Robert de Ferrers had broken one of the greatest of baronial families by his ill-judged actions and contributed to the rise of another by the conferment of his lands on Edmund, earl of Lancaster. Like his enemies -- Edward, the future king, and Simon de Montfort -- he was quick to resort to violence, but unlike them he was unable to justify violence by any appeal to principle. Isolated by the pursuit of his own interests, he found himself without a party in a dangerously polarized political world, and, in combination with the ruthlessness of his opponents and his own lack of political intelligence, that was the cause of his downfall. 


@@@@@


doc= 9367


Ferrey, Benjamin (1810-1880), architect, was born on 1 April 1810 at Christchurch, Hampshire, the youngest son of Benjamin Ferrey, draper and sometime mayor of Christchurch, who traced his descent from Huguenot emigres. While at the grammar school at Wimborne in Dorset, where he received his early education, Ferrey used to spend hours drawing in the minster. In or about 1825 he was sent to London to study architectural draughtsmanship with Augustus Charles Pugin. He remained with him for seven years as a boarder in the Pugins' house in Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury. During this time he accompanied Pugin and his other pupils on drawing tours in England and France, the purpose of which was, in part, to assemble illustrations for Pugin's books. Ferrey is credited with plates in several of them, including 'Views in Paris' (1829-31). For 'A series of ornamental timber gables from existing examples in England and France, of the sixteenth century, drawn by B. Ferrey under the direction of A. Pugin, with descriptive letter-press by E. J. Willson' (1831), he made all the original drawings. Ferrey was the only one of Pugin's pupils who lived too far from London to go home at weekends. As a result he became more intimate with the family and in particular with the young Augustus Welby Pugin, of whom he was a close companion in their formative years. The friendship was to have a considerable influence on Ferrey as an architect and eventually led him to become Pugin's biographer. 
In 1833 Ferrey went to work in the office of William Wilkins, where he gained a practical training in architecture, working on the detail drawings for the National Gallery. He was also able to expand his repertoire beyond the Gothic, for which A. C. Pugin's school maintained a strongly partisan support in the battle of the styles. Ferrey's links with the school remained close, however. In his first publication, 'The Antiquities of the Priory of Christchurch, Hants' (1834), with text by E. W. Brayley, he followed the style of A. C. Pugin's own antiquarian works. Ferry entered the competition for the rebuilding of the palace of Westminster in 1835. He also entered into the pamphlet war surrounding the competition. Like A. W. N. Pugin he was moved to respond to A. W. Hakewill's attack on the Gothic and published his 'Answer to Thoughts on Rebuilding the Houses of Parliament' in 1835. No copy of it is known to survive. From 1834 to 1836 Ferrey was in partnership with Thomas Larkins Walker, who had been a fellow pupil, and they kept an office in Great Russell Street. During these years Ferrey laid out the estate of Sir George Gervis at Bournemouth. Most of his villas were destroyed in the 1920s, but the hotel, now the Royal Bath, survives. It was possibly on the strength of this first important commission that in 1836 he married Ann Lucas ('c'.1812-1871), of Stapleton Hall, Hornsey. She shared her husband's antiquarian interests and their domestic life was happy. They had three children, two daughters and a son. The latter, Edmund Benjamin ('c'.1846-1900), became an architect. 
Ferrey was an amiable man and popular, with a pleasing, friendly appearance. He was a capable if not an outstanding architect. His practice expanded steadily and respectably over the years. In 1839 he became one of the first fellows of the Royal Institute of British Architects and was later twice vice-president. His most distinguished work was ecclesiastical, his training with the Pugins helping him to become, according to Charles Eastlake, 'one of the earliest, ablest, and most zealous pioneers of the modern Gothic school' ('A History of the Gothic Revival', 1872, 220). After experiments in various styles, including the Norman, he settled, like most of his contemporaries, for the 'middle pointed' or Decorated. The patronage of Angela Burdett Coutts enabled him to realize, in St Stephen's, Rochester Row, and its vicarage and associated schools (1845-50) 'one of the most complete and costly' (ibid., 381) exercises in that style to date. The closest Ferrey ever came to scandal was in 1842, when his church of St Nicholas, East Grafton, Wiltshire, was under construction. The stone vaulting collapsed, killing a visiting antiquary, the Revd George Montgomery, who was subsequently buried at Bishopstone in a handsome Gothic tomb, for which the commission was given to A. W. N. Pugin. Despite this accident, Ferrey became one of the consulting architects of the Incorporated Church Building Society. In his own ecclesiastical work, however, he did not develop. Remaining loyal to the Puginian tradition, he refused to look at the continental models that inspired the structural polychromy and the more robust manner of the 'high Victorian' style. As a result his own began to seem old-fashioned. All Saints', Blackheath, completed in 1867, looks like a building of the 1840s. It is, nevertheless, a fine church set picturesquely in the hollow of the heath. 
Ferrey also had an extensive country house practice, in which he was more stylistically flexible. He rebuilt Wynnstay, Denbighshire, for Sir Watkin Wynn, after a fire in 1858, in the French Renaissance revival style. He partially rebuilt Bulstrode Park in Buckinghamshire for the duke of Somerset from 1861 to 1870. Correspondence relating to this commission survives in the Devon Record Office. His last commission was Bagshot Park in Surrey (1877), for the duke of Connaught, a brick and stone Tudor mansion. Neither house has, however, been much admired. The rest of Ferrey's architectural efforts were devoted to parsonages, schools, and public buildings, of which the town hall in Dorchester (1847-8) is one of the most successful. Others include Luton town hall (1846), Dorset County Hospital (1839-56), and St Peter's College, Saltley, Birmingham (1847-50). Like many of his contemporaries, he was an active restorer of medieval churches, notably of the lady chapel and west front of Wells Cathedral (1842-50). He became honorary architect to the diocese of Bath and Wells in 1841 and held the post until his death. His restorations have sometimes seemed insensitive to later commentators, but they were always thoughtful. In 1845 he contributed 'Remarks on the Gothic towers of Somerset' to James Cottle's 'Some Account of the Church of St Mary Magdalene, Taunton, and the Restoration Thereof'. Ferrey was proud of his election, in 1863, to the Society of Antiquaries. He also helped to found the Royal Architectural Museum. 
Arguably Ferrey's most important work, however, was his second and last book, 'Recollections of A. N. Welby Pugin and his Father, Augustus Pugin', published in 1861. This memoir, one of the first architectural biographies, brings the reader close to both its subjects. Ferrey's style is plain but engaging and his value as an eyewitness far outweighs his inability to organize material. A devout, conventional Anglican, Ferrey found it impossible to sympathize with his friend's conversion to Roman Catholicism and had, apparently, lost touch with him in later years. The book's greatest strength is its account of the young Pugin and his father, of the Great Russell Street school, and the world of architectural practice in late Georgian London. The quality of the book that ensured its survival, its author's unconcern with the depiction of its subjects as 'great men' according to the conventions of Victorian biography, gave rise to criticism when it was published. Ferrey's childhood dislike of Catherine Pugin, A. C. Pugin's wife, led him to caricature her in a manner that was also felt, by contemporaries, to be unfair. The book's reception was, however, generally enthusiastic. 
With the exception of a brief but happy period from 1846 to 1853, when the family home was near Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, Ferrey seems to have lived entirely in London. He always kept an office there and had several articled pupils, including his son, Edmund Benjamin Ferrey. His leisure time was occupied with drawing: some of his views of Italy, Switzerland, and Germany were lithographed for the Architectural Publication Society. He was also a keen amateur musician and fly-fisherman. Ferrey was well known and well liked in his profession, and received in 1870 the RIBA royal gold medal. The following year his wife died and in 1872 he married Emily Hopkinson. With his son's help he continued to practise, despite a stroke and failing health. He died on 22 August 1880, at his home, 55 Inverness Terrace, Bayswater, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 9368


Ferriar, John (1761-1815), physician, son of the Revd Alexander Ferriar (died 1764), Presbyterian minister, and his wife, Mary Burn, was born at Oxnam, near Jedburgh, Roxburghshire, on 21 November 1761. After his father's death in 1764 the family moved to his mother's native Alnwick, where she married her second husband, Thomas Ilderton. Ferriar studied medicine at Edinburgh University and took his MD degree in 1781, with a thesis entitled 'De variola'. He married Barbara Gair (died 1800), at Alnwick on 16 October 1782. 
After his marriage Ferriar began to practise medicine at Stockton-on-Tees, but in 1785 he moved to Manchester. Soon after his arrival he joined the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society for which he wrote a number of papers covering poetry, drama, and archaeology; these included a paper on the work of Laurence Sterne, and a paper on materialism which was dedicated to Thomas Cooper. This interest brought him into close association with the physician Thomas Percival and other local cultural leaders. In 1788-90 Ferriar sided with the expansionist party in the politically divisive dispute over the role and staffing of the Manchester Infirmary. He was appointed in 1789 to a new post of assistant physician, with the duty of attending to the infirmary's existing home-patient service. In 1790 the reforming party succeeded, the medical staff was increased, and Ferriar became an honorary physician. 
Ferriar's experience with infirmary home-patients led him to draw public notice to the wretched condition of the working classes. His paper on the epidemic fever of 1789-90 pointed out the evils of filthy lodging houses, cellar dwellings, and unventilated cotton mills, and of inadequate food and clothing. He publicly urged the police committee to take a variety of sanitary measures, including the licensing of lodging houses, the establishment of fever wards, and the setting up of a committee of health. During the fever outbreak of 1795 Ferriar's latter suggestion was taken up by a group of influential laymen and doctors who established the innovative Manchester board of health in early 1796. This led to the foundation of the House of Recovery, or fever hospital, in the same year, which was the first such institution to be founded in Britain. Ferriar was also involved in the establishment of fever wards at nearby Stockport. 
Ferriar became the premier physician in Manchester and gained an extensive reputation. His medical writings were contained in 'Medical Histories and Reflections' (vol. 1, 1792; vol. 2, 1795; vol. 3, 1798; 2nd edn, with additions, 4 vols., 1810-13; American reprint, 1816). These included his writings on fever, and on cases and observations from his hospital practice; there was a paper in the second volume on insanity, and a paper in the second edition on the medical properties of foxglove (first published separately in 1799). 
Ferriar's ideas about fever and about the treatment of insanity were important. He believed that the poison of fever was generated by the effluvia of the hungry and depressed poor living in overcrowded, dirty, and ill-ventilated conditions; that the remedy was to provide more space and air circulation; that the wealthy had a moral duty to help the fevered poor through charity -- otherwise contagion would spread, ultimately to the rich as well as to the poor; and that neither the miseries of poverty nor the dangers of luxury were healthy in society. Ferriar's ideas on insanity derived from his experience as a physician to the infirmary's lunatic hospital. He advocated the management of the mind by a system of mild but exact discipline, using encouragements and rewards or else punishment through seclusion, solitude, and deprivation of light and food. His purpose in disciplining was to instil self-restraint, and he believed that mechanical means should be avoided if possible but that a sense of imposed restraint was important and thus that removal from home quickened recovery. He also stated that separate hospital accommodation for convalescents could be a powerful reward. 
During his career Ferriar was involved in various local professional disputes. He aided the surgeon William Simmons in an acrimonious medical controversy with Dr John Hull in 1798-9 over the caesarean operation, which they opposed. He also sided with Simmons in a long series of disputes among the infirmary staff, but later he and Simmons quarrelled and became estranged. 
Ferriar had considerable fame as a polite scholar. His best-known work is his 'Illustrations of Sterne, with other Essays and Verses' (1798; 2nd edn, 2 vols., with additions, 1812), in which Sterne's obligations to the old French novelists are skilfully traced. The second edition contains an entertaining poem entitled 'The Bibliomania, an Epistle to Richard Heber, Esq.' (originally published in a shorter version in 1809). His last work was 'An Essay towards a Theory of Apparitions' (1813), on mental hallucinations. 
Ferriar was living in St James's Square, Manchester, in 1788, but moved to 4 Dawson Street before 1794, and to 27 Mosley Street after 1811. Between 1805 and 1810 he was taxed on his Dawson Street house, which had twenty-three windows and a yearly rental value of $80, and on his two male servants, one four-wheeled carriage, and three riding horses. Ferriar died at Manchester on 4 February 1815, his wife having predeceased him in 1800; he was buried in St Mary's Church, Manchester, on 9 February. In his will he left his Mosley Street house, on a ninety-nine year lease, with coach house and stables, to his eldest son, along with his library of books, maps, and prints, and life policies for $1500 and $3500. Of his five surviving children, two sons, Thomas Ilderton (died 1821) and John (died 1829), became soldiers, serving as members of the British Legion at Venezuela; the other sons, Alexander (died 1836) and Arthur Edward William (died 1835), became lawyers, the former holding judicial office in India. The daughter, Jane Catherine, died unmarried at Leek, Staffordshire, in 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 9369


Ferrier, James Frederick (1808-1864), philosopher, was born on 16 June 1808 at 15 Heriot Row, Edinburgh, the eldest son of John Ferrier, barrister and writer to the signet, and Margaret Wilson, sister of John Wilson (the essayist and poet Christopher North). James Ferrier was thus heir to a dual legacy -- to a tradition of successful advocacy and public commitment from his father's family and to a world of letters and culture from his mother's kinsmen. He therefore grew to maturity not merely in an atmosphere of wealth and learning, but also in the expectation of achievement and service. Intended to pursue his family's customary legal career, Ferrier was privately educated at the manse of the Revd Henry Duncan in Ruthwell, Dumfriesshire, and then, from 1817 to 1821, at the Royal High School, Edinburgh. After two additional years at the school of the Revd Charles Parr Burney at Greenwich, he enrolled at the University of Edinburgh for the sessions of 1825-6 and 1826-7. At the urging of John Wilson, he followed his uncle's example and enrolled, in 1828, as a gentleman commoner at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he received a BA degree in 1832. Contrary to the wishes of his father, and against the contours of his later career, he exhibited little intellectual discipline or academic distinction at Oxford, devoting his time to riding, hunting, and conversation. 
In 1832 Ferrier returned to Edinburgh and qualified for the bar, although he seems never to have practised. Instead, he devoted his energies to courting his cousin Margaret Anne Wilson, enjoying the literary society of John Wilson's home at Elleray, toying with his own prospective literary career, and exulting in the company of Sir William Hamilton. Hamilton, then at the summit of his reputation, made a strong and enduring impression on Ferrier. Dissatisfied with the narrow provincialism and arid pieties of the then dominant common-sense school of Scottish philosophy and determined to reinvigorate that school in the light of contemporary German thought, Hamilton set himself the task of philosophical revisionism and cultural reform. To such an enterprise the young Ferrier was an enthusiastic recruit. At Hamilton's urging Ferrier visited Germany for some months in 1834, immersed himself in its language and literature, acquired an extensive library of German-language philosophy and literature, and returned -- miniature of Hegel literally in hand -- to join the vanguard of intellectual combatants against the intellectually orthodox in Edinburgh. Pausing only to marry Margaret Wilson on 3 October 1837, Ferrier rejoined Hamilton's circle and set to work on serious literary and philosophical writings. 
The first evidence of Ferrier's labour was a lengthy article, 'An introduction to the philosophy of consciousness', which appeared in seven instalments in 'Blackwood's Magazine' in 1838 and 1839; this was closely followed in 1840 by an essay on Coleridge's alleged plagiarisms from Schelling in 'Biographia literaria'. These articles -- lucid, learned, and iconoclastic -- established Ferrier as a major new presence in Scottish intellectual life. Recognition of that standing was his election in 1842 to the chair of civil history at the University of Edinburgh and, in 1845, to that of moral philosophy and political economy at St Andrews. With that second election, Ferrier moved to St Andrews, where he quickly established himself as a popular teacher, an able committee man, and a valued conduit to a broader cultural and intellectual life beyond Fife. In the twenty years of his teaching at St Andrews, Ferrier gave courses of lectures on moral philosophy, Greek philosophy, political economy, and metaphysics. In such lectures, which he revised and published as articles in major reviews and encyclopaedias, Ferrier revealed himself to be an uncommonly subtle dialectician, an unusually outspoken innovator, and an unapologetic partisan in the intellectual controversies that convulsed Scotland in the wake of the Disruption of 1843. 
Sharing Hamilton's conviction that Hume's corrosive scepticism was at once intellectually misguided and culturally dangerous, Ferrier grew dissatisfied with Hamilton's adoption of an intuitionist metaphysics well within the mainstream of traditional Scottish common-sense philosophy. To Ferrier's mind, Hamilton did not so much prove the principles of common-sense philosophy as rebut criticism of it, and he himself was sharply critical of the uncompromisingly psychological approach of his mentor. It was therefore to the more rigorous task of elucidating the foundations of common sense, of offering such a rationally conceived and presented 'reconciliation of philosophy and common sense', that Ferrier set himself. Insistent upon the non-empirical character of philosophy, Ferrier elaborated -- most fully in his chief work, 'Institutes of Metaphysics' (1854) -- a resolutely a priori account of epistemology and metaphysics and one described by Ferrier himself as 'Scottish to the very core'. In that task -- self-consciously aimed as a contribution to distinctly Scottish debates -- Ferrier's great innovation was not merely his own rigorous logical thoroughness but also his careful and approving use of the arguments of German idealism -- arguments he had read for himself. After Ferrier, with his ferocious attacks on Coleridge's bogus -- because secondhand and uncomprehending -- 'Germanness', it was no longer intellectually respectable among Scottish or English philosophers not to read Kant, Hegel, Fichte, and their contemporaries in their original form. 
Such claims, explicitly indebted to contemporary German thought, won Ferrier not merely renown but notoriety. Appearing after the Disruption and amid challenges to theological and intellectual orthodoxy presented by biblical criticism, Ferrier's views, forcefully and uncompromisingly expressed, won him many critics. To those either unwilling or unable to distinguish between metaphysics and theology, and others determined to brand any expression of German thought as necessarily atheistic, Ferrier seemed not so much an innovator as an infidel. Evidence of this stigmatization was his failure, twice, to be elected to chairs at the University of Edinburgh -- in 1852 to that of moral philosophy and in 1856 to that of logic and metaphysics. Such failures stung Ferrier badly, and in 'Scottish Philosophy, the Old and the New' (1856) he bitterly condemned the insularity and intolerance of his critics. 
Failure at Edinburgh rooted Ferrier permanently at St Andrews, where he proved to be a determined reformer and gifted teacher. Never forsaking either his literary interests or his contact with the wider cultural world of Scotland, Ferrier, with his wife and five children, served as a centre of intellectual gravity in the ancient university community. He died on 11 June 1864 at his home, 12 York Place, West Park, St Andrews, and was buried on 16 June at St Cuthbert's kirkyard, Edinburgh. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9370


Ferrier, Susan Edmonstone (1782-1854), novelist, was born on 7 September 1782 in Edinburgh, the ninth of the ten surviving children of James Ferrier (1744-1829), writer to the signet, and his wife, Helen (1741-97), daughter of Robert Coutts, a farmer near Montrose. James Ferrier, who came from Linlithgow, had a legal practice in Edinburgh and included John, fifth duke of Argyll among his clients and friends; his appointment as principal clerk of session in 1802 owed much to Argyll's influence. In 1784 Ferrier and his family moved from Lady Stair's Close, where Susan was probably born, to 11 George Street, a house in the Georgian New Town. Susan Ferrier was educated at home, and as her father was well established in Edinburgh's close-knit society, she and his other children came to know many of its notable figures, not least Sir Walter Scott and Henry Mackenzie. 
James Ferrier frequently went to Inveraray on Argyll's business, and in 1797 he took Susan on her first visit. Large house parties were often held there and the duke's daughters, Lady Augusta Clavering and Lady Charlotte Campbell (later Lady Charlotte Bury), encouraged private theatricals and the production of a weekly journal. Susan Ferrier became a close friend of the family and in particular of the duke's granddaughter, Charlotte Clavering, with whom she maintained a lively correspondence. By about 1810 they had decided to co-operate in writing a novel, but a major obstacle to this project was the difference in style and ability of the two authors. The novel, eventually published as 'Marriage' in 1818, was wholly Susan Ferrier's work except for 'The History of Mrs Douglas', which was contributed by Charlotte Clavering. However, their letters show that Charlotte provided encouragement and criticism throughout, reading passages to Lady Charlotte Campbell and reporting her delighted reaction. William Blackwood, to whom Susan Ferrier sent the unfinished manuscript in 1817, was also enthusiastic, though he offered only $150 for the copyright. The novel was published anonymously and, although a few people guessed the author's identity, Susan Ferrier denied authorship. It was an immediate success, the lively humour and social satire having great appeal. The author had a sharp eye for the foibles of human nature and several of her more eccentric characters such as Lady Maclaughlan and the three aunts at Glenfern Castle were based on real people. Charlotte Clavering had already recognized Lady Maclaughlan's dress as that of the sculptress Anne Seymour Damer, and her manners as those of Lady Frederick Campbell. 
After the death of her mother and the marriages of her three elder sisters, Susan Ferrier remained at home to keep house for her father. As was the custom, they would take a house on the outskirts of Edinburgh during the summer months, and it was in East Morningside House that she wrote much of 'The Inheritance', published by Blackwood in 1824. By now, the author's identity was more widely known, but she genuinely wished to remain anonymous. Writing to her sister Helen Kinloch in 1823 she said 'I never will avow myself, and nothing can hurt or offend me so much as any of my friends doing it for me; this is not 'facon de parler', but my real and unalterable feeling. I could not bear the 'fuss' of authorism! (Ferrier, 'Memoir', 178)' 
'The Inheritance' was enthusiastically received; Scott, Henry Mackenzie and his daughters, Francis Jeffrey, Basil Hall, and the Argyll family all expressed their delight. Her friends were able to recognize James Ferrier in the character of Uncle Adam Ramsay, and others who read the novel enjoyed speculating on the identity of the characters. ''Everybody' knows who the characters are, but no two people can agree about them. I have heard of five or six Lord Rossvilles and as many Miss Pratts' (Ferrier, 'Memoir', 180). Appreciation of the work was not confined to Scotland; an American edition and a French translation both appeared in 1824 and a Swedish translation in 1836. 
The publication of Susan Ferrier's third novel, 'Destiny', in 1831 owed much to her friendship with Scott. She had visited him at Ashestiel in 1811 and again at Abbotsford in 1829 and 1831. They evidently enjoyed each other's company: she thought him delightful, and he wrote of her 'This gifted personage besides having great talents has conversation the least exigeant of any author, female at least..., simple, full of humour, and exceedingly ready at repartee, and all this without the least affectation of the blue stocking' ('Journal', 654). Lockhart recorded her tact in helping the ageing Scott over his lapses of memory. Her account of these visits was published posthumously in volume 40 of 'Temple Bar' (1874). She dedicated 'Destiny' to Scott and it was he who advised her to break with Blackwood and who helped her brother to negotiate publication by Robert Cadell at the greatly enhanced fee of $1700. Thirteen years had passed since the appearance of 'Marriage', and while 'Destiny' retains the element of caricature in the figure of the minister Mr M'Dow, its tone is more didactic than that of the earlier novels. Social satire and the mockery of vulgarity have given way to a moralizing approach, reflecting the author's maturer interests. Although it did not prove as popular as 'Marriage', 'Destiny' was well received and appealed to readers as diverse as Joanna Baillie and the lord advocate, Andrew Rutherfurd. All three novels are rather weakly plotted, their success lying mainly in the author's keen eye for the ridiculous and her entertaining portrait of Scottish society. Her letters reveal her own tastes in literature: she admired Jane Austen and Scott (though she had reservations about some of his works), but condemned Galt and Lockhart. In 1836, Robert Thorburn painted a miniature, intended to show her as she was about 1812; this was one of his early commissions and he kept in touch with her even after he had established himself successfully in London. 
In 1841 Susan Ferrier sold the copyrights on her novels to Richard Bentley, who brought out new, illustrated editions. To her annoyance, 'Marriage' did not include her revisions, and she disliked the illustrations. Eleven years later she gave him permission to publish a new edition, the first under her name, on condition that her revisions were incorporated and some of the illustrations removed. Bentley also tried to persuade her to write another novel, but in vain. She had already made several unsuccessful attempts at the request of a friend in 1837. The surviving chapters of a work entitled 'Maplehurst Manor' probably date from that period. Her eyes had been troubling her for some time and towards the end of her life she spent much of her time in a darkened room, but still managed to keep up some cheerful correspondence with her family and friends. Her life had always been quiet; her devoted care for her father and her own poor health discouraged her from travel, though she made occasional visits to friends and relatives in Scotland, and a few to London. Otherwise, she spent her life in Edinburgh, becoming more secluded as her health deteriorated, but maintaining an interest in literature and the church. Like most of her family, she had been a member of the Church of Scotland, but she joined the Free Church after the Disruption of 1843. She died in her brother's house at 38 Albany Street, Edinburgh, on 5 November 1854, and was buried in the family grave in St Cuthbert's churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 9371


Ferris, Richard (bap. 1561?, d. 1613?), oarsman, was a native of Westminster. An infant of his name was baptized at St Margaret's Church, Westminster, on 26 October 1561, the son of another Richard Ferris, who had married Agnes Goodlad there on 22 April 1554. The elder Richard was probably 'the aged' father still living in Westminster to whom his son referred in 1590. By February 1586 Ferris was employed as one of five messengers to the queen, probably owing his position to the vice-chamberlain, Sir Thomas Heneage, to whom he later dedicated his book. On 28 August 1586 a Richard Ferris was married, also at St Margaret's Westminster, to Thomasine Stranger, a widow. The couple did not baptize any children in the parish church, and Thomasine died young; she was buried on 5 July 1592. 
By this time Ferris had rowed in an open boat from London to Bristol. He does not relate why he set out upon his hazardous enterprise, revealing only that it occasioned 'the ill will of sundry my good friends, but especially full sore against my aged fathers consent'. He set out from Tower Wharf on 21 June 1590, in a wherry, an open boat, captained by one William Thomas, 'a man of sufficient will and approved experience' (Ferris, sig. A3r), indispensable since Ferris himself 'was never trayned up on the water' (ibid., preface). Also on board was at least one other person, Andrew Hill, whose share of the rowing was certainly greater than his share of the glory. A flotilla of friends and onlookers escorted the three adventurers as far as Greenwich, where they were entertained at the court. 
The early part of their voyage passed off without serious incident. They put in at Margate and Dover before encountering and surviving a violent storm off Portsmouth. At Dartmouth they rested for two days, but soon after venturing onwards, 'the wind rose... we were in such an extremity, that we had like to have been drowned, yet it pleased God so far to work for us, that we escaped' (Ferris, sig. A4'r'). At the Lizard, 'a place well known to be most dangerous and full of rocks and rases... we passed in the current of the tide with great swiftnesss but with wonderful danger' (ibid., sig. A4'v'). Off Land's End the chance discovery of a safe but narrow channel enabled the seafarers to avoid the attentions of a pirate ship. Soon afterwards they found themselves weatherbound for over a fortnight, but were accommodated during this time at 'Bottrick' (perhaps Botreaux) Castle by a Mr Pynder. Here as elsewhere, the warmth of their reception seems to have increased noticeably once Ferris reported (as he unfailingly did) his position as messenger to Queen Elizabeth. At length, late on Saturday 1 August, they arrived at Ilfracombe. By this time Ferris was impatient to complete the voyage and insisted, against his captain's advice, upon sailing the same night. Thomas was proved right, for the weather worsened dangerously, and Ferris recalled that 'I myself was constrained to row four hours alone on the larboard side, and my fellow rower was compelled to lade forth water so fast as it came into the boat' (ibid., sig. B'v'). The following day 'great multitudes' turned out to watch as they sailed up the Avon to Bristol. Here 'the people of the city gathered themselves together, and had prepared trumpets, drummes, fyfes, and ensignes to go before the boate, which was carried upon mens shoulders round about the city... Afterwards we were had to master Mayors, to the Aldermen and sheriffs houses, where we were feasted most royally and spared for no cost.' Ferris and his companions arrived back in London on 8 August 1590 where 'our entertainment at our coming was great and honourable, especially at the court, and in the cities of London and Westminster... I have given order that the boat be brought by land from Bristol to London' (ibid., sig. B2'r'). 
His achievement seems not to have transformed life for Ferris. He continued to carry out duties as a messenger until at least 1606, when he played a minor role in the apprehension of suspects in the Gunpowder Plot. On 8 November 1605, a 'Richard Ferrers', messenger of the king's chamber, wrote from Gravesend to Robert Cecil with the news that Thomas Percy was riding towards Rochester with the constable of Gravesend in pursuit. On 28 January 1606 'Richard Ferris' delivered to Sir Henry Bromley, MP for Worcestershire, a letter from the privy council concerning two priests residing at the house of a Mr Abington of Hindlipp in the same county. Bromley later testified that Ferris had been employed in arresting these men and that he 'was very careful and painful in this service' ('Salisbury MSS', 18.37). When the records of the privy council resume in 1613, Ferris does not appear. He may well have lived all his life within the parish of St Margaret's Westminster, for a Richard Ferris was buried there on 23 February 1613. 


@@@@@


doc= 9372


Festing, Sir Francis Worgan (1833-1886), Royal Marines officer, second son of Captain Benjamin Morton Festing RN, and Caroline Jane, only daughter of F. B. Wright of Hinton Blewett, Somerset, was born at High Littleton, Somerset, on 24 July 1833. He was educated at the Royal Naval College, New Cross, and at sixteen entered the Royal Marines as a cadet, being gazetted second lieutenant on 3 July 1850. In 1854 he served with the Baltic expedition. He commanded a mortar in the flotilla used against Sevastopol from June 1855 until its fall, and was also at the bombardment and surrender of Kinburn. For these services he received a medal with clasp, and was made a knight of the Legion d'honneur. He saw service with the China expedition 1857-9 as adjutant of the artillery, when he assisted in the blockade of the Canton River and in the bombardment and storming of the city, and was rewarded with his brevet of major. In 1862 he married Margaret Elizabeth, daughter of A. Hall of Watergate, Sussex; she died in June 1864. In 1869 he married Charlotte Letitia, daughter of R. J. Todd; she died in 1871. 
Festing served throughout the Second Anglo-Asante War during 1873-4, and when the Asante army under Amanquatia threatened Cape Coast Castle, he was selected to command the detachment of marines sent to the Gold Coast in May 1873 to assist in repelling the Asante army, which was then encamped at Mampom, between Abrakampa and the River Pra. The chiefs of Ehina were asked to lay down their arms, and on their refusal their town was attacked on 13 June. Festing commanded the forces in the engagements that day, when the enemy were defeated and their town burnt. On the arrival of Sir Garnet Wolseley, Festing was placed in command at Cape Coast. He was taken on Wolseley's list of special service officers on 20 October, and took the command of the indigenous camp at Dunkwa and of the advanced posts. He commanded the forces at the engagements near Dunkwa on 27 October, when he was slightly wounded, and on 3 November, when he was severely wounded while trying to rescue Lieutenant Eardley Wilmot of the Royal Artillery, who had fallen mortally wounded. He was afterwards placed in charge of the camp at Prahsu. 
Festing held a dormant commission to administer the government of the Gold Coast while commanding the regular troops, and was on the executive council. He was specially allowed to retain the rank of colonel (brevet colonel, 7 January 1874) in the army for his distinguished services, and was made CB on 31 March 1874 and KCMG on 8 May 1874, and received the thanks of parliament. He was appointed assistant adjutant-general of the Royal Marines in August 1876, made an aide-de-camp to the queen on 7 July 1879, and gazetted colonel commandant of the Royal Marine Artillery on 3 September 1886. In 1876 he had married Selina Eleanor Mary, only daughter of Leycester William Carbonell; she survived her husband. He died at his home, Donnington Lodge, Newbury, on 21 November 1886, and was buried at Eastney cemetery, Portsmouth, on 26 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 9373


Festing, Michael Christian (1705-1752), violinist and composer, third son and fourth child of John Festing ('b'. 1672/3) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Casey or Casy ('b'. 1680/81), was born in London on 29 November 1705; his elder brother John, also a musician (flautist and oboist), was evidently born five years earlier. Thus the tale (retailed not only in Burke's 'Landed Gentry' but in several other standard works of reference) which maintains their father to have been a certain Count Festing, German-born aide-de-camp to Prince Eugene killed in the battle of Blenheim (1704), whose boys were taken to England in 1711 or thereabouts and given a helping hand by the duke of Marlborough, is a romantic fiction evidently created during the first half of the nineteenth century. So too, it seems, is the notion that one or other of the brothers was the original of Hogarth's 'Enraged Musician'. 
John, the boys' true father, was most probably the Mr Festing whose name is to be found in one or two early eighteenth-century concert notices. Michael himself is said to have been a pupil of Richard Jones and later also of Geminiani. It seems likely that he also had composition lessons with Bononcini. According to Burney, Festing made his first public appearance as both violinist and composer in 1724, but as a soloist at any rate this is at least a year too late. Certainly it was not long before he had established himself as a leading figure on the London musical scene. By 1727 he was playing not only in Handel's opera orchestra at the King's Theatre in the Haymarket, but also in the royal band (both of which he subsequently led), and for ten years (from its opening in 1742) he was director of music at Ranelagh Gardens. He was also much involved in subscription concerts at Hickford's Room and in the activities of several City musical clubs such as the Castle Society, the Philharmonic Society, the Academy of Vocal (later Ancient) Music, and Maurice Greene's Apollo Society. Festing is now chiefly remembered, however, for his key role in the setting up, in April 1738, of a 'Fund for the Support of Decay'd Musicians or their Families' (later the Royal Society of Musicians), a charitable organization to which, for several years, he acted as secretary. Though Hawkins considered him 'inferior to many of his time' (Hawkins, 2.892) as a public performer, he thought Festing 'had but few equals' (ibid., 2.893) as a composer for the violin, 'the nature and genius whereof he perfectly understood' (ibid., 2.892-3). Burney, on the other hand, could find almost nothing good to say of him, and Festing is damningly dismissed as a man who 'by good sense, probity, prudent conduct, and a gentleman-like behaviour, acquired a weight and influence in his profession, at which hardly any musician of his class ever arrived' (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 2.1072). His published works, the first of which came out in 1730, were mostly sold not in the music shops but by the composer himself, and consist mainly of music for strings: three sets of concerti grossi, two of trio sonatas, and four of solos (or rather sonatas) for violin and continuo. There are also four volumes of songs and cantatas together with an ode written to celebrate the duke of Cumberland's victorious return after the battle of Culloden. The instrumental works (but not the vocal ones) all have opus numbers, and their subscriptions lists show that the composer was well supported not only by the nobility and gentry but also by professional musicians and musical societies up and down the country. At his death on 24 July 1752 Festing left a widow (Anne) and two sons, the elder of whom (Michael) was a clergyman who, two years earlier (on 28 January 1750), had married the daughter and only surviving child of his close friend Maurice Greene. 




@@@@@


doc= 9374


Fetherston, Richard (d. 1540), Roman Catholic ecclesiastic and martyr, graduated BA at Cambridge University in 1499 or 1500 and received his MA at Oxford University in June 1505; while often referred to as 'doctor' there is no evidence of his doctorate. He was rector of Sulhampstead Abbots, Hampshire, from an unknown date until 1519 and rector of Newnham, Hampshire (a living in the gift of Queen's College, Oxford), from 1519 to 1520. He was presented to the archdeaconry of Brecon on 8 April 1523 and probably kept it until January 1535; statements that he was also archdeacon of St David's seem to be incorrect. From about 1525 until at least 1533 he was schoolmaster to Princess Mary, having been recommended to that position by the Spanish humanist Juan Luis Vives, and was also chaplain to Katherine of Aragon. 
Fetherston was one of the few clerics in the convocation of the province of Canterbury who, in 1531, signed a protest against the king's assumption of the title of supreme head of the church. As part of his opposition to the royal divorce and the break with Rome he is said to have written a treatise 'Contra divortium Henrici et Catherinae', but no copy survives. He was committed to the Tower of London on 13 December 1534 to coerce him into taking the oath of supremacy; after persistent refusal he was attainted by act of parliament in January 1535 and deprived of his benefices. He seems to have remained in the Tower until 1540, when he was once again attainted for denying the king's supremacy. He was hanged and quartered at Smithfield on 30 July 1540, along with fellow Catholics Edward Powell and Thomas Abel, as well as Robert Barnes, Thomas Garrett, and William Jerome, as part of the king's symbolic, simultaneous executions of three papalists for treason and three protestants for heresy. Fetherston was beatified by the Roman Catholic church in 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 9375


Featherstonhaugh, Sir Timothy (1601-1651), royalist army officer, was the son of Henry Featherstonhaugh (died 1626) of Kirkoswald, Cumberland, and his wife, Dorothy Wybergh, daughter of Thomas Wybergh of Clifton, Westmorland. His father was the high sheriff of Cumberland in 1613. 
Featherstonhaugh matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 30 May 1617, and was admitted to Gray's Inn on 24 October 1620. In 1623 he married Bridget Patrickson, daughter of Thomas Patrickson of How, Cumberland. He was knighted at Whitehall on 1 April 1628, and was high sheriff of Cumberland in 1638-9. His estates included lands at Kirkoswald, a coal mine at Broughton, and mills at Caldbeck and Ravenwick. Featherstonhaugh was appointed a commissioner of array in 1642, and despite initial difficulties he left Cumberland in 1643 with 3000 men to reinforce the royalist northern army under the earl of Newcastle. He requested that the earl of Ormond in Ireland dispatch royalist troops to relieve Cumberland from the Scots. He served in the defence of York and was among the royalist army defeated at Marston Moor on 2 July 1644. Afterwards he served with the Northern horse, possibly holding a cavalry command. He contributed provisions to the Carlisle garrison and was reported to be in the city on 8 October 1644, shortly before it was besieged. By February 1645 he was in Oxford, fruitlessly seeking reinforcements for his hard-pressed county; the king and Lord Digby sent him to Dublin to seek Ormond's assistance, where he met with no more success. 
With the end of the first civil war Featherstonhaugh compounded for delinquency in arms on 26 February 1647, and took the negative oath and the national covenant. He was fined on 11 May 1647, but the money remained unpaid in September 1649. He was among the royalist and Scots army that invaded England in 1651, and on 26 August he was captured at the battle of Wigan Lane, Lancashire. On 11 September parliament ordered that he was fit 'to be brought to trial, and made example of justice' ('CSP dom.', '1651', 423). Despite his plea that he had quarter for life given him, he was tried by court martial. He wrote a farewell letter to his wife on 20 October and was beheaded in Chester two days later. Two of his sons had been slain seven weeks before in the battle of Worcester on 3 September -- the elder, Henry, having been knighted on the field. Another son, Philip, petitioned in 1665 that his father had lost $10,000 in loyal service. 
Featherstonhaugh's widow suffered much legal expense in her attempts to recover some of the estates, which remained under sequestration until at least 1658. His grandson Thomas erected a Latin monumental inscription to him in the chancel of Kirkoswald church. 


@@@@@


doc= 9376


Fettes, Sir William, baronet (1750-1836), benefactor of Fettes College, Edinburgh, born in Canongate, Edinburgh, on 25 June 1750, was the son of William Fettes (died 1758), merchant there, and Margaret (died 1782?), daughter of James Rae, surgeon. After attending classes at Edinburgh's high school from eight years of age he set up in business, aged eighteen, as a wine and tea merchant in Smith's Land, High Street, in Edinburgh then combined this business with that of an underwriter and banker, being connected with trading establishments in the north of England. On 27 March 1787 he married Maria (died 1836), the youngest daughter of Dr Malcolm of Ayr, a retired army surgeon. They had one child, William, who was called to the bar in 1810, but died at Berlin in 1815. As a successful businessman Fettes entered the town council of Edinburgh in 1785. He soon was elected a bailie, and in 1799 became first bailie. From 1795 until 1810 he was a contractor for provisions to army forts in Scotland. In 1800 he was chosen lord provost, and in 1805 was elected for a second time to that office. 
In 1804 Fettes was created a baronet, and in the same year retired from business and devoted himself to the management of landed estates throughout Scotland which he had purchased as investments. In 1830 he executed a trust disposition, in which, after making some minor provisions, he devoted the residue of his estate to 'form an endowment for the maintenance, education, and outfit of young people whose parents have either died without leaving sufficient funds for that purpose, or who from innocent misfortune during their own lives are unable to give suitable education to their children. (Fettes MSS)' The trustees were given wide powers as to the administration of the estate. Fettes died on 27 May 1836 at his home, Gogarbank House, Midlothian, and was buried in Canongate churchyard, Edinburgh, on 1 June 1836. At the time of his death the trust funds amounted to $166,000. According to Sir William's will the trustees could not start building until a certain number of annuitants had died and there was sufficient free capital to carry out the aim of his bequest. 
In 1864 building began on Fettes's estate at Comely Bank, Edinburgh, according to a design by David Bryce. The college building, with chapel and headmaster's house attached, continues to form one of the most conspicuous architectural features in Edinburgh's northern suburbs. It was opened in October 1870 with fifty-one pupils. The trustees determined that on the foundation of the institution a number of boys, not exceeding fifty, should receive their board and education free, while other boys should be eligible for admission on payment. However, the proposals met with dissatisfaction from several Edinburgh residents who objected to what they saw as the small number of beneficiaries in proportion to the resources of the trust, and the college's failure to provide assistance, as was Fettes's intention, to children in reduced circumstances. The complaints prompted some changes on matters of detail but the educational endowments (Scotland) commission did not propose any essential change to the plan which the trustees had carried out. In 1970 girls were admitted to the sixth form, and since 1983 the college has been fully co-educational. 


@@@@@


doc= 9377


Ffennell, William Joshua (1799-1867), fisheries inspector, was born on 16 August 1799 at Ballybrado, Waterford, Ireland, the eldest son and second of sixteen children of Joshua William and Elizabeth Ffennell. The family's much resented exclusion from the Society of Friends through his father's liberal 'conformity to the world' led to all six sons joining the established church. A nondescript education was enhanced by country gentleman's pursuits. In 1830 he married Margaret Catherine, youngest daughter of Robert Prendergast of Greenmount, co. Tipperary, with whom he had nine children. 
In 1824, after taking a lease at Carrigataha, and later being appointed to the commission of the peace in 1834, Ffennell improved the salmon fisheries of the River Suir. This was achieved by the use of firmness, impartiality, and tact at the local level. In 1837 he and his neighbour, Lord Glengall, became secretary and chairman of the newly founded Suir Preservation Society, and were instrumental in obtaining the 'Salmon Acts' of 1842, 1844, and 1845 which aided the improvement of freshwater salmon fisheries in Ireland. Ffennell was appointed sea and freshwater fishery inspector under the 1842 act. He was appointed inspecting commissioner under the 1848 act (commonly called 'Ffennell's Act'), which founded modern salmon legislation by making administration of the acts local and self-supporting. During the potato famine he attempted to introduce fish curing to the west coast of Ireland. 
Ffennell's expertise was much sought after, and he appeared before many fishery commissions in England and Scotland. In 1860 he was appointed to the royal commission on salmon fisheries, resulting in an act under which he was appointed (28 February 1862) inspector of fisheries for England and Wales under the auspices of the Home Office. Shortly afterwards he was made commissioner of fisheries for Scotland and was involved in the preparation of five major salmon fishery bills. During 1863 in Ireland, and 1865 in England, he was instrumental in obtaining an act that fulfilled his lifelong ambition of banning stake weirs in rivers. His concern for fisheries and fishermen in general, highlighted by his countrywide investigations into fishery problems, led to the appointment of a royal commission to inquire into sea fisheries (1863-5). 
Ffennell's main attribute was his ability to convey to all walks of life his practical knowledge and expertise on all fishery matters. His fair and effective manner of settling disputes at local level made salmon inspectorship successful until the early 1880s. His influence was the catalyst that brought parliamentary prominence to the production of fish as a mid-nineteenth century staple of diet. He co-wrote the first six annual reports of the inspectors of salmon fisheries for England and Wales between 1862 and 1867. He wrote pamphlets, gave many lectures, and supplied information and expertise for several books. In 1866, to popularize fisheries and fishing matters, Ffennell started the weekly periodical 'Land and Water', with Frank (Francis T.) Buckland. Buckland succeeded to the salmon fisheries inspectorship post following Ffennell's death at his home in Arundel Gardens, Notting Hill, London, on 12 March 1867. His wife had predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9378


Fiachra (fl. mid-7th cent.), monastic founder, was an Irish 'peregrinus' (wandering holy man) who settled at Breuil in the Merovingian Frankish kingdom of Neustria. He is associated with St Faro ('fl'. 650), bishop of Meaux, and with fellow Irish saint Kilian (died 689?) of nearby Aubigny. Although Breuil developed into a considerable abbey, little is known for certain about Fiachra. He is commemorated in the twelfth-century Irish martyrology of Gorman on 30 August. The compiler of the martyrology, Mael Muire Ua Gormain, describes Fiachra as a prince, hermit, and resident of France. Undoubtedly this information came from outside Ireland. There is no evidence that Fiachra was remembered in the traditions of the Irish church and he is not mentioned in any of the earlier Irish martyrologies. 
Fiachra's cult, then, seems to have been initially confined to Neustria, whence it spread widely. This growth necessitated a life of the saint that would fill out his meagre biography. Probably dating from the twelfth century, the life of Fiachra is of little historical value. It brings him into contact with Faro and Kilian as well as portraying him as a sort of spiritual successor to the earlier and more famous Columbanus. According to the life, Faro granted Fiachra the site of the future monastery of Breuil and the latter, in a fashion regarded as typical of the Irish ascetic saints, founded a small hermit's cell far away from worldly temptations. Despite his remoteness Fiachra's reputation for holiness attracted many disciples and eventually the cell was transformed into the monastery of Breuil. Typically, too, Fiachra developed friendships with other saints, chief among them Kilian, who is presented as being very much in the same mould as Fiachra. In other ways, the life is characterized by a concern that male religious should keep well away from the temptations of the proximity of women that reflects the tenor of ecclesiastical life after the Gregorian reforms of the eleventh century. Overall, though, the life mainly served as an adjunct to Fiachra's flourishing cult. 
This cult's vigour made Breuil into a popular pilgrimage destination. In 1234 the saint's remains were enshrined by Bishop Peter of Meaux, with the exception of his arm which was kept in a separate reliquary. Later, in 1439, the wooden containers that held the remains of Fiachra and those of Kilian were placed together in a silver shrine. In 1568 these were moved to the cathedral of Meaux. The shrine was opened in 1617 and again in 1637 and on the latter occasion Cardinal Richelieu received some of the saint's vertebrae. Fiachra's shrine is an object of devotion to this day. He was considered capable of curing the tumour known as 'le fic de St Fiacre' and is also a patron of gardeners, presumably because of the physical labour he engaged in during the years he lived in his hermit's cell at Breuil -- iconographically he is often represented carrying a spade. It seems clear that the doings of the real Fiachra have been lost and in their place the legendary personality of the healing gardener saint has taken root. 


@@@@@


doc= 9379


Fyche, Thomas (d. 1518), Augustinian canon and ecclesiastical writer, was almost certainly Irish by origin. He is said by Anthony Wood to have studied at Oxford, but is first recorded in 1468 as a canon of Holy Trinity Cathedral priory, Dublin. He was probably related to other men named Fyche who occur in connection with the churches of Dublin, notably Richard Fyche (died 1482), who was receiver-general to the archbishop of Dublin, and Geoffrey Fyche, who was dean of St Patrick's when he died in 1537. Thomas Fyche was increasingly involved in the administration of his house: in 1478, for instance, he acted as Holy Trinity's proctor at a parliament held at Trim; in 1490 he made a rental for some of its properties; and in 1494 he was said to be the priory's proctor-general at an inquest into its claims to tithes of salmon from the River Liffey. By August 1503 he had become sub-prior, an office he held until his death. 
It was doubtless for administrative purposes that Fyche made two compilations relating to Holy Trinity's interests and responsibilities. The so-called 'Liber albus', a collection of charters, papal bulls, leases, rentals, and other memoranda, made between November 1504 and January 1518, declares on folio 57 that 'I am the book of the cathedral church of the Holy Trinity of the city of Dublin, made by Brother Thomas Fyche, canon of the same' (Lawlor, 30). A book of obits, which also includes a list of the cathedral's relics (of particular value since these were destroyed in 1538), although it continued to receive entries until 1558, has been attributed in its original form to Fyche, on the strength of the similarity of its handwriting to that of the 'Liber albus'. It records the names of benefactors going back to the twelfth century, along with members of the priory's confraternity, and also the cathedral canons. The latter include Thomas Fyche himself, who died on 17 January 1518 and was buried in the cathedral. His book of obits was published in 1844, a calendar of the 'Liber albus' in 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 9380


Fiddes, Richard (1671-1725), Church of England clergyman and writer, the eldest son of John Fiddes, was born at Hunmanby in the East Riding of Yorkshire. After attending a school at Wykeham, near Scarborough, he matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 21 October 1687. In March 1690 he migrated to University College, where he was remembered as 'a very hard drinker' ('Remarks', 8.396), and took the degree of BA in 1691. Following his return to Yorkshire he married Jane Anderson, 'a gentlewoman well descended and of a good fortune' ('DNB'), in 1693. Having taken holy orders he was presented in 1696 to the rectory of Halsham in Holderness by Ralph Rand of Skirlaugh. Though the parish was small and afforded Fiddes leisure for study, his health and voice were impaired by the damp location. Having been granted leave of non-residence by the archbishop of York, John Sharp, he moved first to Wykeham and then, in 1712, to London. However, he did not sever his Yorkshire associations: he preached a sermon at Beeford in Holderness on the death of Queen Anne in 1714 and dedicated his 'Fifty Two Practical Discourses' (1720) to Sir Arthur Kaye, the high-tory MP for Yorkshire from 1710 to 1726. 
Having published several sermons in an attempt to provide for the financial needs of his large family Fiddes made some reputation as a writer even before his arrival in London. Introduced to Jonathan Swift in 1713 by George Smalridge, the dean of Christ Church, Oxford, Fiddes rapidly established valuable connections with prominent members of Queen Anne's last tory administration. He became a chaplain to Robert Harley, earl of Oxford, and obtained a further chaplain's place -- to the garrison at Hull -- through the interest of the duke of Ormond. On 1 February 1714, on a motion moved by Smalridge, he was admitted to the degree of BD by diploma at Oxford. Two days earlier, on 30 January, the anniversary of the martyrdom of Charles I, he had preached a sermon, later published with a dedication to the high-tory secretary of state, William Bromley, MP for Oxford University. A devout high-churchman who revered the memory of Charles I, Fiddes vigorously approved the tory measures to secure the Church of England against the encroachments of dissent. He warmly supported the 'Occasional Conformity Bill' (1711) and the 'Schism Bill' (1714) but shared in the general proscription of the tory party after the death of Queen Anne, and lost his chaplain's place at Hull. 
Though Fiddes was not a Jacobite his allegiance to the Hanoverian succession was unenthusiastic: 'there must be somewhere, of necessity, a last Resort of Power' (R. Fiddes, 'Sermon... on the... Death of Queen Anne', 1714, 30). The tone of his 'Remarks on the State Anatomy of Great Britain' (1717), answering a notoriously anticlerical work by the deistical writer John Toland, was uncompromising. High-churchmen, he insisted, were still 'the greatest part of the Nation' (p. 51) and the 'Schism Act' was 'the great Security of the Protestant Succession and of the Peace of the Church' (p. 59). Like his friend the nonjuror William Law, Fiddes maintained that the church possessed a divine commission independent of any reliance upon civil government, and in 'A Preparative to the Lord's Supper... with Meditations and Prayers' (1718) his eucharistic doctrine and sense of the importance of the apostolic order of the ministry were again revealed as those of a high-churchman, thoroughly hostile towards ''Enthusiasts', who under pretence of greater Light... decry all external Rites' (p. 37). In the same year he published 'Theologia speculativa, or, The First Part of a Body of Divinity' (1718), a handsome folio dedicated to Archbishop William Dawes of York. Both archbishops and nineteen diocesan bishops, together with many prominent tories and high-churchmen, were among the more than 500 who subscribed to the work. Explaining that he had been moved to compile the volume out of a sense of frustration caused by 'incapacity for discharging my ministerial function' (p. xxvi) Fiddes expressed a hope that it would help 'young divines' to counteract the influence of 'atheism and infidelity, for which free-thinking is of late substituted only as a softer name' (p. vi). The second part of the work, 'Theologia practica', was published in 1720. In 1724 Fiddes continued his systematic defence of orthodox Christianity in 'A General Treatise of Morality' (1724). Written against Shaftesbury's 'Inquiry Concerning Virtue' and Mandeville's 'Fable of the Bees', and displaying marked sympathy with the works of Malebranche and Norris of Bemerton, this book was a notable defence of revelation against the claims of natural religion. 
As a writer on non-religious subjects Fiddes had an uneven reputation. His 'Prefatory epistle concerning some remarks to be published on Homer's Iliad, occasioned by the proposals of Mr Pope towards a new English version', though topical at the time of its publication in 1714, failed to enlist public support for a more detailed treatment of the subject. However, 'The Life of Cardinal Wolsey' (1724), a work of notable originality, attracted much interest. Dedicated to the chancellors and members of the universities of Oxford and Cambridge its courageous aim to do 'justice to [Wolsey's] injured memory' (p. ii) was supported by 260 pages of original documents. Fiddes' attempt to represent the medieval Roman Catholic church in an impartial fashion attracted predictable hostility, notably in the 'London Journal' and from Dr Samuel Knight, a prebendary of Ely; and his gracious determination to acknowledge the scholarly assistance of Bishop Francis Atterbury, even after the latter's conviction and banishment, attracted the further accusation of sympathy with Jacobitism. The volume's large subscription list -- heavily high-church, high-tory, and nonjuring in character -- contained the names of many Jacobite subscribers; these included the earl of Orrery and Lord North and Grey, both imprisoned in the aftermath of the Atterbury plot. However, the Jacobite antiquary Thomas Hearne thought as little of the 'Life of Wolsey' -- 'a very indifferent Thing' -- as he did of the abilities of the author: 'Dr Fiddes is a mercenary, careless Writer and will do anything for lucre, as I have been told' ('Remarks', 8.274). A further study, of the lives of Sir Thomas More and Bishop John Fisher, remained unfinished at Fiddes' death and has since been lost. 
Fiddes died on 8 July 1725 at Putney, at the home of his friend John Anstis, Garter king of arms. He was buried in Fulham churchyard, leaving a wife and six children, and Hearne reported that ''tis thought his heart was broke with the Troubles of his Family and some other misfortunes' ('Remarks', 8.397). 


@@@@@


doc= 9381


Field, Barron (1786-1846), judge and writer, was born on 23 October 1786 in London, the second of the ten children of Henry Field (1755-1837), apothecary to Christ's Hospital, and his wife, Esther (1759x64-1834), daughter of John Barron of Deptford. The patristic scholar Frederick Field (1801-1885) was a younger brother. From at least 1806 until 1810 he was a legal and parliamentary reporter for 'The Times' and its theatrical critic. He moved in a literary circle which included J. H. Leigh Hunt, Charles Lamb, H. C. Robinson, and William Wordsworth. He was the 'B. F.' who accompanied Lamb and his sister on the excursion described in Lamb's essay 'Mackery End', republished in 'Essays of Elia'. He wrote for Hunt's 'Examiner' and 'Reflector'; and when Hunt was convicted of seditious libel in February 1813, Field accompanied him in the coach from court to gaol and afterwards helped to sustain him during his two-year sentence. 
After qualifying as an attorney and solicitor, Field was admitted on 20 June 1809 at the Inner Temple, London. In 1811 he published for students 'An Analysis of Blackstone's Commentaries' (rev. edns, 1817, 1821). Called to the bar on 23 June 1814, he practised in London, on the Oxford circuit, and at the Worcester and Stafford sessions, until in May 1816 he accepted a judgeship in New South Wales. Before leaving he married on 4 July 1816 Jane Cairncross ('c'.1792-1878), at St Dunstan-in-the-West, London. Leigh Hunt published a farewell epistle in verse in the 'Examiner' of 11 August and Field and his wife sailed from Gravesend on 28 August; the couple arrived at Sydney on 24 February 1817. 
New South Wales, established in 1788 to receive convicts transported from Great Britain and Ireland, was still essentially a penal colony, despite the arrival of free settlers, natural increase, and the growing number of emancipists (former convicts). In a letter dated 31 August 1817 and afterwards elaborated in 'Distant correspondents' ('Essays of Elia'), Lamb asked Field, 'What do they do when they an't stealing?' (Marrs, 3.251). Attempts by the governor, Lachlan Macquarie, to rehabilitate the emancipists were resented by the 'respectable' settlers, with whom they were in economic and social competition. In February 1818 Field privately warned Governor Macquarie that he considered certain fiscal duties imposed by Macquarie or his predecessors to be unauthorized by parliament and therefore illegal. The question was referred to the law officers in London, who took the same view. 
The principal courts of New South Wales were the court of criminal jurisdiction, presided over by Judge-Advocate Wylde, and the supreme court, with civil jurisdiction where the cause of action exceeded $50, which was constituted by Field as presiding judge and one or both of two lay magistrates. These courts ordinarily sat at Sydney; but in December 1818 Field went on circuit to Van Diemen's Land (Tasmania), which was then a part of New South Wales. This involved a return voyage of 1200 miles and an absence of seven weeks, and was the first visit by a superior court since settlement had begun fifteen years earlier. Field went again in January 1821 in company with Wylde, who conducted criminal trials there, thus saving the cost of litigants, witnesses, and prisoners travelling to Sydney. 
Field inherited two years' arrears of work, but business in his court was not heavy: by the end of 1820 it had heard 165 actions at law and 13 equity suits. According to the report of the commissioner John Thomas Bigge few of them involved difficult questions. Most of Field's considered judgments were reported by himself and published in the 'Sydney Gazette': according to Roger Therry they 'did not acquire the weight of authority afterwards' (Therry, 332). 
Although in strictness convicts were incapable of giving evidence, Field followed local practice in allowing them to do so, unless the conviction was formally proved. Otherwise, in a penal colony, there would often be no evidence available. Convicts who had been pardoned by the governor were allowed to sue and be sued. But in 'Bullock v. Dodds' (1819), the court of king's bench held that such pardons did not remove the incapacity. When Field followed this decision, he incurred the hostility of the emancipists. He would, however, have admitted to practise an emancipist attorney named Crossley, but was overruled by the two magistrates sitting with him. 
Field was accused, it seems 'unjustly' (Therry, 331), of encouraging litigation in order to increase the court fees he received. However, he did act precipitately and improperly in striking off the roll of attorneys a free settler named Amos, without allowing him to speak in his defence. Moreover, this occurred in proceedings initiated by Field, admittedly acting in a representative capacity only. 
In 1819 Field edited and arranged for publication in London the 'Memoirs of James Hardy Vaux', an account of criminal and convict life by one already twice transported to New South Wales, to which he also contributed an introductory 'advertisement'; further editions were published in 1827 and, with an introduction and notes, in 1964. Also in 1819 Field published in Sydney his 'First Fruits of Australian Poetry', which was the first book of poems printed in Australia and which evoked its unfamiliar fauna and flora. Later editions followed in 1823, 1941, and 1990. Field was president of the Agricultural Society of New South Wales, and with other members of the Philosophical Society of Australia, established in 1821 to conduct scientific studies, he compiled a union catalogue of their books. 
Field suggested to Bigge various improvements to the judicial system of New South Wales, many of which Bigge recommended in his report. He also advised him that, in the then state of the colony, trial by jury and a legislative assembly should not be introduced; Bigge agreed. In a letter to the secretary of state, the third earl of Bathurst, dated 9 September 1822, Bigge wrote that Field possessed 'talents of a high order -- a cultivated mind and great quickness of perception'; but not 'that degree of Temper and Deliberation that are necessary to conduct the Judicial business of such a Colony' (TNA: PRO, CO201/142 171). When the judicial institutions of New South Wales were being reorganized in pursuance of the act 4 Geo. IV c. 96 (assented to on 19 July 1823), Field was notified by Bathurst in a letter dated 4 August that his appointment was terminated. He sailed for England on 4 February 1824 and disembarked at Portsmouth on 18 June. By way of welcome Hunt wrote another epistle to him in verse, published in the eleventh volume of the 'New Monthly Magazine'. 
Field resumed practice at the bar in Liverpool and on the Oxford circuit. He edited a substantial work, 'Geographical Memoirs on New South Wales' (1825), comprising reprints of official documents, papers given to learned societies, and articles in magazines -- some written by himself and others by various experts. His 'Journal of an excursion across the Blue Mountains of New South Wales, October 1822', from this volume, was reprinted by George Mackaness in 1950-51. As with his poems, the 'Geographical Memoirs' show a genuine interest in nature. So does his presenting of a large collection of Australian seeds to the Chelsea Botanic Garden managed by the Society of Apothecaries (of which his father had been a prominent member). In a letter dated 30 July 1827 to James Dowling, Field referred to New South Wales as a place 'in which I have still a stake in land and beeves, and shall always take an interest' (Dowling, 101-2). 
From March 1829 Field served as judge of the court of civil pleas at Gibraltar, until letters patent dated 1 September 1830 replaced it by the supreme court of Gibraltar and appointed Field as first judge of the new court. Here Field met the young Benjamin Disraeli, who 'found him a bore, and vulgar' ('Home Letters', 27). Field resigned in 1841 and returned to England, where he lived at Torquay, Devon. He had written a well-regarded memoir of Charles Lamb ('Annual Biography and Obituary', 1836, vol. 20), and in retirement edited plays, including several by Thomas Heywood, and wrote 'Memoirs of Wordsworth', first published in 1975 at Sydney. 
Barron Field was regarded with considerable affection by his literary friends in London and by some of his associates in New South Wales, though ultimately he was not very successful either in the law or in literature. But he was a pioneer of literature and science in Australia, and continuing interest in his writings is shown by their publication during the twentieth century. Field died at Meadfoot House, Torquay, on 11 April 1846, survived by his wife, who died at Wimbledon in 1878 aged eighty-six. They had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 9382


Field, Edwin Wilkins (1804-1871), law reformer and promoter of art, was born on 12 October 1804 at Leamington, Warwickshire, eldest son of the Unitarian minister William Field (1768-1851) of Warwick, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Wilkins (1784?-1848). On his father's side he was a lineal descendant of Oliver Cromwell. He was educated at his father's school in Leamington, and on 19 March 1821 was articled to the firm of Taylor and Roscoe, solicitors, of King's Bench Walk, Temple. For some years after coming to London he lived with the family of the junior partner, Robert Roscoe, to the influence of whose fine tastes he attributed much of the pleasures of his subsequent life. Edgar Taylor, the senior partner, who was a highly literary man and a campaigner for the rights of nonconformists, was also an influence. At Michaelmas term 1826 Field was admitted attorney and solicitor. He considered beginning business in Warwick, but remained in London on the advice of the legal writer James Booth (1796-1880), joining his fellow clerk William Sharpe (1804-1870) to form the firm of Sharpe and Field in Bread Street, Cheapside. Henry Ellwood was their first clerk. In 1835 Taylor, who was then alone, took Sharpe and Field into partnership with him. The office of the firm was long in Bedford Row, afterwards in Lincoln's Inn Fields. 
In 1830 Field married Mary, daughter of Sutton Sharpe and sister of Samuel Sharpe, Egyptologist and biblical translator, and Daniel Sharpe, geologist. She died at Leamington in 1831, soon after the birth of her son Rogers, named after his great-uncle, the poet Samuel Rogers. In 1833 he married his second wife, Letitia, daughter of Robert Kinder, with whom he had seven children; his sons Basil and Allen followed the legal profession; Walter Field was a painter. 
In 1840 Field came forward as an advocate of chancery reform, publishing a work on that subject which attracted much attention. In 1841 two of his suggestions were carried out, namely the abolition of the court of exchequer as a court of equity, and the appointment of two additional vice-chancellors. The energy with which he continued to press his views had much to do with the passing of the act of 1842, by which the 'six clerks' and 'sworn clerks' were abolished, and the path was opened for further improvements in the efficiency and economy of chancery proceedings. 
In 1844 Field was in communication with the Board of Trade on the subject of a winding-up act for joint-stock companies. The act of 1848 substantially embodied the proposals contained in a draft bill laid before the legal adviser of the Board of Trade on 27 April 1846 by Field and his friend Rigge, who had formerly been in his office. As early as 1846 Field took up the question of reform in the system of legal remuneration, advocating an 'ad valorem' system, with the option of special contract. He had the support of Lord Langdale, then master of the rolls, and pressed the matter on various legal societies, giving evidence on the subject in July 1851 before a committee of the House of Lords. Lord Westbury's bill of 1865, on which Field was consulted, was not passed; but the act of 1870 gave effect to his views so far as regards the option of contract. In 1861 he was appointed on a royal commission to report on the accountant-general's department of the court of chancery. The acts of 1865 for the concentration of the lawcourts were largely promoted by his exertions. He was secretary to the royal commission appointed in that year to prepare a plan for the new courts, and declined any remuneration for his services. 
As a Unitarian, Field was naturally interested in decisions such as that taken in the House of Lords in August 1842 concerning the Hewley Trust which invalidated the title of Unitarians to any trust property created before 1813, the date of their legal toleration. Field suggested the remedy of an act of parliament, and was the mainspring of the agitation which secured the passing of the 'Dissenters' Chapels Act' in 1844, making the legal toleration of unitarian opinion retrospective, and, in the case of all dissenting trusts not in favour of specific doctrines, legalizing the usage of twenty-five years. His co-religionists raised a sum of $530 in acknowledgement of Field's unpaid services; he put the money towards the rebuilding of his father's meeting-house at Kenilworth. A further memorial of the passing of the act was the building of University Hall, Gordon Square (opened on 16 October 1849), towards which Field himself collected much money. In 1847 he was consulted by Robert Hibbert about a trust which he was proposing to create, with the aim of securing a higher culture in the ministry of his denomination. The provisions of the trust deed (executed on 19 July) were mainly due to Field's suggestions. He induced Hibbert to modify his original plan in favour of what became practically an endowment for research and from 1878 produced an annual series of Hibbert lectures. 
From 1857 Field exerted himself in procuring a measure for establishing artistic copyright. He worked hard for the act of 1862, though it did not do all he desired. In reply to the thanks of the Society of Arts, he wrote that no labour he could ever give would repay his obligations to art and artists. 
Field was an enthusiastic artist, first inspired by a Warwickshire artist, William Ryder. Early in his professional life he introduced a drawing class at the Lancastrian school, Harp Alley, Farringdon Street, London, and taught it once a week. Recuperating in Ventnor from a broken leg, he spent a long vacation sketching. From this period art was the perpetual joy of his busy life. He taught it to working men; cultivated it in the 'conversation society' founded at his residence, Squire's Mount, Hampstead; and pursued it in successive long vacations on the Thames, at Mill House, Cleve, near Goring, Oxfordshire. His original sketches fill many folios. He greatly assisted Henry Crabb Robinson in forming the Flaxman Gallery at University College, London. In 1862 he was a member of the committee of the fine art section of the International Exhibition. In 1868 he took a leading part in framing the scheme for the Slade School of Art (opened in 1871) in connection with University College. Few things gratified him more than the token of regard presented to him in 1863 by his artist friends of the Old Watercolour Society, in the shape of a portfolio of their original drawings. 
Field's character impressed even casual acquaintances, and accounted for the warmth and range of his friendships. All his ideals were high; and his pace and force were tremendous. His convictions were strong; equally strong was his love of independence in others. 'Do you believe that heresy is the salt of the earth?' was a characteristic question of his. A certain bluffness of manner expressed the rapidity of his mind, without veiling his robust goodness of heart. 
Field's death was tragic. Following the capsize of a boat on 30 July 1871 he was drowned in the Thames at Cleve-on-Thames, with Henry Ellwood, his old clerk. Both were good swimmers, but their strength had been exhausted in supporting another clerk, who could not swim and was saved. Field was buried on 4 August at the Highgate cemetery, in a vault next to that of his friend Robinson. 
Field's publications included a memoir of Edgar Taylor, works on the practice of a solicitor, and a volume of correspondence on Anglo-American relations. 


@@@@@


doc= 9383


Field, Frederick (1801-1885), patristics scholar, was born in London on 20 July 1801, one of eight surviving children of Henry Field (1755-1837), an apothecary, and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Barron (died 1834), of Woolacre House, near Deptford. Barron Field, the chief justice of Gibraltar, was his brother. Through his grandfather John Field he was a direct descendant of Oliver Cromwell, John Field having married Anne Cromwell. He was sent, aged six, to Christ's Hospital, where his father was medical officer and where he was taken by the headmaster as a private pupil. He left Christ's Hospital in 1819 to matriculate at Trinity College, Cambridge, where in 1823 he was tenth wrangler, chancellor's classical medallist, and Tyrwhitt's Hebrew scholar. In 1824 he was elected a fellow of Trinity at the same time as T. B. Macaulay. Perhaps because of his increasing deafness (which began early in life, and which later became so aggravated that he avoided all social intercourse), he did no official teaching in his college, although he was examiner for the classical tripos in 1833 and 1837 and read with private pupils (including F. D. Maurice). 
Field was ordained in 1828 by Kaye, bishop of Lincoln; from then onwards he devoted himself almost entirely to biblical and patristical studies, being especially known for his work on Chrysostom and Origen. His first work was his valuable edition of Chrysostom's 'Homilies on St Matthew' (3 vols., 1839), providing an improved critical Greek text. Shortly afterwards he ceased to reside in Cambridge, and for the next twenty-four years he combined parochial duties with his academic work. For three years he officiated in the small parish of Great Saxham in Suffolk, then in 1842 he was presented by Trinity College to the rectory of Reepham in Norfolk. Here he lived a respected and valued life for twenty-one years, dividing his time between his pastoral duties and various theological works. His own lifestyle was by choice simple and modest; he devoted his resources instead to improving and enlarging the chancel of his church, and building a school which was maintained chiefly at his own expense. 
Field's main work while he was at Reepham was his edition of Chrysostom's 'Homilies on St Paul's Epistles' (7 vols., 1845-62), which followed the same structure as the 'Homilies on St Matthew', and was published in the Oxford 'Library of the Fathers'. He next undertook a new edition of the fragments of Origen's 'Hexapla'. As he was well aware that this work would require the whole of his attention for many years, he resigned his living in 1863, and moved to Norwich, where he continued to live until his death. Although Origen's 'Hexapla' was an important witness to the original text of the 'Old Testament', obtaining funding for the project proved difficult. Eventually sponsorship was provided by Oxford's Clarendon Press. The work was completed in 1874 as 'Origenis hexaplorum quae supersunt' (2 vols., 1867-75) and remained the most comprehensive and extensive collection of the fragments for over a century; it also included a highly informative prolegomena. 
During his endeavours to gain approval for the project, Field published the pamphlet 'Otium Norvicense' (1864), with parts 2 and 3 appearing in 1876 and 1881, and a fourth (published posthumously) in 1897. The work functioned as a synthesis of his research into readings of the Greek text of the 'Old' and 'New' testaments, often with reference to knowledge gained from classical literature. In part 4 he claimed to have been the first person to reintroduce the ancient interpretation of 'Mark' 7: 18 which was adopted wholesale in the Revised Version of 1881, forty years after Field had first revived it. On the basis of his edition of the 'Hexapla', recognized as one of the most important contributions made to patristic scholarship over the course of the century, Field was made an LLD of Cambridge and an honorary fellow of his college. He was offered a DCL by Oxford University, but he declined to attend the ceremony. 
Field's age and deafness also prevented his attending meetings with fellow members of the committee for the revision of the Authorized Version of the 'Old Testament', to which he had been appointed in 1870. He was none the less a useful colleague, sending notes and suggestions. He lived to see the work finished, but died, unmarried, on 19 April 1885, at his home in Carlton Terrace, Heigham, Norwich, a few weeks before it was published. A brass tablet was left by his sister in Reepham church and another memorial tablet was placed in the chapel of Trinity College, Cambridge. 
In Field's own short account of his life (in the preface to the edition of Origen's 'Hexapla') there is a dignified simplicity, and no complaint at having failed to receive ecclesiastical honours. He describes himself as a faithful member of the Church of England; as having avoided the extremes of evangelical, rationalist, ritualist, and Catholic approaches. He was probably one of the most eminent and learned of nineteenth-century patristic scholars and was described by Christopher Wordsworth, bishop of Lincoln, as 'the Jerome of the Anglican Church'. The unusual combination of Greek with oriental scholarship made his opinion especially valuable. He was critical of the revision of the 'New Testament', partly because he felt there were many needless verbal alterations, but mainly because he disagreed with the historical methods used, as was made clear in his 'Letter to the Rev Philip Schaff, DD, President of the American Committee on Revision' which was printed for private circulation in 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 9384


Field, Frederick (1826-1885), chemist and mineralogist, was born on 2 August 1826 in Lambeth, the second son of Charles Field, a partner in the family firm (founded before 1642) of candle manufacturers J. C. and J. Field, and his second wife, whose name is not known. He was educated at Denmark Hill grammar school and in 1841 at Mr Long's School at Stockwell, where he was a schoolfellow of William Odling, who later became professor of chemistry at Oxford. To nourish his interest in chemistry he was placed in the laboratory of London's Polytechnic Institution in 1843, then under the superintendence of Dr Ryan. He soon left there to work briefly as an assayer and analytical chemist with a consulting chemist named Mitchell. In late 1845 or early 1846, Field moved to the Royal College of Chemistry to acquire further skills in analytical chemistry as a student under the supervision of August Hofmann, who was beginning to establish the college as one of Britain's leading research schools. In 1846 Field was elected a fellow of the Chemical Society, and soon after he published his first scientific paper 'On the products of the decomposition of cuminate of ammonia by heat' in the 'Memoirs of the Chemical Society'. 
In late 1847 Field accepted a position as chemist to a new copper-smelting establishment at Coquimbo in Chile. Until his final return to England in 1859, Field carried out his duties as a metallurgical chemist and published many of his scientific observations in both British and Chilean journals. Most of his papers were of interest primarily to assayers and mineralogists, but some were of broader chemical interest. 
In 1852 Field was appointed manager of his company's new smelting works at Caldera, a port settlement north of Coquimbo at the edge of the Atacama Desert. Before assuming this position he returned to England and married Augusta Annie Abel, a sister of Frederick Abel, analytical chemist, who had been at the Royal College of Chemistry with Field. On his return to Caldera the following year Field was appointed vice-consul of the British consulate to protect British interests in the area, and soon after added the duties of French consul. In 1856 he accepted a position as chemist and submanager to a new copper smelter at Guayacan, which he protected from damage during the Chilean revolution of 1859. In September 1859 Field quit his position in Chile and returned to England, where he rejoined his wife and children who had left at the start of the revolution. 
Field's analytical expertise and connections to the chemical community in London helped him secure an appointment as lecturer on chemistry to St Mary's Hospital in 1860 and as professor of chemistry in the London Institution in 1862. Later that year, his friend, and fellow student at the Royal College of Chemistry in 1846, Edward Chambers Nicholson, hired him as a chemist to the aniline colour works of Britain's leading dye-making firm Simpson, Maule, and Nicholson. While there Field developed the process for the production of the first azo dye, a bright yellow aniline dye commonly called Field's yellow. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1863 and in 1866 became a partner in J. C. and J. Field. He remained there until his death, by which time he had become senior partner. In 1876, while living in Hither Green, Kent, his health began to fail. After a prolonged illness he died on 3 April 1885 in Oakfield, Addlestone, Surrey. Field had been a founding member of the Institute of Chemistry in 1877, and was active in the B Club, an informal association of chemists connected to section B (chemistry and mineralogy) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He published a total of fifty-five papers, including one co-authored with his brother-in-law, Frederick Abel, and one with Nevil Maskelyne. 


@@@@@


doc= 9385


Field, George (1777-1854), chemist, was born in March 1777 at Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, where he was baptized on 16 March 1777 and where his family had resided since at least the sixteenth century. Field was educated at St Peter's School in Berkhamsted. In the mid-1790s, following the death of his father, he moved to London, where he was soon attracted to the study of natural dyestuffs, especially the widely used red colourant obtained from the root of the madder plant. At that time the main European suppliers of the dye were the French and the Dutch, but access to these sources had been restricted by war. As a result, Field decided to attempt the cultivation of madder in England. It has been claimed (without substantiation) that he turned for advice to Sir Joseph Banks, president of the Royal Society, who had made an earlier (abortive) attempt to grow the plant in Essex. Field succeeded, both in growing the plant and in extracting from the crushed root a preparation that contained the colourant. A growing interest in art and artists' pigments led him to become one of the three directors of the British School, an exhibition gallery opened in Berners Street, London, in October 1802. In this venture Field was associated with the marine painter John Thomas Serres, whose parlous financial affairs brought about closure of the school in 1804. 
After the school's closure Field devoted his energies to the improvement of artists' colours, undertaking experiments with madder lakes (coloured compounds made from a dye and a metal salt). He devised a drying stove for which he was awarded a silver medal by the Society of Arts in 1806 and, in 1808, opened a works for production of lakes at Conham, near Bristol. This well-planned works, laid out in the form of a circle, was to make Field's fortune. His interest in science and art led to the invention of the 'lenticular prism' or chromascope and the development of an alkaline yellow (Lemon yellow) based on barium chromate. He also invented a chromometer, or metrochrome, that permitted him to work out values of the three primaries for any colour. However, the values he obtained were questioned even during his lifetime. Field also developed an improved process for madder production, which involved a drying stove and press for removal of colourant from the root, as well as a novel apparatus -- a 'physeter', or percolator -- working at atmospheric pressure. These were exhibited before the Society of Arts, and in 1816 gained Field the society's gold Isis medal 'for his apparatus for preparing coloured lakes'. (The percolator was later patented by other inventors and used for the clearing of sugar.) Field constructed a new and larger factory at Hounslow Heath, west of London, about 1813, and subsequently became an avid collector of paintings and sketches. He went on to enlarge his range of high quality artists' colours, notably with various madder-based lakes, and the mineral pigment ultramarine. 
In 1817 Field published his first contributions to the study of physical sciences, and went on to write about theology, art, science, and technology. He is best-known as the author of the technically detailed 'Chromatography, or, A Treatise on Colours and Pigments, and of their Powers in Painting' (1835), which was intended to point out to students of art the 'true character and powers of colours and pigments' (xi). There were three later editions (1841, 1869, 1885), and a German edition. A version was published as 'Rudiments of the Painters' Art, or, A Grammar of Colouring Applicable to Operative Painting, Decorative Architecture and the Arts' (1850), which again went to three further editions (1858, 1870, 1875); his concern with the harmony of colours and their impact on painting was carried over to his aesthetic writings. Field died at his home, The Cottage, Syon Hill Park, Isleworth, Middlesex, on 28 September 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 9386


Field, Henry (1755-1837), apothecary, was born on 29 September 1755 at Woodford, Essex, the first-born of eleven children (two of whom died in infancy) of John Field (1718/19-1796), apothecary and founder in 1765 of the London Annuity Society for the Benefit of Widows of Members, and his wife, Anne (1730/31-1797), daughter of Thomas Cromwell, wholesale provisions merchant and sugar refiner of Snow Hill, later of Bridgewater Square, in the City of London, and his first wife, Frances ('nee' Tidman). His great-grandfather was Henry, lord lieutenant of Ireland and the fourth son of the protector, Oliver Cromwell. Field's parents both came from nonconformist families with long-established connections with Hertfordshire. The thriving practice which his grandfather John Field (died 1740) had built up in Newgate Street in the City passed to the oldest son of each of the next three generations. John Field the younger took over in 1754, Henry in 1786, and Henry Cromwell in 1809. William Field (1768-1851) was his brother. 
Apprenticed to his father on 3 October 1769 for seven years, Henry Field qualified and was made free of the Society of Apothecaries by patrimony on 5 November 1776. He rose through its ranks to become master in 1825-6, and he donated $50 to the society's Widows' Fund on completing his term of office. Thereafter he was frequently official deputy for many masters and wardens until the year of his death, in 1837. Field married Esther (1759x64-1834), daughter of John Barron of Woolacre House, near Deptford, Kent, on 2 September 1784 at St Paul's, Deptford. Their ten children (seven sons and three daughters) were all baptized in Haberdashers' Hall Independent Chapel, Staining Lane, City of London. Barron Field (1786-1846) and Frederick Field (1801-1885) were their sons. 
In 1798 Field was elected to the Friendly (later Friendly Medical) Society of the Society of Apothecaries, an elitist, social, dining club. He prompted and jointly chaired its centenary celebrations, a dinner with speeches at the Star and Garter on Richmond Hill, and by 1830 he was accorded the title of 'father'. Pleading infirmity he resigned on 11 December 1837, only to be unanimously elected an honorary member. A director from 1800 of one of the society's two pharmaceutical stock companies, whose customers included the navy, the army, and the East India Company, Field became deputy treasurer of the society's 'trade' from 1815 until 1827. He was then re-elected treasurer of the United Stock annually until his death. The company commissioned Henry William Pickersgill RA to paint his portrait 'in testimony of the very long, faithful and valuable services of their Treasurer', and the work was presented to the society in 1832 (plaque in the Court Room, Apothecaries' Hall). 
With Joseph Hurlock, Field conducted free, pioneering lectures (with demonstrations) on materia medica to the apprentices at the hall between 1803 and 1808 and initiated examinations for prizes, which were awarded until 1895. An active campaigner for medical reform and a founder member in 1812 of the original committee of the Association of Apothecaries and Surgeon-Apothecaries of England and Wales, Field and his colleagues saw their efforts rewarded by the passing of the 'Apothecaries' Act' of 1815. This empowered the society to institute a court of examiners to examine and grant licences to successful candidates intending to practise as apothecaries in England and Wales. Field was an examiner from 1815 until 1823, excepting 1817, the year he was elected onto the court of assistants. He served on countless committees thereafter. In 1818, at the court's behest, Field updated a history of the society begun by his father. Together with his interest in medical botany and pharmacy, this may have motivated him to write an account of the Chelsea Physic Garden (established by the society in 1673), which the court then printed and distributed to every freeman of the society. Field's reputation became such that, in 1831, Sir Henry Halford appointed him one of the four expert medical advisers to the City of London board of health to handle the threat of a cholera epidemic in the metropolis. The corporation of London later awarded him a large silver epergne which, with his painting of Henry Cromwell, he bequeathed to his second son, Barron. On 11 February 1835 Field delivered an address (which was also printed and circulated by the court) to the first of the society's evening meetings, tracing the history of the art of the apothecary. 
On 23 January 1807 Henry Field had been elected by a massive majority to the office of apothecary to Christ's Hospital, London, receiving ninety-six votes, seventy more than his nearest rival. The appointment commanded a salary of $200 and compulsory residence in the school grounds. Field remained in post until 24 July 1835, and his many responsibilities included requisitioning supplies of top-quality drugs and medicines from Apothecaries' Hall where, from 1808, he was a director of both the Laboratory and the Navy Stock companies (the United Stock was formed by their merger in 1822). He inherited his sense of history, his philanthropic purpose, and his business acumen from his father, and served as treasurer of the London Annuity Society for several decades until his death. In 1836 Samuel Lane was commissioned to paint Field's portrait for its Court Room. Field resigned in July 1835 having lingered at Christ's Hospital rather longer than was perhaps wise. A clergyman, whose son had died, had brought an action against him, alleging discourteous incompetence. In 1832 Field had successfully defended himself in a similar suit, denouncing the accusation as a 'criminal charge against a person who has passed a long and active life, hitherto without reproach' (court of governors' minutes, 16 Nov 1832, Guildhall Library, MS 12, 806/14, 623-5). The governors, however, requested that he stay on until his successor had been selected. 
Field died on 19 December 1837 at Woodford, Essex. His services to the Society of Apothecaries are minuted as 'most valuable and in some respects irreparable more especially in regard to his knowledge of the History and Antiquities of the Society', the court being 'anxious to record the high sense they entertain of the zeal, integrity and ability with which [he discharged] the various duties of his office' (court minutes, 30 Dec 1837, Guildhall Library, MS 8200/12, 223). While they lived, Field's two surviving and unmarried daughters, Esther ('b'. 1792) and Maria Laetitia ('b'. 1805), were the beneficiaries of his freehold estate, comprising a wharf and houses in Millbank Street, near Westminster. The large silver inkstand presented to him by the masters and officers of Christ's Hospital was bequeathed to his fourth son, Francis John Field (1791-1857). As requested in his will (dated 9 December 1837), his remains were buried in the family vault in St Mary's Church, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, on 26 December 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 9387


Field, Henry Ibbot (1797-1848), pianist, was born in Bath on 6 December 1797, the eldest in the family of seven children of Thomas Field (died 1831), organist at Bath Abbey, and his wife, Mary Harvey (died 1815). He was educated at Holdstock's academy and Bath grammar school. At a very early age he showed his aptitude for music, and was taught first by his father and later by James Morris Coombs, the organist at Chippenham. 
In 1807, at the age of ten, Field made his first appearance in public, playing a duet with his father. He went on to secure a successful career as a performer and teacher. In 1822, at a Philharmonic Society concert in London, he gave the first performance in England of Hummel's piano concerto in A minor, op. 85, and in 1830 he performed Hummel's sonata for piano for four hands, op. 92, with the composer. While employed as a music teacher at Prior Park College, near Bath, in 1835, Field was converted by Luigi Gentili, and was received into the Roman Catholic church by Peter Baines, bishop of Siga, in November 1835. He left his house in Bath and moved into a cell in the college. 
Field was very popular in Bath, and was generally known as Field of Bath. He gave his last concert there on 13 May 1848, in the assembly rooms. While playing Vincent Wallace's 'Cracovienne' he collapsed, and died a few days later, on 19 May 1848, at his brother's house in Northumberland Buildings, Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 9388


Feild, John (c.1520-1587), astrologer and compiler of almanacs, was the son of Richard Felde (died 1542), a gentleman, of East Ardsley, Yorkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth. Since he was named as an executor to his father's will of 1542, he was probably born about 1520. Nothing is known of his upbringing and no evidence has been found to support Anthony Wood's claim that he was educated at Oxford. 
In the 1550s Feild was in London as an associate, perhaps a pupil, of the mathematician and philosopher John Dee. In 1555 both were arrested as part of a group suspected of conjuring and witchcraft. From references to their 'lewd and vain practices of calculing or conjuring' ('APC', '1554-6', 143), it seems likely that they were accused of casting royal horoscopes, particularly that of Queen Mary. Feild was detained in the custody of the bishop of London but presumably released after examination. 
His connection with Dee and his astrological interests are prominent in Feild's only two publications. Both were almanacs calculated for and published in London: 'Ephemeris anni 1557 currentis iuxta Copernici et Reinhaldi canones' (1556) and 'Ephemerides trium annorum' (1558) for the years 1558-60. The works are comprised chiefly of astronomical tables, principally dedicated to providing information on the daily positions of the planets for the purposes of astrological calculation. The 1557 ephemeris opens with a letter from John Dee criticizing ordinary almanac makers for their inaccurate tables and their failure to benefit from the work of Copernicus and his followers Rheticus and Reinhold. Dee had encouraged Feild to produce a more reliable alternative. Feild's own preface, signed 'Londini ex musaeo nostro', emphasizes the errors which had arisen in judicial astrology from reliance on the Alphonsine tables. He states that he has based his calculations on Copernicus and Reinhold, 'whose writings are established and founded on true, certain and sincere demonstrations'. 
Such references to Copernicus led to Feild's being labelled a 'proto-Copernican' by the nineteenth-century antiquary Joseph Hunter, who discovered Feild while conducting genealogical research on his own family tree. But, despite the apparent approval, there is no indication that Feild accepted Copernicus's heliocentric cosmology; as his work is based on Reinhold's tables, it is not possible to be certain whether he had gone back beyond Reinhold to his source in Copernicus. Like most of his astronomical contemporaries who were aware of Copernicus, Feild most probably considered the latter to have provided the basis for a restored mathematical astronomy and more accurate tables of celestial phenomena rather than a new natural philosophical account of the heavens. 
On 4 September 1558 Feild received confirmation of his family's arms as well as the grant of a crest featuring an astronomical motif: an arm issuing from clouds and holding an armillary sphere. About 1560 he married Jane (died 1609), the daughter of John Amyas, a Kentish gentleman. By 1577 they had settled in East Ardsley, and he had returned to the gentry network of his birth. In the Yorkshire visitation of 1585 he recorded the names of his wife and nine children, and in his will he describes himself as 'fermor, sometymes studente in the mathematicall sciences'. His death occurred between writing his will, dated 28 December 1586, and its probate, on 3 May 1587. He was buried in the porch of Ardsley Church. His library passed into the hands of the physician William Coley of York, who afterwards returned it to the family. 


@@@@@


doc= 9389


Field, John (1782-1837), composer and pianist, was born on 16 or 26 July 1782 in Golden Lane, Dublin, the eldest of at least seven children of Robert Field, a theatrical violinist, and his wife, Grace. He was baptized on 5 September at St Werburgh's Church. He received his musical education first from his grandfather John, who was an organist, then in 1791 from Tommaso Giordani. He made his first recorded public appearance at the Rotunda Assembly Rooms on 24 March 1792, playing a piano arrangement of a harp concerto by Mme Krumpholtz. 
In 1793 the family moved to London, possibly spending part of the year in Bath. Robert apparently joined the orchestra at the King's Theatre, while John was apprenticed to Muzio Clementi for 100 guineas. He had music lessons from Clementi and worked for the music publishing firm of Longman and Broderip (in which Clementi had an interest) as a piano salesman and demonstrator. Field made his London debut at Covent Garden on 21 May 1793, at Miss Chapman's benefit night. The 'Morning Chronicle' for 21 May announced that 'Master Field, a Child of nine years old, will perform a Concerto on one of Longman and Broderip's Grand Piano Forte Harpsichords', although he was in fact nearly eleven. His occasional public performances included an appearance at the benefit for distressed weavers on 12 December 1793, and a concerto at Lee's benefit on 23 May 1794. Haydn described him in his diary (in English) as 'a young boy, which plays the pianoforte Extremely well' (Landon, 3, 309), and Thomas Holcroft called him 'a youth of genius' ('Memoirs', 253). Field may also have studied the violin with J. P. Salomon, as a fellow pupil of Pinto. Certainly Field played a piano concerto by Dussek at Pinto's benefit on 3 May 1798, and together Field and Pinto played a sonata concertante for piano and violin at Salomon's benefit on 10 March 1800. 
Field gave the premiere of his first piano concerto at the King's Theatre on 7 February 1799, 'composed for the occasion' of a benefit for the New Musical Fund, according to that day's 'Morning Chronicle'. The 'Morning Post' on 9 February praised the work as 'the chief source of admiration' at the concert, 'calculated to display rapidity of execution, attended with characteristic musical expression', and deemed Field himself to be 'one of the finest performers in this kingdom'. The oboist William Parke, however, considered Field's playing to be 'more remarkable for rapidity than expression' ('Musical Memoirs', 1, 290). The concerto was not published until 1815. 
After his apprenticeship expired, Field was in great demand as a pianist, and he made at least eighteen appearances in the 1800 and 1801 seasons. His own students included Charles Neate, who performed at the oratorios in 1800 and became a professional musician. In 1801 Field published his sonatas, op. 1, which he dedicated to Clementi. Like his earlier works, published anonymously by Clementi, they give no hint of Field's mature style. They are classical in form, competent and polished, but lack the delicacy and expressivity of the later nocturnes. 
In 1802 Field accompanied Clementi on a European tour, stopping in Paris, Vienna, and St Petersburg. According to the composer Louis Spohr, Clementi was less than generous with Field, who was 'obliged to pay for the good fortune of having his instruction, with many privations' ('Autobiography', 40). When Clementi left St Petersburg in the summer of 1803, Field stayed on, possibly to escape from Clementi's parsimoniousness, but more probably as Clementi's representative in marketing pianos and music publications. He lived at the house of his patron, General Marklovsky, for most of 1803. He made his public debut in March 1804 and rapidly became fashionable, in demand at private concerts and as a teacher. In 1805-6 he toured in the north, and on 2 March 1806 he made his Moscow debut. 
During this time Field developed the genre that he eventually called the nocturne and for which he became renowned throughout Europe. The nocturne is a one-movement piece characterized by a dreamy atmosphere but with no specific programme, fulfilling the Romantic belief that music can express emotions inexpressible by words. The piano texture is distinctive, with a right-hand melody above a widespaced left-hand accompaniment in which use of the pedal is essential in order to sustain the bass. Field's first three nocturnes were published in 1812, marking the beginning of his most active ten years of publishing. He often published works years after their composition and sometimes after substantial revisions, thus making their chronology hard to establish. 
Contemporary descriptions indicate that Field designed the nocturne for his own style of performance, which was notable for a light touch and expressiveness and an avoidance of big gestures, giving an impression of being enclosed in a private world. 
On 31 May 1810 Field married Adelaide Victoria Percheron, daughter of the war commissioner of the French fleet; she was one of his Moscow pupils and had been his mistress since 1807. Their son, Adrien, was born in 1819, shortly before they separated. Adelaide became a piano teacher in Smolensk and died in 1869. Meanwhile Field had had an affair with a Mlle Charpentier; they had an illegitimate son, Leon, in 1815. 
Field alternated between living in St Petersburg and Moscow for fifteen years before settling in Moscow between 1821 and 1831. In 1822 he met his rival, Hummel, who was on tour in Moscow. Field continued to teach and perform, and introduced his young son Leon to the public in 1823. His slow rate of composition was undoubtedly affected by his alcoholism. He began to suffer from cancer of the rectum, and in 1831 returned with Leon to London for medical treatment and to play for the Philharmonic Society. His performances in London and Manchester were received with only moderate enthusiasm. In London he was reunited with his mother, who died the following year. His own death had been erroneously reported in both 1828 and 1831. He met Mendelssohn and Moscheles in London, and was a mourner at Clementi's funeral on 29 March 1832. 
Field continued his tour in 1832, performing his seventh piano concerto in Paris on Christmas day to a mixed reception. He travelled with Leon through Belgium, France, and Switzerland, to Milan in November 1833, then to Naples in early 1834. There he became seriously ill and was in hospital for nine months. The Rakhmanov family helped him travel back to Moscow via Vienna (where he gave several concerts); he arrived in September 1835. There, ravaged by cancer, he composed his last nocturnes. He died on 23 January 1837 of pneumonia and was buried on 27 January in the Vedensky cemetery. 
Field composed more than sixty pieces, all involving the piano, and including seventeen nocturnes and seven piano concertos. Some of the larger works omit slow movements, probably because he interpolated nocturnes in his own performances. He cultivated a more brilliant style for the piano concertos, and these are dominated by the soloist's virtuoso passagework; however, they suffer from episodic structures, which can result in a chain of momentary effects rather than the build up to an effective climax. Like the nocturnes, they were inspirational for composers including Chopin and Hummel. 
Field's music influenced those Romantic composers who believed that virtuosity was the servant of artistic sensibility, most importantly Chopin -- whose own nocturnes are closely related in style -- but also Mendelssohn and Liszt, among others. Field also influenced the Russian composers Glinka and Balakirev through his treatment of Russian folk-melodies, such as the 'Air russe varie' (1808), an early nationalistic piece. He was one of the most popular composers of the first three-quarters of the nineteenth century. He is extremely important both as a stylistic influence on Romantic pianist-composers and as a composer in his own right, despite the view earlier in the twentieth century that he was merely a precursor to Chopin. 
After learning the piano from his father, Leon Field became a successful operatic tenor. Under the name of Leonov he made his debut in Glinka's 'A Life for the Tsar' (1836), and also sang in the premiere of Glinka's 'Ruslan and Lyudmila' (1842). He died in 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 9390


Field, Joshua (1786-1863), engineer, was born at Hackney, Middlesex, the son of John Field, a corn and seed merchant in the City of London. His father afterwards became master of the Worshipful Company of Merchant Taylors. In 1794 Field was sent to a boarding-school at Harlow, Essex, kept by the Revd J. Brown. In 1803 he began an engineering pupillage at Portsmouth Dockyard under Simon Goodrich, as a draughtsman in the office of Sir Samuel Bentham, and later transferred to the Admiralty at Whitehall. Block-making machinery for the dockyard at Portsmouth was then being made at Henry Maudslay's workshop in Margaret Street, off Oxford Street, London, and when Maudslay requested a naval draughtsman for the work, Field was sent there in 1804. 
In 1810 Field moved with Maudslay to a new works at Lambeth. In 1812 he became a partner in the firm of H. Maudslay & Co., and in 1822 the firm's name changed to Maudslay, Son, and Field. The business specialized in making marine engines but it also made stationary steam engines of various patterns, machinery for flour, sugar, and rice mills and saw mills, equipment for minting coins, machine tools, waterworks pumping machinery, railway locomotives, and fixed haulage engines for railway inclines. It made the tunnelling shield for M. I. Brunel's Thames Tunnel. The first set of ships' machinery the firm built was for the Thames vessel the 'Richmond' (1813), and its first naval contract was for HMS 'Lightning' (1825). 
In 1816 Field was one of the founders of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and he served as vice-president in 1837 and president in 1848 and 1849. He delivered a number of papers at the institution, and in 1821 spent several months making a tour of engineering works in the midlands. Field's illustrated diary of the trip has survived. In 1862 he became a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. 
Field was active as a consulting engineer, helping plan the machinery for laying the Atlantic telegraph cable, and advising the Metropolitan Board of Works on sewage disposal works at Deptford. He advised Isambard Kingdom Brunel on the machinery for his steamships, and was one of the committee appointed to deal with the metropolitan local committees of the Great Exhibition. He patented in 1824 a method of reducing the concentration of salt in marine boilers, but this was superseded later by the widespread introduction of the surface condenser. 
He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 3 March 1836 and was also a member of the Society of Arts. He was by religion a nonconformist. Details of his family life are sketchy, but Field's wife, Matilda (1797-1874), is thought to have been a niece of John Medenham, one of the partners in the firm from 1812 to 1820. Two of their sons, Joshua (1829-1904) and Telford Field, became partners in the company during the 1860s. There was also a third son, Sidney, who lived at Reigate. Field died at his residence, Balham Hill House, London, on 11 August 1863, and was buried at Norwood cemetery on 18 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 9391


Field, Nathan (bap. 1587, d. 1619/20), actor and playwright, was baptized on 17 October 1587 in the parish of St Giles Cripplegate, London, the seventh of seven children of the Revd John Field (1544/5?-1588), a leading puritan, and his wife, Joan. He had two sisters, Dorcas and Elizabeth, and four brothers, John, Theophilus Field, Jonathan, and Nathaniel. Much of John Field's writing shows his fierce opposition to both bishops and public entertainment. It is a nice irony then that his son Theophilus became bishop of Llandaff, of St David's, and finally of Hereford, while his son Nathan was a renowned player and a playwright. John Field's fourth son, Nathaniel, was a stationer, apprenticed to that profession in 1596. On 20 February 1633 he was buried at St Anne's, Blackfriars, and in March his widow, Anne, was granted letters of administration for his estate. Despite incontrovertible evidence presented by Roberta Brinkley in the 1920s that the unmarried player and playwright Nathan was not the same man as the married stationer Nathaniel, there is still some confusion over the actor's name and history. Fortunately we know what he looked like. There is a portrait of him in Dulwich Picture Gallery (G. Waterfield and others, 'Mr Cartwright's Pictures', 1988). 
Nathan Field's professional career began in 1600 while he was a pupil at St Paul's School. He, along with several other children, was 'impressed' for a theatre company in Blackfriars, the Children of the Chapel Royal. The master of the Chapel Royal was licensed to take up boy choristers for service in the queen's chapel, but also used this privilege to obtain boy actors for his stage. Field played many parts for this children's company. Humphrey in Beaumont's 'The Knight of the Burning Pestle' was probably one of his roles, and his name appears on the actor lists for Jonson's 'Poetaster' and 'Epicoene'. Field and Jonson seem to have been friends. They read Latin together and Field wrote commendatory verses for two of Jonson's plays, 'Volpone' and 'Catiline'. During his time at Blackfriars Field also took part in a number of entertainments in the city, in great houses and at court. 
For some thirteen years the boys' company was popular and successful despite its frequent changes of name, organization, and management. However, on at least two occasions Field may have spent time in prison when plays in their repertoire offended the king. Less contentious was Field's own comedy 'A Woman is a Weather-Cocke' (1612), which was performed at court. His second comedy, 'Amends for Ladies' (1618), written and performed some time before October 1611, was later revived at the short-lived Porter's Hall theatre in Blackfriars. There are, as one may expect, good roles he might have played in both plays, though we have little evidence about their casting. A merger of the Children of the Queen's Revels with Henslowe's Lady Elizabeth's Men took place in 1613 and Field became their court payee and representative. In 1614 he appeared with the new company in Jonson's 'Bartholomew Fair'. One scene from the play suggests he played the puppet-master, Littlewit. As he is demonstrating his puppets he is asked, 'Which is your Burbage now... Your best actor, your Field?' (Brinkley, 19). Littlewit replies by showing the puppet for the romantic lead, Leander, perhaps indicating the type of role for which Field was best-known. 
Though the dealings of the Lady Elizabeth's Men with Henslowe were often strained, Field's own relationship with the financier seems to have been friendly. Letters asking for money are signed 'yor louing and obedient son' or 'yor louing son'. Another letter, written by Field but with postscripts by Daborne and Massinger, shows that they, with Fletcher, were all working on plays for Henslowe (Greg). It was during his time with the Lady Elizabeth's Men that Field wrote and acted in his tragicomedy 'The Honest Man's Fortune'. His regular collaborators Massinger and Fletcher also made some small contribution to this play. Like several other Field collaborations, it was not published until 1647 in a folio collection of plays attributed to Beaumont and Fletcher. Another of the works in this 1647 collection is 'Four Plays or Moral Representations in One' (1612x15?), written by Field and Fletcher. 'The Triumph of Honour', 'The Triumph of Love', the 'Induction', and the connecting scenes of this entertainment are all by Field. Earlier he had written a commendatory verse for Fletcher's pastoral 'The Faithful Shepherdess' (1609?). 
Some time before 4 November 1616 Field left the combined companies to join the King's Men. By 28 April 1619 he was a company shareholder. He is listed on the King's Men's licence of 27 March 1619 and on the livery grant of 19 May 1619. In the great folio collection of Shakespeare's plays published in 1623 Field is listed as one of the principal actors. Though we do not know which Shakespearian roles he played, his parts in two Jonsonian revivals by the company are known: Face in 'The Alchemist' and Voltore in 'Volpone'. During his time with King's Field continued to write plays with both Massinger and Fletcher and he acted in at least two of their collaborations, 'The Queen of Corinth' and 'The Knight of Malta'. All three collaborated on the non-extant 'The Jeweller of Amsterdam', while the tragedy 'The Fatal Dowry' (first performed 1616 or 1617, published 1632), again with some strong acting roles, was the work of Field and Massinger alone. While with King's Field also appeared in 'Thierry and Theodoret', 'The Mad Lover', and 'The Loyal Subject'. 
It was about this time that Field wrote 'Field the Players Letter to Mr Sutton, Preacher att St Mary Overs'. From the pulpit of St Mary Overie, the church that preceded Southwark Cathedral, Thomas Sutton had attacked plays and playing. In his letter Field produced a well-argued, elegantly phrased defence of his profession. In the seventeenth century he was sufficiently well known to be the subject of contemporary gossip. In June 1619, for example, the earl of Argyll was said to be 'privy to [a] paiment... for the noursing of a childe which the worlde sayes is daughter to my lady [Argyll] and N Field the player' (Brinkley, 42). 
Field died some time before 2 August 1620. The letters of administration for his estate granted to his sister Dorcas Rice on that date show that at the time of his death he was living in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, Middlesex, and that he was a bachelor. His reputation as an actor lasted well beyond his death. In 1635 the audience at 'Wits Triumvirate' was expected to recognize differences between Field's acting style and those of Burbage and Alleyn. The prologue to the 1641 edition of 'Bussy D'Ambois' assumed that an audience would be familiar with his performance in the title role. Even after the Restoration he was still being discussed in the same terms as Burbage. In 1664, for example, Richard Flecknoe placed Field alongside Burbage as 'Actors in their greatest flourish' (Brinkley, 37). 
The frequently reproduced Dulwich portrait and the appearance of Field's name on the Shakespeare actor list have ensured that he is remembered as an actor. He must also be recognized as a playwright who, either wholly or in part, wrote at least eight plays. As he says himself, 'I haue been vexed with vile plays my selfe, a great while... nowe... they shoulde heare mine too' ('To the Reader', 'Weather-Cocke', 1612). 


@@@@@


doc= 9392


Field, Richard (c.1554-1606), Jesuit, was born into an Old English family in co. Dublin. He is recorded as attending the Jesuit college in Paris in 1579, and entered the Society of Jesus in 1584. In 1593 he was at the University of Pont-a-Mousson, and later at Fribourg and at Lucerne, before he was instructed to join the Irish mission in 1599. When his fellow Jesuit Christopher Holywood was captured in England, Field was appointed interim leader of the mission on 17 April 1599. He was chosen ahead of more impetuous colleagues who were already active in Ireland. The choice was motivated by the desire of the Jesuit general Claudio Acquaviva to exert greater control over the activities of his subjects and to steer them away from political controversy. Acquaviva urged the Irish Jesuits to inform Field of their activities and to obey his advice. On 1 September 1599 Field sent his first report from Dublin to Rome. This account makes clear the degree of autonomy enjoyed by individual missionaries. It also highlights real issues and tensions between colleagues. Field noted that Henry Fitzsimons worked tirelessly to promote religion but lacked discretion. Raising substantial sums of money through his sodality organization, he neglected to disclose the sources of the funds or to consult his nominal superior, preferring to consort with 'outsiders'. Fitzsimons was as critical of Field. He felt that the superior was reserved and aloof, and was not well known in the community. Fitzsimons attributed this partly to the illness that dogged Field during his time in Ireland, and partly to his 'cold spirit' and lack of zeal. Fitzsimons stopped short of openly criticizing the general's decision and conceded that Field was the best choice as an interim superior, but added that the Irish acted on example, not words, and that zealous spirited leadership was required. Within three months the zealous, spirited Fitzsimons was confined in Dublin Castle. 
Field's insistence on regulation and procedure irritated more impetuous colleagues. His tenure as superior may have been brief, but it was at a critical juncture and helped to establish a formal, structured, and politically conservative identity for the Jesuit mission in Jacobean and Caroline Ireland. When Holywood finally arrived in Ireland on 16 March 1604, Field's temporary commission expired and Holywood resumed the role of superior. Field stepped back to a missionary role, staying in and around Dublin. He rallied the Dublin county gentry in the face of official persecution, exhorting them to be a protective wall before the house of God. Field himself preached on the theme 'Render unto Caesar', balancing the obligations of obedience to the state and to the church. The steadfast example of the priest and the gentry bolstered the resolve of the Dublin citizenry to resist the state's attempts to enforce religious conformity. 
Holywood noted in June 1604 that the house where Field lodged was affected by plague. By the beginning of the following year, Field's health had deteriorated. It was thought that he had consumption and he spent almost four months confined to bed. His health did not improve during the summer of 1605 and he died the following spring on 21 February 1606. 


@@@@@


doc= 9393


Field, Richard (1561-1616), Church of England clergyman, was born on 15 October 1561 at Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, the eldest son of John Field. Academically precocious, he was educated at Berkhamsted School and entered Oxford University in 1577, aged sixteen. Anthony Wood claimed that he had entered Magdalen College and remained there until he graduated, after which he moved to Magdalen Hall; but this is probably a mistake, arising from confusion with a namesake from Kent. He certainly was at Magdalen Hall, from where he graduated BA on 18 November 1581 and proceeded MA on 2 June 1584, and was appointed catechism lecturer that year. He drew a large audience from the whole university, among whom one enthusiastic attender was John Rainolds, president of Corpus Christi College. Field was now famous for his prowess in school divinity, and esteemed one of the best disputants in the university. At this time he seems to have refused a marriage arranged by his father on condition that he did not seek ordination, and he remained at Oxford about seven years. 
In 1591 Field was appointed to the municipally funded lectureship at St Martin Carfax (the city church), where he delivered fortnightly Sunday sermons. After he proceeded BD on 14 June 1592, he was apparently made the Winchester Cathedral divinity reader, though the cathedral archives have no record of this. His place of residence for the next two years is not known, but his renown as an exceptional scholar survived long after his departure from the university, and Field's rooms were shown as an object of interest. On 9 April 1594 Field married Elizabeth (died 1614), daughter of Richard Harris, rector of Hardwick, Buckinghamshire. 
In that year he was chosen divinity lecturer at Lincoln's Inn. Impressed with his abilities, the bencher Richard Kingsmill of Highclere, Hampshire, presented him to the living of All Saints, Burghclere, where he was instituted on 12 February 1595. He took up residence at the parsonage, built around an old Saxon hall house, and now known as Burghclere Manor. Subsequently offered the more valuable living of St Andrew's, Holborn, he declined it, preferring to remain in the comparative quiet of Burghclere, the better to proceed with his studies. 
On 7 December 1596 Field proceeded DD from Queen's College. Following a probationary sermon before the queen on 23 September 1598, he was appointed a chaplain-in-ordinary, and subsequently received a grant dated 30 March 1602 of the next vacant prebend at Windsor; he was admitted on 3 August 1604. At the Michaelmas chapter that year Field was chosen reader of the divinity lecture for the year following. At Windsor he held the roles of treasurer (1606), precentor (1607), and steward and receiver-general (1611, 1615). 
Field attended the Hampton Court conference on 14 January 1604, but probably spoke only once. However, in other contexts King James took singular pleasure in discussing with him fine points of divinity. He often preached before the king, who on the first occasion that he heard him exclaimed 'Is his name Field? This is a field for God to dwell in' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.'). His 'A Learned Sermon Preached before the King at Whitehall' (1604) took as its text 'Jude' 3; this verse of scripture, appealing for loyalty to 'the faith once delivered to the saints', undergirded Field's entire thinking on what constitutes a true church. When King James came to Oxford in 1605, Field was sent for to take part in the 'Divinity Act'. The disputation between Field and John Aglionby before the king, on the question 'whether saints and angels know the hearts of men', was, it was said, one of the best ever heard. 
Field's principal work, 'Of the Church, Five Bookes', was first published in London in 1606, printed by Humfrey Lownes and dedicated to the archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bancroft. In fact this volume contained only the first four books. Another impression, with many errata corrected, was printed by Nicholas Okes, probably in 1614, but still dated 1606 on the title-page, and with the printer's name omitted. 'The Fifth Booke of the Church, together with an Appendix Containing a Defense', printed by Okes, appeared in 1610. 'Of the Church' has been described as standing 'by the side of Hooker, among the grandest monuments of polemical divinity in the language' ('DNB'). Written (in contrast to Richard Hooker's work) in eminently readable English, it is a substantial defence of the authenticity of the Church of England as a true church, against the claims of contemporary Romanism (particularly of its late sixteenth-century spokesmen Bellarmine and Stapleton) that it was no church at all. The reformed, protestant Church of England after the Elizabethan settlement was, Field argued at length, the true Catholic continuation within England of the historic Latin Church; for it was the Church of England and not the late medieval Church of Rome which had 'adhered to the Catholic verity' ('Of the Church', bk 3, chap. 39). While this was a common feature of the writings of Anglican divines of his era, Field was perhaps unique in arguing that 'none of those erroneous positions... which at this day they of the Romish faction do defend and we impugn, were ever constantly received in the days of our Fathers, as the doctrine of that Church' (ibid., bk 3, appendix). These erroneous beliefs and corrupt practices were only 'the private fancies and conceipts of particular men' (ibid.), namely the latter-day popes and their followers and spokesmen, who were, according to Field, only a relatively small schismatical and heretical faction within the historic Church of Rome, albeit latterly 'the prevailing faction' (ibid., bk 3, chap. 8). In its fundamental sense the Church of Rome had always been, substantively, a true protestant church. This masterstroke of his tightly reasoned argument needless to say aroused the objections of several contemporary Romanists, despite Field's earlier claim that he would write 'as they shall have no great mind to answer me' (ibid.). His appendix to the whole work, published with the fifth book in 1610, responded to a number of these, including Theophilus Higgons, a London lecturer and formerly at Christ Church, Oxford, who had transferred his allegiance to Rome about 1607 or 1608. Field accepted as a true church every other world church, towards whom his writings have a thoroughly eirenical tone, including the Eastern Church; but towards the Church of Rome he rose to heights of implacable polemicism, and sometimes disdain. In 1609 the king had made Field dean of Gloucester. He never resided there, and only preached a few times a year, but always, as at Windsor, commanded a great audience. There is some evidence that in the aftermath of the publication of 'The Fifth Booke' James's enthusiasm for Field cooled markedly. The arch-priest George Birkhead wrote to his representative in Rome on 23 April 1610 that, when the king read the book, shown to him by James Montagu, bishop of Bath and Wells, he 'shewed great dislike and Contempt of the proofes' of its arguments and 'did not like that men should handle matter rather with cunning than good learninge', finally throwing 'it on the ground in a great angre' ('Newsletters from the Archpresbyterate of George Birkhead', ed. M. C. Questier, CS, 5th ser., 12, 1998, 79). However, Birkhead was not a disinterested observer, and whatever the king's immediate reaction to the book, manifestations of his favour to Field resumed. Thomas Fuller noted that James had nominated Field as one of the original fellows of the intended Chelsea College. The king had also intended to send him to Germany to settle the differences between the Lutherans and Calvinists (but for some unknown reason this never happened), and he had also wished to bestow on him the bishopric of Salisbury (though Robert Abbot was eventually preferred in 1615), the deanery of Worcester, and the see of Oxford, which latter proposal might have reached fruition were it not for Field's untimely demise. 
According to his son Nathaniel's life of his father, and to subsequent biographies which draw on it, Field was known as a faithful pastor and for his personable character, humility, kindness, peaceable disposition, and amiable qualities; for his learned conversation and wise judgement, his profound scholarship and fine preaching; and for his astonishing memory, particularly for everything he read. His health apparently suffered, though, from the demands of his studies, business, and frequent travelling. He chiefly resided at Burghclere and, during the winter months, Windsor, and when in residence in the cloisters there his house was 'the resort of many eminent men, who came to enjoy his learned conversation' ('DNB'). Among his many friends were, it is said, Giles Thomson, dean of Windsor, John Spencer, Richard Hooker, Sir Henry Savile, provost of Eton, and Sir Henry Nevill, who had been Queen Elizabeth's ambassador to France and lived nearby. 
Field was also celebrated as a loving husband and father. He and his wife, Elizabeth, had at least eight children: John, Benjamin ('bap'. 1598, died 1598), Nathaniel ('bap'. 1600, died 1666), Richard ('bap'. 1602, died 1638), Judith ('bap'. 1606), Giles (1607/8-1629), Josias ('bap'. 1611, died in or after 1638), and Anthony ('bap'. 1612, died in or after 1638). The Burghclere registers, which are complete for Field's period and remarkably well preserved, provide a conundrum concerning his first-born son, John. The act of administration of Field's estate was granted in December 1616 to 'John Field, natural and legitimate son of Richard Field', and also, since John was a minor, to Field's brother-in-law Nathaniel Harris LLD; it is possible that this was the John Field, 'dris. fil.' ('son of a doctor') who graduated BA from Trinity College, Oxford, in 1614, although according to the Burghclere baptism register Field's son was baptized on 7 October 1597, and thus would have been only sixteen at that time. Intriguingly, however, the Burghclere burial register records the burial of 'John Feild, son of Mr Doctor Feilde' on the same day as his baptism. 
On 14 October 1614 Field's wife died aged forty-one. After about two years he married Dorothy, widow of John Spencer (1558/9-1614), sometime president of Corpus Christi College, Oxford; she was Izaak Walton's aunt and the daughter of Thomas Cranmer, the archbishop's nephew. Field, however, survived his second marriage little more than a month. After a seizure on 15 November, he died on 21 November. He was buried with his first wife in the nave of St George's Chapel, Windsor. A black marble slab with brass inscription was laid over his grave, but was later removed, probably at the 1789 repaving of the chapel. On hearing of his death, King James expressed his regret in the words, 'I should have done more for that man' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.'). Later in the century Thomas Fuller, punning on his name as the king had done decades earlier, styled him in his 'Holy War' (bk 4, chap. 5) 'that learned divine, whose memory smelleth like a 'field' which the Lord hath blessed' (after 'Genesis' 27: 27). 
Field's son Nathaniel, who graduated BA from New College, Oxford, in 1621 and proceeded MA in 1625, championed his father's work and in 1628 published a second edition of 'Of the Church', dedicated to George Villiers, duke of Buckingham. The third book is substantially enlarged in two chapters, and the previously minimal appendix to the third book is completely rewritten, though at the time of Field's death only half the sections were completed, and even these retained, uncharacteristically, many untranslated Latin quotations. This edition is charged by Robert Baillie in his 'Canterburian's Self-Conviction' (1641) with having been added to by Archbishop Laud. Further complete and partial editions appeared subsequently. 
Nathaniel became rector of Stourton, Wiltshire, in 1632 and a canon of Chichester the following year. At the time of his death Field had written a great part of a new work to be entitled 'A view of the controversies in religion, which in these last times have caused the lamentable divisions in the Christian world'. This was never completed, and is lost except for the preface and a few notes on predestination, which are printed in Nathaniel's admiring biography of his father, 'Some Short Memorials Concerning the Life of that Reverend Divine Doctor Richard Field' (1716). 


@@@@@


doc= 9394


Field, Richard (bap. 1561, d. 1624), printer, was baptized on 16 November 1561 in Stratford upon Avon, Warwickshire, the son of Henry Field (died 1592), tanner, and his wife, Ursula. On 29 September 1579 he was apprenticed for seven years to George Bishop, stationer of London, with the provision that the first six years would be served under the Huguenot printer Thomas Vautrollier. Under Vautrollier Field worked on many foreign-language books and Latin textbooks, and he also probably helped run the business while his master was printing in Scotland for King James VI. 
Field was made free of the Stationers' Company by Bishop on 6 February 1587, and five months later his former master Vautrollier died. Vautrollier's widow Jacqueline tried to carry on the business, but encountered difficulties because she had not been officially recognized as a printer. In autumn 1588 Richard Field hired Jacqueline Vautrollier to print the first publication to bear his name, 'The Copie of a Letter Sent out of England to Don Bernardin Mendoza'. This piece of post-Armada anti-Spanish propaganda was ostensibly written by the recently executed priest Richard Leigh, but several manuscripts survive in the handwriting of Lord Burghley, Elizabeth's secretary of state, who himself had previously employed Thomas Vautrollier. 
The collaboration of Field and Jacqueline Vautrollier (died 1611?) was apparently a happy one, for on 12 January 1589 they were married in St Anne Blackfriars, and on 1 December 1590 their son Richard was baptized there. Thus Field inherited his former master's business and became one of the leading stationers in London at the young age of probably about twenty-seven. He was fined twice in 1589, once for keeping an unauthorized apprentice and once for printing a book contrary to order (probably Walter Bigges's 'A Summarie and True Discourse of Sir Frances Drakes West Indian Voyage'), but thenceforth he became a model member of the Stationers' Company. In 1592 he took as an apprentice his younger brother Jasper, who was made free of the company in 1601. 
Field inherited Vautrollier's status as a leading printer in England of foreign-language books and books about foreign affairs. These ranged from popular pamphlets about Spain and the French king of Navarre to more substantial works such as Geoffrey Fenton's translation of Guicciardini's Italian history. A number of the Spanish works give the printer's name as Ricardo del Campo, a literal translation of Field's name. He also maintained Vautrollier's contacts in high places, including Burghley and King James. In 1589 Field published George Puttenham's 'The Arte of English Poesie', composing a dedication to Burghley in which he called himself 'a printer alwaies ready and desirous to be at your Honourable commaundement' (sig. AB3'v'). That same year, Field entered King James's 'Poeticall Exercises' in the Stationers' register, but did not print it. However, in 1591 Field published the translation of Ariosto's 'Orlando Furioso' by Sir John Harington, the Queen's godson. Two separate manuscripts in Harington's hand, complete with detailed instructions to Field, survive as MS Rawlinson poet. 125 and BL, Add. MS 18920. Harington must have been pleased, because five years later he again called upon Field, to publish 'The Metamorphosis of Ajax' (1596). 
The most famous author published by Field was his Stratford contemporary William Shakespeare. In 1593 Field published Shakespeare's first printed work, 'Venus and Adonis', but the following year he turned over the rights to John Harrison the elder. Harrison employed Field to print Shakespeare's 'The Rape of Lucrece' (1594), as well as the next three editions of 'Venus' (1594-6); later Edward Blount employed Field to print Robert Chester's 'Love's Martyr' (1601), which contained Shakespeare's 'The Phoenix and the Turtle'. Field was also associated with the printing or publishing of many important sources for Shakespeare's plays, suggesting the possibility that the playwright may have had access to his townsman's shop. These sources include the 1587 edition of Holinshed's 'Chronicles' (which was co-published during the last year of Field's apprenticeship by his master George Bishop), North's translation of Plutarch's 'Lives' (of which Field printed editions in 1595 and 1603), Ovid's 'Metamorphoses' (which Field printed in 1589 for Harrison), and many more minor sources. 
Besides Harington and Shakespeare, Field printed several other important works of poetry, including the first full editions of Spenser's 'Faerie Queene' (1596) and Sidney's 'Arcadia' (1598), both for William Ponsonby; Chapman's translations of Homer (1611-14, for Nathaniel Butter); and Sir William Alexander's 'Aurora' (1604, for Edward Blount). He was also noted as a skilled printer of complicated mathematical treatises; William Bedwell notes in the preface to his translation of Schonerus's 'De numeris geometricis' (1614) that no printer other than Field would touch his manuscript. Field's skill earned the respect of his fellow stationers, for in 1598 he was admitted to the livery of the Stationers' Company, and in June 1604 he was elected to the company's governing body. He was also selected twice to attend the lord mayor's banquet. 
Field's first wife Jacqueline died some time before 1614, and she may be the 'Mr Feilds wife' who was buried on 9 March 1611 in St Anne Blackfriars (parish register). By 1613 Field had moved to St Michael, Wood Street, and set up a new shop there, and it was probably about this time that he married a second wife, Jane (died after 1626). The couple had five children baptized at St Michael, Wood Street, between 1614 and 1624. By now one of the senior members of the Stationers' Company, Field served as the company's master in 1619 and 1622. 
Field died between 24 November 1624, when he made his will, and 1 December, when he was buried at St Michael, Wood Street. His will was proved on 14 December. He split his estate equally among his wife, his children, and various other legatees, including his stepchildren Manassas and James Vautrollier, and his former apprentice George Miller, who eventually took over the business. Field's three surviving sons claimed their portions when they came of age between 1640 and 1646, and in the latter year his son Henry claimed his freedom in the Stationers' Company by patrimony. 


@@@@@


doc= 9395


Field, Theophilus (bap. 1575, d. 1636), bishop of Hereford, baptized on 22 January 1575 at St Giles Cripplegate, London, was the eldest son of John Field (1544/5?-1588), Church of England clergyman, preacher there, and his wife, Joan, and brother of Nathan Field (bap. 1587, d. 1619/20) the actor. He was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in January 1592, but transferred to Pembroke College where he graduated BA in 1596 and proceeded MA in 1599, and was elected a fellow in 1598. He was incorporated at Oxford on 16 July 1600, and proceeded from Cambridge BD in 1605 and DD in 1611. 
In 1600 Field edited and contributed to two books of elegies on the death of Sir Horatio Palavicino, one in Latin the other in English, in which he thanked Palavicino for being his patron for six years. He was appointed rector of Cotton, Suffolk, in 1607, vicar of Mashfield (probably Mayfield), Sussex in 1610, and vicar of Lydd, Kent, in 1611, holding the last living until 1627. By 1619 he was also a chaplain to the king. On 10 October 1619, through the interest of the marquess of Buckingham, he was consecrated bishop of Llandaff. Before 1621 he married Alice, whose surname is unknown. 
In March 1621, during its impeachment proceedings against Lord Chancellor Bacon, the House of Commons uncovered an allegation that in March 1619 Field had undertaken to influence a case in chancery in return for a large bribe, the lion's share of $6000, from Edward Egerton, one of the parties in the suit. Field seems to have been acting opportunistically in the hope of using his connections with Buckingham, and John Chamberlain's claim that Field was Bacon's chaplain and broker in the lord chancellor's peculations ('CSP dom.', '1619-23', 238, 260) appears to be mistaken, although Field's co-conspirator, Randall Davenport, was Bacon's servant. MPs were horrified, especially that someone who had since been elevated to the episcopal bench should be involved, and Sir Robert Phelips complained of 'the now reverend but then practical Doctor' (Notestein and others, 2.225-60). The House of Lords failed to substantiate all the allegations and cleared Field of bribery but, not finding him entirely faultless, requested the archbishop of Canterbury to admonish him publicly in convocation. 
The case appears to have been little check to Field's ambitions, and within weeks he was urging Buckingham to promote his suit to be translated to Hereford as the only way that his credit, 'so cruelly cracked with the sharp teeth of the wide mouth of vulgar lying fame' (BL, Harl. MS 7000, fol. 57'r') could be restored. Field was a master of the wheedling and importuning letter, and he pestered Buckingham and others with pleas for a better and richer bishopric. He pressed the case of his six children who, he feared, would have only a lecture in parsimony from their father in place of their deserved patrimony. His 'Parasceve paschae, or, A Christians preparation to the worthy receiving of the blessed sacrament' (1624), a revised edition of a work first published in 1622 and dedicated to the duchess of Lennox, was this time dedicated to Buckingham, as probably also was 'A Watch-Word, or, The Allarme', a Lent sermon published in 1627. 
On being advanced in July 1627 from what Field called 'miserably spoiled Llandaff' ('Third Report', HMC, 32) to St David's, he thanked Buckingham for his translation but called the move a 'banishment into remoter Wales' and complained that 'my years and accounts do find the print so small, that my benefit is not legible in this Welsh edition', adding a plea for another move, this time to an English see (BL, Add. MS 34274, fol. 158'r'). He had to wait until December 1635, when he was elected bishop of Hereford. Gordon Goodwin in the nineteenth century considered that Field 'took no very exalted view of his profession, nor ever troubled himself much about its duties' ('DNB') and it is evident that he found life in Wales uncongenial for, as he remarked in 1629, the ways to his diocese were 'steep, craggy, and welshly tedious', and when he arrived in that 'desolate place' there was not 'so much as a leech to cure a sick horse' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/150, fol. 170'r'). Nevertheless, he was no less assiduous in his duties than the age demanded, and personally carried out visitations of both Llandaff and St David's cathedrals. Field died on 2 June 1636, not six months after his translation to Hereford, and was buried in the north transept of the cathedral beneath a monument bearing his bust and a fulsome inscription. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 9396


Field, Thomas (1549-1625), Jesuit and explorer, was born in Limerick, son of a medical doctor, William Field, and his wife, Jenet Creah; his family was of Anglo-Norman descent. He studied arts at Paris and Douai and philosophy at Louvain, from where he graduated MA. His education was typical of his background as many urban Catholics, of what would later be called 'Old English' stock, who had previously studied at English universities now preferred to study in Catholic countries as part of their rejection of the Reformation. He entered the Society of Jesus at Rome on 6 October 1574. The date of his ordination as a priest has not been recorded. 
Field went on foot from Rome to Lisbon, where he embarked for Brazil in 1577. He worked in various towns for six years and was the travelling companion of Jose de Anchieta, an outstanding Jesuit missionary. Field was in Sao Paulo when he was sent to work among the Guaranis in Paraguay with two other Jesuits, Manuel Ortega (Portuguese) and Juan Saloni (Spanish), because he spoke Tupi, a language similar to Guarani. They left Buenos Aires on 8 March 1588 and arrived at the city of Asuncion on 11 August. Field and his two companions subsequently made long journeys into territory which was virtually unknown to Europeans, but it was impossible for them to establish any permanent residence, or even to remain in one place sufficiently long for even a group of Guaranis to gather. Their flying missions made little impact, did not allow them to distinguish between different groups of Guaranis, and probably had no influence on the later location of the famous Jesuit reductions. Their most effective work was probably their care of the sick, wherever they found them, particularly in the great epidemic, which began at Cartagena in 1588 and spread all over South America. 
Field's work was finally concentrated on the Spaniards and the American Indians in Asuncion and in the town of Villarrica. Field was, from August 1602 until December 1605, the only Jesuit in Paraguay. He had the reputation of being a tireless worker. Field and his first travelling companions were all members of the Brazilian province of the Jesuits. Final vows were often made very late in a Jesuit's career, and Field was professed of the three vows at Asuncion on 10 March 1613. He died at Asuncion on 15 April 1625. His importance lies in his perseverance as the first Jesuit to enter and to remain in a region where his order would later be very innovative, with a large commitment of men and resources. 


@@@@@


doc= 9397


Field, William (1768-1851), Unitarian minister, was born at Stoke Newington on 6 January 1768, the fifth son of eleven children born to John (1718/19-1796) and Anne Field (1730/31-1797). John Field was a prosperous medical practitioner in London, an active member of the Society of Apothecaries of London, and founder of the London Annuity Society. In 1753 he had married Anne, daughter of Thomas Cromwell, a grocer, and sister of Oliver Cromwell (1742?-1821), solicitor and biographer of the lord protector. Another of John Field's sons was Henry Field (1755-1837). William Field got a good classical education, and while at school corresponded with his father in Latin. He studied for the ministry first at Homerton Academy in London, but left that institution for doctrinal reasons soon after the appointment of John Fell, whose assumption of the classical tutorship touched off a student rebellion and nearly a decade of intramural wrangling. In 1788 Field moved to Daventry Academy under Thomas Belsham, but left there when Belsham resigned in June 1789 after declaring his Unitarianism. Field thus completed the transition from his father's Calvinism. 
In 1789 Field succeeded James Kettle as minister of the Presbyterian congregation at High Street Chapel, Warwick, where he was ordained on 12 July 1790. On this occasion Belsham gave the charge, and Joseph Priestley preached. Samuel Parr attended the service and the ordination dinner and met Priestley for the first time. Thus began also Field's close intimacy with Parr, a connection fostered by their common enthusiasm for classical studies. In 1791 he started a Sunday school, the first in Warwick, which led to a squabble with some local clergy, in which he was accused of bribing the children of Anglicans to attend his school. Always ready for a pamphlet war, he issued the first of many incisive polemics in which the dignity of style and the profusion of literary and classical illustration contrast curiously with the pettiness of the disputes. In the mid-1820s he added the charge of an old Presbyterian meeting-house at Kenilworth, conducting afternoon service there in addition to his Warwick duties. He remained in active duty for nearly sixty years, resigning Warwick in 1843 and Kenilworth in 1850. 
In 1803 Field married Mary Wilkins (1784?-1848), the daughter of a Baptist minister who had previously married one of Field's sisters. They had fourteen children, of whom eleven survived their parents. The eldest son was Edwin Wilkins Field (1804-1871), solicitor and legal reformer, who played a central part in the passage of the 'Dissenters' Chapels Act' of 1844, which secured Unitarian possession of buildings and endowments from orthodox challenge; when a testimonial of $530 was given him for his service he applied it to the rebuilding of his father's chapel in Kenilworth. 
Field's extensive correspondence was both erudite and racy; he was a genial host, and his conversation was very enjoyable, despite a constitutional deafness which was said to make his pulpit delivery eccentric, with 'singular, and sometimes unnatural tones' ('Royal Leamington Spa Courier', 6 Sept 1851). He was a small man whom a perhaps prejudiced Samuel Parr, to whom Field was something of a Boswell, called 'a dwarf in stature but a giant in literature' ('The Inquirer'). Some of Field's published works grew out of the boarding-school he long maintained at Leam, where he lived, among them a textbook on the use of globes (1798; 7th edn, 1829) and a catechetical history of the four gospels and the book of 'Acts', with references to the scriptures in place of answers; this was first published in 1816 and was widely reprinted and admired across denominational boundaries. His principal works were his 'Memoirs of... Samuel Parr' (1828), highly praised by Parr's modern biographer (Derry, xv), and 'An Historical and Descriptive Account of the Town and Castle of Warwick and... Leamington', published anonymously in 1815; a modern editor of the work, Philip Styles, praised it for its depiction of a town undergoing profound economic and social transformation and for the Romantic sensibility of its topographical guidance. 
Field died in Newbold Road, South Leamington, on 17 August 1851. He was buried on 22 August in a vault near the north front of the chapel in Warwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 9398


Fielden, John (1784-1849), industrialist and politician, was born on 17 January 1784 at home at Laneside, Todmorden, Lancashire, the third of the eight children of Joshua Fielden (1748-1811), tenant farmer and clothier, and his wife, Jennifer (Jenny) Greenwood (1749-1825). He had no formal schooling. From a very early age he worked in his father's spinning mills and accompanied him on weekly trips to Manchester, 20 miles away, to exchange yarn and calico for raw cotton. When his father retired in 1803, John, though the third brother, assumed the leading role in the firm and directed its growth, as Fielden Brothers, into one of the largest cotton-manufacturing concerns in the country. In 1811 he married Ann Grindrod (died 1831), daughter of a Rochdale grocer, and moved with her into Dawson Weir, a modest house in the Rochdale Road in Todmorden, opposite Waterside, the largest of Fielden Brothers' mills. Together they had eight children, three sons, including the cotton manufacturer and politician Joshua Fielden, and five daughters, one of whom died in infancy. 
Both Fielden's parents were Quakers and he was raised in the Society of Friends. But in 1801 his interest in Sunday school teaching led him to join first the Methodists, and then the Methodist Unitarians, a small Pennine sect led by Joseph Cooke that tried to combine Methodist piety with Unitarian rationalism. Fielden built and owned the first Unitarian chapel in Todmorden, and he attended regularly, serving as superintendent of the Sunday school, where he had a reputation for 'severe but wholesome discipline' (Law, 54). Though never ostentatiously so, he was a deeply religious man, equally committed to worship, prayer, and scripture. His most consistent reading was the 'Bible'. 
After business, family, and faith, politics was from an early age Fielden's main interest. His father was a tory, but Fielden grew up in the blissful dawn of the French Revolution and soon became, his father complained, 'as arrant [a] Jacobin as any in the Kingdom' (Weaver, 23). An avid reader of Thomas Paine and William Cobbett, he had a particular interest in their 'currency crotchets', as critics called them -- particularly their opposition to paper money -- and in their radical prescriptions to reduce government expenditure in the face of an ever-swelling national debt. In 1816 Fielden supported the Manchester merchant Nathaniel Gould in his campaign for factory reform. He was an early and outspoken advocate of a minimum wage for hand-loom weavers. Though not especially democratic in his dealings with his own workers, he believed in democracy in the abstract, and was a founding member of the Manchester Political Union in 1830. In 1832 he agreed to stand alongside Cobbett for the new parliamentary borough of Oldham, and was easily returned at the head of the poll. His maiden speech was as the seconder of Cobbett's amendment to the address, and he also seconded Cobbett's famous motion to remove Robert Peel from the privy council. 'So long as I sit in Parliament', he had promised his constituents, 'Mr Cobbett's measures shall not want a supporter' (Weaver, 66). In this he proved as good as his word. 
But Fielden was not otherwise an impressive or effective MP. His voice was weak, he spoke in a thick provincial accent that few members understood, and his thoughts seldom ranged beyond the uninspiring realm of industrial statistics. Until 1846, when he assumed parliamentary sponsorship of the 'Ten Hours Bill', his importance to popular politics lay in his influence out of doors. In 1833 he joined with Robert Owen in a short-lived effort to achieve an eight-hour working day by way of a general strike. A year later he organized a petitioning campaign among hand-loom weavers that led to the appointment of a committee of inquiry under Sir John Maxwell. Fielden was the author of the minimum-wage legislation that Maxwell introduced in parliament in 1835. When it failed, he joined Richard Oastler and Joseph Rayner Stephens in leading an increasingly militant factory movement in the north. In 'The Curse of the Factory System' (1836), the most substantial and influential of his several political pamphlets, he argued that a shorter working day would serve the interests of owners and employees by stemming over-production and restoring a healthy level of demand for cotton goods. It was a familiar argument, but that it came in this case from a leading textile master gave it a public credibility that it would otherwise have lacked. 
Like many factory reformers, Fielden was irreconcilably hostile to the new poor law, and when the government attempted to introduce it in the north, he helped orchestrate a furious campaign of resistance. Thanks to his and his children's influence, Todmorden would see no workhouse until 1878. A firm believer in manhood suffrage, Fielden addressed several Chartist demonstrations in 1838 and 1839. In June 1839 he helped Thomas Attwood present the Chartist national petition to parliament. His main interest thereafter was in factory reform. He was a strong supporter of Lord Ashley's unsuccessful 'Ten Hours Bill' in 1844. On Ashley's temporary withdrawal from the House of Commons in January 1846, the bill was entrusted to him and, after one defeat on 29 April 1846, he carried the crucial second reading on 10 February 1847. After an easy passage through the House of Lords, the 'Ten Hours Act' received the royal assent on 8 June 1847. More than the great moment of Fielden's life, it was the turning point of an age, the first significant admission of governmental responsibility for the welfare of the working poor. 
Fielden lost his seat at the general election of 1847, largely because he insisted on standing alongside the unpopular J. M. Cobbett (William Cobbett's son and his own prospective son-in-law). He died of unknown causes at Skeynes Park, his country estate at Edenbridge in Kent, on 29 May 1849, survived by six of his children and his second wife, Elizabeth Dearden of Halifax, whom he had married in 1833 or 1834. He was buried on 4 June 1849 at the Unitarian chapel, Todmorden. 'History for the most part ignores him' wrote G. D. H. Cole of this man, whose simplicity and integrity of character earned him the sobriquet of Honest John Fielden. 'Yet he, if anyone, for faithfulness, honesty, and persistence in well-doing deserves to be remembered among the people' (Cole, 238). 


@@@@@


doc= 9399


Fielding, (Anthony Vandyke) Copley (1787-1855), watercolour painter, the third and best-known of the five sons of Nathan Theodore Fielding (1746/7-1819) and Elizabeth (Betty) Baker or Barker (died 'c'.1806/7), was born near Sowerby Bridge, Yorkshire, on 22 November 1787. Although he is said to have been named after his father's friend the history painter John Singleton Copley, there is no obvious evidence for such a friendship at that time, and Copley, the name by which he was generally known, was also the name of the neighbouring hamlet to Sowerby. Fielding's father was a peripatetic portrait and landscape painter, and the family moved to Acton, where Copley attended a school. He and his brother Frederick ['see 'Fielding, Felix Ferdinand Frederick Raffael, 'under' Fielding, Newton Smith Limbird] were later employed as engrossing clerks in the enrolment office of the court of chancery. About 1804, after periods at Durham and London, the Fieldings settled in the Lake District, first at Ambleside, where a neighbour at Troutbeck was the landscape painter Julius Caesar Ibbetson, and later at Keswick. By this time Nathan Fielding was teaching his children to paint by copying his own landscapes. The Fieldings were also noted for practical jokes, as when they diverted a picturesque waterfall just before the arrival of a party of tourists. Mrs Fielding died about 1806, and after a stay in Manchester Copley went to Liverpool with his father in 1807. 
The following year Fielding toured north Wales and visited London, where he settled in 1809, lodging in Wells Street. According to Cornelius Varley he 'came to town with indifferent drawings, and received most free instruction and advice as a friend' (Royal Watercolour Society archives, J.97) from the ever-generous John Varley, living near by in Broad Street, Golden Square. This understates Fielding's talent, and by January 1810 he had absorbed enough to be elected associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours. That summer he visited his brothers Theodore Fielding at Penrith and Frederick at Carlisle, and toured the borders, while in 1811 he revisited Liverpool and north Wales. Although he became the most eminent of the brothers, his career was the least eventful, and despite family connections with Paris (his brothers established an atelier in the place Dauphine), he never ventured to the continent. This may have been due to the poor health of his wife, Susannah (died 1856), daughter of Zachariah Gisborne of Ramsgate and sister of John Varley's wife, and also the illness of their first daughter. The couple married on 19 December 1813 at St Pancras parish church, and in 1815 they took Mrs Siddons's old house in Judge's Walk, Hampstead, but two years later the doctors decreed that sea air was necessary for their daughter, and they settled at Sandgate. Later they moved to Brighton, and finally to Worthing. Mrs Fielding is described by the historian of the Old Watercolour Society, J. L. Roget, as 'a lady whose high principles, pious feeling, and sound judgement, with which were united a refined taste and some literary acquirements, enabled her to become a main support to her husband during the rest of his life' (Roget, 1.328). Gisborne's third daughter, Emma, married Muzio Clementi (1752-1832), the pianist and composer admired by Beethoven but not Mozart. In 1821 Fielding's sister Cleobulina Amelia married Henry Willey Reveley (died 1875), son of Willey Reveley the architect (1760-1799), whose widow Maria (the friend of Shelley) had married Susannah's brother John. As she reported to Mary Shelley, Maria Gisborne was not impressed by artistic London: 'since we have been in England it has never been our fate to pass an agreeable evening... Clementi is at least a century behind hand; the Fieldings are good, but nothing can be less intellectual or more insipid; Varley is mad; Cristall quaint and quizzical... (letter of 17 May 1822, 'The Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', ed. B.T. Bennett, 1980-88, 86)' Fielding was elected a full member of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1811, serving as treasurer in 1813 and secretary on several occasions thereafter. In 1817 he bought the house at 26 Newman Street which was to be the London base of the family business for the next thirty years. At various times the brothers Theodore, Thales Fielding, and Newton Fielding taught private pupils and apprentices there, including William Callow and Charles Bentley. John Ruskin took lessons from Copley, commenting, 'I know not whether Papa or I most enjoyed the six hours in Newman Street, my father's intense delight in Fielding's work making it a real pleasure to the painter that he should stay chatting while I had my lesson' ('Works', 35.214); despite this, Fielding did manage to teach his pupil. Fielding produced occasional oil paintings, which he exhibited at the Royal Academy and the British Institution, but almost all his exhibited watercolours were shown at the Society of Painters in Water Colours, 1748 in all. A later commentator argued that 'probably no member of the Society was ever held in greater affection and respect by his colleagues' (Smith, 14), and Fielding's life was largely devoted to the society, especially after his election as deputy president in 1823 and president in 1831. He was fitted for the position, his colleagues felt, 'not only by his genial disposition and painstaking habits, but by his courtly manners and a more than ordinary share of social tact' (Roget, 2.79). 
Fielding's works, whether northern or Welsh mountain and moorland views, marine subjects or studies of the South Downs and cliffs, were immensely popular with collectors and the public, although critics then and subsequently have usually qualified their praise. Roget quoted a gibe that Fielding 'painted but one sea, one moor, one down, one lake, one misty gleam' (Roget, 2.77) and in the 1960s Hardie noted that 'in after years his art became facile, dextrous, but not always sincere' (Hardie, 225). Even Ruskin, a lifelong admirer, had reservations: 'In his down scenes and moorland showers he produced some of the most perfect and faultless passages of mist and rain cloud which art has ever seen... Had he painted five rather than five hundred such, and gone on to other sources of beauty, he might, there can be little doubt, have been one of our greatest artists. ('Works', 1.245)' Fielding's prolific output was noted by David Cox, who referring to the Old Watercolour Society's exhibition in a letter of 1846 sounded a slightly sour note: 'I have at present sold only two 10gn drawings... Fielding has sent more than 40 drawings, some large, and a great number appear to be sold' (Hall, 157-8). In his 'Modern Painters' Ruskin observed a kinship to Turner's method of 'driving the eye into the distance by the use of brown moorland foregrounds' created with 'wet broad sweeps of the brush' ('Works', 1.185). A later commentator noted: 'His mannerisms include the dragging of the brush to give an idea of distance and the effect of sunlight through mist, which cleverly disguises the lack of more original ideas' (Mallalieu, 'Watercolour artists'). 
It should not be forgotten, however, that although Fielding's work became formulaic, when new those formulae had a powerful effect. In the 1824 English salon which was the sensation of the Paris art world, Fielding shone along with Constable and Richard Parkes Bonington. For the artist Paul Huet, his exhibits were full of poetry, but they also conveyed the impression of truth ('Paul Huet', 95), while the critic Auguste Jal feared that the merits of Thales and Copley Fielding would so turn the heads of public and dealers that 'we shall be inundated with stupid imitations' (Jal, 417-18). In fact, Fielding's strengths -- tact, and the arts of pleasing -- were also his weaknesses. Ruskin reminisced of visits to the Old Watercolour Society's exhibitions to discuss: 'the unimposing merits of the favourites, from whose pencils we knew precisely what to expect, and by whom we were never either disappointed or surprised. Copley Fielding used to paint fishing boats for us, in a fresh breeze, 'Off Dover,' 'Off Ramsgate,' 'Off the Needles' -- off everywhere on the South Coast where anyone had been last autumn, but we were always pleasantly within sight of land, and never saw so much as a gun fired in distress. ('Works', 14.389)' Later Hardie commented that Fielding was a good example of those painters who supplied what their patrons demanded but in whose 'early work and unexhibited sketches made for their own satisfaction... we find true art and genuine emotion instead of mechanical formula' (Hardie, 2.223-8). 
Fielding's daughter Susanna Henrietta died in 1847, and he himself on 3 March 1855, at his home, 5 Park Crescent, Worthing, of a disease of the bladder; he was buried in Hove, probably on 10 March. His wife followed on 15 December 1856, and their surviving daughter, Emma, on 12 January 1867. There are examples of his work in most major British public collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 9400


Fielding, Henry (1707-1754), author and magistrate, was born on 22 April 1707 at Sharpham Park, near Glastonbury, Somerset, the eldest of the seven children of Colonel Edmund Fielding (1680-1741), a veteran of Marlborough's wars who would rise to the rank of lieutenant-general, and Sarah Gould ('bap'. 1682, died 1718), daughter of Sir Henry Gould (1643/4-1710), judge of the king's bench, and his wife, Sarah ('c'.1654-1733), daughter of Richard Davidge, a wealthy London merchant with property in the west country, whose estate at Sharpham she inherited. On his father's side Fielding was related to the earls of Denbigh and Desmond who, by means of certain papers forged by Basil Fielding ('c'.1608-1675), the second earl of Denbigh, claimed descent from the Habsburgs of Germany -- a connection that enabled Fielding to use as his seal the imperial eagle of Austria. His grandfather the eminent latitudinarian divine Dr John Fielding ('c'.1650-1698), prebendary of Salisbury and archdeacon of Dorset, was first to establish the family in the west country; and through John's brother William, third earl (1640-1685), Fielding was second cousin to the earl's granddaughter, the bluestocking Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who remained his friend and counsellor. On his mother's side his uncle Davidge Gould ('c'.1684-1765), who inherited Sharpham on Sir Henry's death, was himself a prominent lawyer of the Middle Temple and would in due course expedite Fielding's admission to the bar. 
Although Sarah married Edmund against her parents' wishes, Sir Henry, a month before Fielding was born, drew up a new will leaving $3000 towards the purchase of an estate for 'the sole and separate use' of his daughter and her children, Edmund being explicitly excluded from the arrangement (Battestin and Battestin, 'Life', 12); in the event, the cost of the handsome farm which, shortly before his death in the spring of 1710, Sir Henry acquired for Sarah at East Stour, Dorset, was $4750, more than half again the sum provided for. The family, which by then included Fielding's sisters Catharine (1708-1750) and Ursula (1709-1750), were soon settled at East Stour. There Sarah gave birth to four more children: Sarah Fielding (1710-1768), the novelist and translator of Xenophon's 'Memoirs of Socrates', Anne (1713-1716), who died in infancy, Beatrice (1714-1751), and Edmund ('b'. 1716, died after 1755), who would follow his father into the army. After their mother's death in April 1718 the property was held in trust for Fielding and his siblings until, after Edmund came of age, they sold it in 1739. None of the sisters married, and only Sarah, Fielding's favourite, outlived him; the others, who were living together at Turnham Green, Middlesex, died within a few months of each other in 1750-51 and were buried at St Paul's, Hammersmith. 
His duties as colonel of a regiment, and his penchant for the expensive pleasures of London, meant that Fielding's father was, as one of his creditors complained, 'frequently from home', leaving his sons and the girls to be raised by their mother and the female servants of the household (Battestin and Battestin, 'Life', 16). Fielding may have learned a measure of discipline from the neighbouring curate, John Oliver, who visited the farm two or three times a week to teach him Latin: a man he seems to have remembered in the good clergyman who serves as his spokesman in 'Shamela' (1741). But as a boy he was, in his father's words, 'headstrong and undutiful' (ibid., 33); and this behaviour grew worse when, soon after his mother died in April 1718, a week before his eleventh birthday, Edmund left the family in the care of Lady Gould's sister, Mrs Cottington, and went to London to court a new wife: Anne Rapha, a widow and a Roman Catholic with children of her own. In autumn of the following year Colonel Fielding sent his son to Eton College and committed the girls and his infant son to the care of their grandmother in Salisbury; a year later, having suffered financially in the crash of the South Sea stocks, he sold a large part of the farm at East Stour, which was his children's inheritance. Incensed at the insult to her daughter's memory and concerned that their stepmother would raise the children as papists, Lady Gould brought an action against Edmund in chancery to establish her right to custody of the children and the children's right to what was left of the farm. The records of this case, in which servants and relatives on both sides testified, provide a vivid and at times disturbing impression of the enmity that poisoned the atmosphere in the household at this time, exacerbating the boy's frowardness. In May 1722 the lord chancellor gave judgment against Fielding's father on every count: Edmund lost all rights to the East Stour farm; the girls were to continue at Mary Rookes's boarding-school at Salisbury, and Fielding was to continue at Eton, spending his holidays with Lady Gould. 
Fielding remembered Eton chiefly for the blood he sacrificed there at Learning's 'birchen Altar', as he put it in 'Tom Jones' (bk 13, chap. 1). The discipline he received, and may be thought to have needed, was probably the cause of his running away from school in the spring of 1721 to the solace of his grandmother at Salisbury. According to Horace Walpole, when he returned to school on this or another occasion the excuse he gave for neglecting his lessons was 'that he had been writing a Comedy, in which he had drawn the characters of his Father and Family' -- a tantalizing piece of juvenilia now lost (Battestin and Battestin, 'Life', 36). Despite such delinquencies Eton provided Fielding with a sound education in the classical languages and literature, and it encouraged in him an appetite for learning that informed his writing. And there, too, he began important friendships with George Lyttelton, William Pitt, and Sir Charles Hanbury Williams among others. 
By the time he finished at Eton in 1724 Fielding's essential character and physical appearance as remarked by his contemporaries had been formed. He was, as Arthur Murphy, his first biographer, recalled, tall in stature ('rising above six feet') and powerfully built (Murphy, 47). As his friend James Harris remembered him -- and as the picture of him by Hogarth and another attributed to Reynolds confirm -- he was 'not handsome' (Battestin and Battestin, 'Life', 48): he was himself given to joking about his length of nose and chin. There was about him, however, a vivacity of manner, a personal magnetism that his friends found attractive. What struck Harris in particular were the eyes, 'peculiarly penetrating and quick', that enlivened Fielding's aspect 'during the Sallies of Wit and anger' (Harris, 305). By nature he was a sociable man and his conversation dazzled: Lyttelton, who knew them all, declared to James Beattie that Fielding 'had more wit and humour' than Swift, Pope, and the other wits of his time put together (Beattie, 571n.). Harris emphasized as well Fielding's passionate temperament: 'his Passions' were 'vehement in every kind' (Harris, 306). His appetites -- for sex, for good food and drink, for snuff -- were strong and he indulged them. Yet he was no boor: he could lead a minuet in the assembly room at Bath, and he enjoyed the music of Handel. Indeed, he set forth at length in his 'Essay on conversation' a definition of what constitutes good breeding in social intercourse that strikes one today as sounder than the polite maxims of Lord Chesterfield. 
There was, however, nothing obviously polite about a romantic episode of these early years. For some months in the late summer and autumn of 1725 Fielding was at Lyme Regis, Dorset, pursuing a pretty heiress, his cousin Sarah Andrew, a girl of fifteen who was the ward of her uncle Andrew Tucker. The court rolls of Lyme record Fielding's threatening to thrash Sarah's guardian who, it appears, had intervened to prevent his abducting the girl on her way to church. Before he fled the town on 15 November, Fielding posted a notice declaring 'to all the World' that Tucker and his son were 'Clowns, and Cowards' (Battestin and Battestin, 'Life', 51). 
Fielding, who took pride in printing 'esq.' after his name on title-pages, had expectations of living like a gentleman. Nobility were his near relatives and by 1727 his father had risen to the rank of brigadier-general. But in eight years of marriage to his second wife, who died that year, Edmund had fathered six more children, all sons (among them Fielding's favourite, John, who was blinded at the age of nineteen by the incompetence of a surgeon); and when the demands of living in a style suited to his rank were added to his inveterate prodigality and the expense of maintaining a large family, there was little left for his eldest son and heir. Murphy states that Fielding was promised an allowance of $200 a year, which Fielding quipped, 'any body might pay that would' (Murphy, 10). He would have to choose, he told Lady Mary, between being 'a Hackney Writer or a Hackney Coachman' ('Complete Letters', 3.66). He had to write for a living, and he began by writing poems and plays. 
Fielding's first published work, a pair of poems on the occasions of George II's coronation and birthday, appeared together in November 1727; they are known today only through the booksellers' advertisements. 'The Masquerade', a verse satire in hudibrastics, was published in January 1728 and is his earliest extant work. In February, Fielding's career as dramatist began auspiciously enough when, as an unknown author in his twentieth year, his first play, the comedy 'Love in Several Masques', was staged by Cibber at Drury Lane -- an extraordinary favour due probably to the influence of Lady Mary, to whom Fielding dedicated the published version. Competing for audiences with Gay's 'Beggar's Opera', which was enjoying its highly successful first run at Lincoln's Inn Fields, Fielding's comedy sank without a trace after four nights. In March 1728 he left England for some months to study literature at the University of Leiden, in the Netherlands, and to see something of Europe. When he returned to London in January 1730 he had to carry his next play, 'The Temple Beau', to Goodman's Fields, a new playhouse with a much inferior company of actors located in the City. 
The comedy was nevertheless well received; Fielding's career as dramatist had begun in earnest. His proper element as a playwright, however, was not the five-act comedy but the 'irregular' modes of farce and satire and ballad opera that allowed him licence to experiment with forms and to exploit his talent as a songwriter. In March 1730 at the Little Haymarket Theatre he had his first popular success with 'The Author's Farce'; its third act, entitled 'The Pleasures of the Town', was played by actors who impersonated puppets representing well-known personalities of the day. To this a month later he added as an afterpiece 'Tom Thumb: a Tragedy', a burlesque of heroic drama which, the following year, he improved and expanded as 'The Tragedy of Tragedies, or, The Life and Death of Tom Thumb the Great'. These and other 'irregular' plays yet to come he published under the pseudonym Scriblerus Secundus, declaring his literary kinship with the club of wits founded by Swift, Pope, and Gay. Over the next six years Fielding was, as R. D. Hume observes, 'the most dominant professional playwright in London since Dryden' (Hume, ix). Of the eight 'regular' comedies in which he meant to match the masters he most admired -- Jonson and Moliere, Congreve and Farquhar -- the best are 'Rape upon Rape, or, The Justice Caught in his Own Trap' (1730) (later renamed 'The Coffee-House Politician'), and 'The Modern Husband' (1732). Both plays are experiments in a kind of 'heroic' comedy which anticipates Shaw in the treatment of serious social themes. 'The Miser' (1733), a lively adaptation of Moliere's 'L'Avare', was by far Fielding's most successful play in this classic form; it held the stage for years to come. In the 'irregular' dramatic forms he was often reckless in his choice of subject. In June 1731 'The Grub-Street Opera', which ridiculed the royal family and the leaders of both political parties, was withdrawn at the Haymarket before it opened, almost certainly because of threats from the government. So high, however, was Fielding's reputation by this time that when he resumed writing for the stage six months later it was for Cibber again at Drury Lane. He remained there as house playwright for two lucrative years, producing in that time nine new plays as well as a revised version of 'The Author's Farce'. 
Fielding in his political relations during this period has been considered strictly an opposition writer who targeted the ministry of Sir Robert Walpole. Published either anonymously or pseudonymously in the anti-ministerial papers 'Mist's ('later' Fog's) Weekly Journal' and 'The Craftsman' in 1728 and 1730, a few incidental pieces ridiculing Walpole have been cogently attributed to Fielding; but except for 'The Grub-Street Opera' there is little political content in Fielding's other productions of this time. And it is clear that under the influence of Lady Mary, who was Walpole's friend, Fielding sought the prime minister's patronage: in 1729-30 he wrote an unfinished burlesque of Pope's 'Dunciad' satirizing the minister's enemies; and in 1732 he dedicated the published version of 'The Modern Husband' to Walpole in a fulsome manner. That overture elicited from the anti-ministerial authors of the 'Grub-Street Journal' an abusive series of personal attacks on Fielding -- attacks which were answered in turn by his friends, the ministerial writers James Ralph in the 'Weekly Register' and Thomas Cooke in 'The Comedian'. Fielding's association with Ralph and Cooke, both of whom were freethinkers in religion, squares as well with his own flirtation with deism at this time, an attitude apparent in 'Pasquin' (1736) in the characterization of Firebrand, the hypocritical priest who murders Common Sense. By the time he began writing 'The Champion' at the end of the decade, however, Fielding's disillusionment with deism was complete and is clearly apparent in 'Joseph Andrews' (1742, bk 3, chap. 3), where Wilson repudiates the 'Rule of Right-men' whose heterodox notions resemble those of Ralph and Cooke. 
In January 1734 a dispute between actors and management ended Fielding's profitable association with Drury Lane. On the eve of the general election he took 'Don Quixote in England' to the Haymarket, dedicating the published version to Chesterfield, leader of the opposition party which now included Fielding's friend and patron Lyttelton, with whose political interests, whether in or out of power, he usually identified from this time forward. From March 1734 to September 1739 he promoted those interests in essays published anonymously in 'The Craftsman' and less often in 'Common Sense', the other principal journal of the opposition. 
On 28 November 1734, at Charlcombe near Bath, Fielding married Charlotte Cradock (died 1744) of Salisbury, 'one', he later declared in the 'Preface' to the 'Miscellanies' (1743), 'from whom I draw all the solid Comfort of my Life'. According to Murphy, she brought Fielding a dowry of $1500. In the ten years of their union she bore five children: Charlotte (1736-1742), Penelope (died 1740), Catharine (died 1743), Henry (1741-1750), and Henrietta Eleanor, called Harriet (1743-1766). Charlotte died in November 1744; her 'Idea' is preserved in the heroines of Fielding's novels, Sophia Western (Fielding, 'Tom Jones', bk 4, chap. 2) and Amelia Booth. 
For two seasons in 1736 and 1737 Fielding managed and wrote for his own company of comedians at the Haymarket. In 'Pasquin' and 'The Historical Register', two of his most successful plays, he emulated the 'old comedy' of Aristophanes in satires of a markedly personal and topical cast, ridiculing the follies of the town and targeting in particular the corruption and incompetence of Walpole's ministry. His popularity at this time was such that he was entertaining thoughts of building his own theatre when Walpole acted to silence him. In June 1737 parliament passed the 'Theatrical Licensing Act', which limited theatrical performances to Drury Lane, Covent Garden, and the Royal Opera House, and imposed censorship of the stage. His career as dramatist at an end, Fielding in November 1737 entered the Middle Temple to begin preparing for the bar, to which he was admitted in June 1740. 
Fielding continued his clandestine association with 'The Craftsman' -- and under the name Mum Budget published in 'Common Sense' (13 May 1738) an arch essay recommending the wisdom of keeping silent in Walpole's England. As far as the public was aware, however, he had published nothing for two and a half years when, in November 1739, he reappeared as Capt. Hercules Vinegar, author of 'The Champion'. This periodical, in which he was assisted by Ralph, mixed humour with moral, social, and, most particularly, with political commentary promoting the opposition's campaign against Walpole; his active involvement with the journal ceased about December 1740. A clear sign of his financial distress during these months, when he was being hounded in the courts by creditors, is his willingness to undertake for his bookseller John Nourse the onerous task of translating the voluminous 'Military History of Charles XII, King of Sweden' from Gustaf Adlerfelt's French original -- a labour of ten months before the work was published in October 1740. This was followed in January 1741 by a trio of publications: namely, 'Of True Greatness', a verse epistle dedicated to his patron George Bubb Dodington on a favourite motif of Fielding's moral thought; the 'Vernoniad', a mock-heroic satire of Walpole's ineffectual prosecution of the war with Spain after Admiral Vernon's early victory at Porto Bello; and the initial numbers of the 'History of Our Own Times', a short-lived magazine attributed to Fielding in collaboration with his friend the Revd William Young, an accomplished classical scholar who would serve as the model for Fielding's most memorable character, Parson Abraham Adams. The magazine ended in March when Fielding was for a fortnight confined for debt in a bailiff's sponging house; he was freed on securities posted by his peruke maker and his sister Catharine, who had recently inherited the estate of her godmother, Mrs Cottington. There would be, however, no help from his father. In November 1740 Edmund Fielding, now a lieutenant-general, had been himself committed for debt to the Fleet prison where, in March 1741 as his son fretted in confinement, he married his fourth wife, a woman said to be his servant. If, as is likely, Fielding is the author of the anti-ministerial pamphlet 'The Crisis: a Sermon' published in April, a bitter passage in that work denouncing the irresponsibility of fathers who squander their patrimony and entail beggary on their children attests to his anger at what he considered Edmund's unconscionable self-indulgence. In June, aged sixty-one, General Fielding died at his lodgings in the rules of the prison. 
One production of this troubled season marked the first step towards a new literary career which would bring Fielding lasting fame: this was 'An Apology for the Life of Mrs Shamela Andrews', published on 2 April 1741, a hilarious parody of the epistolary form and naive moralism of Samuel Richardson's popular first novel, 'Pamela, or, Virtue Rewarded'. Fielding's little book, the first of a spate of so-called 'anti-Pamelas', was well received among sophisticated readers; and it gave him the idea of building on Richardson's novel in a more ambitious and constructive way. In the autumn he fleshed out an alternative conception of the art of fiction: 'Written', as the title-page declares, 'in Imitation of The 'Manner' of CERVANTES, Author of 'Don Quixote'', 'Joseph Andrews' is the first comic novel in English -- a new species of writing that Fielding in his 'Preface' called 'a comic Epic-Poem in Prose'. 
The latter part of 1741 was also remarkable for a surprising change of direction in Fielding's political writing. As it became apparent in this election year that Walpole's long tenure as prime minister was coming to an end, the 'patriots' of the opposition, notably Pulteney in the Commons and Carteret in the Lords, began scrambling for places; at a time when Fielding was desperately in need of money, the friends whose cause he had supported for more than seven years saw less need of his services. After April 1741 he not only wrote nothing on their behalf, but in 'The Opposition: a Vision' (December) portrayed them as self-serving hypocrites while representing the prime minister as the wise and genial leader of the nation. Walpole, whose money Fielding in 'The Champion' (4 October 1740) had admitted taking in exchange for suppressing a book (perhaps an ur-version of 'Jonathan Wild'), and who answered generously his call for subscribers to the 'Miscellanies' in the winter of 1741-2, appears to have been his benefactor at this time. These were also the months when he successfully courted two of the most important patrons of his life: James Harris of Salisbury, with whom he initiated a rare personal correspondence in September 1741, and Ralph Allen of Bath, at whose house a month or so later he was entertained in the company of Pope and Warburton. 
On 22 February 1742 Fielding's long association with his friend the Scots bookseller Andrew Millar began with the publication of 'Joseph Andrews'. In April he formally assigned to Millar, for the generous payment of $199 6's'., the copyright to the novel, and to two other minor works: namely, 'A Full Vindication of the Dutchess Dowager of Marlborough', a pamphlet defending the character of the widow of his hero, victor of the War of the Spanish Succession; and 'Miss Lucy in Town', a farce in which he may have collaborated with David Garrick in the actor's brilliant first season at Drury Lane. From this time forward Millar, whom Samuel Johnson credited with having 'raised the price of literature', would publish most of Fielding's major works. 
In February, too, Walpole's twenty-one-year tenure as prime minister came to an end, and he was elevated to the House of Lords as earl of Orford. His former adversaries now dropped the mask of selfless patriotism and followed him there, Pulteney as earl of Bath, Lord Carteret with the augmented title of Earl Granville. Fielding expressed his contempt for their hypocrisy in a number of passages inserted that year in 'Joseph Andrews' (bk 2, chap. 10), in the translation of Aristophanes' 'Plutus, the God of Riches' (act 2, scene 5, n.) written in collaboration with William Young, and in several pieces he was preparing for the 'Miscellanies', notably in 'A Journey from this World to the Next' (bk 1, chaps. 3, 7, 23) and 'Jonathan Wild' (bk 2, chap. 12). That novel, an ironic celebration of 'greatness' as the distinguishing characteristic of its eponymous hero, may have begun as a satire of Walpole, the most notorious 'great man' of his time, whom opposition writers had figured as Wild; but in revision Fielding was at pains to generalize his theme. Indeed, at the end of his life his opinion of Walpole was wholly favourable: in 'The Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon' (18 July) he is 'one of the best of men and of ministers'. 
The 'Miscellanies', published in three volumes in April 1743, included two works already published that year: 'Some papers proper to be read before the R[oya]l Society, concerning the terrestrial chrysipus, golden-foot or guinea', a satire of the miser Peter Walter written in parody of the 'Philosophical Transactions', and 'The Wedding-Day', a comedy drafted by Fielding at the beginning of his career but first acted in February 1743 at Drury Lane with Garrick in the role of Millamour. Volume 1 of the collection comprises most, but not all, of Fielding's poetry, including the verse epistles 'Of True Greatness', addressed to Dodington; 'Of Good-Nature', a concept fundamental to Fielding's moral thought, addressed to the duke of Richmond; 'Of Liberty', addressed to Lyttelton; and a burlesque version of Juvenal's misogynistic 'Sixth Satire' that, Fielding assured his readers, 'was originally sketched out before I was Twenty, and was all the Revenge taken by an injured Lover'. Among the prose pieces included in the volume are the essays 'On conversation', 'On the knowledge of the characters of men', and 'Of the remedy of affliction for the loss of our friends', a Christian stoic 'consolatio' written at his daughter's death in March 1742. The 427 subscribers whose names appear at the head of the volume -- others such as Allen and Pope subscribed anonymously -- brought Fielding, before expenses, more than 770 guineas, 'a pleasant sum', as H. K. Miller remarked in his edition, 'and one that satisfied Fielding's most 'urgent Motive' in publishing' the work (p. xlvii). 
The rest of that year and most of the next Fielding published nothing but a preface to the second edition of his sister Sarah's first novel, 'The Adventures of David Simple'. He continued to ride the western circuit in hopes of finding clients for his law practice, but he had little business: his name appears in the records of courts and assizes for the years 1743-7 (though these are incomplete) on just seven 'declarations of ejectment' pertaining to estates in the counties of Berkshire, Devon, Somerset, Hampshire, and Northamptonshire. These months are chiefly notable for the deepening of his friendship with James Harris, to whom he addressed letters from places such as Brompton, near Knightsbridge, and Twerton, near Bath -- places where he hoped Charlotte might recover her failing health. Harris helped him with what Fielding knew to be his 'lame' translation of Demosthenes' 'First Olynthiac' (in the 'Miscellanies'), dedicated to him a facetious 'History of Nobody', and offered his condolences when Charlotte died, possibly from consumption, in November 1744. Fielding buried her beside her mother and daughter in the chancel vault of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. Replying to Harris's letter on the occasion, Fielding called him 'the Man whom I esteem most of any person in this World' ('Correspondence', 42). 
There are good reasons why Fielding published so little during this period. In February 1745 he announced in the papers the imminent publication of a treatise in two volumes on crown law, entitled 'An institute of the pleas of the crown' -- a work based, it was rumoured, on the manuscript notes of his grandfather Sir Henry Gould. The announcement was, to say the least, optimistic as the treatise was never published. It may have served a purpose, however, by boosting Sir Charles Hanbury Williams's confidence in his legal acumen: in June Hanbury Williams employed Fielding to defend him in a suit brought by the directors of the Italian Opera against the subscribers. 
About this time Fielding, at the instance of Lyttelton, began composing his masterpiece 'Tom Jones', originally entitled 'The Foundling'. More urgent matters, however, soon interrupted him. The Jacobite rising, which broke out in Scotland in the summer of 1745, prompted Fielding's friends in the government -- which now included Lyttelton, Dodington, and Chesterfield, and would soon also include Pitt -- to enlist his help in representing to the nation the gravity of the threat the rebels posed. In October he published within a fortnight three anti-Jacobitical pamphlets: namely, 'A Serious Address to the People of Great Britain', 'The History of the Present Rebellion in Scotland', and 'A Dialogue between the Devil, the Pope, and the Pretender'. On 5 November he began publishing with the same purpose the 'True Patriot', a weekly periodical he continued until 17 June 1746, by which time, the rebels having been defeated at Culloden on 16 April, the danger to the nation had passed. April also proved a propitious month for Fielding personally as it marked the beginning of his association with his most powerful patron, the duke of Bedford, first lord of the Admiralty and later secretary of state for the southern department in the Pelham ministry. Bedford, who was warden, appointed Fielding high steward of the New forest, a royal preserve; he retained this office -- which, though modest, was the most distinguished he held as a lawyer -- until December 1748 when, on his appointment to the Middlesex magistracy, Bedford required him to resign the patent. 
In the summer of 1746 Fielding remained in town for some weeks. In August he answered the complaint of the directors of the Italian Opera against Hanbury Williams, and witnessed the execution of the Jacobite lords at the Tower. When he resumed work on 'Tom Jones' he made the 'Forty-Five an integral part of the plot, altering the time scheme of the narrative so that Jones might demonstrate his loyalty to the Hanoverian establishment by joining a troop of the king's soldiers marching against the rebels. 
In September Fielding was at Bath when news broke of a sensational scandal at Glastonbury. Posing as a physician, one Mary Hamilton, a lesbian and transvestite, duped a young woman into marrying her and successfully carried off the deception for two months. When he returned to town Fielding published in November, anonymously, 'The Female Husband', a fictive account of the affair. In February of the following year he followed this tale of unnatural sexuality by publishing, again anonymously, a prose paraphrase of Ovid's 'Art of Love', 'Adapted', as the title-page promises, 'to the Present Time'. Fielding's uncharacteristically explicit preoccupation with erotic subjects during these winter months is puzzling, and perhaps a reflection of an embarrassing domestic situation then developing at Old Boswell Court, the comfortable house near the inns of court in which, since Charlotte's death, he and the children had been looked after by his sister Sarah and the cookmaid Mary Daniel. By now Fielding's sexual relationship with Mary may have begun; in May, certainly, she was pregnant with his child. Sarah meanwhile was finishing her second novel, this time preferring Richardson's epistolary form to her brother's narrative method. In April she published 'Familiar Letters between the Principal Characters in David Simple', to which Fielding contributed the preface and five of the letters (letters XL-XLIV). 
In June 1747 Fielding resumed his service as publicist for the ministry. As Pelham surprised the opposition by declaring a general election a year early, Fielding, supporting the ministry, published 'A dialogue between a gentleman of London, agent for two court candidates, and an honest alderman of the country party'. In December, under the ironic persona of John Trott-Plaid, he began another periodical, the 'Jacobite's Journal', ridiculing the tory opposition as adherents of the Pretender; he continued publishing the paper every Saturday until 5 November 1748. In the literary department called 'The court of criticism' he reviewed favourably his friend Edward Moore's comedy 'The Foundling' (19 March 1748), James Thomson's 'Castle of Indolence' (4 June), and, of particular interest, Richardson's 'Clarissa'. When the instalments of his rival's masterpiece appeared in December 1747 and April 1748 Fielding warmly recommended the novel in the 'Journal' (2 January and 5 March); and after reading with admiration a pre-publication copy of the fifth volume, with its moving account of the rape, he praised Richardson's achievement still more effusively in a famous letter to him of 15 October. 
On 27 November 1747 at the City church of St Benet Paul's Wharf, Fielding, with his friend Lyttelton attending, married Mary Daniel (died 1802) in the sixth month of her pregnancy. About this time, presumably, Sarah left the house to join her sisters; in October 1748, certainly, all 'the sisterhood' were living together in Duke Street. To spare Mary further embarrassment Fielding rented a little house in Back Lane, Twickenham, from where on 25 February 1748 their son William was baptized in the church of St Mary the Virgin. William lived until 1820; the other children of the marriage were Mary Amelia ('b'. 1749, died in infancy), Sophia (1750- 'c'.1755/6), Louisa (1752-1753), and Allen (1754-1823). Fielding's enemies would not soon let him forget this indiscretion. Horace Walpole, his neighbour in Twickenham, published anonymously in the anti-ministerial journal 'Old England' (23 April 1748) a rude report that Mary had been denied admission to a box at the theatre because she was unfit to mingle with ladies; and Smollett in 'Peregrine Pickle' (1751, chap. 102), was equally insulting. In the spring, ignoring the mockery, Fielding and his new wife applied their different talents in a droll, and successful, attempt to revive for a few weeks his career as theatrical manager and comedian. From 28 March to 14 May Fielding in the guise of Madame de la Nash opened in Panton Street, the Haymarket, 'a large Break-Fasting Room' in which, for the price of a cup of coffee, tea, or chocolate, a polite audience was entertained with a satirical puppet-show reminiscent of act 3 of 'The Author's Farce' except that the actors now were literally Punch and Joan, who under Fielding's direction ridiculed the follies of the town. This amusing device to evade the constraints of the 'Licensing Act' embroiled Fielding in a satirical brouhaha with his rivals Theophilus Cibber at Covent Garden and the mimic Samuel Foote at the Haymarket. 
At this time Fielding, as high steward of the New forest, was more seriously involved in the most fully documented case of his career as a lawyer. The case, concerning the disputed claim of a powerful landholder of Hampshire to a parcel of the royal forest, is the subject of letters between Fielding, his deputy, and the duke of Bedford's steward, exchanged over a period of ten months. Fielding wished to regard the office he held as a sinecure; his deputy in Hampshire normally took care of business, and though small, the annual stipend of $5 was welcome. This case, however, demanded his attention, and he appears to have found it annoyingly complex. In July 1748 the lord chancellor signed the fiat appointing him to the commission of the peace for the city and liberty of Westminster, the first step in the process of his fully qualifying for the metropolitan magistracy, an office far better suited to his abilities. He began acting in the Westminster commission in November; in December he was established in the famous house in Bow Street, and the duke of Bedford enabled him to satisfy the property qualification for the crucially important magistracy of Middlesex. When he began acting in that commission on 13 January 1749 the way was clear for the admirable accomplishments of his five-year tenure as principal justice of the metropolis. 
In June 1748 Millar advanced Fielding $600 on 'Tom Jones', and by September Thomas Birch reported that three of the six volumes of Fielding's masterpiece were printed. Certain privileged readers who obtained pre-publication copies of the first two were warm in commending it. Lyttelton, who had urged Fielding to undertake the novel and read it in manuscript, was especially enthusiastic; in dedicating the book to him Fielding returned the favour, declaring that he had based the character of the benevolent Squire Allworthy on Lyttelton and Ralph Allen. But business and a severe attack of gout prevented him from finishing the work speedily, and public impatience to read it grew to such a pitch that the entire first edition of 2000 copies was bought up before the announced date of publication, 10 February 1749. Three further editions would be printed by September, bringing the total number of copies to 10,000, a figure attesting to the novel's great popularity. In addition to the generous advance he had made Fielding, Millar, as bank records show, paid him $825 over the last seven months of this year. Besides the income from his writing, of course, the magistracy brought him, by his own estimate, $300 annually. In these last years of his life he had plenty of money, but he never had enough. Reflecting on her cousin's imprudence, Lady Mary compared him to Richard Steele: 'They both agreed in wanting money in spite of all their Freinds', she remarked, 'and would have wanted it if their Hereditary Lands had been as extensive as their Imagination' ('Complete Letters', 3.88). 
In the 'Dedication' to 'Tom Jones' Fielding did not neglect to thank the duke of Bedford for the 'princely Benefactions' which enabled him fully to qualify for the magistracy. As court justice in Bow Street he served the Pelham ministry generally and protected Bedford's interests in the Covent Garden area in particular. But he also served the public with diligence, wisdom, and probity -- qualities rarely known among the notoriously corrupt and incompetent 'trading justices' of Westminster. Elected chairman of the sessions in March 1749, he addressed the grand jury in June on their responsibility as 'Censors of this Nation' to correct the manners of the people ('Enquiry', ed. Zirker, 29). To Lord Chancellor Hardwicke on 21 July he sent a copy of the 'Charge', enclosing with it the draft of a bill to reorganize and reform the police which he hoped parliament would enact. This document was never presented to parliament; but it clearly reveals how, after a few months in office, Fielding had not only identified the sources of disorder in the metropolis, but had determined means and methods of eradicating these evils. Those in power scorned the plan, but Fielding soon devised, and implemented, another. Selecting for their courage and integrity a group of constables or 'thief-takers' who acted together under the able leadership of Saunders Welch, Fielding formed the so-called 'Bow Street runners', who are today acknowledged by Scotland Yard as the first modern Metropolitan Police. Later that year he turned his attention to the bench itself, initiating an investigation that resulted in the dismissal of the corrupt justice Henry Broadhead -- an episode remembered at the beginning of 'Amelia', his last novel, which he began writing that year. Another theme of that novel is the extortionary practices of prison keepers; in 1752 Fielding took a step towards reforming that office as well by successfully recommending William Pentlow, one of the best of the 'runners', for the keepership of New prison. 
In November 1749 Fielding had an opportunity to fulfil the promise he made Bedford to 'completely serve the Government' in his capacity as magistrate ('Correspondence', 77), for the duke's brother-in-law, Viscount Trentham, was running for re-election as MP for Westminster against the anti-court candidate, Sir George Vandeput. At this time public sentiment ran strongly against the ministry for having refused to pardon one Bosavern Penlez, a young Cornishman who had been hanged a month earlier for taking part in riots that erupted in July against bawdy houses in the Strand. Fielding, who had quelled the disorders by reading the 'Riot Act' and summoning troops, attempted to justify his own conduct and that of the ministry by publishing 'A True State of the Case of Bosavern Penlez'. He was active as well in treating Trentham's supporters in the taverns, attending at the hustings to preserve order, and writing electioneering handbills and broadsheets, thousands of which were printed and circulated. The election was so vigorously, and improperly, contested that a scrutiny of the votes was called for; Fielding's presence in May, when the results of the scrutiny confirmed Trentham's election, helped prevent a disturbance. 
Except for the opening in February 1750 of the Universal Register Office -- a useful business venture founded by Fielding in collaboration with his half-brother John -- Fielding appears to have been wholly occupied this year with matters pertaining to the magistracy. He directed Welch and his constables to conduct raids against murderous gangs of street robbers and highwaymen, and against the gaming houses; but these were only the most spectacular among hundreds of cases brought before him and reported in the newspapers. So energetic was he in the execution of his office that he had become, according to one observer (the pseudonymous Dr Fitzpatrick), 'much the greatest Man in the three Kingdoms; at least, nobody else is talked of but he and 'G[arric]k'' (Battestin and Battestin, 'Life', 502). His friend Birch wrote to the son of the lord chancellor that these activities had so fatigued Fielding he was determined to resign the office. In May he tried to relieve himself of the exhausting demands of 'Justice Business', as he liked to call it; but he was disappointed in his hope to be appointed judge of the Marshalsea court. 
In the autumn Fielding wrote the most important of his social tracts, 'An Enquiry into the Causes of the Late Increase of Robbers', published in January 1751 and dedicated to the lord chancellor. Fielding was conservative in his social thought. He shared with his contemporaries in Britain, who remained unaffected by French radicalism until the latter decades of the century, a conviction that the stratified structure of the social order was divinely ordained; and he saw the commonwealth as a coherent organism, the body politic, whose 'Constitution' was not only its laws, but its 'Genius, Manners, and Habits'. Since the great, whose luxury was the source of the general decadence he perceived, were above the laws, he focused his attention on the working classes, who were meant to be the 'useful Members of the Society' but had become its scourges and parasites. He urged parliament to curtail 'expensive Diversions', such as masquerades and gaming, that tempted them from their work, and the gin shops that stupefied them; he pointed out defects in the laws pertaining to the poor, and examined the conditions that promoted criminal activity ('Enquiry', ed. Zirker, 66, 82, 77). By thus identifying areas in which specific reforms were needed, the 'Enquiry' had an important influence on the criminal legislation of 1751-2. Its concerns would be reflected in his last novel, published in December 1751: though the story of a troubled marriage, 'Amelia' may be considered the first novel of social protest and reform in English. 
In January 1752, partly as a vehicle for advertising the Universal Register Office and partly as a means of informing the public of matters pertaining to his activities as magistrate, Fielding launched the 'Covent-Garden Journal', the last and, with 'The Champion', the most entertaining of his periodicals: eschewing politics, the lead essays are given to literary, social, and moral comment. His attempt to promote sales by engaging in a facetious 'paper war' made enemies of John Hill, author of the 'London Daily Advertiser', and Smollett. In April, as a measure towards stemming the recent increase in violent crime, he published the monitory pamphlet 'Examples of the Interposition of Providence in the Detection and Punishment of Murder'. Soured by the continuing abuse of Hill and others, Fielding put an end to the journal on 25 November, promising his readers never 'to hold any further Correspondence with the gayer Muses' ('Covent-Garden Journal', ed. Goldgar, 380); it was a promise he kept. The practical functions the journal served in promoting the register office and publicizing his campaign against crime were now assumed by the 'Public Advertiser', a new paper in which he held shares. 
Encouraged by the prime minister, Fielding for more than a year had been preparing the last of his social tracts on a subject he addressed in the 'Enquiry'. Dedicated to Pelham, 'A Proposal for Making an Effectual Provision for the Poor' was published on 29 January 1753. Fielding there recommends the erection of a vast county workhouse in which the poor -- 5000 of them -- would be decently housed, learn a trade which they would be paid wages for practising, and be instructed in their religious duty to society. His aim was nothing less than the rehabilitation of an entire class of people who were at present idle, useless, and demoralized. But nothing came of it. In February he became involved in the sensational case of Elizabeth Canning, a servant girl who claimed to have been abducted and held against her will for four weeks before making her escape. Fielding, who examined her and those she accused, remained convinced she was telling the truth even after evidence was produced that she had perjured herself. Taking her side against her accusers Hill and the lord mayor, Sir Crisp Gascoyne, he published in March 'A Clear State of the Case of Elizabeth Canning'. She was eventually convicted of perjury and transported to America. 
For many months, though his health was in serious decline, Fielding had not spared himself the exacting labour of serving the public as magistrate and publicist. In the summer of 1753 he leased a handsome farm at Fordhook, Ealing, a few miles west of town, where he could find relief from the unpleasant business of Bow Street and the unwholesome air of Covent Garden. Until early in the new year he continued, with remarkable success, to direct a campaign against crime in the metropolis. But he was now in the advanced stages of 'dropsy', or rather cirrhosis of the liver: his skin jaundiced, his body emaciated, his abdomen grotesquely bloated with water that had to be 'tapped' at frequent intervals. Leaving 'Justice Business' to his brother John, who was now himself a magistrate, he retired to Fordhook. From there, accompanied by Mary, his daughter Harriet, and a few members of the household, he sailed for Portugal in the vain hope of recovering his health. He died at Junqueira, near Lisbon, on 8 October 1754, and was buried in Lisbon in the English cemetery, St George's Church, where in 1830 a handsome sarcophagus was erected in his honour. Mary lived on into the next century (she died in 1802). Fielding's account of his last days, 'The Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon', was published posthumously in February 1755. 
In his own time Fielding was famous -- as a playwright, a novelist, and, in his last years, as a magistrate. He was not, however, without enemies and detractors, as Walpole's suppression of his political satires and the slurs of Richardson and others upon his 'low' tastes and character attest. In the century and a half after his death Fielding continued to be admired as an author and public servant, but the aspersions on his character continued throughout the Victorian period. One welcome motive of Cross's important biography (1918) was to rescue Fielding from such prudery; but Cross succeeded in this only by liberal applications of varnish that for seventy years preserved the image of Fielding not only as a hero of letters and the law, which he was, but as a man without flaws, which he was not. Based on much evidence unknown to Cross -- or to Dudden in 1952, who followed Cross's track doggedly -- a more accurate and lifelike image of Fielding has emerged: he appears now not only as one who, as author and magistrate, exercised his extraordinary abilities to the immediate and future benefit of society, but also as the man he was: one with human passions and weaknesses that he owned and regretted. 
Though in 1967 'Lock up your Daughters', a musical version of 'Rape upon Rape', enjoyed some success, today Fielding's plays are largely forgotten; and certain feminist critics deplore what they regard as the unenlightened representation of women in his fiction. But the brilliance of 'Joseph Andrews' and 'Tom Jones' -- the two works that established the tradition of the comic novel in English -- continues to be appreciated: indeed, to Anthony Burgess, Fielding was, 'conceivably, England's greatest novelist' (Burgess). Published in 1985, 'The Later Adventures of Tom Jones' by Bob Coleman is a continuation of Fielding's masterpiece written in imitation of his style. Earlier, in 1963 the director Tony Richardson and the playwright John Osborne collaborated in producing a popular film of 'Tom Jones' starring Albert Finney; and in 1997 the novel was adapted for television in a five-hour series produced by the BBC. In 1976 Richardson made a less successful film of 'Joseph Andrews'. And in 1986-7 Fielding and his friend Hogarth were the principal characters in the Royal Shakespeare Company's production of Nick Dear's play 'The Art of Success'. 
Though he would no doubt have wondered at the compliment, in the twentieth century Fielding was lauded by Marxists of the eastern bloc as an advocate of social reforms that anticipated the Russian Revolution; and in the People's Republic of China he remains the favourite eighteenth-century English novelist. Less surprisingly, he continues to be honoured at New Scotland Yard as the founder of the Metropolitan Police. 


@@@@@


doc= 9401


Fielding, Henry Borron (1805-1851), botanist, was born on 17 January 1805 at Garstang, Lancashire, the fifth child and only son of Henry Fielding (1755/6-1816) of Myerscough House, near Garstang, and his wife, Susanna. His father was head of Henry Fielding, Brothers, & Co., calico printers, of Catterall, near Garstang, and a deputy lieutenant for Lancashire. Fielding's sensitive health made it difficult for him to pursue a career and a substantial inheritance permitted him to devote himself to the study of plants at his home, Stodday Lodge, near Lancaster, and then at Bolton Lodge, Bolton-le-Sands. In this he collaborated with his wife, Mary Maria Fielding (1804-1895), botanist, whom he married on 21 December 1826. She was born at Lancaster on 25 January 1804, the daughter of John Simpson, merchant, of Lancaster, and his wife, Maria. In 1836 Henry Fielding bought the herbarium of Dr Steudel, forming the basis of what was to become one of the best private herbaria in Europe. That same year Sir William J. Hooker gave him some Arctic plants and he bought Peruvian plants collected by Andrew Mathews (died 1841). These acquisitions rapidly increased the importance of his herbarium. In 1837 he purchased the collection of J. D. Prescott (consisting of 28,000 plants from Russia) and he later also bought a large part of the important collection of A. B. Lambert. 
During the last twenty years of his life Fielding subscribed to almost every collection made by travelling botanists and bought much at sales. In 1842 the dampness of his home at Bolton-le-Sands induced him to move to a more airy house in Lancaster. Mary Fielding was active in preserving his collection; they both spent several hours each day mounting, arranging, describing, and figuring the specimens. This further increased the value of the Fielding herbarium, which was noted for its high standard of preservation and order. 
Fielding was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1838 but his retiring disposition prevented him from taking an active public role in the scientific community. He was also a member of the London Botanical Society. In 1843 he was assisted by the botanist George Gardner in preparing his 'Sertum plantarum' (1844), with figures drawn by Mary Fielding and descriptions of seventy-five new or rare plants from the Fielding herbarium. At the time of his death he was engaged in classifying a large collection of north Indian plants that had come from Gardner. He died of pneumonia at Church Street, Lancaster, on 21 November 1851 and was buried at Churchtown, Lancashire. He bequeathed the whole of his herbarium (and part of his library) to the University of Oxford, where it formed one of the key resources for the study of botany. 
Mary Fielding lived on independent means at Church Street, Lancaster, until her death there on 22 February 1895. Six volumes of her botanical watercolours, many of Lancashire plants, dated 1830-33 (Bodl. Oxf., MSS Eng. d.3354-3359), represent an important source for the study of the county's flora in the early nineteenth century. Her brother Samuel Simpson (1802-1881), a solicitor, had amateur botanical interests and created a herbarium, before entering the Anglican ministry. Oxford made him an honorary MA in recognition of his sister's donation to the university. 


@@@@@


doc= 9402


Fielding, Sir John (1721-1780), magistrate, was born on 16 September 1721, probably in Blenheim Street, St James's, London, the third of the six children of General Edmund Fielding (1680-1741), an army officer, and his second wife, Anne Blanchfield (died 1727), who may have owned a London eating-house and was the widow of an Italian called Rapha. Fielding was half-brother to the novelists Henry Fielding (1707-1754) and Sarah Fielding (1710-1768), children of Edmund's first marriage. He enjoyed a close relationship with Henry, and after the latter's death edited 'Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon' (1755), administered his estate, and supported his widow and children. He also gave financial support to Sarah, although they quarrelled when Fielding gave information to Henry's biographer, Arthur Murphy, which, she thought, cast him in a bad light. 
Nothing is known of Fielding's education and little of his life before 1749, although he may have served in the navy. He had poor eyesight and was blinded in 1740 by what he called 'an accident' (J. Fielding, 'The Universal Mentor', 1768, iii), but which was, in fact, negligent treatment by James Wilkie, a surgeon, against whom damages of $500 were awarded in 1741. Fielding married Elizabeth Whittingham (died 1774) of Lichfield, the niece of the Revd Dr Whittingham, on 21 November 1751 at Duke Street Chapel, Westminster. They had no children, but his wife's niece, Mary Ann Whittingham ('c'.1745-1820), lived with them; she adopted the name of Fielding and married Henry's son Allen. After his wife died, Fielding married Mary Sedgley (died 1794), the daughter of a Mr Sedgley of Brompton, on 6 August 1774 at Kensington parish church; they had no children. 
In February 1750, along with Henry Fielding and others, Fielding opened the Universal Register Office opposite Cecil Street in the Strand, London. The business, which was probably Henry's idea, aimed 'to bring the World... together into one Place' by acting as an intermediary in various business transactions, although it became mainly an employment exchange and a retailer of 'Glastonbury water', a famous restorative (J. Fielding, 'A Plan of the Universal Register-Office', 1752, 9). The office moved along the Strand to the corner of Castle Court in the early 1750s. Fielding lived at both of these locations and under his management the business prospered. Following in Henry's footsteps, he became a justice of the peace for Westminster on 29 August 1751 and for Middlesex on 14 January 1754. In January 1754 he succeeded Henry as court justice, an adviser to government on law and order, and by June 1754 he had moved into the house and office at Bow Street vacated by Henry. He lived there for most of the rest of his life, although in 1768 he bought Brompton Place, at the junction of Cromwell Lane and Brompton Park Lane. 
Fielding was criticized by a committee of the House of Lords for a lack of vigour in quelling riots by silk weavers and by supporters of John Wilkes in the 1760s. His major achievement lay in the general preventative plan of 1772 which aimed to deter potential offenders by 'the Certainty of speedy Detection' through 'the drawing of all Informations of Fraud and Felony into one point [Bow Street], registering Offenders of all Kinds, quick Notice and sudden Pursuit, and keeping up a Correspondence with all the active Magistrates in England' (J. Fielding, 'Extracts from such of the Penal Laws', 1768, v-vi). With government finance, Henry had initiated such a plan in London in 1753, but Fielding extended it to collate information, initially, from the area around London and, then, in 1772, from the whole country. He advertised crimes and suspects in newspapers which were distributed to magistrates, gaolers, and other officials, and kept records at Bow Street of the information gathered. The plan attracted widespread support because of fears about crime prompted by demobilization following the peace treaty in 1763, and because of general recognition that co-operation was essential to deal with those professional criminals who moved about the country. Fielding also believed magistrates needed to be active in solving cases through lengthy interviews of suspects and witnesses. He continued Henry's practice of using a small group of thief-takers to pursue serious offenders in London and beyond, and he defended them against allegations of corruption. The government funded a horse patrol in London on his advice during the crime panic of 1763-4. 
Fielding's involvement in charities was informed by his belief that vice was the root of crime. Concerned at the number of 'distressed friendless boys' driven by circumstance into petty crime, and believing them to be the 'black fountain' from which robbers came (J. Fielding, 'An Account of the Receipts and Disbursements Relating to Sir John Fielding's Plan', 1769, v), he arranged for thirty boys to enter naval service in 1756. This blossomed into the Marine Society (established 1756), of which Fielding was a committee member. In 1769 he formed the modestly titled Fielding's Seminary for Sailors to equip boys for the merchant navy. Such initiatives were well received by parish officials, who were able to divest themselves of their responsibility for pauper boys. Fielding was a governor of the Magdalen Hospital (founded 1758), which sought to reform prostitutes, and a life governor of the Female Orphans Asylum (1758; later the Royal Female Orphanage), which, initially, aimed to divert orphans from prostitution, and of the British Lying-In Hospital (1749). He was a member of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. 
While not an original thinker, Fielding was an able and determined administrator who built the reputation of Bow Street. Its example was followed in establishing other police offices under the 'Middlesex Justices Act' of 1792, and, although Robert Peel did not adopt this model for the Metropolitan Police in 1829, Fielding's view that crime could be prevented by an efficient detective system became a guiding principle of modern police work. He boasted of his achievements in print and before two parliamentary committees, in 1768 and 1770. Good publicity was, of course, crucial to his plans and to continued government support, but he tended towards pomposity and self-aggrandizement. Jealous of his status, he was quick to take and give offence. His single-minded and sometimes rather unimaginative pursuit of his objectives led him to persuade David Garrick and George Colman not to produce John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' on the ground that it induced young men to imitate Macheath. This was not an uncommon view at the time, but his attitude angered Garrick, and prompted an attack by W. A. Miles in 'A Letter to Sir John Fielding' (1773). Contemporaries questioned his integrity, claiming he was paid by newspaper proprietors and, according to William Hickey, by the brothel keepers who flourished in the area around Bow Street. Yet, in an age of widespread corruption among public officials, he does not appear to have acquired great wealth from his work. 
In 1757 Fielding canvassed the government for a knighthood, which was conferred on 1 October 1761. He became ill, probably in early 1780, and died at Brompton Place on 4 September 1780, a few months after the Gordon rioters had destroyed the records he had gathered at Bow Street. He was buried on 13 September at All Saints' Church, Chelsea. 


@@@@@


doc= 9403


Fielding, Nathan Theodore (1746/7-1819), painter, was born in Sowerby, near Halifax, Yorkshire. He had a considerable local reputation, and was especially noted for his portraits of the elderly, which were carefully painted. On 16 March 1780 Fielding married in Rochdale, Lancashire, Elizabeth (Betty) Baker or Barker (died 'c'.1806/7); they had six children. By 1788 he had settled in London and had exhibited four works at the Society of Artists and three at the British Institution between 1791 and 1814. His choice to exhibit 'The Botanist with a Nondescript Fern', 'A Moonlight Seacoast' and 'A Landscape -- Morning' is indicative of his gradual shift towards the production of landscapes during this period. In 1801 he published a print of St George's Church, Doncaster, which was aquatinted by his son, Theodore Henry Adolphus Fielding (1781-1851). He occasionally etched, notably a portrait of Elias Hoyle of Sowerby in Yorkshire, at the age of 113, in 1793. By 1800 he was living in Keswick and remained in the Lake District until 1807. Between 1807 and 1809 he moved to Liverpool with the intention of promoting his son Anthony's career prospects. He died in 1819. 
Fielding's sons, Theodore Henry Adolphus, (Anthony Vandyke) Copley Fielding, Felix Ferdinand Frederick Raffael Fielding ['see under 'Fielding, Newton Smith Limbird], Thales Angelo Vernet Fielding, and Newton Smith Limbird Fielding, all became artists. Frederick Fielding later practised in Carlisle, exhibiting local landscapes at the Royal Academy from 1810 to 1826, and at the Carlisle Academy in 1824. His oil painting 'Carlisle from Stanwix' (1811) is in Carlisle Museum and Art Gallery. A. V. C. Fielding's 'Landscape Near Ullswater' (1813) is in Abbot Hall Art Gallery, Kendal, Cumbria. A self-portrait of Nathan Fielding was sold at Sothebys on 17 April 1957 (lot 85). 


@@@@@


doc= 9404


Fielding, Newton Smith Limbird (1799-1856), watercolour painter and lithographer, was born in London and baptized on 10 March 1815 at St Pancras Old Church, the youngest son of the painter Nathan Theodore Fielding (1746/7-1819) and his wife, Elizabeth (Betty), 'nee' Baker or Barker (died 'c'.1806/7). Fielding had a sister, (Cleobulina) Amelia ('bap'. 1790), who was noted for her beauty. Three of his brothers, (Anthony Vandyke) Copley Fielding (1787-1855), Thales Angelo Vernet Fielding (1793-1837), and Theodore Henry Adolphus Fielding (1781-1851), are separately noticed; the fourth -- second in age -- was Felix Ferdinand Frederick Raffael ['see below']. Newton Fielding was apprenticed to a doctor in 1815, but nevertheless first exhibited with the Society of Painters in Water Colours in that year, and again in 1818, when he abandoned his articles and joined the family business at 26 Newman Street, in the artists' quarter off Oxford Street, London. He made his reputation with watercolours of ducks, farmyard fowl, and animals, often in ponds or streams. There is a pleasing contrast between the precision with which he drew and coloured the creatures and his impressionistic rendering of their settings. Fielding was also a printmaker, working in etching, aquatint, and lithography, with especial success in the last. About 1821, the year of his first publication, 'British Game Illustrated in Twelve Spirited Etchings', he began with his brother Thales to work for the Parisian publisher Ostervald. During the following decades the brothers played an important part in the Anglo-French school of watercolourists centred on Richard Parkes Bonington and Eugene Delacroix, whose work they popularized through prints. In the summer of 1824 he was sketching with Bonington on the Normandy coast. From about 1827 until interrupted by the revolution of 1830, Newton ran the family atelier in Paris. In 1833 he married in London Josephine Eliza Berger, the daughter of a surgeon in Napoleon's army, and thereafter they divided their time between England and France. Of their six children Edward and Emily painted in the family manner, and the latter married a French architect, Eugene Colibert. In 1838 Fielding's London address was 2 Gothic Cottages, Park Village East, but in 1845 bronchitis drove him to settle permanently in Paris. Among his many French pupils were members of Louis Philippe's family. He died in Paris on 12 January 1856. His brother 


@@@@@


doc= 9405


Fielding, Sarah (1710-1768), novelist, was born on 8 November 1710 at East Stour, Dorset, third daughter and fourth child of the mercurial and improvident Edmund Fielding (1680-1741), army officer, third son of William, fifth earl of Denbigh, and his first wife, Sarah Gould (1682-1718), daughter of Sir Henry Gould, judge of the queen's bench, of Sharpham Park, near Glastonbury, Somerset. Sarah spent her youth in East Stour, with her brother Henry Fielding, sisters Catharine (1708-1750), Ursula (1709-1750), Anne (1713-1716), and Beatrice (1714-1751), another brother, Edmund ('b'. 1716, died after 1755), and, after her father's second marriage, to Anne Rapha, an Italian and Roman Catholic widow (died 1727), six stepbrothers. Her father, pursuing a military career in London, placed his children in the care of Lady Sarah Davidge Gould, Fielding's maternal grandmother, and the daughters were sent to Mary Rookes's boarding-school in the close, Salisbury, where girls were 'to be educated and to learn to work and read and write and to talk French and Dance and be brought up as Gentlewomen' (Fielding, 'Governess', 7). Lady Gould won legal custody of the children. During her Salisbury years Sarah made friendships important for both her education and her subsequent writing career: Dr Arthur Collier taught her Latin and Greek; the talented Jane Collier, Arthur's sister, became her closest companion and literary collaborator until her death some time before the autumn of 1755; and James Harris, Greek and Latin scholar, linguist, musician, politician, and close friend of Henry Fielding, gave detailed advice on her most ambitious and taxing publication, a translation of Xenophon. Most of Sarah's extant letters are addressed to Harris. 
Lady Gould died in June 1733, and Sarah probably left Salisbury for extended periods in East Stour, London, and Bath. From 1739 to 1744 she may have lived with her sister Catharine in Prince's Court, Westminster, and then for three years with Henry and his wife, Charlotte, in Old Boswell Court, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, where Joseph Warton met her in October 1746 (Wooll, 215). She may have lived for a time in Church Lane, Widcombe, near Bath, in a cottage provided by Ralph Allen, dedicatee of her brother's last novel, 'Amelia' (1751), and the owner of nearby Prior Park, where Sarah was a visitor. Allen left her a legacy of $100, paid annually for the last three years of her life. She was in London until May or June 1754 and then moved to Bath. In October 1760 she moved to Walcot, her last known address. 
Sarah's first known venture into print was a 'letter' from 'Leonora to Horatio' included in her brother's first major novel, 'Joseph Andrews' (February 1742, bk 2, chap. 4). The letter's courtship theme of personal integrity and solid values corrupted by materialism and fashion anticipates her later fiction. Sarah's short fictional autobiography of Anne Boleyn appeared as the final chapter of Henry's 'A Journey from this World to the Next' (H. Fielding, 'Miscellanies', 2, April 1743), and in May 1744 her first novel appeared, 'The Adventures of David Simple', set in the cities of London and Westminster. For its second edition (July), Henry supplied revisions 'not entirely for the good' (Kelsall, introduction to Fielding, 'Simple', xxi), corrections, and a preface. Sarah was also on friendly terms with the master of the epistolary novel, Samuel Richardson -- to whom she addressed her only separately published piece of literary criticism (anonymously), and one of the earliest published critical defences of Richardson, 'Remarks on 'Clarissa'' (1749) -- and on 10 April 1747 she published by subscription a two-volume plotless collection of different sorts of prose and poetic narrative, neither novel nor sequel, set in Bath and reminiscent of Richardson's first book (usually known by its short title, 'Familiar Letters', 1741), 'Familiar Letters between the Principal Characters of David Simple and Others'. This included biographical remarks in a preface and letters 40-44, all written by her brother, as well as two dialogues (2.276-93) supplied by James Harris. Its 500 subscribers included Sarah's cousin Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, William Warburton, and Samuel Richardson. 
Sarah's next novel, the first children's school story exclusively about and for young girls, was printed by her artistic mentor, Richardson, by now her brother's rival. 'The governess, or, The little female academy: being the history of Mrs Teachum and her nine girls, with their nine days amusement' appeared in 1749, by which time Sarah was living with her 'sisterhood' -- Catharine, Ursula, and Beatrice -- in Duke Street, Westminster, near to Jane Collier at Doctors' Commons. The lead article in the 'Jacobite's Journal', number 30 (25 June), is a 'letter' from Honoria Hunter, and is possibly Sarah's work (Battestin and Battestin, 'Fielding', 440). A second, revised edition of 'The Governess' appeared in August 1749 in a cheaper edition 'For the use of schools' ('London Evening-Post', 29-31 August, and 'General Advertiser', 2 September), but nothing seems to have come of a project to write an instructive 'Book upon Education' (Barbauld, 2.63). Her publisher, Andrew Millar, paid Sarah $58 on 3 June 1752, presumably for the copy of 'David Simple, Volume the Last', and a total of $256 between 5 October 1750 and 6 October 1753, presumably for 'The Governess' (Battestin and Probyn, xxxviii). Through the Richardson circle Sarah met Elizabeth Carter and enjoyed some generous financial patronage from Mrs Elizabeth Montagu (1720-1800), whose sister, the Bath novelist Sarah Scott (1723-1795), probably knew Sarah better than anyone else between 1754 and 1768. 
In 1753 the true sequel to Sarah Fielding's first novel appeared, 'The Adventures of David Simple, Volume the Last', with a preface almost certainly written by Jane Collier. John Upton remarked that 'the world think it a meer 3d volume and not a new story, and thus the book stops with the booksellers. She should, I told her, have changed the title; for Novelty is the charm of the present age' (12 Feb 1753: Battestin and Probyn, 74). The moral vision of this book is Sarah's most powerful, and its sombre depiction of the decline and fall of a good man depicts a society driven by self-seeking and cruel social indifference. It is now thought unlikely that Sarah contributed numbers 63 and 64 of the 'Covent-Garden Journal', 23 and 30 September 1752 (Goldgar, 336-43). In March 1754 appeared 'The Cry: a New Dramatic Fable' (3 vols.), a product of collaboration between Sarah and Jane Collier. Its ironic wit and formal originality were not appreciated, and few readers saw its merits (Richardson and Hester Lynch Piozzi were two notable exceptions): its odd combination of allegory, philosophy, moral theorizing, and social satire remains a readerly challenge. Avoiding the model of the exemplary or cautionary tale, it turns to psychology, 'the inward mind' and 'the labyrinths of the human mind' (1.11, 14). In another respect, the contribution made by Sarah Fielding, both in 'The Cry' and in her works in general to a feminist agenda had to await the twentieth century for general recognition and sympathetic evaluation. Although hardly revolutionary, she clearly focuses on the powerlessness of the unhappily married woman who, because of economic dependence, becomes the easy victim of patriarchy. 
By the end of 1754 Sarah had lost every member of her immediate family. Poor health and resulting impecuniousness necessitated a move to Bath, facilitated by some financial help from Richardson. A series of novels followed rapidly, each concerned with female friendship and the perils of the marriage market, and profits enabled her to survive the loss of her family. A total of 441 subscribers signed up for her double fictional autobiography told from beyond the grave, 'The Lives of Cleopatra and Octavia' (published 19 May 1757, although William Strahan had printed subscription receipts for it back in June 1748), for which she undertook a prodigious amount of reading, from Plutarch to Shakespeare, Sedley, and Dryden. 'The History of the Countess of Dellwyn' followed in 1759 -- remarkable for her most extensive essay in literary theory, a discussion of mimetic theories of character in fiction -- and an epistolary novel, 'The History of Ophelia' (31 March 1760; German translation, 1764). The last was her most popular novel, although the title page describes her not as the author but as the publisher, the manuscript having been found 'in an old Buroe' (advertisement). 
In Bath, Sarah lived in straitened circumstances, and perforce quietly, but she was neither impoverished nor isolated. Apart from her own income from writing, Sir John Fielding gave her $20 in 1761, and possibly in earlier years too, and she may have purchased (through Harris's influence and at half price) the lifehold of her Walcot cottage. Her visitors included Elizabeth Carter, Mrs Frances Sheridan, the mother of the dramatist, and Elizabeth Montagu, the so-called Queen of the Blues. Mrs Montagu's scheme for a 'Millennium Hall'-like community of self-financing, unmarried gentlewomen and widows (including Sarah Fielding) devoted to charitable works, to be based at Hitcham, came to nothing. A less institutionalized Bath sisterhood was established, however, including Elizabeth and her novelist sister Sarah Scott, Lady Barbara Montagu (the sister of the second earl of Halifax), Sarah Fielding, and perhaps the poet Esther Lewis ('c'.1747-1789), who addressed a poem 'To Miss Fielding, in London' about 1758, among others. Nothing came of a planned collaboration with James Harris on a memoir of her brother, although Harris's memoir has since been published, but Sarah's own final triumph came on 27 January 1762, the publication day of her 'Xenophon's Memoirs of Socrates, with the Defence of Socrates before his Judges' translated from the Greek original (Bath and London, 1762; corrected edn, 1767). The project had begun in early September 1758 and she had worked closely on it with Harris, who had advised her on Greek etymologies and the translating of particularly abstruse passages and phrases. Nevertheless, the translation was her own, and the fastidious Harris was evidently willing to have his name printed alongside all but two of his contributions. It is the only book she signed with her own name, and it was well received. One section was often reprinted, and it remained in print until well into the twentieth century ('Socratic Discourses: Plato & Xenophon', 1937). It attracted 611 subscribers, including her friends Ralph Allen, Elizabeth Carter, Arthur Collier, seven members of the Harris family, Dr John Hoadly, Hester Lynch, four women from the Montagu family, Hester Mulso, Henry Wortley Montagu, Joseph and Thomas Warton, and one of her deceased brother's (and Samuel Johnson's) closest friends, Saunders Welch. Mrs Montagu thought the translation 'excellent' and, ever sensitive to the social obstacles placed in the way of clever women, wrote to Sarah Scott with a comment that applies equally to the powerfully bookish substructure of the novels, with their abiding moral and ethical focus: 'Her genius points to the Portico & Academick groves, never let it saunter in the tuilleries... Her style and manner is more suited to the concise wit of Diogenes in his tub' (Battestin and Probyn, xxxix). Montagu was also willing to pay Sarah's medical expenses and all the money she thought Sarah was entitled to but did not receive from Sir John Fielding. 
Sarah Fielding's work indicates wide reading in English literature, in the Latin classics, and in French, and her translation shows that she was better in Greek than her highly educated brother. She wrote to make a living, but her novels also take up important social and economic issues for women (and in 'Volume the Last' for men, too), and her translation was done out of intellectual ambition and pride in her own accomplishment. She died on 9 April 1768, probably at Bath, and was buried on 14 April in St Mary's, Charlcombe, Bath, where her brother had married Charlotte Cradock in 1734. Her friend Dr John Hoadly's inscribed monument to her in Bath Abbey contains several factual errors, but celebrates her moral teaching (her books were 'Incentives to Virtue and an Honour to her Sex') and her classical scholarship, which taught 'Athens' Wisdom to her Sex'. There is no known portrait. 


@@@@@


doc= 9406


Fielding, Thales Angelo Vernet (1793-1837), watercolour painter, the fourth son of the painter Nathan Theodore Fielding (1746/7-1819) and Elizabeth (Betty) Baker or Barker (died 'c'.1806/7), was born in 1793. Although traditionally said to have been born in London, he was baptized at All Saints, Stamford, Lincolnshire, on 4 December of that year. During his youth the family settled variously in Yorkshire, Durham, at Acton, Ambleside, Keswick, and Manchester. He first showed with the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1810. His exhibits at the Royal Academy have been thoroughly confused with those of his father, who presumably taught him, and eldest brother, Theodore Fielding, but he was certainly exhibiting there by 1816, and continued to do so until the year of his death. This confusion may also account for the apparent rarity of his work in museums and on the market. 
About 1821 Fielding and his younger brother, Newton Fielding, went to Paris to work for the print publisher Ostervald on lithographs for 'Voyages pittoresques et romantiques dans l'ancienne France' (published as a series from 1824). Together with their eldest brother, Theodore, who was in Paris in 1823, they established an atelier, first in the place Dauphine and then in the rue Jacob. There they painted and sold watercolours, engraved prints, taught pupils from the 'haute monde', and entertained their fellow artists of the Anglo-French school including Bonington and Delacroix. The latter shared the studio from 1823 and took it over during Fielding's temporary returns to London. At the 'English Salon' of 1824 Fielding's 'Macbeth and the Witches' was critically acclaimed. 'Run, friends of Romanticism,' urged Fabien Pillet, 'here is Shakespeare by Monsieur Fielding' (Pillet, 38-9), while Stendhal thought that 'in a year's time I will still remember this poor little watercolour -- two feet square -- and I will have forgotten, as will the public, those oil paintings which plaster the grand salon' (Stendhal, 114-15). 
That summer Fielding toured Switzerland, and he made many of the arrangements for the visit of Bonington, Delacroix, and their friends to London in the following year. Delacroix, whose portrait by Thales descended in the Fielding family until at least 1919, described him as 'le meilleur enfant possible' (Delacroix, 151). Thereafter Fielding seems to have returned to Paris until 1827, when Theodore's move to Addiscombe meant that he had to take over the London business at 26 Newman Street. He was elected associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1829. His most frequent exhibits were landscapes, generally with cattle, but he also produced rustic figures and classical and literary subjects. He was known for pleasing colours and the soundness of his technique. 
In 1836 Fielding was himself appointed drawing master at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, at a salary of $300 per annum. He died of an apoplectic seizure on 20 December 1837 at 26 Newman Street, which was presumably being redecorated since his death was witnessed by an illiterate builder's mate. He was unmarried, and his brothers were his executors. There are watercolours by him in the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the Gloucester City Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 9407


Fielding, Theodore Henry Adolphus (1781-1851), watercolour painter, engraver, and author, was the eldest son of the painter Nathan Theodore Fielding (1746/7-1819) and Elizabeth (Betty) Baker or Barker (died 'c'.1806/7). He was born near Sowerby Bridge, Yorkshire, in 1781, and baptized at nearby Rippondon on 27 February the following year. He probably shared his family's peripatetic existence in Yorkshire, Acton, Durham, and Ambleside and received instruction from his father until the early 1800s. The first exhibit credited to his name at the Royal Academy, a Northumberland view in 1799, is now thought to have been by his father. At other times his exhibited works have been confused with those of his brother Thales Fielding, and indeed Graves's list of Royal Academy exhibitors conflated their names. 
In 1819 at Manchester Fielding married Mary Anne Walton, daughter of Robert Walton, a painter. Both she and her elder sister painted flowers, birds, and insects, and on 12 February 1821 she was elected a lady member of the Society of Painters in Water Colours. She exhibited there until 1834 and died in the following year. Also in 1821 one of Fielding's first publications, 'A Picturesque Tour of the English Lakes', was illustrated with his plates after drawings made by himself and his brother-in-law James Walton 'during a two years residence among the Lakes'. Early in 1823 Theodore Fielding went to Paris to work for the print publisher J. F. Ostervald, who had already employed Thales and their youngest brother, Newton Fielding. The brothers established an atelier in the place Dauphine, which was maintained for some years at various Parisian addresses, in parallel to their London studio at 26 Newman Street. They established close relations with Bonington and Delacroix, who frequently mentioned the brothers in diaries and letters, and were pivotal figures in the Anglo-French school. 
Fielding returned to London at the end of the year to concentrate on teaching and engraving. He had already taken on William Callow as a studio assistant, and in 1825 Callow was apprenticed to him, along with Charles Bentley and John William Edge. His 'British Castles: a Compendious History of the Ancient Military Structures of Great Britain' appeared in 1825, which may have been a factor in redirecting his career. Towards the end of the following year he was appointed teacher of drawing and perspective at the East India Company's military college at Addiscombe, and moved from Newman Street to Croydon, his home for the rest of his life. He was very popular with the cadets, among whom 'there was a tradition that in order to be marked high in his class it was advisable to take lessons from his brother' Newton, who needed the business (Vibart, 64-5). Fielding's Frenchified manner (a souvenir of his one visit to Paris) earned him the nickname Johnny Bleu. 
In Fielding's numerous sets of published prints after his own drawings and those of other artists such as his brother Copley and Bonington, he used stipple and aquatint as well as line engraving. He also published a series of well-regarded books on the theory and practice of painting and engraving beginning with 'Synopsis of Practical Perspective, Lineal and Aerial' (1829), and continuing with 'Index of Colours and Mixed Tints, for the Use of Beginners in Landscape and Figure Painting' (1830), 'On the Theory of Painting' (1835, with enlarged editions in 1836, 1839, and 1842), 'The Art of Engraving' (1841), 'Ackermann's Manual of Colours used in the Different Branches of Water-Colour Painting' (1844), and 'The knowledge and restoration of old paintings, the modes of judging between copies and originals, and a brief life of the principal masters of the different schools' (1847). In 'On the Theory of Painting', he took up the cudgels against the alliance of science and fashion which insisted on drawing papers 'of an extraordinary degree of whiteness; these may be suspected of having had a superabundance of acid used in the bleaching' (Mallalieu, 'Understanding Watercolours', 41). He quoted an instance of acid turning all the blues in a drawing to reds in a matter of three or four months. Fielding retired on a comfortable pension in 1850, and he died at his house, Duppas Hill, Croydon, of bladder stones and chronic cystitis on 11 July 1851. There are watercolours by him in the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the Eastbourne and Leeds art galleries. 


@@@@@


doc= 9408


Fielding, Thomas (fl. 1776-1787), stipple engraver, was probably taught in London by William Wynne Ryland, for whom he subsequently worked as assistant until 1783, when Ryland came to his disastrous end. From that date Fielding's name began to appear on plates of similar quality and appearance to Ryland's. 'Theseus Finding his Father's Sword and Sandals' and 'The Death of Procris', after Angelica Kauffman (1784), were published with William Palmer, who appears to have taken over Ryland's shop two years before the engraver's execution for forgery. In 1787 Fielding engraved and published, under the name Palmer and Fielding, 'The Meeting of Jacob and Rachel' and 'Moses Saved by Pharaoh's Daughter', after Thomas Stothard. Nothing is known of Fielding's personal life, or of his death, which may have occurred about 1790. He should not be confused with the engraver John Fielding, who about 1750 engraved some plates after Hogarth and others. 


@@@@@


doc= 9409


Fiennes, Anne, Lady Dacre (d. 1595), courtier, was the only daughter of Sir Richard Sackville (d. 1566), administrator, of Ashburnham and Buckhurst, Sussex, and his wife, Winifred (died 1586), daughter of Sir John Brydges of London, and his wife, Agnes. Nothing is known of her education but it was probably by private tuition, followed by a period of service as gentlewoman in the household of one of her father's colleagues and social equals. Her paternal grandmother was a cousin of Anne Boleyn. Her father's wealth provided Anne with a substantial dowry and by November 1558 she was married to Gregory Fiennes, tenth Baron Dacre (1539-1594), courtier and landowner, second, but only surviving, son of Thomas Fiennes, ninth Baron Dacre, and his wife, Mary. A daughter, who was living in 1565, died young and there are no other known children of the marriage. 
Following the death of her father in 1566 Lady Dacre's mother became the second wife of William Paulet, first marquess of Winchester. Her brother Sir Thomas Sackville, who was raised to the peerage as first Baron Buckhurst in 1567, was a trusted servant of Elizabeth I. Lady Dacre and her husband were close to the court and enjoyed the convenience of a house in Westminster. She appears from the evidence of the state papers and her will to have been a determined and exacting woman, who was also somewhat imperious. Her husband by contrast was a considerably weaker character, who was dominated initially by his mother and later by his wife. At one time Lady Dacre fell out with her brother and there were legal disputes with her husband's family over their concern to prevent the alienation of Fiennes lands. On the death of her mother in 1586 the couple came into possession of Sir Thomas More's former house at Chelsea, which had been granted to Winchester after More's execution. It was at Chelsea that Lord Dacre died on 25 September 1594. They appear to have been a close couple, despite the strains imposed by their failure to produce an heir. Lady Dacre wrote her will the following December, when she was already ill, and also died at Chelsea, on 14 May 1595. She directed that she should be buried alongside her husband in the More chapel, Chelsea, 'without all earthlie pompe but with some privat freindes and nott to be ripped [embalmed]' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/86, sig. 41). An elaborate tomb was subsequently erected. 
Lady Dacre's will is a long and detailed document, which reveals a good deal about her character and how she wished to present herself to posterity. It begins with a lengthy exposition of her religious faith using a formulary favoured by protestants, followed by demonstrations of her loyalty to the crown in the form of a gift of a jewel worth $300 to the queen and of 'my Jewell of the Quenes Maiesties picture' to Buckhurst. Her concern for the poor and her wish to leave a lasting monument to herself and her husband is revealed in the detailed instructions for the endowment of an almshouse for twenty paupers and twenty poor children at Tothill Field adjacent to their Westminster house. Her concern for her servants and the importance of her friends to this childless woman are shown by numerous individual legacies, which amount in value to over $3000. The prominence of members of the queen's household among the legatees demonstrates her closeness to the court. Her house in Chelsea was bequeathed to William Cecil, first Baron Burghley, for life and then to his younger son Sir Robert Cecil and 'my deere freinde' his wife, Elizabeth, and their heirs. The bequest of her house in Hayes, Kent, to 'my lovinge freinde' Edward Fenner, justice of the king's bench, alongside bequests to Sir Thomas Egerton, master of the rolls, and Thomas Owen, justice of the common pleas, is suggestive of the importance litigation and consequently legal advice had played in her life. The Westminster house was bequeathed to her nephew Robert Sackville, second Baron Buckhurst and second earl of Dorset, with the manor of Barwick, Sussex and a house there. The continued friction with her husband's family is revealed by the lack of personal bequests to them. Only her husband's niece, who had married the son of Lady Dacre's friend Lady Waller, was to derive any benefit from the will in the form of lands in Middlesex, provided her father Sampson Lennard paid $2000 and did not challenge the will. 


@@@@@


doc= 9410


Fiennes, Gregory, tenth Baron Dacre (1539-1594), courtier, was the younger son of Thomas Fiennes, ninth Baron Dacre (b. in or before 1516, d. 1541), nobleman and murderer, and Mary (died 'c'.1576), daughter of George Neville, Baron Bergavenny. He was baptized at Hurstmonceux, Sussex, on 25 June 1539. Following the execution of his father in 1541 the wardship of his elder brother Thomas Fiennes was acquired by Thomas Darcy, Baron Darcy of Chiche, lord chamberlain to Edward VI. His brother died in August 1553 and Gregory Fiennes's wardship was subsequently awarded to his mother and her third husband, Francis Thursby, esquire, of Congham, Norfolk. He and his sister Margaret were restored by act of parliament in 1558, he becoming tenth Baron Dacre, by which time he had married Anne Sackville ['see 'Fiennes, Anne (d. 1595)], daughter of Sir Richard Sackville, whose substantial endowment helped to restore Dacre's depleted fortunes. Their only known child died before reaching adulthood. Dacre was summoned to parliament in January 1563. 
According to William Camden, Dacre was 'a little crack-brained' ('DNB'), and he certainly appears to have been a weaker character than his mother, sister, and wife. Despite the lack of an heir and differences in character, both husband and wife attested to the happiness of the marriage. Dacre does not appear to have played any active role in political life, although he and his wife had close associations with the court. He was interested in fine buildings. According to John Stow (who called him Gyles) he purchased and rebuilt Stourton House in Westminster, which provided his wife and him with a convenient London residence. Dacre also acquired Thomas More's house in Chelsea, Middlesex, from John Paulet, second marquess of Winchester, his wife's stepfather, for $3000 in 1575. He played a ceremonial role in the entourage accompanying Edward Fiennes de Clinton, earl of Lincoln, to France to ratify the confederacy of Blois in 1572. His wife complained that she and her husband were kept in subjection by his mother, and there was undoubtedly tension caused by the attempts of the dowager baroness and his sister to prevent the alienation of Dacre lands. The latter two may have been anxious to prevent the diminution of the estates, especially as Margaret was heir. 
In his will Dacre wrote of the 'hard measure' likely to be offered to his wife after his death by his heirs, which the document was designed to prevent. This will, written in November 1586, left all his lands not subject to an entail and all his personal property to his wife, who was made his executor. It appears to embody the success of his wife in supplanting the influence of her in-laws. Dacre died on 25 September 1594 at the house at Chelsea and was buried in the Old Church there. His title and entailed estates were successfully claimed by his sister Margaret, who had married Sampson Lennard, esquire, of Chevening, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 9411


Fiennes, James, first Baron Saye and Sele (c.1390-1450), administrator, was the second son of Sir William Fiennes (1357-1402) of Herstmonceux, Sussex, and Elizabeth, daughter and heir of William Batisford of Wartling, Sussex. James's paternal grandmother was Joan, youngest daughter of Geoffrey de Say, second Lord de Say, and Maud, daughter of Guy de Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (d. 1315). His father served twice as sheriff of Surrey and Sussex, and died in 1402 possessed of estates in five southern counties. His elder brother, Sir Roger, the builder of Herstmonceux Castle, who furthered Fiennes's early career, probably ceded to James two Oxfordshire manors held by their father. 
James Fiennes took part in the Agincourt campaign and in Henry V's conquest of Normandy. He served as lieutenant of the garrison of Caudebec under the captaincy of Sir Lewis Robessart. In 1419 he was granted the 'seigneurie' of Court-le-Compte and other confiscated properties in the 'bailliages' of Rouen and Caux. In the next decade, thanks to his brother, Fiennes became established in Kent. By February 1430 he was in possession of his principal seat, the manor of Hever, near Tonbridge, purchased by Roger in 1423. In the same month Fiennes, as an esquire of the royal household, indented to serve for a year as part of the large military and domestic establishment that accompanied the nine-year-old Henry VI for his coronation in France. He probably owed his entrance into the household to his brother, a long-standing member of the royal affinity, and to Robessart, who was chamberlain. In 1433 Fiennes was named a justice of the peace for Kent and remained on the commission until his death. He served as sheriff of Kent in 1436-7 and of Surrey and Sussex in 1438-9, in which capacity he returned his brother to the parliament of 1439-40 as a member for Sussex. Fiennes represented Kent in that parliament, and in all parliaments that followed until his elevation to the peerage in 1447. 
By 1440 Fiennes had begun his rapid rise in influence and wealth. An esquire of the body since 1438, he and Roger, treasurer of the household from 1439 to 1446, were members of the inner circle surrounding the king led by William de la Pole, earl of Suffolk (died 1450). He was one of the courtiers involved in the implementation of the two projects that above all else provoked Henry VI to enthusiastic activity, namely the foundation of the colleges of Eton and King's, Cambridge. Perhaps it was this that gave rise to the tradition, much later given memorable expression by Shakespeare through the mouth of Jack Cade, that 'Thou hast most traitorously corrupted the youth of the realm in erecting a grammar school' ('2 Henry VI', IV. vii). Knighted in 1444, he became chamberlain to the royal bride, Margaret of Anjou, in the following year, and fed mightily at the trough of royal munificence. Estates, offices, wardships, and annuities were his by royal gift. By 1446 he had obtained from the crown lands four manors in Kent, one each in Surrey and Sussex, and two in Warwickshire. Offices, whose work was performed by deputies, ranged from the constableship of Rochester Castle (held for ten months) to the relatively humble but profitable post of ulnager of Northamptonshire and Rutland. The resources of the duchy of Lancaster enhanced Fiennes's position in the home counties. The stewardship of Pevensey, and the constableship of the castle there, together with that of Hertford Castle, fell to his lot. 
Fiennes's custody of the bailiwicks of Otford, Kent, and South Malling, Sussex, during the vacancy of the see of Canterbury in 1443 was a prelude to the life grant of the stewardship of the archiepiscopal lands given him in September by Archbishop John Stafford at the king's request. Stafford, also chancellor of England, told the prior of Canterbury that he made the appointment 'havyng consyderacion how the seid James stondyng aboute the Kyng as he dooth, may dayly proufyte our church and us' (Sheppard, 3.182). His influence at court earned Fiennes retaining fees from Richard, duke of York (died 1460), and Henry Beauchamp, duke of Warwick. The latter also gave him in May 1446 a life grant of the stewardship of the Warwick lands in Kent and Sussex. In July 1446, after Duke Henry's sudden death, Fiennes was appointed sheriff of Worcestershire and held this hereditary perquisite of the Beauchamps until Warwick's young daughter died in 1449. 
Fiennes did not figure prominently in the Suffolk regime's peace negotiations with Charles VII that led to the surrender of Maine. His name, however, came to be linked with Suffolk's in one result: the arrest at the Bury parliament of 1447 of the opponent of that policy, the king's uncle, Humphrey, duke of Gloucester. Humphrey's sudden death while in custody sparked rumours of murder, and Fiennes was later deemed to be one of the perpetrators. He certainly profited from the duke's demise. On 24 February, the day after Humphrey died, the chancery received warrants signed by the king approving Fiennes's petition for offices held by the duke or in his gift. Fiennes thereby obtained the grant in tail male of the critically important posts of constable of Dover Castle and warden of the Cinque Ports. Although he was simply styled knight in the draft he had prepared, the actual patent letter noted his recent creation as Lord Saye and Sele and substantially increased his wages for the offices. He was subsequently one of those authorized to dispose of Humphrey's goods. By April he had been appointed chamberlain of the household, which gave him control over access to the king. He was also made a member of the continual council. In August he became constable of the Tower of London for the duration of the minority of Henry Holland, duke of Exeter (died 1475). 
Fiennes's unusual dual title, necessitated because others, including his brother, had a better hereditary claim to the barony of Saye, also underscores his aggressive acquisition of Kentish properties in this period. Purchase and, it was said after his death, intimidation made him the dominant secular landowner in the county. Two territorial blocks in particular were created by 1450. In the neighbourhood of Sevenoaks he acquired the manor of Knole, and also that of Seal -- hence his title of Sele -- and Kemsing. Jurors before a royal commission in August 1450 charged that, in extending the latter, he had forced a prominent landowner to make an unprofitable exchange of property and then had kept both estates. Plaintiffs in a later unsuccessful chancery suit told a similar tale. After purchasing a substantial group of estates in the Romney Marsh area, he had the supposed heir arrested and coerced into sealing a release before a chancery master. It was also claimed that Fiennes admitted, to the priest who heard his last confession, 'that of all the thinges that ever he dyde in his life' this 'was moost in his consciens' (TNA: PRO, C1/27/419) and sought to make amends. Fiennes's accumulation of property and offices in the south-east, when added to those of his brother and their gentry associates, made the Fiennes affinity one of the most formidable in the country. His control of local affairs in Kent would attach his name to the manifold charges of extortion and corruption soon to be made against county and archiepiscopal officers. 
The renewal in 1449 of the war in France, and the rapid collapse of the English defence of Normandy that followed, led to the downfall and murder of Suffolk and some of his associates. On 22 September 1449 Lord Saye assumed the office of lord treasurer upon the resignation of Bishop Marmaduke Lumley. The costs of war quickly nullified Lumley's policy of restoring solvency to royal finances. When faced with parliamentary refusal to consent to direct taxation, Saye initiated a campaign to secure loans, and personally lent over $2000. Nevertheless, both before and after the fall of Suffolk, public opinion targeted Saye, 'that dastard of renown' (Robbins, 204), as one of the 'traitors' responsible for England's misgovernment, bankruptcy and military humiliation. Some among the parliamentary Commons began to demand his arrest. His last will of 12 April 1450, composed in evident haste, suggests the uncertainty of his position and the probable loss of the crown properties he held if the policy of resumption, advocated by the Commons, took place. 
When the Kentishmen rose under Jack Cade, denouncing the courtiers and the oppression of their agents in Kent, Saye's fate was sealed. At the demand of some in the royal forces opposing the rebels, he was arrested and sent to the Tower on 19 June 1450, and an order for the confiscation of his goods was issued. An attempt by Henry VI to secure his release was thwarted by the duke of Exeter. When Cade's insurgents temporarily occupied London, Saye was brought before a commission of oyer and terminer meeting in the Guildhall on 4 July, to answer charges of treason and extortion. His demand to be tried by his peers provoked the mob present to seek his death. Permitted to make his last confession, he was taken to The Standard in Cheapside and beheaded. His head, placed on a staff, was made to kiss that of his son-in-law, William Crowmer, sheriff of Kent, who had been beheaded at Mile End. Cade then rode about the city with Saye's corpse trailing on the ground alongside his horse. Saye's head was set up on London Bridge. A week later it was taken down and he was buried on 11 July in the church of the London Greyfriars, in accordance with his will. Soldiers returning from Normandy soon afterwards contemptuously hauled down his coat of arms from above his tomb and reversed it. 
Modern scholarship has generally upheld the negative assessment of Fiennes found in contemporary sources, especially regarding his ill-doing in Kent. His wife, Emeline (died 1452/3), the only executor to accept the administration of his will, received by it possession of many of his estates, including Hever and Knole. But most of the lands accumulated by Fiennes were either lost by resumption or were later sold by his son William, the second Lord Saye. William fought for the Yorkists at Northampton in 1460, and died in Edward IV's army at Barnet in 1471. 


@@@@@


doc= 9412


Fiennes, John, appointed Lord Fiennes under the protectorate (d. in or before 1710), parliamentarian army officer and politician, was the third son of William Fiennes, eighth baron and first Viscount Saye and Sele (1582-1662), and Elizabeth (died 1648), daughter of John Temple of Burton Dasset, Warwickshire. Nothing is known of his early years or education, but at the outbreak of civil war he commanded a troop of horse in the army of the earl of Essex. He took part with his elder brother Nathaniel Fiennes in the unsuccessful attack on Worcester in September 1642, and in February 1643 was sent with him to garrison Bristol. In the spring of that year he served under Colonel Massey, the governor of Gloucester. He had returned to Bristol by the time of its surrender in June 1643; he defended his brother's conduct in capitulating, and assaulted one of the witnesses against him for impugning it. Some time during summer 1643 he obtained a commission as colonel of a regiment of horse, and is henceforth recorded as prominent in the civil war in the district round Oxford. He besieged Banbury from 27 August 1644 to 25 October of the same year, when the siege was raised by the earl of Northampton and Colonel Gage. In April 1645 Fiennes was for a time under the command of Cromwell, who specially commended him in a letter to the committee of both kingdoms of 28 April 1645: 'his diligence was great, and this I must testify, that I find no man more ready to all services than himself... I find him a gentleman of that fidelity to you and so conscientious, that he would all his troop were as religious and civil as any, and makes it a great part of his care to get them so. ('Writings and Speeches', 1.343)' At the battle of Naseby he fought on the right wing, under the command of Cromwell, and was entrusted with the duty of conducting the royalist prisoners to London. He was elected MP for Morpeth in Northumberland in 1645, bringing an end to his military career. Although he supported the army in its struggle with parliament in 1647 he stayed away from parliament after Pride's Purge of the following year. 
In 1657 Fiennes was summoned by Cromwell to his other house, having been appointed a councillor of state earlier that year. A republican pamphleteer describes him as 'such a one as they call a sectary, but no great stickler', and adds that he was entirely under the influence of his brother Nathaniel (GEC, 'Peerage', 4.604n.). He survived the Restoration in 1660 and escaped all penalties for his political conduct, being included in the 'Act of Indemnity'. At an unknown date he married Susannah (1656/7-1715), daughter of Thomas Hobbs of Amwell Magna in Hertfordshire. Their fifth but only surviving son, Lawrence, succeeded his cousin Nathaniel as fifth Viscount Saye and Sele in January 1710, by which date Fiennes had died. His wife died at Bath on 22 July 1715, aged fifty-eight, and was buried at Broughton, Oxfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 9413


Fiennes, Nathaniel (1607/8-1669), politician and army officer, was the second son of William Fiennes, first Viscount Saye and Sele (1582-1662), and his wife, Elizabeth Temple (died 1648). He attended Winchester College and on 19 November 1624, aged sixteen, matriculated from New College, Oxford, where he qualified as founder's kin. According to Anthony Wood, he stayed five years but did not take a degree. Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, noted that after university Fiennes went to Geneva and elsewhere in Switzerland, where he was influenced further in the animosity toward the church which he had already learned from his father. He also suggested that Fiennes travelled back to England by way of Scotland where he established contacts between the Scots and the English opposition. While there is strong evidence that Fiennes went to Scotland late in 1639 or early in 1640, he had returned home in the meantime. On 11 August 1636 he married at Haynes, Bedfordshire, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1616), eldest daughter of the 1620s MP Sir John Eliot (1592-1632), who had died a prisoner in the Tower of London. 
With the convening of the Short Parliament in April 1640, Fiennes was elected MP for Banbury, thanks to the influence of his father. He does not seem to have taken a significant part, although Saye later claimed that the parliament's dissolution was above all a strategy to block a motion by his son that any money raised through taxation should not be employed against their 'brethren' in Scotland. His role in the Long Parliament of November 1640, where he also sat for Banbury, was much more important. He became one of the chief spokesmen for the opposition to the crown and a prominent figure in the middle group under the leadership of John Pym, to whom he was one of 'his most trusted lieutenants' (Fletcher, 26). Fiennes was particularly significant in two areas. The first was his work in the early summer of 1641 in systematically revealing the strands of the so-called army plot, which he did through committee and in speeches. He was also active in attacking the bishops and calling for the abolition of episcopacy. In two published speeches, especially, one on the church canons of December 1640 and the other on the London petition in February 1641, he emerged as a key figure in the assault on the church. Fiennes accused the hierarchy of attempting to create a religion of its own choosing and to impose it upon the people, of trying to sow dissension between the king and parliament, and of endeavouring to punish individuals for things which were not under their jurisdiction. In reference to the canons Fiennes took issue with the bishops' claim to define heresy and saw it as the responsibility of the state to restrain and control the clergy. He has, on that account, been labelled as an Erastian. Most historians see him as a radical on the question of episcopacy, along with men like Oliver Cromwell and Henry Vane the younger. In this connection Clarendon recounted that Fiennes had asked him to go out riding, at which time the latter declared that episcopal government was intolerable to many and that 'if the king resolved to defend the bishops, it would cost the kingdom much blood' (cited in Fletcher, 124). 
Fiennes also saw service on numerous committees, including those which in 1641 drew up the grand remonstrance and considered the root-and-branch petition, and in 1642 he was a member of the important committee for safety. Moreover, he was named as a commissioner to travel with the king to Scotland in August 1641 along with, among others, John Hampden. The extent to which his thinking departed from the king's is attested by his remark in the house on 2 April 1642 that 'the king had no negative voice in passing those acts of Parliament which both Houses had agreed unto but was to assent to them' (quoted in Russell, 501). 
At the outset of the civil war Fiennes served with his father and his brother John Fiennes (d. in or before 1710) in the unsuccessful attempt to prevent guns from Robert Greville, Lord Brooke, from falling into the hands of Spencer Compton, earl of Northampton, at Banbury, Oxfordshire, in August 1642. Later the same month he served with John Hampden in the relief of Coventry and in September was involved at Worcester. Fiennes also fought at the battle of Edghill in October. Several times he was described as having acted bravely and when the king briefly occupied Banbury in November both Fiennes and his father were exempted from the pardon. 
In February 1643 Fiennes was sent to Bristol following suspicion of the loyalty of the parliamentary governor. The garrison had been denuded by General Sir William Waller, parliamentarian commander in the west, and the leadership of the city was royalist in sympathy; in March two men were executed for plotting to open the city to Prince Rupert. Appointed governor by the earl of Essex in May, Fiennes argued that he needed more men and supplies, but when the prince appeared before Bristol in July and commenced his attack, Fiennes was left with insufficient resources and an unsympathetic populace. Moreover the ships in Bristol harbour had been convinced to declare for the king. Though there was resistance at first, some of it quite effective, when Rupert's forces breached the walls of the city Fiennes, with no help in sight, considered the battle lost and in August he surrendered. On terms published in 'A Copie of the Articles Agreed upon at the Surrender of the City of Bristol' (1643), his forces were allowed to leave Bristol with partial arms. 
Fiennes made a defence of his actions to the House of Commons, which was published as 'A Relation' (1643), and also issued 'Colonel Fiennes Letter to my Lord General Concerning Bristol' (1643), but he was accused by William Prynne and Clement Walker of treason and cowardice. At Fiennes's request, a trial before Essex and a council of war was held in December. Found guilty not on the more serious charges, but only for improper surrender, he was none the less sentenced to death, but he was subsequently pardoned by Essex and may have left England for a period of time. Clarendon reflected that but for this episode Fiennes would have had a bright future. Describing him as a man esteemed by the Commons and of 'very good parts of learning and nature', he opined that, if he had stayed out of the army, for which some thought him not suited, 'he had sure been second to none after Mr. Hampden's death in those councils' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.254). 
In 1645 Fiennes experienced a kind of vindication of his actions at Bristol when the city was quickly surrendered by Prince Rupert to parliamentary forces, and consequently that year he returned to public life. His reappearance in the House of Commons found him playing an important part in its affairs. He once again became a member of the middle group or 'royalist independents' who had coalesced around Oliver St John after the death of Pym. Seeking to maintain the balanced constitutional reforms of 1641-2, the middle group pursued a path that lay between the radicals on the one hand, and the peace party, now including the Scots, on the other. Moreover, Fiennes continued his strong objection to independent, coercive clerical power, be it episcopal or presbyterian, as can be seen in his strong warning of April 1646 to the Westminster assembly that they should obey the authority of parliament. In many of these activities he worked in co-operation with his father. 
In this connection much attention has been given to 'Vindiciae veritatis', which appeared in 1654, although written between 1646 and 1648. Echoing the ideas outlined above, as well as containing a defence of Fiennes's military career, the pamphlet is a strong endorsement of middle-group positions and a forceful criticism of the Scots. Some have identified this as the work of Saye and some have attributed it to Nathaniel, while others have suggested a collaboration between the two. There seems no clearcut answer to the authorship, but it is clear that the ideas expressed mirror the opinions of Nathaniel Fiennes and can be read with profit to understand them. 
In the period after the conclusion of the first civil war Fiennes worked, along with the middle group, to achieve a settlement with the king, but not at the price of sacrificing their goals or negotiating out of weakness. Thus, he supported the army in its struggle with the presbyterians in the Commons and was one of those, along with his father and brother, John, who fled to the army in August 1647. Fiennes endorsed 'The Heads of Proposals', but when Charles I escaped to the Isle of Wight in November and then refused the 'four bills', embodying once again the programme of the middle group, Fiennes joined in the negative reaction in November and was credited with drawing up the declaration defending the vote of no addresses to the king which appeared in February 1648. In addition, in January 1648 Fiennes was made a member of the newly formed Derby House committee. 
However, following the second civil war, as it became evident that the army was moving in a more radical direction, Fiennes and his colleagues, seeing the destruction of their ideals of political balance, continued to attempt a negotiated settlement based on the treaty of Newport. When the king's answers to the treaty were debated in the house in December, Fiennes endorsed the need for settlement in what Underdown calls a 'notable speech' and a 'remarkable oration'. Fiennes's statements, he comments significantly, represented 'the final testimony of the middle group'. 
Shortly after, however, when the army had determined on the king's trial, Fiennes found himself swept up in Pride's Purge and was one of those members secluded, albeit being released the same day. With the establishment of the Commonwealth he left public life and remained aloof until the establishment of the protectorate. It may be that Fiennes saw the protectorate as in keeping with his ideas of a balanced polity and so was ready to resume a public role. 
Fiennes became a member of the council of state on 26 April 1654 and was appointed one of the keepers of the great seal in June 1655 -- he became a prominent figure under Oliver Cromwell. He sat in the parliament of 1654 for the county of Oxford and in 1656 represented the university. He emerged as one of the chief movers in the attempt to convince Cromwell to take the crown and spoke at length during the discussions, pointing out the advantage of Cromwell's taking the title of king, having that authority, rather than holding a title that had no limitations. In taking this view he was joining middle group associates like John Glyn in arguing for a settlement that would represent their political values. A pamphlet, 'Monarchy Asserted' (1660), which printed these discussions, is attributed to Fiennes. 
Later, after Cromwell had refused the crown but accepted the rest of the proposal, Fiennes and his brother John became members of the Cromwellian House of Lords, although his father staunchly refused to recognize that body. In an enthusiastic address of January 1658 Fiennes lauded the new constitution as taking a middle path between two extremes, providing the balance that was so dear to his ideology. At the same time, he continued his concern with religious issues, attempting to mitigate the treatment of the Quaker James Naylor, advocating a limited toleration, but criticizing the Quakers for not recognizing the authority of the magistrate. The spiritual quality of his speeches and interest in that dimension of Cromwellian foreign policy is notable. 
In September 1658 Fiennes was one of those who attended Cromwell's deathbed and attested to his designation of Richard Cromwell as his successor. He was also one of those who advised Richard to dissolve parliament in April 1659 and when the Rump was restored in May he was not appointed to a position. Consequently, he removed himself to his country house at Newton Tony, Wiltshire, was ignored by the Restoration government, and took no further part in public events. He seems to have divided his time between Newton Tony and his other house, Bromby Wood Hall, Lincolnshire. By the late 1650s his wife Elizabeth had died; she was buried at Framingham, Lincolnshire. He married a second wife, Frances (1621-1691), daughter of Colonel Richard Whitehead of West Tytherley, Hampshire. In his will, drawn up on 5 October 1669, he divided his lands in Wiltshire, Lincolnshire, Gloucestershire, and Hampshire between his two sons from his first marriage, Nathaniell ('c'.1637- 'c'.1672) and William, and four daughters from his second, Frances, Anne, Celia, and Mary. Although he then described himself as in 'reasonable health' he died on 16 December; there is a monument to him in Newton Tony church. At least three of his children died young, but William (1639-1698) succeeded his uncle James Fiennes ('c'.1603-1674) as third Viscount Saye and Sele, Mary (1663-1737) married Sir Edmund Harrison, a London merchant, and Celia Fiennes (1662-1741) was the celebrated traveller. 


@@@@@


doc= 9414


Fiennes, Thomas, ninth Baron Dacre (b. in or before 1516, d. 1541), nobleman and murderer, was the son and heir of Sir Thomas Fiennes and Jane (died 1539), daughter of Edward Sutton, Lord Dudley. He succeeded his grandfather Thomas, eighth Lord Dacre, in 1533, his father having died on 26 October 1528. The principal seat of this southern branch of the Dacre family was at Herstmonceux, Sussex. In 1536 he married Mary, daughter of George Neville, Lord Bergavenny; she probably died in 1576. Despite his youth on joining the peerage (he was said to be eighteen or more in 1534), Dacre was soon called upon to meet the responsibilities to which his rank committed him. In May 1536 he was included in the jury which tried Anne Boleyn, and five months later he was ordered to attend the king with 200 soldiers as part of the force to be dispatched against the uprising in Yorkshire. Although he was not required to march against the rebels, he was one of the jury which tried Thomas, Lord Darcy, and John, Lord Hussey, in May 1537. Dacre attended the baptism of Prince Edward in October 1537, and bore the canopy at Queen Jane's funeral the month following. He was also among those lords who greeted Anne of Cleves at Rainham Down on new year's eve 1539. 
Dacre's career was ended prematurely by an ill-advised hunting trip. On 30 April 1541 he led a party on a poaching expedition to Nicholas Pelham's estates at Laughton, Sussex. While pursuing their prey they encountered a group of Pelham's servants, one of whom was fatally injured in the ensuing scuffle. Dacre and his companions were charged with murder and tried at the court of king's bench on 27 June. Dacre originally entered a plea of not guilty to the charge of wilful murder, but was later induced to change it to guilty and throw himself upon the king's mercy. Despite the intercession of the council on Dacre's behalf the king refused to grant him a reprieve. His execution by hanging took place two days later, on 29 June 1541; a brief account of the execution can be found in Hall's 'Chronicle': 'he was led on foot between the two sheriffs of London from the Tower through the city to Tyburn where he was strangled as common murderers are and his body buried in the church of St Selpulchre' ('Hall's Chronicle', 842). Although Dacre's fate has previously been used as an example of Henry's growing intolerance and brutality, the sentence was just: as Miller has pointed out, the baron was indisputably an accessory to murder, the punishment for which was death. Dacre left two sons: Thomas, who died aged fifteen in 1553, and Gregory Fiennes, tenth baron Dacre, who was restored to the lands and title of his father in 1558. 


@@@@@


doc= 9415


Fiennes, William, first Viscount Saye and Sele (1582-1662), politician, was born at Broughton Castle, Oxfordshire, on 28 May 1582, the only son and heir of Richard Fiennes, seventh Baron Saye and Sele ('c'.1557-1613) and his first wife, Constance Kingsmill. He was educated at Winchester College and then at New College, Oxford, which he entered as a fellow-commoner in 1596, 'spending some time in logicals and philosophicals' before being called home (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', new edn, 1813-20, 3.546). At both institutions he claimed to be founder's kin by virtue of his descent from one of William of Wykeham's sisters. About 1602 he married Elizabeth Temple (died 1648), daughter of John Temple of Burton Dassett, Warwickshire, and Stowe, Buckinghamshire. Their third son, John Fiennes, became a parliamentarian officer and politician. 
Fiennes succeeded his father as eighth Baron Saye and Sele in February 1613 and sat in the Lords from the 1614 parliament onwards. He first emerged to national prominence in the parliament of 1621, when he strongly urged that Lord Chancellor Bacon be summoned to the bar of the house to answer the charges against him, and later proposed (unsuccessfully) that Bacon should suffer degradation from the peerage in addition to his other punishments. 
From his youth Saye was strongly drawn towards godly protestantism and during the later years of James I's reign he emerged as a prominent opponent of the king's pro-Spanish foreign policy. He donated money privately for the relief of James's daughter Elizabeth of Bohemia and her husband the elector Frederick. However Saye's constitutional principles were such that when in March 1622 the king and council requested the raising of a benevolence to aid the elector in regaining the Palatinate, Saye challenged the legality of such extra-parliamentary levies and refused to collect the benevolence in his capacity as a justice of the peace in Oxfordshire. As a result he was summoned before the privy council on four separate occasions between 23 May and 6 June, where he argued that he knew no justification for 'raising or levying mony of the subjects of England' other than 'by their owne full and free consent in parliament' (Lincoln's Inn, Hale MS 12 [Selden Collection], no. 86, fol. 481). After his fourth hearing the council ordered Saye to be imprisoned in the Fleet prison for six months. Although following a direct appeal to Buckingham he was allowed to return to his estate at Norton in Gloucestershire in early February 1623, and then to Broughton in July, he was confined to the area within 20 miles of either estate until at least September of that year. 
Saye's political fortunes improved temporarily when Prince Charles and the duke of Buckingham returned in October 1623 from their disastrous expedition to Madrid: their new-found determination to prosecute a war against Spain was now in tune with Saye's own long-standing anti-Spanish attitudes. In the 1624 parliament Saye followed Buckingham in vigorously attacking Lord Treasurer Middlesex, and through Buckingham's influence he was created Viscount Saye and Sele on 7 July 1624. However, in 1625 Buckingham began to fear that Saye was deserting him, and by the following year Saye was again distancing himself from the court. A staunch 'puritan', he was dismayed when King Charles and Buckingham associated themselves with the anti-Calvinists at the York House conference in February 1626. In the parliament of that year he strongly defended the privileges of the peerage against the king's attempts to exclude the earls of Bristol and Arundel from the Lords. He was also a leading figure in pressing for a standing order that reduced the number of proxies that any one peer could hold to two, a move clearly directed against Buckingham who at that time held no fewer than thirteen. In the autumn of 1626 Saye, together with about fifteen other peers, refused to pay the forced loan. In 1628 he was among the most energetic supporters of the petition of right in the Lords, and consistently opposed the various amendments and qualifications advocated by Buckingham and his allies. Saye's most decisive speech came on 24 May when, according to one diarist's account, he declared: 'It is the due right of the subject not to be committed without cause expressed. Not to recede from this... The refusing to join with [the Commons] in petition to enjoy this right will seem strange to posterity and make us hateful to posterity if we thus degenerate from our ancestors. I desire my name may be recorded amongst those Lords who shall agree to join with the Commons herein for preservation of our just rights. (Johnson and others, 5.524)' According to another eyewitness Saye summed up the petition as 'no more than the just rights of the subjects of England' (ibid., 5.528). Having played an important role in securing the passage of the petition in the Lords, Saye was then less prominent during the short second session of the parliament in 1629, although he was appointed to a committee to draw up bills to prevent the decay of churches and chapels, and another to ensure sufficient stipends for curates. 
The work of this short-lived committee coincided strongly with Saye's abiding interest in the promotion of a godly clergy. He was closely connected with distinguished puritan divines such as Richard Sibbes, John Preston, and John Davenport, and throughout his adult life was an active patron to an extensive circle of godly clergy. During the 1630s his growing friendship with Robert Greville, second Lord Brooke, brought him into contact with further networks of puritan ministers and laity who felt increasingly beleaguered by the onslaught of Laudian policies. As was evident in his sympathy for Elizabeth of Bohemia and the elector palatine, and his hostility towards Spain, these religious attitudes extended also into the international sphere and Saye felt a loyalty to the cause of Calvinists outside England. In July 1633, for example, he and Lord Brooke had a private conversation with the Dutch ambassador at Brooke House, a gesture that alarmed the king and some of his closest advisers. 
During Charles I's personal rule Saye's godly religious attitudes and his alienation from the court led him to devote his energies principally to colonization schemes. In December 1630 -- together with Brooke, John Pym, and other prominent puritan figures -- Saye established a company to settle Providence Island in the Caribbean. On 19 March 1632, in association with Brooke and ten others, he purchased from the earl of Warwick and the New England Company a large area of land on the Connecticut River. They appointed John Winthrop the younger as governor and set up a fort at the mouth of the river which they named Sayebrook (now spelt Saybrook). In 1633 Saye and Brooke also purchased a plantation in what is now New Hampshire from some Bristol merchants, and they both seriously considered settling in New England. However, in 1636 their proposal for the creation of a hereditary upper house was rebuffed by the government of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, and Saye thereafter concentrated his efforts on encouraging emigrants to settle Providence Island. In March 1638 Saye and Brooke indicated their intention to travel to Providence Island as soon as possible, but in fact they never did so. Unfortunately the puritan settlers in Providence Island soon became hopelessly factionalized and engaged extensively in privateering and the use of slaves. The company failed to replicate the representative assemblies and private ownership of land that were so crucial to the success of the New England colonies, and the settlement was destroyed by the Spanish in 1641 without ever having become really successful. By that time the company was deeply in debt and Saye himself owed bonds worth a total of $1190. In due course Saye surrendered his rights in New England: the New Hampshire settlements were transferred to Massachusetts in 1641, and Sayebrook was sold to Connecticut in 1644. 
Closer to home, Saye once again proved an inveterate opponent of extra-parliamentary taxation, and he led the resistance to ship money in Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire. In Lincolnshire his goods were distrained, and he sued the constable and the sheriff for acting illegally. In retaliation, on 28 June 1637 the privy council ordered the attorney-general to proceed against him in Star Chamber for allegedly depopulating three farms in Lincolnshire and enclosing an ox pasture, although apparently no action was taken. Saye, acting on Oliver St John's legal advice, wanted to bring his case to court, insisting that the writ for levying ship money was illegal. However, the king and council were reluctant to take on such an eminent figure, and when Saye's nephew Sir Peter Temple, sheriff of Buckinghamshire, returned a list of ship money defaulters headed by the comparatively obscure John Hampden, Charles permitted that case to come to court instead. It is possible that Saye agreed to withdraw his own case on the understanding that Hampden's case would be allowed to test the legality of ship money. 
Saye's deep hostility towards Laudian policies was associated at the end of the 1630s with a corresponding sympathy towards the Scottish covenanters. In the spring of 1639 he accepted only with great reluctance the king's summons to York for the first campaign against the Scots. When Charles demanded that all English peers take a military oath committing their lives and fortunes to the maintenance of the struggle, Saye and Brooke queried the legality and wording of the oath. On 21 April both peers publicly refused to take the oath at a meeting of nobles at York. When his turn came, Saye: 'rose upp and secondly kneeled downe and told his Majesty that he would take the Oath of Allegeance and Supreamacy, to adventur his lyfe and fortunes for the defence of this kingdome of England against any that should invade it. But to goe and kill a man in Scotland he was not satisfyed of the lawfullness therof. ('Rutland MSS', 507)' The king interviewed both Saye and Brooke but when they refused to relent he ordered them to be imprisoned and interrogated. However, the crown's lawyers could find no reason to punish them and after four days' confinement both peers were sent home and restricted to their estates during the king's pleasure. 
Following his decision in February 1640 to recall parliament for the following April, Charles attempted to deny Saye, Brooke, and Edward Montagu, Lord Mandeville, their writs of summons, but was persuaded to relent, possibly by Algernon Percy, earl of Northumberland. On 24 April Saye was among the minority of twenty-five peers who sided with the Commons in refusing to grant supply before redress of grievances, and entered their dissents when the majority in the Lords rallied to the king. Alone among the peers Saye spoke out directly against Charles's appeal to the Lords not to join with the Commons. Following the parliament's dissolution on 5 May, Saye, Brooke, Pym, and John Hampden were imprisoned and their studies were searched for documents that might reveal treasonable dealings with the Scots. But Saye was too wary to have left such evidence and, although probably complicit in encouraging the Scots to invade England in the summer of 1640, he refused to sign the proposed letter of invitation. However, many at court remained deeply suspicious of him and towards the end of that year Strafford was advising Charles to begin treason proceedings against Saye and his allies when he was himself arrested and put on trial. In August 1640 Saye was one of the twelve peers who petitioned Charles to recall parliament, complaining of various 'evils and dangers', including the king's 'present expedition against the Scottish army'; 'the sundry innovations in matters of religion'; 'the urging of Ship Money'; and 'the great grief of your subjects by the long intermission of Parliaments' (S. R. Gardiner, ed., 'Constitutional Documents of the Puritan Revolution, 1625-1660', 3rd edn, 1906, 134-6). 
In the early months of the Long Parliament Saye was among the peers whom Charles attempted to win over with appointments to high offices. On 19 February 1641 -- along with such other prominent 'opposition' peers as the earls of Bristol, Bedford, Essex, and Hertford and lords Mandeville and Savile -- Saye was appointed a privy councillor. He also became master of the court of wards on 17 May, and one of the commissioners for the treasury four days later. But such preferment failed to secure his compliance. In the Lords he supported the earl of Strafford's attainder, and on 24 May he urged that bishops and clergy be restrained from interfering in secular matters, arguing that in the upper house the bishops 'have such an absolute dependency upon the King, that they sit not here as freemen' ('Two Speeches in Parliament', 5). In another speech the same year he criticized the rigidity of the Church of England and the 'Book of Common Prayer' and denounced attempts to impose 'certaine prayers and formes of divine service... upon all persons, in all times, and upon all occasions to be used and none other'. This 'injunction of such formes upon all men' was, he argued, 'as if because some men had need to make use of crutches, all men should bee prohibited the use of legges, and injoyned to take up such crutches as have been prepared for those who had no legges' (ibid., 10). However, Saye vehemently rebutted the charge that he was 'the greatest separatist in England', and asserted that the 'separatists' failing is in this, they hold that there is no true Church in England, no true ministry, no true worship' (ibid., 13). Late in June he was among the majority in the Lords who supported the bill for the abolition of the court of Star Chamber. Towards the end of the following month it was rumoured in London that Saye might be appointed lord treasurer (with Pym as chancellor of the exchequer and Hampden as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster), and during the king's visit to Scotland between August and November 1641 Saye served as one of the commissioners of regency. 
As the civil war approached Saye was one of the peers who consistently supported the Commons' demands. Early in December he supported the Commons' impressment bill authorizing conscription of an army to suppress the Irish rising against those peers who argued that this measure encroached upon the royal prerogative to raise armed forces. On 24 December 1641 Saye entered his protest against the peers' vote to postpone consideration of the Commons' declaration for the 'good and safety of the King and kingdom' demanding the removal of Sir Thomas Lunsford as lieutenant of the Tower of London ('JHL', 4, 1628-42, 489-90). When the Lords voted on 17 January 1642 not to join the Commons in demanding that Sir John Conyers be appointed lieutenant of the Tower, Saye entered his dissent. Similarly on 24 January, when the Lords refused to support the Commons' request that fortresses and the militia be placed in the hands of persons in whom parliament could confide, Saye was among those who protested. When the militia ordinance was passed on 5 March 1642 Saye was nominated as lord lieutenant of Oxfordshire, Cheshire, and Gloucestershire. The following month he ignored a summons from the king, issued to several privy councillors, to join him at York. 
Equally there are tantalizing glimpses that Saye had tried not to sever his links with the court completely until this point. A record survives of a warrant on 28 December 1641 to issue $1200 to Saye, 'which he is forthwith to disburse in His Mats. speciall and private service according to his Mats. direccons already given him therein' (TNA: PRO, SO 3/12, Signet office docket book, fol. 179'r'). $40 was paid on this warrant on 5 May 1642. It is intriguing that in January 1642, when the duke of Richmond (who was of the blood royal) created a furore by proposing that the Long Parliament be adjourned for six months and was required to 'make an humble submission and acknowledgement', Saye did not join Essex, Pembroke, Warwick, Wharton, Brooke and seventeen other peers in protesting that this was 'not a sufficient punishment' ('JHL', 4, 1628-42, 543). On 12 April Saye reported to the Lords a message from the earl of Dorset, the queen's lord chamberlain, stating that he was absent from the Lords because of ill health and would not join the king at York without the Lords' permission. In the event, Dorset arrived at York in May, and the fact that Saye had conveyed this message from a prominent royalist suggests that he may have retained some contacts with the court. However, events were moving rapidly towards armed conflict: on 10 June Saye pledged to donate $1000 for the raising of troops for the houses' cause, and on 4 July he was one of five peers appointed to a committee of safety comprised jointly of members of the Lords and Commons. 
Saye's political influence continued to grow after the outbreak of the civil war. In August 1642 he raised a regiment of troops and in the following month occupied Oxford, where he had been high steward of the university since July 1641. He then joined the parliamentarian forces at Edgehill, and shortly after the battle Broughton Castle surrendered to the royalists. Charles exempted Saye from pardon on 3 November 1642, and in the following March the king refused to grant him safe conduct to act as one of the parliamentarian peace commissioners at the treaty of Oxford. On 12 June 1643 Saye was appointed to the Westminster assembly of divines. He attended the assembly frequently and soon emerged as a prominent Erastian Independent who wished to extend religious toleration and whose hostility towards presbyterianism (as towards episcopacy) rested on a deep vein of anticlericalism. 
Saye's Independent attitudes aligned him with a number of close political allies in both houses of parliament, the most important of whom were Oliver St John, Sir Henry Vane the younger, Sir John Evelyn of Wiltshire, Oliver Cromwell, and Saye's own second son Nathaniel Fiennes in the Commons, and lords Wharton and Howard of Escrick, and the earls of Kent, Northumberland, Salisbury, and Denbigh in the Lords. These figures formed the core of a political 'interest' committed to a decisive victory over the king. To this end Saye was prepared to support the solemn league and covenant of September 1643 which established a military alliance between the parliamentarians and the Scots. It is likely that in February 1644 Saye, along with his allies in the Commons such as St John and the younger Vane, supported the creation of the first committee of both kingdoms. Sir John Berkenhead, author of the royalist newsbook 'Mercurius Aulicus', alleged that Saye was one of the 'first authors of this new committee' ('Mercurius Aulicus', 7th week, 11-17 Feb 1644, 828 [mispaginated as 825], BL, E 35/27). The Scottish minister Robert Baillie likewise reported that the proposal 'was gotten through the House of Lords with little difficultie, where most was expected; my Lord Say... being somewhat of the generall' ('The Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', ed. D. Laing, 3 vols., 1841-2, 2.141, 18 Feb 1644). These reports are suggestive, although there appears to be no evidence in the surviving parliamentary record to prove conclusively that Saye actually introduced the bill that established the new committee, a move that followed immediately upon a Scottish request, reported to the Lords by Essex, for the appointment of commissioners to consider 'the managing of the affairs of both kingdoms' ('JHL', 6, 1643-4, 405). Saye was among the peers appointed to the committee and he was also named to the second committee of both kingdoms, created in May 1644. Thereafter he assiduously attended the committee's meetings (and from 1648 those of its successor, the Derby House committee), and he regularly acted as a messenger between these committees and the Lords. 
The committee of both kingdoms henceforth assumed wide-ranging executive powers, and this had the effect of eroding the authority of the earl of Essex, the parliamentarian lord-general. Essex's authority was finally brought to an end by the military reforms of the winter of 1644-5, notably the self-denying ordinance and the creation of the New Model Army, and Saye was among the supporters of these measures. The self-denying ordinance was brought up to the Lords from the Commons on 21 December 1644 and when it was rejected on 13 January 1645 Saye was one of only four peers (along with Kent, Nottingham, and Northumberland) who registered their dissent. 
The Commons was meanwhile considering a scheme for 'new modelling' the army, with Sir Thomas Fairfax as its commander-in-chief: this ordinance was sent to the Lords on 28 January and accepted by them on 15 February. On 17-18 March the Lords divided 11:11 over whether to accept Fairfax's proposed list of officers, which contained a number of prominent Independents. Saye produced the proxy of the aged and absent earl of Mulgrave (who was Fairfax's grandfather), and thereby swung the vote in favour of accepting the list ('JHL', 7, 1644-5, 276-7). Saye was also among the peers (along with the earls of Northumberland, Kent, Pembroke, Nottingham, and Salisbury, and lords Wharton, North, and Howard of Escrick) who sided with the Commons in urging that Fairfax's commission should not include a clause for 'preserving the safety of His Majesty's person' ('JHL', 7, 1644-5, 293), like the one contained in the original commission to Essex as lord-general. Twice, on 29 and 31 March, Saye again used Mulgrave's proxy to produce an even division in the Lords. Finally, on 1 April the earl of Bolingbroke transferred his vote, enabling Saye and his allies to win the day and ensuring that the Lords agreed to the Commons' request that the clause be dropped. On 3 April the Lords also accepted the new self-denying ordinance which the Commons had sent up on 31 March. 
Saye's important contribution to the new modelling of the parliamentarian army continued with his appointment, on 31 March 1645, to the new bicameral army committee. Here he again found himself co-operating closely with like-minded peers (especially Northumberland, Pembroke, Salisbury, Kent, Wharton, and Howard of Escrick) as well as allies in the Commons (notably St John, Vane the younger, John Glynne, Robert Scawen, and Sir John Evelyn of Wiltshire). As the committee responsible for overseeing the collection of the assessment and providing the army with pay and provisions, the army committee had considerable opportunities to dispense patronage. Between 1645 and 1648 Saye and his allies also became prominent members of some of parliament's other bicameral committees, including the committee of revenue which in effect controlled the exchequer. It was unsurprising that when the court of wards was abolished in February 1646, Saye was granted $10,000 as compensation for the mastership. As satisfaction for $4000 of that sum he received Lord Cottington's estate at Hanworth in Middlesex that was in reality worth $14,000. Following the royalist surrender in June 1646, Saye was appointed one of the commissioners for parliament to treat with the Scots. 
During the months that followed Saye and his allies in both houses became steadily more disillusioned with the dominant presbyterian grouping within parliament led by Denzil Holles. Saye's hostility towards Holles was of long standing, and he was suspected of having put Lord Savile up to accusing Holles and Bulstrode Whitelocke of backstairs intrigues with the royalists during the treaty of Uxbridge in 1645. Saye and his allies particularly resented presbyterian attempts, in the spring and summer of 1647, to disband the majority of the army without guaranteed payment of arrears and to send the remnant to Ireland. When rioters sympathetic to the presbyterian leadership besieged the Palace of Westminster on 26 July 1647 Saye was among the eight Independent peers who, along with fifty-seven Independent members of the Commons and the speakers of both houses, fled to the protection of the army at Hounslow Heath. These members of both houses subsequently signed an engagement on 4 August defending their conduct and the justness of Fairfax's march into London to restore 'the honour and freedom of the Parliament' ('JHL', 9, 1646-7, 385). The army entered London two days later, and the members who had fled resumed their seats. From then until early 1648 Saye, Northumberland, and their allies generally formed a majority in the Lords and were able to seize the initiative to a greater extent than had been possible hitherto. 
Meanwhile, leading Independents in each house, together with their allies within the army such as Cromwell and Henry Ireton, had also been collaborating for several weeks on drafting and promoting their own terms for a settlement, known as 'The Heads of Proposals'. These terms offered Charles an alternative to the Newcastle propositions backed by the dominant presbyterian group, and enshrined the political and religious aims of the Independents. From Charles's point of view they were significantly more generous than the Newcastle propositions. They required that the houses nominate the officers of state and control the militia for ten years (rather than twenty), that only seven royalists be exempted from pardon (rather than fifty-eight), and that episcopacy be preserved provided that it was shorn of coercive powers and did not infringe religious liberty of conscience. Such terms coincided with Saye's attitudes as an Erastian Independent, and with his commitment to a balanced polity in which crown, Lords, and Commons wielded co-ordinate powers. The latter conviction made him wary of simply transferring responsibilities from the monarch to the houses. The heads were unusual among the peace terms of the 1640s in departing from that principle by requiring biennial parliaments, revoking the 'Triennial Act', and reducing the period of parliamentary control over the militia and the appointment of officers of state. 
Saye's role in drafting and promoting these proposals remains highly controversial. In particular, the surviving evidence does not prove that he oversaw the drafting of the first recension of the heads, or that he co-ordinated a sequence of meetings between army officers and the civilian Independents shortly before the army council adopted a revised recension at the beginning of August 1647, or that he masterminded the presentation of the terms to the king. The likelihood is that Saye was one of the peers, like Northumberland and Wharton, who were consulted over the terms and who were sympathetic to them, but that the actual drafting of the various recensions of the heads was performed primarily by Henry Ireton. A number of contemporaries, including Charles and some of his leading advisers, perceived the heads as 'the proposals of the army' (for example 'JHL', 10, 1647-8, 434-5), but Saye was a prominent member of the Independent coalition which backed the terms, and they were probably an accurate reflection of the basis on which he hoped that a post-war settlement with Charles might be constructed. 
Following the members' return to Westminster early in August and the king's rejection of the Newcastle propositions in mid-September, Saye was among the leading Independents in both houses who promoted a series of resolutions and propositions intended to embody the central elements of the heads. This process involved intensive collaboration by a familiar bicameral grouping of Independents, prompting Sir Lewis Dyve to inform the king early in September that 'Cromwell and his Cabbinett Counsell, which are the Lord Say, Saint Jon and Vaine the younger, now steer the affaires of the wholl kingdome' (Sir Lewis Dyve to Charles I, 5 Sept 1647, 'The Tower of London letter-book of Sir Lewis Dyve, 1646-47', ed. H. G. Tibbutt, Bedfordshire Historical RS, 38, 1958, 84). Saye, Wharton, and their allies now commanded a majority in the Lords, and they worked in close collaboration with their allies in the Commons led by Fiennes, Cromwell, St John, Evelyn, and the younger Vane. These Independents also maintained close links with the army and Saye was present at Putney, conferring with senior officers, during the opening days of the Putney debates at the end of October. 
Shortly afterwards, on 11 November, the political landscape changed once again when Charles escaped from Hampton Court. In an effort to keep negotiations alive, and to counter the sense of indignation felt within the army, Saye was among the peers who supported the presentation of a set of minimum terms to the king. On 25 November the Lords identified four propositions which were accepted by the Commons two days later and converted into bills. These four bills, presented to Charles on 24 December, required him to accept parliamentary control over the armed forces for twenty years, the voiding of all royalist declarations against the houses, the cancellation of peerages granted since May 1642 without parliament's consent, and the confirmation of parliament's right to adjourn to any place of its own choice. However, two days later Charles signed an engagement with commissioners representing his new-found allies among the Scots, with whom he had been secretly negotiating for several weeks. On 28 December he rejected the four bills, thereby wrecking the conciliatory strategy of Saye and his allies. Deeply disappointed, the houses passed the vote of no addresses, breaking off negotiations with Charles. Saye was apparently sympathetic to this vote, although he was not present in the Lords on the day that the house passed it (17 January 1648). 
In the spring of 1648 Saye was involved in a further attempt to reach a settlement with Charles and to dissuade him from his alliance with the Scots. This was a highly risky strategy as it involved a direct breach of the vote of no addresses. In mid-March Saye was rumoured to be in the Isle of Wight, and in the last week of that month he met St John, Evelyn, and Fiennes at Wallingford. They attempted to persuade the earl of Southampton 'to goe to the King to make way for a Treaty' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 31, fol. 51'r', letter of intelligence, 13 April 1648), but the earl declined to violate the vote of no addresses. Saye was absent from the Lords between 6 March and 20 April and on his return to London he tried to mobilize as much support as possible for continued negotiations. But these attempts were rapidly overtaken by the outbreak of the second civil war. As the army faced a series of provincial uprisings and an invasion from Scotland, many officers became more and more convinced that Charles should be brought to account as a 'man of blood'. 
Yet Saye, like the majority of members of both houses, could not envisage any lasting settlement without the king. The vote of no addresses was therefore repealed on 24 August, and Saye was among the fifteen parliamentarian commissioners appointed to treat with the king at Newport in September (alongside Northumberland, Pembroke, Middlesex, and Salisbury). During the treaty Saye was reported to be 'the most inward man with the King': he was 'very intimate' with Richmond, and 'by him... [Saye] conveyed his intelligence still to the King. Hee was so confident of the succes of the Treatie, that hee had bespoke himselfe to bee Lord Treasurer' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Dep. c. 169, MS Nalson, fol. 181'r'- 'v'). When the treaty was adjourned for a few days early in November, Saye returned to London and lobbied actively for the talks. But his efforts were in vain: on 6 December, Colonel Pride purged the Commons, and Nathaniel Fiennes was among the forty-five imprisoned members. Saye's influence with Fairfax secured his son's early release but with the path now cleared for the king's trial and execution Saye's hopes for a settlement had been abruptly dashed. He did not attend the Lords after 7 December; on 23 December he and twenty-seven other peers were summoned to attend the house on 28 December, but when the appointed day arrived he neither appeared nor requested leave for absence. His political influence was at an end, and to add to his woes his wife had also died in 1648 and was buried in the church at Broughton. Deeply dispirited, Saye withdrew from public affairs and apparently retired to his retreat on the Isle of Lundy in the Bristol Channel. 
Saye was certainly on Lundy in 1651 when a royalist privateer who had captured one of his ships wrote a letter to him; he was apparently still there two years later, when Dorothy Osborne wrote that 'My Lord Saye as I am tolde has writ a Romance since his retirement in the Isle of Lundee' ('The Letters of Dorothy Osborne to William Temple', ed. G. C. Moore Smith, 1928, 91, letter 40, undated [2 Oct 1653]). The following year saw the publication of an anonymous work, the 'Vindiciae veritatis', and it is possible that Osborne's comment referred to this. If so, it was either incorrect or ironic, for the 'Vindiciae' was no romance but a lengthy polemical text that offered both a sustained defence of the political and religious views associated with Saye and his allies and an account of the civil wars from their viewpoint. It also presents a detailed apology for the conduct of Saye's son, Nathaniel Fiennes. The 'Vindiciae' has often traditionally been attributed to Fiennes; it has also been plausibly ascribed to Saye himself; and it is even possible that it was, at least in part, co-authored. Internal evidence suggests that large sections of it were written in 1646 and reworked in 1648. The 'Vindiciae' advocated the co-ordinate powers of crown, Lords, and Commons, a view that Saye had held since at least 1640. The treatise also revealed a marked strain of anticlericalism against both bishops and presbyterians which, together with the crucial role accorded to the Lords as a balance between crown and Commons, affords further clear resemblances to Saye's own attitudes. 
Saye's view of the constitution was clearly set out in a letter that he wrote to his friend Lord Wharton on 29 December 1657 explaining why he felt unable to accept Cromwell's invitation to join the 'other house' created by 'The humble petition and advice'. He argued that English government was 'the best in the worlde' because it was: 'a mixture of the three lawfull governments in that manner that it hath the quintessence of them all, and thearby also the one is a boundary unto the other, whearby they are keapt from fallinge into the extreames which eather are apt to slippe into, monarchy into tyranny, and aristocracy into oligarchy, democracy into anarchy.' In maintaining this balance, the House of Lords played a vital role as 'the beame keepinge both scales, Kinge and people, in an even posture, without incroachments one uppon another to the hurt and dammage of both'. Saye deplored the idea of a nominated 'other house' on the grounds that it was 'a stalkinge horse and vizard to carry on the designe of overthrowinge the House of Peeres' and replace it with a chamber hand-picked by Cromwell. Such an invitation, he felt, could only be to the 'perpetual shame' of those who accepted it ('A letter from Lord Saye and Sele', 106-7). 
Saye appears to have spent the later years of the protectorate back at Broughton. In March 1658 a royalist agent reported that Saye, although sympathetic to the king, felt that any restoration of the Stuarts should be conditional upon 'a confirmation of the articles of the Isle of Wight, or something equivalent' ('State Papers Collected by Edward, Earl of Clarendon', 3 vols., 1767, 3.392). In the following year Saye published a bitter denunciation of the Quakers, 'Folly and Madnesse Made Manifest' (1659). It is possible that fear of a Quaker uprising helped to make Saye, like many others, more amenable to the idea of the king's return. By 1660 Saye had accepted the restoration of Charles II without conditions, and when the Convention met on 25 April he was one of ten former parliamentarian peers who entered the Lords for the first time in eleven years. 
Keen to woo his old political opponents, Charles II appointed Saye a privy councillor in June 1660, although the story that he was also made keeper of the privy seal appears to be unfounded. Saye retained his interest in the New England colonies, and was appointed a member of the committee for plantations (4 July 1660) and of the committee to settle the government of New England (17 May 1661). Near the end of his life he wrote from London to the governor of Massachusetts on 10 July 1661: 'I was loth to omit writing, because it may be my last, my glass being almost run out, and I retiring home... I have not been wanting, both to the King and Council, to advance your interest; more I cannot do, but earnestly to pray the Lord to stand with you and for you. (T. Hutchinson, 'The History of the Colony of Massachuset's Bay', Boston, 1765, 220-21)' Saye died at Broughton Castle on 14 April 1662, a few weeks before his eightieth birthday, and was buried in the church at Broughton. He was succeeded by his eldest son, James ('c'.1603-1684). His will, dated 3 March 1659, was proved on 19 November 1662. He left an extensive library, valued for probate at $500. 
Saye's contemporaries recognized his considerable influence, especially during the 1640s, and even his avowed ideological opponents acknowledged his political agility. The author of the royalist newsbook 'Mercurius Elencticus' observed: 'He's as smooth as a butter-box. Oh how the Presbyterians sneare in their sleeves to see with what dexterity this spider weaves his nets to catch the silly flies of the Army' ('Mercurius Elencticus', no. 2, 5-12 Nov 1647, 11, BL, E 414/4). In January 1648 Marchamont Nedham wrote that Saye: 'with a twine thread leads about our wise nobility... He hath a footing in every Juncto, maintaines a correspond with every conventicle, and preserves an interest in every faction; hath oportunity to kisse and betray all in a breath, and is the only modern copie of the ancient Janus, that can looke forward and backward to watch all advantages. ('Mercurius Pragmaticus', no. 19, 18-25 Jan 1648, sig. T2'v', BL, E 423/21)' Clarendon summed up Saye's importance thus: '[he] gave over any pursuit in Court, and lived narrowly and sordidly in the country, having conversation with very few but such who had great malignity against the Church and State, and fomented their inclinations, and gave them instructions how to behave themselves with caution and to do their business with most security, and was in truth the pilot that steered all those vessels which were freighted with sedition to destroy the government. (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.548)' In another passage Clarendon wrote that Saye 'had for many years been the oracle of those who were called Puritans in the worst sense, and steered all their counsels and designs. He was a notorious enemy of the Church and to most of the eminent churchmen' (ibid., 1.241). 
Overall, Saye's contemporary nickname, Old Subtlety, was highly appropriate, for he was an adroit and skilful politician with a real talent for intrigue and manoeuvre. His political behaviour is often difficult to reconstruct fully, partly because the surviving evidence is incomplete but also because his deftness sometimes left little more than intriguing glimpses in the historical record. His personality and life were in many ways full of paradoxes. Saye was a man of emphatic views and high principles, whose political influence often remains elusive and enigmatic. He had a lengthy political career, yet his real period of prominence on the national stage lasted for only a decade during the 1640s. He was someone who constantly sought peace, yet who achieved his greatest eminence in a time of war and who regarded a decisive victory over Charles as necessary for a lasting settlement. In the end he epitomized many of the agonies and dilemmas of the turbulent age in which he lived: his life offers an illuminating case study of sincere and principled opposition to Charles I, an unsuccessful search for a settlement, an inability to come to terms with the republic, and eventually an acceptance of the restoration of the monarchy. 


@@@@@


doc= 9416


Fife, Sir John (1795-1871), surgeon and politician, was born at Newcastle upon Tyne, his father, William Fife, being a medical man of Scottish origin, practising at Newcastle. After qualifying as a member of the London College of Surgeons, he was for a short time an army assistant surgeon at Woolwich, but returned to Newcastle in 1815, and commenced practice with his father. As a practitioner, and especially as a surgeon, he took a leading position in his town and throughout the northern counties, being remarkable for his punctuality and for the long distances he would ride in all weathers. He specialized in diseases of the eye, founding in 1822, with T. M. Greenhow, a charity which became the Newcastle Eye Infirmary. In 1834 he took an active part in founding the Newcastle school of medicine, in which he long lectured on surgery, being also surgeon to the Newcastle Infirmary. He was a successful lithotomist and a very cool and confident operator. He became fellow of the College of Surgeons in 1844. In March 1818 he married Elizabeth, second daughter of Joseph Bainbridge, a prominent Newcastle solicitor who contained Fife's radical political enthusiasm. They had four sons and two daughters. His wife died in 1834. 
Fife's distinction as a local politician was even greater than his mark as a surgeon. He was, as a young man, an advanced Liberal, being active in 1831 in forming the northern political union, which agitated in favour of the 'Reform Bill', Fife's stirring speeches and effective organization having a great effect on Northumbrian opinion. In 1835 he was elected one of the first members of the new corporation of Newcastle, and was immediately chosen alderman. In 1838-9 he was mayor, and when the Chartist outbreak of July 1839 took place he broke it up with bayonets. For this he was knighted in 1840. In 1843 he was again mayor, and presided at a great meeting on 22 January 1843, addressed by Richard Cobden, in furtherance of the anti-corn law agitation. He continued a member of the corporation until 1863. His radicalism cooled and he 'gradually settled down into a mild and colourless Whig'. He was an energetic proponent of the establishment of a diocese of Newcastle. He was one of the most influential promoters of the volunteer movement in Newcastle in 1859, and became lieutenant-colonel of the local regiment, resigning his post in 1868, and receiving a silver centrepiece, of value $100, as a testimonial from the regiment. He was for some years president of the Newcastle Mechanics' Institution, and supported many educational and other measures for the benefit of the working classes. After a life of great activity, Fife suffered from stone in the bladder, which was removed by Sir William Fergusson in 1870, but he was compelled to retire from practice. On 15 January 1871 he was attacked by paralysis, and died the next day at his home, Reedsmouth House, North Tyne. 


@@@@@


doc= 9417


Figg, James (b. before 1700, d. 1734), prize-fighter, was born in Thame, Oxfordshire, of unknown parents. Little is known of his early life but by 1714 he was living in London and a scholar of the renowned master of the noble science of defence, Timothy Buck of Clare Market. It appears that during that year Figg himself attained the position of master, which necessitated expertise in such weapons as the backsword and quarterstaff. In due course he opened an amphitheatre adjoining his house, at the sign of the City of Oxford, in Oxford Road. This was later the subject of a dispute between Figg and his landlord, who appeared before the master of the rolls in a hearing which went in favour of the prize-fighter. Figg's amphitheatre became London's premier venue for sporting entertainment and it was considered fashionable for a gentleman to attend frequently the many advertised performances: '
From Figg's theatre, he will not miss a night, 

Though cocks and bulls, and Irish women, fight. 
(Caulfield, 2.69)' Figg is generally regarded as England's first pugilistic champion, although he primarily specialized in 'trials of skill' (weapons) rather than 'trials of manhood' (fists). However, his amphitheatre was undoubtedly a showcase for some of the best early exponents of regular boxing, including the Lincolnshire drover John Whitacre (Whitaker), John Gretton (Gretting), a Westminster cabinet-maker, and the St Giles pipe-maker, Thomas Allen (Pipes). Figg's own pugilistic exploits seem to have been confined to Southwark fair, where within its duration he exhibited 'his knowledge in various Combats -- with the Foil, Back-sword, Cudgel, and Fist' at his booth on the bowling green (Egan, 1.44). He did, however, play an important role in what was almost certainly the first international boxing match. Figg was requested to select a man capable of beating an Italian famous for his fistic ability and personally train him for the contest ('London Journal', 16 Jan 1725). The chosen opponent was Whitacre, who defeated the 'Venetian Gondolier' on 20 January 1725 at Figg's amphitheatre. Figg also acted on occasions in the capacity of stakeholder, as when Allen and William Smallwood signed articles of agreement to box at his establishment in the summer of 1729. 
In line with the prevailing trend of the time, in his numerous trials of skill Figg faced several opponents on a regular basis. He met the noted Dubliner Rowland Bennet (Bennett) on no fewer than twenty-three occasions before April 1731 ('Daily Post', 21 April 1731) and often fought another renowned Dublin master, Christopher Perkins. He also participated in three bloody battles with the Irishman William Holmes in less than two months in 1730. The third of these, on 14 October, was Figg's 271st trial, and was terminated in his favour when he cut his opponent's wrist to the bone. However, Figg's greatest rival was Edward Sutton, a Gravesend pipe-maker. One of their encounters, on 14 April 1725, was witnessed by the poet and stenographer John Byrom. He penned a poem describing the event and recorded in his journal: 'Figg and Sutton fought; Figg had a wound, and bled pretty much; Sutton had a blow with a quarterstaff just upon his knee, which made him lame, so then they gave over' ('Private Journal', 1.117). Another of Figg's famous battles occurred against John Sparks at the Little (sometimes referred to as the French or New) Theatre in the Haymarket on 3 December 1731. It was contested in front of the duke of Lorraine, Count Kinski, and other persons of distinction, with Figg triumphing to great applause. More unusual was a much earlier trial 'at Marybone, between the famous Figg and one Mr. Donald in plain Buff, as they call it' on 11 September 1723, when Figg disabled his opponent by cutting his arm ('Daily Journal', 12 Sept 1723). 
Several advertisements in contemporary newspapers show that occasionally Figg was scheduled to participate in trials of skill with a fellow master against an opposing duo. His intended partner in one of the earliest of these was Timothy Buck, and in one of the last, Edward Sutton. Although Figg arranged mixed paired encounters at his amphitheatre, he does not appear to have taken part in any of these himself. However, James Stokes, who later set up in opposition to him, was advertised with his wife, Elizabeth, the celebrated 'City Championess', to meet Sutton and a Kentish female at Figg's in August 1725. 
Owing to Figg's position as the most respected stage gladiator of his day he was much in demand as a teacher. His success in this field can be measured by the quality of his scholars, among the most renowned of whom were William Flanders of Northamptonshire, Gloucester's William Gill, and Thomas Sibblis from Worcestershire. Figg also had many students among the gentry and nobility. He is said to have boasted that he had not bought a shirt for years, as every time he fought he borrowed one from each of several wealthy pupils. Seeing his master's cut shirt after the battle, each man, supposing this to be what he had lent, did not think it worthwhile to ask for its return, and hence Figg was regularly supplied with fine shirts, always at the expense of others. In June 1731 Figg began teaching at new premises in Poland Street, and his Oxford Road establishment, by then known as Mr Figg's Great Room, was later taken over by Sibblis. 
In combat Figg's style was characterized by his coolness, resolution, and peerless judgement. A former pupil, Captain John Godfrey, later wrote 'He was just as much a greater MASTER than any other I ever saw, as he was a greater Judge of 'Time' and 'Measure'' (Godfrey, 41). The marquis de Bretagne, who witnessed an encounter in which Figg sliced off a large piece of an Irish sergeant's calf, considered his dexterity with a sword to be unsurpassed. Figg's expertise stood him in good stead when, on 16 February 1732, two sheriff's officers unlawfully entered his house to arrest an acquaintance of his wife. He fended them off with a hanger (short sword), and proceedings were subsequently instigated against him. On 23 May, at the court of the king's bench, Westminster, the plaintiffs were awarded $100 for the assault. This was nullified when a countercharge by Figg, accusing the officers of trespass, resulted in the same amount of damages being allowed. 
Such was Figg's fame that he is traditionally considered to be featured in two notable works by William Hogarth, 'Southwark Fair' and 'A Rake's Progress'. In addition, it is probable that he also appears in the artist's 'A Midnight Modern Conversation', although a ticket, or business card, depicting Figg, originally regarded as an early engraving by the celebrated painter, is now believed to be of dubious origin. Figg was also known to the thief and renowned gaolbreaker Jack Sheppard, who stopped at the City of Oxford for a pint of sack on his way to be hanged at Tyburn. 
In autumn 1729 the earl of Essex appointed Figg gatekeeper of the upper St James's Park. He died on 8 December 1734 at his house in the Oxford Road and was interred in the burial-ground of the parish church of St Marylebone three days later. Although there is little doubt that Figg was married, nothing is known of his wife except that she was reported by the 'London Evening-Post' to have given birth to a son the day after Figg's burial. 


@@@@@


doc= 9418


Filbie, William (c.1555-1582), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was the second son of George Filbie and his wife, Alice. He was born in St Mary Magdalen parish in Oxford, where his father was a courier. Both he and his older brother, John, were probably educated at Lincoln College, where John graduated BA. The brothers left England for Douai and began their studies at the English College there. William Filbie was priested in the parish church of St Mary, Rheims, by the bishop of Chalons-sur-Marne on 25 March 1581, and was sent to England later that year to work in the mission. 
Filbie was arrested at Henley-on-Thames, where he wanted to speak to the captured Edmund Campion, who was being conducted to London with two other arrested priests, John Colleton and Thomas Forde. While under guard at Henley, Filbie was said to have had a violent nightmare, dreaming about 'the ripping up of his body and taking out of his bowels, the terror whereof caused him to cry so loud that the whole house was raised' (Allen, 11). The four prisoners were taken to London and committed to the Tower on 22 July 1581. Filbie was charged and condemned together with Campion on 21 November 1581, and executed at Tyburn with two other priests on 30 May 1582. He, being the youngest, was the first to be executed. The diary of the English College records that the three priests were hanged, drawn, and quartered: 'In crucem actos et pro more solito membratim dissectos fuisse tres ex sacerdotibus nostris' ('Diaries of the English College', 188). 
Filbie was beatified in 1886 by Pope Leo XIII. 


@@@@@


doc= 9419


Filcock, Roger (c.1570-1601), Jesuit and martyr, was probably born in Sandwich, Kent. Nothing is known about his parents or his early life; none of the family appears in the three Sandwich church registers. Filcock arrived at the English College, Rheims, on 15 June 1588 for his early studies. He was then sent to St Alban's College, Valladolid, Spain, on 29 September 1590 with nine other students, entering on 20 February 1591. After completing his studies in theology he was ordained a priest in 1597. He wanted to become a Jesuit, but his superior, Henry Garnet, deferred his admission until he had spent some time on the English mission, to which he was sent in 1598. Filcock's alias in the English mission was Arthur Nayler. He was admitted to the Society of Jesus about 1600. Garnet was about to send Filcock to Flanders for his two years noviceship when Filcock was apprehended. 
On 23 February 1601 Filcock was indicted under the statute of 27 Elizabeth for being a seminary priest and entering the country. He was convicted, without any previous examination and without production of any witnesses, on the bare suspicion of being a priest. He neither denied nor admitted his priesthood. He was executed at Tyburn on 27 February 1601, together with the woman who had allowed him to stay in her house, the gentle widow Ann Line, and Mark Barkworth. There had not been a martyrdom at Tyburn since 1595 and it was said that the three were executed to divert public attention from the trial of the earl of Essex, who was executed on 7 March 1601. 
Filcock was beatified by Pope John Paul II on 22 November 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 9420


Faelan Amlabar (641/2-724), abbot of Iona, is one of two saints commemorated under the name of Fillan in Scotland and often confused in the literature of the later middle ages; the epithet Amlabar means 'the Mute'. His seat was at Rotterns in Perthshire and, according to later traditions, he was buried at Strathfillan and his cult is associated with the Scottish king Robert I. Although a later genealogy made this Faelan the son of the fifth-century Irish prince Oengus, son of Nad Fraich, a more likely identification is with the eighth-century ecclesiastic Faelchu mac Dorbeni (Faelan is the diminutive of Faelchu). Faelchu was elected abbot of the monastery of Iona on 29 August 716, at the age of seventy-four; he died in 724 and his feast is celebrated on 20 June. The other saint is the Irish cleric 
Two precious relics of Faelan are treasured at Edinburgh in the museum of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. They are his crozier and his bell. Of the crozier the earliest existing record is found in an inquiry (of which the original is preserved in the Breadalbane charter room at Taymouth Castle), held before a jury at Glendochart on 2 April 1428, as to the privileges attaching to its possession by the Dewar family. The name by which the crozier was then called was the 'coygerach', or, later, the 'quigrich', a form of the Gaelic 'coigrioch' ('stranger, foreigner'). The name demonstrates that the authority of the crozier allowed its holder to travel out of his own district in pursuit of stolen property. It next appears in letters patent of James III, dated 11 July 1487, which testify that it had been in the possession of the same family from the days of Robert I. The Dewar owner emigrated to Canada after 1795, and all trace of the crozier was lost, until in 1859 it was found in the possession of a descendant of the emigrant. He, at the age of eighty-seven, desiring that the relic should be restored to Scotland, sold it on 30 December 1876, to be kept in the museum at Edinburgh. It is of silver gilt and ornamented with filigree work; but upon examination the silver was found to form an outer case enclosing an older staff of bronze or copper. 
The second relic is the bell (which weighs 8 lb 14 oz). It was long preserved in an ancient churchyard in Strathfillan in Perthshire, where it was regarded as possessing great curative powers, especially in cases of insanity. It was stolen by an English traveller in 1798 and taken to Hertfordshire, where it remained until 1869, when it was restored to Scotland by Alexander Forbes, bishop of Brechin. Hector Boece (died 1536) has linked the saint with the winning of the battle of Bannockburn by a legend, of which he is the sole narrator: that Robert I (Robert Bruce) was accustomed to carry about with him an arm of St Fillan, set in silver, as an amulet ensuring good fortune; that the chaplain to whose care it was entrusted brought only the empty case to the field, fearing that the fortune of war might lead to the loss of the precious contents; but that the night before the battle the case was suddenly heard to open and close itself, and on examination it was found that the arm had returned to its place. Boece puts in the mouth of the king a reference to this miracle in his speech to his army before the battle. Robert I's veneration for the saint is indicated by his provision, on 26 February 1318, of an Augustinian canon to celebrate divine service in the church of St Fillan at Strathfillan. Later in the same year William, bishop of Dunkeld, promoted the church to a priory, and in 1329, shortly before his death, funds were granted by Robert for building expenses. 


