@@@@@


doc= 9421


Fillian, John (fl. 1650-1662), engraver, was the son of William Fillian, a tailor of Covent Garden, London, and was apprenticed in the Goldsmiths' Company to Edward Cooke for eight years on 20 September 1650. He never, however, became a freeman, and seems never to have worked as a goldsmith. He evidently became a pupil of the engraver William Faithorne the elder, who himself became a member of the Goldsmiths' Company in 1652. He is mentioned by John Evelyn in his 'Sculptura' of 1662 as 'J. Fellian, disciple of Mr Faithorne, who is a hopeful young man' (Evelyn, 99). 
Only four engravings by Fillian are known, of which by far the best is his portrait of Faithorne himself, which was probably made around 1660. It is of vastly higher quality than his other plates, and bears out Evelyn's high assessment of his merit. His only dated plate is a half-length engraving of Thomas Cromwell, which was published by Peter Stent in 1653. He also engraved for Stent a copy of John Payne's portrait of Paracelsus, which was advertised in Stent's catalogue of 1662. 
Fillian's fourth plate was a title-page for a later edition of Peter Heylyn's 'Cosmographie', copied from Robert Vaughan, who made the title-plate for the first edition in 1651. Fillian's copy is only known with the date 1677, but the plate has clearly been altered, and remaining traces of the original lettering show that it was first used at some point in the 1660s. Thus the date of his death is probably long before 1680, the traditional date given in print literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 9422


Fills, Robert (c.1521-1578), translator and Church of England clergyman, is of obscure parentage. However, it is likely that he belonged to the Fell family who in the sixteenth century were distributed in the Furness district of Lancashire. Fills may plausibly be identified with the Robert Fellys who was admitted BA at Oxford in November 1542 and who was a scholar at St Alban Hall in 1543. He was dispensed in August 1546 to take holy orders outside the statutory time, and was ordained sub-deacon, deacon, and priest at Oxford on various dates in September 1546. 
Fills fled England some time after the accession of Mary I, and he and his wife, Rose (died 1578/9), became members, on 26 November 1557, of the Genevan congregation led by the Scottish reformer John Knox. Three days later he was entered (as 'Robert Fillet') in the city's 'Livre des habitants', with the designation 'Un Anglois'. 
Fills had returned to England by July of either 1560 or 1561 (probably the latter), when, on the petition of John Scory, also a quondam Genevan exile and now bishop of Hereford, he was presented by Elizabeth I to the third prebend (without cure of souls) in the quasi-collegiate church at Bromyard in Herefordshire; he was instituted to this benefice in June of either 1561 or 1562 (probably the latter). In April 1562 Fills published a translation of a text inspired by Calvin's teaching: 'The lawes and statutes of Geneva, as well concerning ecclesiastical discipline, as civill regiment', which was printed by Rowland Hall, the printer of the 1560 Geneva 'Bible'. Although it makes no reference to Calvin himself, this translation, admitted by Fills to be 'worde for worde' (Hopfl, 268, n. 83) and judged 'highly accurate' by Hopfl, includes not only the text of the ecclesiastical 'Ordonnances' of 1560 but also that of the 1543 'Edicts' (that is, the civil constitution). Claiming to have obtained his raw materials 'oute of the register booke of the foresayde Citie' (sig. *3'v'), the translator dedicated his work to Lord Robert Dudley, the future earl of Leicester, testifying to Dudley's 'zeale... to the advau[n]cement of gods glorye in this realme, and the singuler... favour that you usually shewe to the furtherers thereof' (sig. *2'r'). Fills paraded his humanist learning in the dedicatory epistle by citing Aristophanes, Josephus, Xenophon, Plutarch, Aristotle, and Livy. 
In 1563 Fills was preferred by an unknown patron to the Herefordshire rectory of Kingsland, and recorded by crown officials as having failed to compound for the first fruits of his Bromyard benefice. In that same year he published a translation from Theodore Beza: 'A briefe and pith-thie summe of the Christian faith made in forme of a confession, with a confutation of all suche superstitious errours, as are contrary thereunto', also printed by Rowland Hall. The translator boasts in the dedicatory epistle, addressed to Henry Hastings, the puritan third earl of Huntingdon and Lord Robert Dudley's brother-in-law, that he was 'somewhat acquainted' with Beza himself (sig. *2'r'), who was to succeed Calvin as the Genevan 'antistes'. Referring to England, Fills took this opportunity to complain vituperatively of the 'myngle mangle of spirituall and temporall regiment', drawing particular attention to the state of the cathedrals, many allegedly being 'only a very refuge and denne of idell, ignoraunt, and unpreaching lubbers' (sig. 4'v'). There were at least six further editions of Fills's work by 1590. 
Probably in 1564 Fills followed up 'A briefe and pith-thie summe' with yet another translation from French: 'A treatice co[n]teining certain meditatio[n]s of trew & perfect consolatio[n]', the original of which had been written by Martin Luther. Once again dedicating the book to Lord Robert Dudley, Fills writes of the peer's 'accustomable benevolent kindenes towards me' ([sig. A2'v']). Fills's latest known translation from a French original, 'Godly prayers and meditations, paraphrasticallye made upon all the psalmes', survives in an edition ostensibly published in 1577, but possibly first published in 1566-7 when the work was entered in the Stationers' register. 
Described in 1567 as being resident and hospitable at Kingsland, Fills became one of the earl of Leicester's chaplains either in or before November 1567; a document dateable to 1567 alleges that he was then aged forty-six. On 16 November 1570, described as the earl's chaplain, he was presented by Leicester to the rectory of Pembridge, also in Herefordshire. His institution followed twelve days later. Documents of the mid-1570s record Fills as the pluralist rector of both Kingsland and Pembridge, whose annual income from those two benefices was reckoned to be at least $67, a fairly substantial figure for the age. In 1576 Edmund Grindal, archbishop of Canterbury, appointed Fills a commissioner for his primary metropolitical visitation of the cathedral, city, and diocese of Hereford. 
Certain leading puritans were shocked to learn, in February 1574, that copies of Fills's translation of Beza's 'Confessions' -- presumably meaning a recent (and lost) edition of 'A briefe and pith-thie summe' -- had lately been seized from stationers and burnt at Stationers' Hall in London. Fills was reportedly ready to defend the faithfulness of his translation, alleged to be the source of the difficulty. 
Attended by his surgeon, who was to receive 'my Paracelsian still', Fills dictated his will on 16 October 1578. He was buried at Kingsland the next day. The will, in which the testator requested burial in the chancel at Kingsland, reveals something of the contents of Fills's library: 'my greate 'Bible' in englishe... 'Carions Chronicles', 'Flores doctoru[m]', a greate 'Bible of St Jeromes', 'Eliots Dictionarie', marlorate and my Decades of Bullinger... all my frenche bookes... the frenche 'Bible'... 'Dodius herball'... [and] my englishe 'Geneva Bible'' (Herefs. RO, MS 17/5/13). Fills was survived by his wife, but the will is silent about any issue of the marriage. 
Although Fills's surname has sometimes been rendered 'Fitz', there is nothing to connect him with the Richard Fitz who was the minister of one of the earliest organized Elizabethan separatist congregations and who, in any case, seems to have derived from Devon stock. Garrett's suggestion that Fills may have been the father of John Field, the leading London co-ordinator of the Elizabethan puritan movement, is rightly rejected by Collinson. Fills's significance is twofold: as a popularizer of Calvinism for English readers and as a chaplain to the earl of Leicester. He may be added to the incomplete tally of Leicester's godly chaplains already identified by Adams (S. Adams, 'A godly peer?: Leicester and the puritans', 'History Today', 40, 1990, 14-19). 


@@@@@


doc= 9423


Filmer, Edward (1651/2-1703), playwright, was the second son of seven children of Sir Robert Filmer, baronet (1621-1675), of East Sutton, Kent, and his wife, Dorothy (died 1671), daughter of Maurice Tuke of Layer Marney, Essex, and his wife, Amy. He matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 17 April 1668, aged sixteen, and was admitted as founder's kin fellow at All Souls in 1672 (Filmer was descended from a brother of Archbishop Henry Chichele, the founder of All Souls, through his mother.) He graduated BA that same year and became a bachelor of civil law on 21 February 1676. He took a doctorate in civil law in 1681. Filmer was admitted to Gray's Inn on 7 January 1675. 
In 1687 Filmer married Archibella Clinkard (1664?-1743), only daughter and heiress of Archibald Clinkard, esquire, of Sutton Valence, Kent, with whom he had six sons and four daughters. Three sons and three daughters survived him. His eldest son, Edward Filmer (1688-1724), joined the army and served in the War of the Spanish Succession. Filmer's first two children were baptized at East Sutton but his subsequent children, beginning with Archibald ('bap'. 28 December 1690 and buried shortly afterwards) were baptized at Sutton Valence, indicating that Filmer and Archibella moved to her family's estate. 
Filmer's one dramatic effort was a long and mediocre blank-verse tragedy, 'The Unnatural Brother' (1697) based on an episode in Madam de Calprenede's romance 'Cassandra'. 'The Unnatural Brother' was produced by Betterton's Company at Lincoln's Inn Fields in early January 1697. Filmer's petulant preface to the published play blamed its failure on the bad taste of the public and his principled refusal to include a comic sub-plot. He also claimed to have been criticized for never including more than three characters on stage at one time, defending himself by claiming to follow the practice of classical antiquity. An abridged version of Filmer's play entitled 'The Unfortunate Couple' was included in Peter Anthoine Motteux's 'The Novelty' (1697), a series of short plays presented one after another at Lincoln's Inn Fields that summer. 'The Unfortunate Couple' was revived separately after Filmer's death on 17 August 1704 at Lincoln's Inn Fields. 
Filmer's most notable contribution to the theatre was a well-argued response to Jeremy Collier's attacks on its 'immorality and profaneness', begun in 1698. His response was published posthumously as 'A Defense of Plays, or, The Stage Vindicated' (1707). (The anonymous 1698 'A Defense of Dramatick Poetry' and its sequel, 'A Farther Defense', are sometimes ascribed to Filmer, but the author was Elkanah Settle.) Collier, seemingly unaware of Filmer's death, replied the following year in 'A Farther Vindication of the Short View of the Profaneness and Immorality of the English Stage' (1708). Filmer died at Sutton Valence, and was buried there on 20 June 1703. 


@@@@@


doc= 9424


Filmer, Sir Robert (1588?-1653), political writer, was born in East Sutton, Kent, almost certainly in 1588, the eldest of the eighteen children of Sir Edward Filmer (1566-1629), a country gentleman, and his wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1570-1638), daughter of Richard Argall (or Argol). Edward and Elizabeth Filmer had married in 1585. Little is known for certain of Filmer's early education, though he appears to have been sent to the grammar school at Canterbury. He was subsequently educated at Trinity College, Cambridge (he matriculated at Easter 1604). He did not take a degree, and was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 24 January 1605. He was called to the bar in 1613, but there is no record of his ever practising law. Filmer's early life seems to have been spent mostly in Westminster, and he eventually acquired as his town house the porter's lodge of Westminster Abbey, which remained his until his death. 
Filmer married Anne Heton 
(or Hetton; died 1671)
in St Leonard's Church, London, on 8 August 1618. Anne was the daughter and coheir (with her sister) of Martin Heton (1554-1609), bishop of Ely from 1599 until his death. There has been speculation about whether Filmer married a child bride, and certainly a marriage licence was issued (the usual way to avoid reading of the banns), but in any case the first child of the marriage was baptized in February 1620. Soon after his marriage Filmer was knighted by King James I at Newmarket on 24 January 1619. 
When his father died on 2 November 1629, Sir Robert's centre of activities shifted from Westminster to the estates and manor house that he inherited at East Sutton. His father, Edward Filmer, had shown a considerable record of activity in the affairs of Kent, and was eventually knighted. He had served as sheriff of Kent in 1616. Edward Filmer had inherited the manor of Little Charlton in East Sutton, Kent, from his own father, Robert, and had later purchased the manor of East Sutton itself from his brother-in-law, John Argall. Sir Robert inherited these and other lands, and followed his father's lead by involving himself in the politics of the county. He served as a justice of the peace and an officer of the county militia in the 1630s, though when the county began to divide early in 1642, it was not Sir Robert but his eldest son, Sir Edward Filmer, who was active in the newly emergent opposition to the excesses of the Long Parliament. Nevertheless, in April 1642 Filmer stood surety for $5000 to secure the release from custody of his friend Sir Roger Twysden, when the latter was imprisoned by the Commons for his involvement with the Kentish petition of 25 March 1642. Parliamentary troops looted Filmer's East Sutton manor at the beginning of September 1642, and by 1643 Filmer's properties in Westminster and Kent were being heavily taxed in the interests of the parliamentary cause. Throughout 1643 he was repeatedly harassed on suspicion of supporting the king, but Filmer does not, in fact, seem to have been active in lending such support. No hard evidence against him was ever uncovered by the county committee. Indeed he was soon to assert his neutrality, and he invited his persecutors to note 'how far he hath binn from medling on either side in deeds or so much as words' (Laslett, 'Sir Robert Filmer', 535). In spite of this, one of Filmer's own tenants did inform the county committee -- falsely it seems -- that he had hidden arms for the royalist cause in the parish church. Perhaps as a consequence of this, Filmer was imprisoned for a time in Leeds Castle, and his estates were sequestered. It is uncertain exactly how long he spent in confinement, but it was at least from early 1643 until the summer of 1645. On 26 May 1648 Filmer's support was sought by eight of his fellow Kentish gentlemen for the Kentish revolt (May-June 1648) that formed part of the second civil war. Though he was assured that no one expected him to take an active part in military affairs, Filmer appears to have declined his assistance, perhaps claiming that his increasingly fragile health prevented him from doing much. By this time, though, his words had become a good deal stronger than his deeds, and Sir Robert's pen had produced two of a series of political tracts in support of the king's authority. 
Filmer was the friend of a number of distinguished historians and scholars. One circle formed around his Westminster existence, and included the antiquarian scholars William Camden and Sir Henry Spelman, and the Laudian divine Peter Heylyn (from 1631 a prebendary of Westminster Abbey, and thus almost literally on Filmer's doorstep). From 1629 Filmer entered a circle of scholarly Kentish gentlemen which also included Sir Edward Dering and Filmer's close friend Sir Roger Twysden. It has been suggested that Filmer's earliest writings may well have been written for circulation in manuscript among this circle. There may be truth in this, but it is also true that Filmer's intellectual interests owed at least as much to his Westminster and London friends, and that he did in fact seek early publication for his work. Around 1630 he wrote two important works which were only published much later. 'Quaestio quodlibetica, or, A Discourse whether it may be Lawful to Take Use for Money' was said by Sir Roger Twysden, the man responsible for its first publication (dated 1653, though the work was available before the end of 1652), to have been written 'almost thirty yeares since', suggesting a date for its composition in the later 1620s (sig. a2'r'). It defends the paying of interest on money borrowed as compatible with biblical instruction. Filmer's best-known work, 'Patriarcha', was perhaps written a little later, about 1630, though it remained unpublished until 1680. There has been much dispute over when 'Patriarcha' was composed, but there is good internal evidence to suggest that the manuscript of the work now in the University of Chicago Library Codex MS 413 was composed before 1631. The idea that Filmer was unwilling to publish at this time of his life, and that he wrote only for a restricted audience, has been reinforced by a letter from Peter Heylyn to Filmer's son Sir Edward Filmer, of 20 April 1659, later printed as a preface to the 1680 editions of 'Patriarcha'. Heylyn remarked that Filmer 'did not think it fit while he was alive, to gratifie the Nation in publishing that excellent Piece' (Heylyn, 208). So far as 'Patriarcha' was concerned this was not true. In 1632 Filmer sought permission to publish what was almost certainly a version of 'Patriarcha'. The request came before Georg Rudolph Weckherlin, who handled much licensing work of this sort, and Weckherlin referred it to the king himself. Charles refused permission to publish. 
Filmer's first published work was probably 'Of the Blasphemie Against the Holy Ghost', which appeared in February 1646. The pamphlet was reprinted in 1677 as 'A Tract Concerning the Sin Against the Holy Ghost' as the work of John Hales, and it has been commonly attributed to Hales ever since. Manuscript evidence seems, however, to confirm Filmer's authorship. The work was an exercise in defining the 'via media', criticizing the views both of the schoolmen and of some reformed divines, notably Calvin, on the subject. The anti-Calvinism of the work perhaps reflects Filmer's known connections to the world of high-churchmanship: he was not only a friend of Heylyn's but also the dedicatee of Ambrose Fisher's 'A Defence of the Liturgie of the Church of England' (1630). 
Filmer's first published political work has also raised similar concerns of authorship. 'The Freeholder's Grand Inquest, Touching our Soveraigne Lord the King and his Parliament' was published early in 1648. From 1679 it several times lent its title to collections of Filmer's political writings. Despite this, the work was attributed by Anthony Wood to Sir Robert Holbourne (or Holborne), and a number of scholars maintain that attribution, though most accept the work as Filmer's. If this tract was Filmer's, it was the first of a sequence of five published political works that ran from 1648 to 1652. All of them appear to have been published by the royalist printer Richard Royston. 

'The Freeholder's Grand Inquest' can be read as an elaboration of the third and final section of 'Patriarcha', in which Filmer had applied his more general arguments to the English constitution and English law. In general, all of Filmer's political writings built on the foundation laid by 'Patriarcha'. That book was a clearly organized and succinct work. It did three main things. First, it refuted all accounts of human society that suggested that the people were originally free, and that political authority originated in the consent of these free people. Filmer, displaying considerable acumen and powers of logic, was able to pick some sizeable holes in consent theory, and it is in this area that the book still has some force. Secondly, as an alternative account of the matter, Filmer identified political authority with the patriarchal authority of Adam. No human beings were ever born into freedom, because from creation onwards royal-patriarchal authority was in the hands of successors to the patriarchal authority of Adam, and then again of Noah. All modern kings were 'either fathers of their people, or heirs of such fathers or usurpers of the right of such fathers' (Sommerville, 2). Kings might be elected by their people, but the power that they executed was divinely instituted at the creation. Thirdly, Filmer used these arguments as a basis for a reading of the English constitution and its development. The natural patriarchal authority of kings was not limited by positive law. The king of England was 'the author, interpreter and corrector of the common laws' (Sommerville, 34). The liberties of parliament existed only by the monarch's grace, and, in point of fact, the Commons were not an original part of parliament. Many of Filmer's contemporaries believed that the tripartite character of the modern parliament had existed from before the Norman conquest, but he argued that the Commons had been summoned only from the time of Henry I. This proved, so Filmer argued, that the people had no natural or original right to parliamentary representation. 
The political works that Filmer published in his own lifetime developed points made in 'Patriarcha'. 'The Freeholder's Grand Inquest' was a royalist survey of the history of English law and constitution. 'The Anarchy of a Limited or Mixed Monarchy', which appeared in April 1648, was a Bodinian reply to Philip Hunton and others, arguing that stable 'mixed' government was impossible. There must be a single arbitrary authority in any stable political community. Filmer's reliance on Bodin was taken further in his 'The Necessity of the Absolute Power of All Kings' (August 1648), which consisted entirely of a digest of passages from Richard Knolles's 1606 translation of Bodin's 'Les six livres de la republique'. This flurry of publication in 1648 was followed by silence, until February 1652 saw the appearance of 'Observations Concerning the Original of Government'. This work, in replies to Grotius, Milton, and Hobbes, carried further Filmer's attack on consent theory, and like its successor 'Observations upon Aristotle's Politiques Touching Forms of Government' (May 1652) was perhaps a shade more reflective than the engaged works of 1648. The 'Observations' was, though, coupled with Filmer's more obviously topical 'Directions for Obedience to Governours in Dangerous and Doubtfull Times', in which he seemed to accept that in fact many, and perhaps all, governments originated in usurpation, and in which he tentatively allowed that usurpers might be obeyed in matters indifferent. 
Filmer remained intellectually active until the end of his life. Though May 1652 saw his last political work, he was not quite finished with publishing. In late July 1652 the Kent summer assizes convicted ten people of witchcraft, at least six of whom were hanged. The event prompted Filmer's last known work, 'An Advertisement to the Jury-Men of England, Touching Witches', published in March 1653. The witches hanged were accused of causing death by witchcraft, and confessed 'that the Divell had known them carnally, and that they had no hurt by it' ('A Prodigious and Tragicall History', 3). Filmer's scepticism was aroused, and he wrote a tract arguing that none of the 'marks' of witchcraft identified by the puritan clergyman William Perkins provided a reliable guide to whether someone really was a witch, and that the scriptures provided little foundation for the view that witchcraft involved a diabolic pact. 
Sir Robert Filmer died on or around 23 May 1653, and was buried in East Sutton on 30 May. His will, dated 1 November 1651, was proved on 13 January 1654. Filmer was survived by his wife and three sons (Edward, Robert, and Samuel) and by a daughter (Anne). Two other children, Elizabeth and Thomas, had predeceased their father. There are contemporary portraits of both Sir Robert and his wife Lady Anne which remain in private ownership. Filmer also left behind a number of unpublished works. They included, in addition to 'Patriarcha', a treatise 'in praise of the virtuous wife', published by Margaret Ezell in 1987, and a substantial treatise entitled 'Theology or divinity'. A tract of about 1649 by a royalist casuist concerning the lawfulness of taking the Engagement oath, though in Filmer's hand and sometimes attributed to him, is almost certainly by another, perhaps Sir John Monson. 
Death did not end Filmer's contribution to English political life. Though his writings were little noticed by his own contemporaries they were to stimulate extensive debate when republished after 1679. Filmer's reputation has been much shaped by these debates, in which he was a posthumous participant. In the turbulent years after 1678, the supporters of Charles II drew upon Filmer's writings in their efforts to rebut arguments for the exclusion of the king's brother James, duke of York, from the succession, and for the limitation of the monarchy. As a result, he is now remembered almost entirely for his political writings, and in particular for their notoriety as the target of Locke's first 'Treatise'. In the 1640s and 1650s Filmer's views were rejected by the Presbyterian writers Clement Walker and Edward Gee; but also by his Kentish friend Sir Roger Twysden. But it was the republication of his works in 1679, and then the publication of 'Patriarcha' in 1680, that made Filmer the target of whig writers, notably (in addition to Locke) James Tyrell and Algernon Sidney. Concern about Filmer's view of the English constitution as the creation of a sovereign king inspired a reply from William Petyt which, in its turn, inspired a defence of the Filmerian position from Robert Brady. In 1684 Edmund Bohun produced a defence of Filmer's views, and in the following year there appeared a third and more careful edition of 'Patriarcha', based on a manuscript available to Archbishop William Sancroft. 
Despite Bohun's efforts, the whigs, and Locke in particular, treated Filmer as a figure of ridicule for a long time. On the other hand, Filmer's adherence to Spelman's view that the House of Commons was no older than the thirteenth century was to prove, in Brady's hands, a powerful weapon against the whigs. More broadly, it helped to create a climate in which the idea of the pristine Saxon constitution, embodying king, lords, and commons, could be exposed as myth. More recently there has been a sustained reappraisal of Filmer's work, made possible especially by Peter Laslett's 1949 edition of his political writings. All Filmer's writing may be understood as attempting to apply the scriptures to contemporary problems -- usury, theological dispute, politics, witchcraft -- but the application was undertaken with intelligence. He was a succinct writer in a prolix age, and a man with a keen eye for the weak points in his opponents' arguments. Unfortunately for him, they had as good an eye for the weak points in his, and historical circumstance helped to give them a more attentive audience. 


@@@@@


doc= 9425


Finan (d. 661), missionary and bishop of Lindisfarne, was an Irish monk of Iona who succeeded Aedan as second bishop of Lindisfarne in 651. No life of Finan is extant and the authority for what little is known about him is Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum', which was completed in 731. 
Finan, like his predecessor Aedan, had been sent to Lindisfarne from Iona. Upon his succession to the bishopric of Lindisfarne, Finan built a church there suitable for an episcopal see (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.17). He had striking successes as a missionary, due in large part to the support he received from the powerful Northumbrian court. The first of these was his baptism of Peada, son of Penda, the heathen king of the Mercians. Having been appointed king of the Middle Angles by his father, Peada sought in marriage Alhflaed, the daughter of King Oswiu of Northumbria. Oswiu would consent to this marriage only on condition that Peada and his people were converted and baptized Christians. When Finan had baptized Peada and many of his followers, Peada returned to his kingdom with four priests, who had been carefully selected to instruct and baptize his people. These four Northumbrian priests, Cedd, Adda, Betti, and Diuma, successfully spread Christianity to the Middle Angles and Mercians. After Penda was killed and Oswiu acquired his kingdom, the only Irishman among these four missionaries, Diuma, was consecrated the first bishop of the Middle Angles and the Mercians by Finan. 
Finan's second missionary success was his baptism of the king of the East Saxons, Sigeberht, who had been persuaded to accept Christianity by his friend King Oswiu. Sigeberht subsequently requested that Oswiu send him teachers to convert his people. Cedd, who had been dispatched on the mission to the Middle Angles and Mercians, was recalled by Oswiu and sent with another priest to the kingdom of the East Saxons. When Cedd reported the success of this mission to Finan in Lindisfarne, Finan, with two other bishops, consecrated him bishop of the East Saxons. 
Despite Finan's missionary successes, Bede does not represent him in a particularly favourable light, perhaps because of the bishop's obstinacy over the Easter question. The differences between the Irish and the Roman practices of Easter observance had been an issue in Anglo-Saxon England even during Aedan's episcopacy, but though Bede did not approve of Aedan's adherence to the Irish custom of computing Easter, he reports that this was patiently tolerated by all because Aedan was so greatly admired and loved for his virtuous character and exemplary work. Bede's attitude to Finan's observance of the Irish Easter, however, is remarkably different. He suggests that it was during Finan's time that this issue escalated into a bitter controversy, which was complicated by the conflicting interests of King Oswiu, who had become a firm supporter of Irish customs when exiled in Iona, and his wife, Eanflaed, the daughter of King Eadwine, who had learned the Roman practice in Kent. It was further complicated by another Irishman, Ronan, who defended the Roman practice of Easter he had learned in Gaul and Italy. Finan engaged in a violent dispute with him, and even though through it many were persuaded to accept the Roman practice, and others at least to question the truth concerning the correct observance of Easter, Ronan did not succeed in altering Finan's convictions. Bede reports that 'on the contrary, as he was a man of fierce temper, Ronan made him the more bitter by his reproofs and turned him into an open adversary of the truth' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.25). Rather than taking the view that Finan was faithfully following the example set by Aedan, Bede is extremely critical of Finan. It is possible that Finan had become a highly influential figure and that Irish influence was growing during his time (a phenomenon with which Bede was becoming increasingly uncomfortable). Bede's report that many in England went to Ireland during the episcopate of Finan and his successor, another Irishman named Colman, either to study or to pursue a more strict religious life (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.27) implies as much. 
If Bede's knowledge of Finan derived from oral tradition preserved at Lindisfarne, the animosity underlying his characterization of him, despite Finan's successful missionary activities south of the Humber and the royal support he received from King Oswiu, might suggest that the bishop was not well thought of by his contemporaries. On the other hand, it is perhaps more likely that Finan was rather more powerful and successful than Bede would have cared to acknowledge; but, if he was in fact remembered as such, Bede could not ignore his achievements altogether and could only play them down. Although some Irish annals place Finan's death variously in 659 and 660, Bede states that he was bishop for ten years and died in 661 (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.26). 


@@@@@


doc= 9426


Finch, Anne, countess of Winchilsea (1661-1720), poet, was born in April 1661 at Sydmonton, Hampshire, the youngest of three children of Sir William Kingsmill (1613-1661), son of Sir Henry Kingsmill ['see under 'Kingsmill family] and Bridget White, and Anne Haslewood (died 1664), daughter of Sir Anthony Haslewood and his wife, Elizabeth Wilmer, of Maidwell, Northamptonshire. Her parents were descended on both sides from old and respected families. The Kingsmills had over four centuries of royal service and acquired valuable estates from Henry VIII, and Thomas Fuller's 'History of the Worthies of England' (1662) refers to the Haslewoods as a 'very ancient' and 'worshipful family in Northamptonshire' (1.286). 
Her mother, widowed just a few months after Anne's birth, a year later married Sir Thomas Ogle, and a half-sister was born. Following her mother's death in 1664, Anne and her two Kingsmill siblings became involved in complicated but successful litigation on their behalf against Ogle. Young Anne was raised in London with her paternal grandmother until the age of eleven, and then with her uncle, Sir William Haslewood, at Maidwell in Northamptonshire. 
In 1682 Anne Kingsmill became a maid of honour to Princess Mary of Modena, and, in the environment of the famed Restoration court wits, began secretly to write poetry, fearing, as she was later to acknowledge in the preface to the privately circulated manuscript of her poems, that she might be ridiculed as a 'Versifying Maid of Honour' (Finch, 'Poems', ed. Reynolds, 7-8). On 15 May 1684 she married Heneage Finch (1657-1726), second son of Heneage Finch, third earl of Winchilsea. Her husband, gentleman of the bedchamber to the future James II, then duke of York, was a courtier and soldier with a promising public career. She resigned her court position, but the couple resided in Westminster Palace and, through her husband, she maintained her close ties with the court. 
After her marriage Anne Finch took up writing more seriously. In addition to a number of love lyrics to her husband, she wrote songs and religious verses, as well as a tragicomedy entitled 'The Triumphs of Love and Innocence'. Her preoccupation with comedy and songwriting was cut short, however, by the revolution of 1688. With the flight of James II to France and the crowning of William and Mary early the following year, the couple's hopes for public life were ended. Remaining loyal to the Stuart cause, Heneage Finch and his wife fled London, and resided with various family members in the countryside. On 29 April 1690 Heneage was arrested while attempting to join James in France, and charged with Jacobitism. For the remainder of that year Anne Finch stayed in Kent at Godmersham, while her husband remained in London until the case was finally dismissed from the court of king's bench. During this period she wrote several poems of a political nature (for example, 'The Change', 'Caesar and Brutus', and her elegy 'On the Lord Dundee') or expressive of personal anguish (for example, 'The Losse', 'On Affliction', and 'A Song on Greife'). She also wrote a tragic play, 'Aristomenes, or, The Royal Shepherd'; this, she explains in the prose preface, was undertaken as a distraction, for otherwise 'such dejection of mind, cou'd not have been supported' (p. 12). 
Once reunited the couple settled in Kent at the Eastwell estate of Heneage's nephew Charles, who had succeeded Heneage's father as the fourth earl of Winchilsea, and for several years at nearby Wye College. Finch's marriage, which was childless, proved advantageous to her poetry; her husband, who served as a lifelong editor and transcriber of her poems, strongly encouraged her in her writing. 'To Mr. F. now Earl of W', for example, is addressed to Heneage, who, 'going abroad, had desired Ardelia [Finch's poetic name for herself] to write some Verses upon whatever Subject she thought fit, against his Return in the Evening'. Her first publications (all appearing anonymously) were love lyrics, including two set to music: 'Tis strange this heart', set by R. Courteville and published in 'Vinculum societatis' in 1691, and 'Love, thou art best of human joys', set by Henry Purcell and included in a popular collection of songs in 1694 ('Comes amoris, or, The Companion of Love'). Six of her religious poems were published in the 'Miscellanea sacra' (1696). 
Finch's poems cover a wide variety of genres and subject matter. In addition to religious verse and love lyrics, she wrote fables, nature poems, verse plays, odes, songs, pastorals, and occasional poems to friends and relatives. Women play a prominent role in her poetry, from satirical poems (such as 'The Unequal Fetters' and 'An Epilogue to the Tragedy of Jane Shore') that deal with gender issues and the inequality of women in contemporary society, to numerous poems that celebrate women's intelligence and resourcefulness. 
Finch's best-known poem during her lifetime was 'The Spleen', published anonymously in 1701 in Charles Gildon's 'New Miscellany of Original Poems'. This Pindaric ode examines the social and personal implications of spleen, or melancholy, a malady with which she was afflicted throughout her life and to which her poetry contains numerous references (from her early 'Ardelia to Melancholy' to 'A Suplication for the Joys of Heaven', written in her late fifties, just a couple of years before her death). 
In 1708, after two decades of rural retirement, the Finches returned to London. As active nonjurors and Jacobites they continued to be political outcasts and under the threat of government reprisals, but the return to London brought with it some beneficial literary relationships, as well as significant publications. In 1709 Delariviere Manley included two of Finch's poems in 'The New Atalantis' and Jacob Tonson's prestigious 'Poetical Miscellanies' published three of her pastoral poems ('A Pastoral Dialogue between Two Shepherdesses', 'Adam Pos'd', and 'Alcidor') bracketed between two poems by Jonathan Swift and Alexander Pope's first publication, his 'Pastorals'. Richard Steele hailed the miscellany as 'a collection of the best pastorals that have hitherto appeared in England' ('Tatler', no. 10). 
With the death of his nephew Charles in 1712, Heneage Finch became fifth earl of Winchilsea and Anne became a countess. However, for the next eight years, until just a few months before her death, the Eastwell estate was involved in complex litigation and financial difficulties inherited from the former earl. Moreover, because Heneage Finch continued to refuse to take the oaths of allegiance, he was denied his seat in the House of Lords. Thus, despite the return to a more public life and the evident advantages of involvement with some of the most prominent writers of the day, Finch and her husband continued to remain political and, to an extent, social outcasts. 
The year following her husband's accession to the peerage, 'Miscellany Poems, on Several Occasions', an anonymous collection containing eighty-six of Finch's poems and her play 'Aristomenes', was brought out by John Barber, also a Jacobite, and a friend of Swift. Subsequent title-pages that year identified the author as Lady Winchilsea. Various theories have been put forth to account for Finch's overcoming her earlier reluctance to publish: her new-found status as a countess (Messenger); the more favourable political climate that the brief tory return to power (1710-14) would have offered a known Jacobite sympathizer (Hinnant, 'Anne Finch and Jacobitism'); and the encouragement and support of her new literary friends, especially Swift and Pope (McGovern, 'Finch, Pope, and Swift'). 
Both Swift and Pope wrote poems praising Finch as a poet. Swift's 'Apollo Outwitted' humorously portrays her as inflicted with modesty by the lustful Apollo, whose advances she has rebuffed, and encourages her to overcome his curse and publish. And Pope, who counted the Finches among his friends and for whom Finch wrote three poems, addressed to her his 'Impromptu, to Lady Winchilsea' in which he heaps praises upon Ardelia as the greatest of all women poets. The sincerity of his high regard for her poetry is also evident in his having included eight of her poems in the miscellany 'Poems on Several Occasions' that he edited in 1717. 
Finch continued writing poetry until the time of her death at the age of fifty-nine. After months of deteriorating health she died on 5 August 1720, at her Cleveland Row home in London. She was buried, at her request, in the small church on the Eastwell estate, on 9 August. Lord Winchilsea survived her by six years. 
For nearly two centuries following her death, Finch's poetry fell into oblivion. Her reputation in the nineteenth century rested almost entirely upon a remark in Wordsworth's 1815 supplementary essay to his preface to the 'Lyrical Ballads', in which he praises her 'Nocturnal Reverie' for its new images 'of external nature' ('Prose Works of William Wordsworth', ed. W. Owen and J. Smyser, 1974, 3.73). With a few exceptions, Finch's poems are all collected in one of three manuscripts -- an octavo and a folio, both dating from the 1690s and the source of the 1903 edition, 'The Poems of Anne, Countess of Winchilsea', and the Wellesley manuscript, containing her most mature work and compiled about the time of her death, though not published until 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 9427


Finch, Daniel, second earl of Nottingham and seventh earl of Winchilsea (1647-1730), politician, was born in London on 2 July 1647, the eldest son of Sir Heneage Finch (1621-1682) (descendant of the cadet branch of the earls of Winchilsea), solicitor-general (1660), attorney-general (1670), first Baron Finch (1674), lord keeper and lord chancellor (1674-82), and first earl of Nottingham (1681), and Elizabeth Harvey (1627-1676), daughter of Daniel Harvey, a Levant merchant of London. 
Under his father's watchful rearing, Daniel Finch imbibed Sir Heneage's devout Anglicanism and constitutional royalism, as did his younger brother Heneage Finch (whose own legal and political career was to be capped by elevation to the peerage as earl of Aylesford). Both brothers attended Westminster School, and Daniel was enrolled at the Inner Temple before he matriculated at Christ Church in mid-1662. Three years at Oxford were followed by a version of the grand tour which included Germany, Italy, and France. Most of his three years abroad was spent in Italy, where his uncle Sir John Finch served as English resident at the court of the grand duke of Tuscany. Recalled to London by his father in mid-1668 and promptly elected a fellow of the Royal Society (perhaps through the influence of Sir John and his companion Sir Thomas Baines), Daniel seems to have spent the next four years studying the law and assisting Sir Heneage. 
Daniel Finch's first appearance on the public stage came with his return to the Cavalier Parliament at a by-election for Great Bedwyn in early 1673. A year later, on 16 June 1674, he married Lady Essex Rich (1651/2-1684), coheir of Robert Rich, third earl of Warwick, and ward of the pious Mary, countess of Warwick. The marriage negotiations also brought Daniel into contact with George Savile, first marquess of Halifax. 
Daniel's marriage to Lady Essex was terminated in March 1684 by her death, eleven days after the birth of her eighth child (though only two survived her). Her successor on 29 December 1685 was Anne Hatton (1668-1743), the seventeen-year-old daughter of Christopher, Viscount Hatton; in early 1687 Anne gave birth to a son, the first of her twenty-two children (at least thirteen of whom were to survive to adulthood, including the diplomatist Edward Finch-Hatton). 
After the dissolution of the Cavalier Parliament early in 1679, Daniel served in the three Exclusion Parliaments before succeeding his father as second earl in December 1682. As an MP he distinguished himself by vocal, if sometimes qualified, support for his father's colleague in office between 1674 and early 1679, Thomas Osborne, earl of Danby. After Danby's fall, Daniel (and Halifax) opposed the first earl of Shaftesbury's campaign to exclude James, duke of York, from the line of succession; instead, he advocated that limitations be imposed on any Catholic successor. 
As part of Charles II's attempt in the spring of 1679 to blunt the exclusionist thrust by bringing moderates into office, Daniel was named to the commission of the Admiralty (while Halifax was appointed lord president of the council). Daniel lacked experience in naval matters, but from 1680 onwards he took the leading role at the board. However, his efforts were hampered by quarrels with Admiral Arthur Herbert. Subsequently, the board's work was to be much criticized, not altogether fairly, by Samuel Pepys -- himself a victim in 1679 of the purge of the duke of York's men from the Admiralty. None the less, Daniel appears to have made a sufficiently positive impression on Charles II to be offered a secretaryship of state after the earl of Sunderland was dismissed in late 1680 for backing exclusion. But he declined this promotion and remained at the Admiralty until May 1684, when the commission was wound up, and Pepys and other old hands were reinstated. 
Although James succeeded to the throne peacefully in March 1685 (with Heneage Finch, named solicitor-general, publishing the royal pledge to uphold the established church), Nottingham soon saw his worst fears being realized. Thus, he joined with Halifax and also one-time exclusionists in the second session of the first (and only) parliament of the reign to oppose the appointment of Catholic officers in an army much enlarged in the wake of the duke of Monmouth's abortive rebellion. After the prorogation and later dissolution of this parliament, and with James now determinedly pursuing pro-Catholic measures, Nottingham -- as did many other Anglican loyalists -- pinned his hopes on the anticipated succession of James's elder daughter, Mary, reared an Anglican and the wife of James's nephew, William, prince of Orange. While James laboured to secure a compliant parliament, Nottingham was made privy to the design to 'invite' William to intervene in England, though at the last moment he drew back from that venture. Instead, after the prince's landing in November 1688, Nottingham and Halifax agreed to act on a commission appointed by the king in the vain hope of diverting William's armed progress towards London. 
After James's flight to France and the assembly in January 1689 of the convention, Nottingham led a determined, though abortive, campaign in the Lords to preserve a fig leaf of legitimacy by the device of a regency in which William and Mary would rule in James's name. As he explained, his principal concern was to minimize constitutional innovation as well as to salve the consciences of Anglicans unwilling to contemplate James's return yet hostile both to the appearance of election to the throne and to the legitimation of subjects' resistance. When regency was rejected, Nottingham took the lead in formulating a revision of the oath of allegiance so that the scrupulous might acknowledge William and Mary without recognizing them as 'lawful and rightful' rulers. 
In addition, Nottingham -- named (with Halifax's backing) as one of the secretaries of state in the new royal administration -- revived plans for comprehension of moderate dissenters and for toleration of those nonconformists who could not or would not be comprehended on any conceivable terms. The companion bills that he introduced in the Lords in March 1689 were revisions of those he had drafted as a member of a broad-based Commons' committee in 1680. As earlier, so in 1689 his promotion of comprehension with toleration was primarily to strengthen English protestant unity -- thereby frustrating any revival of James's strategy of bidding for dissenting support by espousing a policy of general toleration and by dispensing with the 1673 sacramental test to hold governmental or municipal office. But comprehension foundered on the rock of Anglican distaste at the prospect that newly comprehended moderate dissenters would thereby be qualified to hold office, and in the event only a limited 'indulgence' (leaving the sacramental test in place) reached the statute book in May 1689. In this fashion Nottingham was in some measure an unintending contributor to a situation he would later come to deplore of 'the Church in danger' -- having lost its legal monopoly (and hence no longer able to enforce church attendance in the parishes) and beset by dissenting efforts to repeal the sacramental test or else to evade it by the practice of 'occasional conformity' in order to qualify for local office. 
For the time being, however, Nottingham -- with the backing of the pious Queen Mary -- was in a position to influence the choice of new members of the episcopate, thinned by death and also by the defection of incumbents unwilling to swear even the revised oath of allegiance. The resultant vacancies were filled mainly by men from among the circle of moderate Anglicans (the so-called latitudinarians) that the first earl of Nottingham had patronized and with whom his heir had remained in close touch, above all John Tillotson and John Sharp as archbishops of Canterbury and of York respectively. 
Although Nottingham had Mary's confidence and William's respect, his tenure as secretary of state was not a success, even though whig excesses in 1689 inclined the king between 1690 and 1693 to rely increasingly on Danby, Nottingham, and their tory associates. On the one hand, the tory ministers had to reckon with persistent whig obstructionism in parliament, with Nottingham repeatedly the target of denunciations as a crypto-Jacobite and with his perorations in the Lords mocked as 'the grievance of the times' ('Poems on Affairs of State: Augustian Satirical Verse', ed. G. deForest Lord and others, 7 vols., 1963-75, 5.171 n. 33) both for their pedantry and their extreme length. On the other, Nottingham became, in part by his own readiness to meddle in the conduct of naval affairs (on the strength of his earlier service on the Admiralty board), the scapegoat for English set-backs in the war at sea against Louis XIV. First, the earl fell out with William's most effective naval commander, the whig Admiral Edward Russell, and then he was blamed for the disastrous loss of the Smyrna-bound merchantmen in mid-1693. Thus, William -- forced to turn back to the whigs to sustain parliamentary financing of the war -- sought and received Nottingham's resignation in November 1693. 
For the rest of the reign Nottingham was out of office, and during the mid-1690s he figured as an occasional critic of the whig junto whose hold on office tightened up to the war's end in late 1697. Meanwhile, the death of the marquess of Halifax in early 1695 (only days after Nottingham's daughter Mary married Halifax's son and heir) brought to a close perhaps his oldest friendship. Then, too, the demise of Queen Mary in late 1694 snapped his strongest remaining link with the royal court. Thus, he mounted a determined, if unsuccessful, resistance to the junto-backed association of loyalty to William (as 'rightful and lawful' ruler) in the wake of the discovery in early 1696 of a Jacobite assassination plot -- prompting the king to strike Nottingham's name (and those of several other opponents of association) from the list of privy councillors. But the principal focus of Nottingham's energies in the years after his loss of the secretaryship was the planning and erection of his great house of Burley on the Hill, Rutland -- paid for, in part, by the profits of office. 
However, with the treaty of Ryswick and the gradual unravelling of the junto's hold on office, Nottingham's attendance in the Lords revived. Although omitted from the revamped ministry of mid-1700, he took a prominent part in the parliament elected in early 1701 in the tories' bid to impeach the fallen junto ministers. And while supporting strong measures against France in the wake of Louis XIV's repudiation of the second partition treaty and his subsequent recognition of James II's son and heir as king of England, Nottingham vehemently opposed whig efforts in the last parliament of the reign to promote a voluntary oath of abjuration acknowledging William as 'lawful and rightful'. 
Given Nottingham's prominence among tory peers, his reappointment as secretary of state by Queen Anne, as well as the selection of other leading tories, including the queen's uncle the earl of Rochester and Sir Edward Seymour, came as no surprise: Anne had long been reputed a wholehearted supporter of the church and a foe of the junto's ambitions. However, because Anne's principal confidants were her long-time courtiers the earls of Godolphin and Marlborough (the 'duumvirs'), the tory ministers found that they were not able to dictate war strategy or domestic policy. On the one hand, Nottingham -- harking back to schemes of the early 1690s -- favoured an amphibious strategy (including landings on the French mainland) as against Marlborough's emphasis on the war in the Low Countries. On the other hand, tory expectations of court backing for legislation against the practice of occasional conformity foundered on the rock of the duumvirs' lack of enthusiasm for any measure that might endanger whig parliamentary backing for war supply. Increasingly frustrated, Rochester resigned in 1703 and Nottingham (despite the queen's efforts to dissuade him) followed him out of office in the spring of 1704. At this period he initiated what many believed to be a romantic relationship with the opera singer Francesca Margherita de L'Epine. 
Rochester and Nottingham then lent their backing in the autumn of 1704 to an effort by the tory militants in the Commons to 'tack' (attach) a clause against occasional conformity to the 'Land Tax Bill'. As a 'tack' was likely to lead to a stalemate between the two houses that would jeopardize the grant of supply, the court -- with Robert Harley functioning as the duumvirs' manager -- mobilized a coalition of moderates and whigs to secure its rejection. The consequences were the queen's increasing alienation from the 'tackers' and their noble supporters, and Harley's entry into office, to be followed by a number of moderate whigs. 
Despite the loss of the 'tack', neither Nottingham nor Rochester was prepared to forswear resistance to the duumvirs and their new colleagues in the revamped ministry. Perhaps the most striking instance of their successive parliamentary campaigns was their scheme, advanced in the autumn of 1705, to invite the electress of Hanover to reside in England. This they justified as necessary to safeguard the 'protestant succession' against Jacobite plotting. But the prospect of her putative successor's presence in the realm infuriated Anne, and the duumvirs and Harley, with whig backing, turned the tables on their foes by sponsoring the 'Regency Act' as a more acceptable and effectual alternative. Other tory tactics proved no more effective in succeeding years, while Harley's falling-out with Godolphin in 1707-8 only made the duumvirs less able to resist junto pressure for added influence in the ministry. 
Thus, even when Anne finally dismissed Godolphin in mid-1710 (and in 1711 Marlborough, too), she was not prepared to contemplate having Nottingham back in office. Rather, the 'ministerial revolution' of 1710, facilitated by growing war-weariness and the revival of high-church sentiment among the electorate (fuelled by the abortive ministerial impeachment of Dr Henry Sacheverell), was made chiefly by Harley with the queen's backing. His aim was to build a ministry of moderates of both parties, and to avoid those who, like Nottingham, had won the reputation of being 'party sense in person without respect to the reason of things' -- a reputation which was only reinforced by the earl's association with the October Club and his backing of partisan tory causes in the parliamentary session of 1710-11 ('Portland MSS', 4.684). 
So Nottingham was left out in the cold (though some of his kin were given places), and his frustration -- coupled with mounting doubts about the wisdom of Harley's negotiations with France via Jacobite channels -- propelled him into the arms of the junto when the ministry laid its peace preliminaries before parliament early in the 1711-12 session. This unlikely alliance of partisan extremes, brokered by Nottingham's son-in-law the duke of Roxburghe, added little to either's repute. And Harley countered effectually by having the queen create a dozen new peers and by conceding the passage of the long-sought legislation against occasional conformity -- the measure that had been Nottingham's price for acting with the junto against the preliminaries. None the less, Nottingham had made his bed and he was prepared to lie in it. For the rest of the reign, he sided with the junto while denouncing Jacobite influence in the ministry. 
Nottingham received his reward at George I's accession. He was made lord president of the council; his brother Heneage was promoted to the earldom of Aylesford and named chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster; his eldest son, Daniel, was appointed a gentleman of the prince of Wales's bedchamber; and one of his sons-in-law was made a teller of the exchequer. However, other prominent tory adherents of the Hanoverian succession, though offered subordinate places in the new ministry, declined them rather than distance themselves from their fellow tories. So the ministry had a predominantly whig cast, despite Nottingham's efforts to persuade the king and his foreign advisers, as he had formerly preached to William and Mary, that the tories were the better friends to the royal prerogative. 
Nor did the alliance between Nottingham and the whig ministers long endure. Their views on many topics diverged, and the whigs were alarmed by the pains he and his son took to 'insinuate the Tories' into the favour of the princess of Wales ('Diary of Mary, Countess Cowper, Lady of the Bedchamber to the Princess of Wales, 1714-20', ed. S. Cowper, 1865, 65). Hence, when the earl came out in February 1716 against the execution of those Scottish peers convicted for their parts in the Jacobite rising of 1715, the whigs were able to secure his dismissal. 
So, after nearly four decades of intermittent tenure of office Nottingham was once more in the wilderness. He continued to attend the Lords through the lengthy 1720-21 session (while also unsuccessfully pleading his Savile granddaughters' civil suit for specific performance for the sale of Halifax House before Lord Chancellor Macclesfield, 'English Reports', 24.596-7), but in fact he had little room to manoeuvre. Dismayed as he was by the whigs' use of their power, he was still wary to act too closely with those with whom he had broken in 1711 lest he seem to be conceding he had been in error in his breach with the Harley ministry. Yet, he could still claim that if he could not stem the tide that at least 'I am not concurring in any measures... destructive of our constitution in church and state' (Nottingham to Lord Coningsby, 24 July 1721, BL, Add. MS 57861, fol. 184). Thus, not only did he speak out against the proposed repeal in 1718 of the 'Test Act' but he also turned his hand to draft (with the advice of Dr Daniel Waterland) and to publish in 1721 a lengthy vindication of orthodox trinitarianism when provoked to respond on this much controverted subject by William Whiston. 
Nottingham succeeded to the senior Finch title of Winchilsea shortly before his own death at Burley on the Hill on new year's day 1730; he was buried at Ravenstone. But it was the accomplishments of his own branch of the family in which he chiefly took pride -- not the greater antiquity of the title of the ne'er-do-well senior line. His father had been a distinguished holder of the great seal, and he himself was, after all, the author of the 'Act of Toleration', a consistent supporter of the protestant succession, and a steady opponent of French pretensions who recognized, as many tories did not, that Louis XIV must be challenged on the continent as well as at sea. Moreover, if his own long political career was marked as much by frustration as by accomplishment, he did display a constructive capacity at critical junctures -- not least during the exclusion crisis and in 1688-9. 
None the less, the second earl's official career was marked by repeated disappointment, and his difficulties clearly owed something to his tendency to lapse into stubborn self-righteousness in the face of resistance and his penchant for lecturing the monarchs he served. Indeed, even in his dealings with his fellow tories he was -- as Sir Keith Feiling shrewdly observed -- 'a man not exactly of tangents, but of corners; he consorted with his fellows, but his volubility was self-centred and did not react to common opinion' (K. G. Feiling, 'A History of the Tory Party, 1640-1714', 1924, 259). But the second earl of Nottingham's temperament and his long-winded, legalistic speechifying (hence, the hostile Harley's epithet of Spintext) were hardly the only reasons why the tories never matched the discipline and relative unity of the whig junto and its following nor were able to capitalize fully upon their initial favour first with William and Mary and then with Anne. 
Thus, in the post-1714 world, and even perhaps before then, the second earl figures as a smouldering volcano. The future lay with those who could accommodate themselves to the new order -- among them, some of the prestigious spouses he found for his daughters, and also his four younger sons (all MPs), who, like many other offspring of long-time tory families, would figure as supporters and beneficiaries of the Walpolean oligarchy. However, his eldest son, Daniel, who succeeded him as eighth earl of Winchilsea (and third earl of Nottingham), though holding household office for the last five years of his father's life, thereafter aligned himself with his friend John Carteret and the 'patriot' opposition. 


@@@@@


doc= 9428


Finch, Edward (b. after 1584, d. 1641/2), Church of England clergyman, was a younger son of Sir Henry Finch (c.1558-1625) and Ursula Thwaites (died in or after 1625), of Eastwell in Kent. John Finch, later first Baron Finch of Fordwich (1584-1660), was his elder brother. Nothing is known of his early life or education. He became vicar of Christ Church, Newgate, London, on 9 December 1630 following the death of the incumbent, Sampson Price, and received a BD from Cambridge early in 1632. At some point during late 1640 or early 1641 a number of his parishioners petitioned the Long Parliament for his ejection from the parish. They complained of his 'superstitious affection to the Surplice and other Popish practices' such as the erection of an altar, bowing at the name of Jesus, and the use of organ music ('Petition and Articles', 6). They also charged that he exacted 'unlawfull and unreasonable Fees and summes of money' from his flock and had not lived in the parish 'for many years'. It was further alleged that he was 'a common haunter of Tavernes, and Alehouses', lived apart from his wife, and kept company with 'divers women suspected of incontinency'. In particular it was alleged that he had behaved in a lewd fashion while ministering to a dying woman and had tried to seduce another woman by showing her 'what was most shameful to be seen or spoken of' ('Petition and Articles', 1-2, 4, 10). 
On 8 May 1641 John White of the grand committee for religion reported the matter to the Commons and the house resolved that Finch was 'guilty of practicing Innovations in the Church, Non-residence, foul Extortions, Neglect of the Duty of his Function, and Prophaning of the Sacraments'. The house further resolved that he was 'a Man of Prophane Life, Scandalous in his Doctrine and Conversation, and a Hinderer of Preaching' and, as such, was 'unfit to hold any Benefice or Promotion in the Church' ('JHC', 2.139; 8 May 1641). In August Finch's opponents complained that he had not been removed from his position, and he may have still been vicar when he published his defence, 'An Answer to the Articles', in November 1641. 
In this Finch admitted his Laudian leanings but denied any pastoral, financial, or sexual impropriety. He denied that he was married, and claimed, apparently with some justification, that some of the evidence presented against him had been fabricated. Yet he was forced to admit that he did swear and had frequented taverns and alehouses. He also admitted that he had suffered imprisonment at some unspecified point during the 1630s, and had twice successfully defended himself in the courts against allegations of sexual misconduct. He ascribed the petition and articles against him to the machinations of William Greenhill, 'that Arch-incendiary of Christ-Church Parish', and presented a petition in his favour signed by 'most of the Gentry, and divers other persons of quallity, honestie and abilitie' (Finch) in his parish. 
Finch died some time before 1 February 1642, when the 'rigid Presbyterian' William Jenkins succeeded him as vicar of Christ Church (Kennet, 792). 


@@@@@


doc= 9429


Finch, Edward (bap. 1663, d. 1738), Church of England clergyman and musician, was baptized on 20 April 1663 at St Mary Abbots, Kensington, the fifth surviving son among the fourteen children of Heneage Finch, first earl of Nottingham (1621-1682), lord chancellor, and his wife, Elizabeth Harvey (died 1676), daughter of William Harvey. Edward was admitted to Christ's College, Cambridge, on 8 June 1677; he proceeded to the degree of MA in 1679, and from 1680 to 1684 was a fellow there. On 23 April 1683 he was admitted to the Inner Temple but he did not pursue a legal career. In 1689 he was appointed under-secretary of state to his brother Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham, and in 1690 was elected member of parliament for Cambridge University. He supported the administration in the Commons but became disheartened by party rivalries and in 1693 resigned his under-secretaryship. He did not stand for election in 1695. At the age of thirty-two Edward took holy orders; he was ordained deacon at York on 8 September 1695 and priest a week later. His opportunities in the church were limited following his brother's fall from power and it was not until 1704 that he was preferred to the prebend of Wetwang in York Minster by Archbishop John Sharp. The next year he was appointed rector of Kirkby in Cleveland, a sinecure. 
Between 1707 and 1713 Finch was rector of Wigan. There he became involved in a dispute with some of his parishioners concerning the positioning of an organ within the parish church. He also took a leading role in managing the tory interest in the borough. At some time before 1707 he married Mary (died 1742), daughter of Nicholas Stanley, fellow of New College, Oxford; the marriage was childless. In 1710 he became a prebendary of Canterbury Cathedral, in 1715 a chaplain to George I, and in 1718 rector of Eyam, Derbyshire. On leaving Wigan he probably took up permanent residence in York and from 1728 lived there in the north part of what is now known as the Treasurer's House. He was cited to the chapter of York Minster in 1730 for contempt after failing to give up the keys of the capitular chest. He died at York on 14 February 1738 and was buried three days later in the south aisle of York Minster. 
Finch's posthumous reputation rests on his activities as an amateur musician. In the 1680s he composed a piece for violin (or flute) and continuo, 'The Cuckoo', which was published in 1693. Ten other unpublished sonatas for the same instruments are included in a Durham Cathedral Library manuscript. Given the six flutes that he owned at the time of his death and the several flute fingering charts in his music manuscripts, it seems probable that he was a flautist. He composed three pieces of sacred music: a 'Te Deum in G minor' (1708); a short anthem, 'Grant we beseech thee, O merciful Lord' (before 1715); and a 'Jubilate in G minor' (1721). These works were copied into the York Minster choir books, and thus were probably performed there, but there is no evidence to suggest performance elsewhere. He also adapted two works by A. Steffani for use as anthems in York Minster. Finch's small musical output, in which lapses in technique sometimes reveal the amateur, is made up with a few catches and Anglican chants. After his death a part of his collection of music went to Thomas Sharp, then to the latter's son, Granville, and was finally dispersed by sale in 1814. 


@@@@@


doc= 9430


Finch, Edward (1756-1843), army officer and politician, was born on 26 April 1756, the fifth son of Heneage Finch, third earl of Aylesford ('bap'. 1715, died 1777), politician, and Lady Charlotte Seymour (1730-1805), daughter of Charles Seymour, sixth duke of Somerset. He was educated at Westminster School as a queen's scholar and entered Trinity College, Cambridge in 1773, proceeding BA (1777). He entered the army as a cornet in the 11th dragoons on 27 December 1778, exchanged into the 20th light dragoons, and on 7 October 1779 was promoted lieutenant into the 87th regiment. He accompanied this regiment to the West Indies in January 1780, and served there and in America until he was promoted lieutenant and captain into the 2nd or Coldstream Guards on 5 February 1783. On 11 May 1789 he was elected MP for Cambridge, in which capacity he supported first Pitt's and then Lord Liverpool's ministries. On 3 October 1792 he was promoted captain and lieutenant-colonel. In the following year he accompanied the brigade of guards to Flanders under General Gerard Lake, and served throughout the campaigns in the Netherlands under the duke of York with great credit. He was present at the actions of Caesar's Camp and Famars, in the famous engagement of Lincelles, and at the battles of Hondschoten, Lannoy, Turcoing, and round Tournai. He remained with his corps until the withdrawal of the British troops from the continent in April 1795. 
On 3 May 1796 Finch was promoted colonel and nominated to command the light companies of the guards in Sir Eyre Coote's expedition to cut the sluices at Ostend, but was prevented from going by an accidental injury he received the day before the expedition sailed. He was present with the guards in the suppression of the Irish rising of 1798, and in 1799 commanded the 1st battalion of the Coldstreams in the expedition to The Helder and at the battles of Bergen. In the following year Finch was appointed to the command of the brigade of cavalry, consisting of the 12th and 26th light dragoons, which accompanied Sir Ralph Abercromby's army to Egypt. His regiments hardly came into action at all in the famous battles of March 1801, for the ground was not well adapted for cavalry, and he covered only the siege operations against Alexandria. He received the thanks of parliament with the other generals, and on 1 January 1801 he was promoted major-general. 
In 1803 Finch took command of the 1st brigade of guards, then stationed at Chelmsford, consisting of the 1st battalion of the Coldstreams and the 1st battalion 3rd guards, and commanded that brigade in the expedition to Denmark in 1809, and at the siege of Copenhagen. In 1802 he had been appointed a groom of the bedchamber to George III. On 25 April 1808 he was promoted lieutenant-general, and on 3 August 1808 was appointed colonel of the 54th regiment, transferring to the colonelcy of the 22nd foot on 18 September 1809. On 12 August 1819 he was promoted general. His seniority to Lord Wellington prevented him from being employed in the Peninsula, and he did not see service after 1809. He continued to sit in the House of Commons for Cambridge, through the influence of his cousin the duke of Rutland, until December 1819, when he accepted the Chiltern Hundreds. Throughout the thirty years of his parliamentary career his seat was only once contested, in 1818. After 1819, Finch entirely retired from public life; he died, unmarried, on 27 October 1843, aged eighty-seven, being at the time of his death the sixth general in order of seniority in the British army. 


@@@@@


doc= 9431


Finch, Francis Oliver (1802-1862), watercolour painter, was born prematurely on 22 November 1802, possibly in Friday Street, near Cheapside, London, the son of Francis Finch, a merchant in Friday Street, and his wife, whose maiden name was Oliver. His father died two years later, leaving his widow inadequately provided for. Finch, cared for by his mother and her sisters, was a sickly child and was sent to live with his grandmother, Mrs Oliver, at Stone, near Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire. In this rural environment he flourished, being able eventually to join in children's games. When he was seven an offer of presentation to Christ's Hospital, London, was refused by his mother on account of his earlier delicacy. He had little education apart from what he received at home, but he early acquired an appreciation of literature: before the age of thirteen he had learned by heart much of 'Paradise Lost' and was reading Edmund Spenser's 'Faerie Queene'. As an adult he himself wrote prose and poetry, including some pleasing sonnets. 
Finch began painting during his boyhood; his promise moved the unidentified friend who had wished to present him at Christ's Hospital to offer to bear the cost of placing him with a professional painter. Consequently, at the age of twelve, he was articled to the watercolourist John Varley for three years (subsequently extended to five) at a premium of $200. The same friend afterwards paid for a tour in Scotland, where the young artist realized the possibilities of landscape study. On his return he attended Henry Sass's life academy; he probably also attended Henry Fuseli's lectures at the Royal Academy. 
Finch was introduced to William Blake by John Linnell, another of Varley's pupils. He initially saw Blake as 'a new kind of man, wholly original' (Gilchrist, 300) but later he qualified this opinion, characterizing him as 'perverse and wilful' (ibid., 320). His early admiration was enhanced when he met Samuel Palmer, the central figure of a group of admiring young men gathered around Blake who called themselves the Ancients. They understood little of Blake's thought but all -- especially Palmer -- were deeply affected by the vision of landscape in his wood-engravings for Robert John Thornton's 'Virgil for Schools' (1821). It was probably these illustrations which finally decided Finch to paint landscapes. His compositions are sometimes topographical but more often they are an imaginative amalgam with undertones from the poetry of Keats, which he loved, and recollections of the compositions of Claude; in technique they are much indebted to Varley. At their most original they are well composed, with depth, richness of colour, and intensity of atmosphere: 'Classical Landscape with a Sea Coast' (Ashmolean Museum, Oxford) and 'Ruined Castle with a Thunderstorm' (British Museum, London) are examples of his best work. On 11 February 1822, at the tender age of nineteen, he was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours; he became a full member on 4 June 1827. 
Finch was elegant in appearance, demeanour, and address, and his presence at any dinner party was said to ensure its success. A pianist and a gifted counter-tenor, he joined the choir of the Swedenborg church in Cross Street, Hatton Garden, London, where he met Elizabeth (Eliza) McNab (1808-1891). They were married at All Souls Church, Langham Place, in the spring of 1837 (the Cross Street church was not licensed for weddings) and at first lived with Finch's mother, now married to Dr William Thomson, at 51 Upper Charlotte Street, Fitzroy Square; later they moved to 2 Argyle Square, New Road (now Euston Road). Early in their marriage the couple visited Paris, where Finch copied a Claude in the Musee du Louvre. He was never robust and on 13 May 1857 suffered a severe stroke from which, however, he recovered. In 1860 he and his wife moved to a smaller house, 38 Manchester Square, where in 1861 he suffered a more severe stroke, depriving him of the use of his limbs. Finally they moved to 6 Highfield Villas, Kentish Town, London, where Finch died peacefully on 27 August 1862. He left no children. His wife published his 'Memorials' in 1865. The British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum in London and the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven, Connecticut, have examples of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 9432


Finch, Sir Heneage (1580-1631), speaker of the House of Commons, was born on 15 December 1580 at The Mote, near Canterbury, Kent, the fifth but fourth surviving son of Sir Moyle Finch ('c'.1550-1614) of Eastwell in Kent and Elizabeth (1556-1634), daughter and heir of the Elizabethan chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, Sir Thomas Heneage of Copt Hall in Essex, after whom he was named. He matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, about 1592, and gained his BA in 1595 or 1596. In November 1597 he entered the Inner Temple; he was called to the bar in July 1606. On 20 December 1607 he was returned to parliament at a by-election for Rye in Sussex on the recommendation of his brother-in-law Sir William Twysden, taking his seat at the earliest opportunity, in 1610. He made a notable contribution to the parliament's proceedings on 2 July when, in a cogently argued speech, he disputed the crown's right to levy impositions. His intervention undoubtedly brought him to the notice of the government, which on 19 August 1610 instructed him and five other leading lawyers to codify the English legal system. Finch and two of his colleagues rapidly identified numerous obsolete statutes ripe for repeal, but it was not until about 1616 that he and his fellow commissioners turned their attention to the problem of codification. He recalled that their labours took up 'ten hours in a day, all one vacation' ('Letters and Life of Francis Bacon', 6.71) and culminated in the compilation of a lengthy and detailed report. 
In June 1611 Finch's father purchased one of the newly created baronetcies. At a debate before the king and council in April 1612, at which both Finch and his father were present, Finch expounded the view that baronets were synonymous with earlier bannerets. He attempted to impress the king with his scholarship but his verbosity and presumption merely irritated James, who cut him short. James instructed another lawyer present 'to answer nothing to what young Mr. Finch had spoken, because he had said nothing worth the answering' ('Westmorland MSS', 8-9). 
Finch was reader at Lyon's Inn in 1612 and 1613. He did not sit in the 1614 parliament. On 26 November 1614 his father surrendered to him the stewardship of the duchy of Lancaster's lands in Essex. Sir Moyle died in the following month, and Finch and several other trustees took control of his estates, until the death of Finch's eldest brother, Sir Theophilus, in November 1619, when the lands reverted to Sir Moyle's second son, Sir Thomas. In 1618 or 1619 Finch entered the service of Prince Charles, whose patronage facilitated his return to the third Jacobean parliament in December 1620 for West Looe in Cornwall. On 15 February 1621 he became recorder of London, the king's first choice, Robert Shute, having died unexpectedly. In parliament Finch took a leading role in investigating the monopolist Sir Giles Mompesson. However, until reprimanded following a conference with the Lords, he proved reluctant to pursue the referees who had advised the king to award the offending patents, as the evidence pointed to the royal favourite, the marquess of Buckingham. He may have gone some way towards repairing the damage to his reputation on 3 December when he eloquently defended the Commons' right to petition the king to break off the negotiations for a Spanish match. 
Finch was called to the bench of the Inner Temple on 23 April 1621, and on 12 May 1622 he was appointed summer reader. On 8 June 1623 he again irritated the king by making a fawning speech on the occasion of the knighting of the lord mayor of London. He was himself dubbed on 22 June; appointed a serjeant-at-law a few days later, his formal creation took place in October, when he was also accorded the same status by Prince Charles. On 8 July 1623 his mother was ennobled as Viscountess Maidstone, becoming countess of Winchilsea on 12 July 1628. 
As recorder of London Finch enjoyed an almost automatic right to represent the city in parliament, and he was returned by the Londoners in 1624. An active member of the committee for grievances, he played an important role in harrying the beleaguered lord treasurer, Lionel Cranfield, earl of Middlesex, who stood accused of taking bribes and of introducing an imposition of $3 per tun on wine imports. Bribery was a form of behaviour which Finch deplored in private as well as in public, as his commonplace book shows, but he was most incensed at the new impost on wine -- echoing not merely his earlier expressed hostility to impositions, but also the concern of his London constituents. He did not join the initial clamour for war with Spain in 1624, and on 1 March he even criticized in committee one of the reasons advanced by his colleagues to persuade James to break off the marriage negotiations with Spain. However, he clearly had no wish to offend Prince Charles, not least because this would have jeopardized his career, and he therefore subsequently moderated his tone. Indeed, on 11 March he even proposed that, should the king accept the house's advice to break off the treaties, 'we will be ready to assist him and make it good with our bodies and goods to the uttermost' (Harvard U., Houghton L., English MS 980, p. 107). 
Finch's participation in the parliament of 1624 appears to have been cut short by illness, and over the summer he suffered from an eye condition which kept him from his duties. He had recovered by October, when he presented London's mayor to the exchequer. In April 1625 the city again elected him to parliament, where his attention now focused on religious issues, in particular the growth of Arminianism which, as an orthodox Calvinist, he regarded with alarm. On 7 July he reported from the committee for religion, to which had been referred two recent publications by the Arminian cleric Richard Mountague. He declared that it was the opinion of the whole committee that Mountague's 'Apello Caesarem' was 'a factious and seditious book, tending manifestly to the dishonour of our late king and to the disturbance of our church and state'. He himself was particularly incensed at Mountague's claim that the church contained within it a powerful faction of 'puritans', whose doctrines Mountague held to be worse than those of the papists. He observed that by Mountague's definition 'we may all be puritans', even those who conformed to the established rites and ceremonies of the church (Jansson and Bidwell, 331, 337). Mountague's 'A New Gagg for an Old Goose' he described as containing many propositions which contradicted the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. He was appointed to the committee for drawing up charges against Mountague, but was subsequently reassured by Charles I's response to the Commons' petition on religion, and on 10 August, during the Oxford sitting of parliament, he unsuccessfully urged the house to show its gratitude to Charles by voting additional subsidies. 
Shortly after parliament was dissolved it was rumoured that Finch would replace Sir Robert Heath as solicitor-general, but in the event this office was bestowed upon Sir Richard Shilton. On 29 December 1625 Finch received notification that he had been chosen to serve as speaker in a fresh parliament which had been summoned to meet in February 1626. He acknowledged that he was indebted for this honour to the royal favourite, Buckingham, 'as I am much otherwise' ('Finch MSS', 1.44), but he initially declined the invitation only to change his mind after discussing the matter with the lord keeper, Sir Thomas Coventry. Once at Westminster he found himself in a near-impossible position. While the king expected swiftly to receive a grant of subsidies to pay for the war with Spain, many members of the Commons were determined to vote supply only if they were first permitted to impeach Buckingham. As the attack on Buckingham gathered pace Finch was frequently obliged to vacate the speaker's chair in order to make way for the grand committee, so leaving him powerless to direct the business of the house. His impotence was revealed most starkly following the arrest in open parliament of Sir Dudley Digges and Sir John Eliot on 11 May. Finch, then in the chair, attempted to keep to the business in hand but his colleagues 'refused to proceed but abruptly broke off'. On the following day he urged the house to return to its earlier business, but was met with shouts of 'sit down' (Bidwell and Jansson, 3.233, 236). He entered the house again the next morning, but he had learned his lesson and stayed in the chamber only long enough to lead the house in prayer. The collapse of the 1626 parliament was followed by royal demands for a forced loan and he was among the first to contribute, also acting as a commissioner for its collection in London. His enthusiasm for this unpopular levy was not shared by the citizens of London, who also disapproved of his dependence on Buckingham, and in February 1628 they broke with tradition when they refused to return Finch, their recorder, to parliament. Finch's marriage to Frances, daughter of Sir Edmund Bell of Beaupre Hall, Outwell, in Norfolk, which may have lasted almost twenty years, ended with Frances's death on 11 April 1627, leaving him with three young sons and a daughter. Over the summer of 1628 he courted Elizabeth Bennett (died 1661), daughter of William Cradock and widow of the London alderman and mercer Richard Bennett, who had reportedly left her $30,000. She initially rebuffed his advances, announcing that she would not marry anyone who had already started a family, but he persuaded her to change her mind and they were married on 16 April 1629. They subsequently had two daughters, the younger of whom was the philosopher Anne Conway. With his new-found wealth Finch purchased a magnificent house in Kensington, which William III would later acquire as Kensington Palace. 
Finch was appointed serjeant-at-law to Queen Henrietta Maria in April 1629. He was undoubtedly destined for further promotion but he died on 5 December 1631 after a long illness. By his will, which he drew up on 16 April 1631, he placed his estate in the hands of seven trustees, his children being all under age, and instructed them to raise $10,000 to purchase a jointure property for his widow, who survived until September 1661. Despite requesting to be buried at Eastwell, Finch was interred in the south chancel of the church at Ravenstone in Buckinghamshire. His simple marble tomb, costing $50, was commissioned by his brother Francis and was built by Nicholas Stone. Finch was the author of an unpublished treatise 'touching the power and jurisdiction of bishops' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. C240). His eldest son, also Heneage Finch (1621-1682), became lord chancellor and earl of Nottingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 9433


Finch, Heneage, first earl of Nottingham (1621-1682), lord chancellor, born on 23 December 1621, probably at Eastwell, Kent, was the eldest son of Sir Heneage Finch (1580-1631), recorder of London and speaker of the House of Commons in 1626, and Frances (died 1627), daughter of Sir Edmund Bell, of Beaupre Hall, Outwell, Norfolk. Finch came of an old Kentish family from which had come many persons prominent in the legal profession. His great-uncle was Sir Henry Finch, serjeant-at-law and legal author, whose son, Heneage's cousin, was John Finch, Baron Finch of Fordwich, who had held the great seal prior to the civil war. Heneage's father died when his son was under ten years of age, but this did not hinder his early career. After Westminster School he was at Christ Church, Oxford, from 1635, was then admitted to the Inner Temple, on 26 November 1638, and was called to the bar in 1645. For the next fifteen years he was in private practice and acquired a high reputation as lawyer and advocate, but being a convinced royalist he abstained during the Commonwealth from taking any part in public affairs. In 1646 he married Elizabeth Harvey (1627-1676), daughter of Daniel Harvey, a Levant merchant of London, and kinswoman of the physician William Harvey. They had fourteen children, some of whom had distinguished careers: Daniel Finch, their eldest son, held high office under the later Stuarts; Heneage Finch, their second son, became solicitor-general and was created earl of Aylesford; Edward Finch was a clergyman and musician. The family lived in Kensington House, later sold by Daniel to William III. 
The Restoration of 1660 was a tide of good fortune for Heneage Finch. He became solicitor-general on 7 June (and acquired a baronetcy the same day, probably procured by his kinsman, the earl of Winchilsea). He was elected member of the Convention Parliament for Canterbury, and since the attorney-general, Sir Geoffrey Palmer, was not a member of the House of Commons this cast on Finch much of the management of legal business in parliament for the next dozen years. In the legal profession he became treasurer of his inn of court in 1661, and the king was present at his reader's feast. 
Having entered the Convention Parliament as member for Canterbury, Finch was immediately active in the promotion of the restoration of the monarchy and established church. He was chairman of the committee to consider the 'Bill of Indemnity' and of the committee which made exceptions from the amnesty. In the election of 1661 he was returned with Laurence Hyde as member for Oxford University, and kept this seat until his removal to the House of Lords. As solicitor-general he prosecuted the regicides. Finch was particularly vigorous in the re-establishment of the church and was generally opposed to the toleration of dissenters; in February 1663 he chaired the committee which drew up the address requesting the withdrawal of the declaration of indulgence, though in February 1673 he did concede in the debate on the declaration of 1672 the prerogative of dispensation. His concerns with church and state did not exhaust his political interests. Thus he was extremely active in the vexed question of the Irish cattle trade and made numerous speeches against the protectionist bills ('Cattle Acts' of 1663 and 1667) since they sought to prevent the king from exercising his dispensing power to exempt individuals from the operation of the legislation. The strain of this work caused him to collapse with nervous exhaustion. Towards the end of the Cavalier Parliament his activities had somewhat declined, but it has been computed that in that parliament he had served on 245 committees and had made 47 reports, and that since 1666 (when regular reporting of debates began) he had made about 130 speeches. 
Perhaps the most difficult of his political positions was that brought about by the impeachment of Clarendon in 1667. To Clarendon he owed his parliamentary seat and he was doubtless resentful of being drawn in to the proceedings against the fallen minister. He did attempt to restrain the fury of the impeachment, though he had to concede that his speech on that occasion was capable of a double interpretation; in the event the crisis was resolved by Clarendon's flight and banishment. In February 1668 he was able to defeat Temple's bill for triennial parliaments, as he had earlier been instrumental in securing in 1664 the repeal of the 1641 act on the subject. In the same month he appeared as counsel to defeat the attempt to confer original instance jurisdiction in civil cases on the House of Lords in the case of Skinner and the East India Company, and after the House of Commons had voted that such proceedings were illegal, the Lords abandoned their claim to hear such cases. Finch was also hostile to the appellate powers of the Lords, but though he was successful in this regard as to ecclesiastical appeals, the House of Lords did establish its right over chancery appeals. In December 1668 he opposed the impeachment of Lord Orrery, saying 'No man knows, when a spirit of accusation is up, when it will rest again, and he never knew much good done in Parliaments where many impeachments were' (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 2.320). In 1670 Finch became attorney-general in succession to Sir Geoffrey Palmer, but his parliamentary activity continued unabated, particularly in the management of money bills and the dispute with the Lords in 1671 over the practice of tacking. The House of Commons voted him their thanks for maintaining their monopoly over supply. In 1673 he was much involved in the controversy over the king's declaration of indulgence, in which debate he defended the prerogative of dispensation, though ultimately advising a petition that the declaration be withdrawn and chairing a committee formed for the purpose. He resisted a bill for the naturalization of protestant immigrants, though generally favouring a bill of ease for protestant dissenters. His Commons career terminated abruptly when on the dismissal of Shaftesbury as lord chancellor he was made lord keeper on 9 November 1673. The following January he received a peerage as Baron Finch of Daventry. He was appointed lord chancellor in 1675. 
While in the House of Lords, Finch was less involved in controversial politics, though with rising faction he could not avoid such conflicts altogether. On the issue of exclusion of the duke of York from succession he favoured rather a scheme of limitation, though he argued at length in council against the dissolution of the first Exclusion Parliament. He was dangerously exposed to faction politics for his role in the projected impeachment of his old Commons colleague, the earl of Danby, who was sent to the Tower in 1679. Finch was appointed high steward to preside over the impending impeachment, but the distasteful duty was avoided by an arrangement whereby the great seal was temporarily placed in the king's hands and Danby's pardon sealed by an under-officer. A committee of the House of Commons seems to have accepted Finch's explanation for this technical evasion of responsibility. (As a result of this episode he composed a learned treatise on the royal prerogative of pardon, especially in relation to impeachments.) Some trials over which he did preside as high steward were of ordinary crime, as that in 1678 of the earl of Pembroke for a duelling manslaughter. 
A more serious political event was the impeachment for high treason of Lord Stafford in 1680. Sir James Fitzjames Stephen wrote of this trial: 'I do not think that even in our own times a prisoner could be treated with greater tenderness, consideration and courtesy... yet this most courteous and humane proceeding ended in what I think must be regarded as by far the most inexcusable of all the verdicts given in connection with the Popish plot. (Stephen, 1.396)' Finch voted as high steward with the majority for conviction (fifty-five votes to thirty-one, so the peers were not a panic-stricken jury), but it does appear from his speech upon judgment that he was a believer in the plot at large. (Among his private papers there is an elaborate analysis of the general evidences for and against the plot; he seems to have relied too far on the dangerous maxim that there is no smoke without fire.) Nevertheless his speech on this melancholy occasion was generally regarded as one of his best public utterances. The final episode of his political career was the dramatic dissolution of the Oxford Parliament in March 1681. During that very brief parliament he had become involved with the attempt by the House of Commons to impeach Edward Fitzharris for high treason. Under his advice the House of Lords decided that they could not receive the impeachment of a commoner on a capital charge. This raised a storm in the House of Commons, but the dissolution two days later blew the whigs away. Finch did not meet another parliament; created earl of Nottingham on 12 May 1681, he was now increasingly affected by ill health, and he confined his remaining energies to his chancery work, up to his death on 18 December 1682. He was buried at All Saints' Church, Ravenstone, Buckinghamshire. His son Daniel succeeded him as second earl. 
Finch was not at home in the world of party politics nor was he a maker of political policy. It has been said of him that 'during 22 years of continuous ministerial office it is hard to trace any serious deviation from his principles of loyalty to the Church and respect for the prerogative' (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 2.322). For the long-term effects of his public career his judicial work as lord chancellor was of much further consequence. As Holdsworth has remarked, 'it is his work as a great equity judge that has given him his distinguished position in our legal history' (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 6.541). The development of equity as administered in the court of chancery was by the seventeenth century moving towards a regular system of principles and rules designed to supplement the common law by emphasizing requirements of honesty and good faith in legal transactions and relations. Finch began the task of organizing and systematizing these principles; he was particularly concerned to rationalize with a view to the future. Numerous instances of this pervade the law of trusts, mortgages, and contracts, and when legislative assistance was required, he managed that, for example, in organizing the content and carriage of the 'Statute of Frauds' in 1677. Perhaps his best-known decision was that in the 'Duke of Norfolk's case' (1681) in which he cut through a mass of confused and confusing precedents to originate the basis of a general rule against perpetuities in trust settlements, and enunciated a principle limiting an owner's power to create future interests in trust property by the imposition of the 'dead man's hand'. 
Apart from some scattered contemporary reports Finch's work was not published until a collection entitled 'Reports of cases decreed in the high court of chancery during the time Sir Heneage Finch, afterwards earl of Nottingham, was lord chancellor' was made by William Nelson in 1725. But these cases were drawn from the books of decretal orders and thus do not supply the judicial reasons for the decisions. But Lord Nottingham had fortunately penned his own private collection of his cases which circulated in manuscript in the eighteenth century and some few selected cases were published in Swanston's 'Chancery Reports' (1821-7). The full publication of Nottingham's reports was not achieved until they were edited and published by the Selden Society in two volumes (73, 79) in 1957 and 1961, and other treatises by him on chancery law and practice were during this period edited and printed after long obscurity. Nevertheless his status as the 'Father of Modern Equity' was recognized in the legal profession long before modern academic retrieval of the texts. Thus Blackstone wrote that he 'was endued with a pervading genius, that enabled him to discover and pursue the true spirit of justice' and that he was enabled 'in the course of nine years to build a system of jurisprudence upon wide and rational foundations' (Blackstone, 3.55). 


@@@@@


doc= 9434


Finch, Heneage, third earl of Winchilsea (1627/8-1689), diplomat, was the ninth child but eldest surviving son of Thomas Finch, second earl of Winchilsea (1578-1639), MP, and his wife, Cicely (died 1642), daughter of John Wentworth of Gosfield, Essex. As the first holder of the title was a woman -- Finch's widowed grandmother, created countess of Winchilsea in 1628 -- he is sometimes known as the second earl. On her death in 1634 he succeeded to the courtesy title of Viscount Maidstone, and in 1639 to the earldom of Winchilsea. His father had already settled the family estates on trustees including Sir William Waller, a brother-in-law of the young heir. Winchilsea matriculated at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1644, and on 21 May 1645 married Diana (died 1648), daughter of Francis, Lord Willoughby of Parham, who was shortly to defect from parliament to the royalists, where Winchilsea's own sympathies lay. In 1649 as a 21-year-old widower he married Mary (died 1672), daughter of William Seymour, marquess of Hertford, settled his estates in turn on trustees, and borrowed heavily against his life interest in order to send supplies to the exiled Charles II and recruit support for him at home. As a peer and head of the influential Finch clan he was a natural leader of the close-knit group of royalists in his part of Kent, and in the abortive rising of 1655 was to have seized first Dover and Rochester, then Colchester for the king. In 1657-8 he travelled extensively on the continent, acquiring a lifelong love of Italy and antiquities. 
Back home the political tide was turning in Winchilsea's favour, and in April 1660 he chaired the election meeting which returned royalist members for Kent to the Convention Parliament. Monck then appointed him governor of the castle and town of Dover, where he proclaimed Charles II on 11 May. On the 25th he marshalled the nobility and gentry of Kent to welcome the king on Barham Downs between Dover and Canterbury, where Charles spent the first night of his return, knighting Winchilsea the next day. A month later he was also created Baron Fitzherbert of Eastwell, in allusion to the alleged descent of the Finch family from the Herberts. He was confirmed as governor of Dover and appointed lord lieutenant of Kent and 'custos rotulorum', colonel of a foot regiment of Kent militia, and captain (later colonel) of the volunteer horse. And at his own request he was nominated as ambassador-extraordinary to the Porte in Constantinople, to remain there as ambassador-in-ordinary on an initial five-year contract with the Levant Company, who paid a large salary and expenses. 
Winchilsea sailed in October 1660, taking his wife and baby but leaving behind the five eldest children. As he later told his mother-in-law, it was 'to tast a bitter cup, to take leave of my children and nearest relations and friends, and to exchange my native countrey when it was the best worth enjoying, to live amongst barbarians', but it seemed the only way to repair the family fortunes: 'to make my selfe miserable that I might make my posterity happy' ('Finch MSS', 1.470). The voyage was an eventful one, in the course of which the ship was twice nearly lost. The first storm drove her into Lisbon for repairs, in the middle of negotiations for the marriage of Catherine of Braganza. The second storm, and Winchilsea's favourable reception by the grand vizier and sultan, were described in an anonymous 'Narrative of the success of the voyage of the right honourable Heneage Finch, earl of Winchelsea', prepared by his secretary Paul Rycaut and published in London in 1661. 
The first peer to be appointed to the embassy in Constantinople, Winchilsea lived in some splendour and soon made an ally of the new vizier, Fazil Ahmed Koprulu. For the earl 'was a jolly Lord, and... having a goodly Person and Mustachios, with a World of Talk, and that all (as his Way was) of mighty Wonders, the Vizier delighted in his Company' (North, 115). A man of strong passions -- the motto on his seal, which translates as 'neither elated nor cast down', could hardly have been less appropriate -- he was also fair-minded, and his correspondence breathes trenchant common sense. He was able in January 1662 to renew the capitulations (trading privileges) with a number of important additional articles, and in subsequent years to ensure that any breaches by Ottoman officials were punished. He also represented the English case against the Ottoman dependency of Algiers, where he had negotiated unsuccessfully in 1660, to such effect that an Algerine delegation to the Porte was forced to promise not to search English merchant ships and take out foreign passengers or their goods. This concession had to be reinforced by a naval expedition in 1663-4, but was then observed until 1677, giving the English merchants a significant advantage over their rivals in the Mediterranean carrying trade. Ratifications were also obtained from the sultan of similar treaties with Tunis and Tripoli. And Winchilsea carried out with enthusiasm his instructions to encourage all good Christians within his province, and to mediate between them as well as on their behalf with the Ottomans; Transylvanian, Wallachian, and Moldavian princes, Greek and Armenian patriarchs, Latin bishops in the archipelago, and Franciscan guardians of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem all sought and received his help. He was largely successful in preventing English shipping from being commandeered by the Ottomans for their war with the Venetians in Candia (Crete), although his offers to mediate were not taken up. 
Winchilsea's other major contribution was in exerting his authority, strengthened by the Levant Company's new charter of 1661, to re-establish discipline in the English factories in the Levant, where fraud and other abuses had become endemic during the civil wars and interregnum. Cloth exports and silk imports, both vital to English manufacturing industry, returned rapidly to their former levels and soon eclipsed the Dutch trade, which had dominated the scene on his arrival. During the Second Anglo-Dutch War the English government at his suggestion extended its convoy system to ensure that these valuable cargoes were protected by frigates throughout their voyage. The Levant Company acknowledged that Winchilsea had done more for them than any previous ambassador, although this did not stop them from lecturing him about the expenses he had incurred in implementing the king's instructions in terms which he found extremely galling. 
'Like a slave used to his chaines, I doe resolve not to change for the worse untill my debts are payd and my children provided for', Winchilsea told a cousin in 1667 ('Finch MSS', 1.459), but soon found his plans doubly frustrated by the clandestine marriage of his teenage heir, William, and his own recall. He left Turkey in March 1669 and in April stopped briefly in Sicily to see the lava flow from Mount Etna, which had erupted the month before. His eyewitness account, in the form of a letter to the king from Naples, together with other material supplied by his host in Catania, was published in London later that year as 'A True and Exact Relation of the Late Prodigious Earthquake and Eruption of Mount Aetna', and several times reprinted. 
Winchilsea's embassy had been an acknowledged success, and he began to lobby for another post in a hot climate: preferably in Italy, but Turkey again, Portugal, Spain, Morocco -- even the governorship of Tangier would do. That he never held another overseas appointment he put down to ill will on the part of his cousin Heneage Finch, the future lord chancellor and first earl of Nottingham. He travelled abroad privately instead, with his third wife, Catherine (1649/50-1678), daughter of Sir Thomas Norcliff of Langton, Yorkshire, and widow first of Christopher Lister and second of Sir John Wentworth, whom he had married on 10 April 1673; they went on an extended trip to France and Italy in 1676 and Winchilsea continued east himself in 1677 for a surprise visit to his old friend Consul Rycaut at Smyrna, where one of his own illegitimate children was being raised. He might have retired permanently to Italy before his fourth marriage -- by licence dated 29 October 1681 to Elizabeth (1661-1745), daughter and heir of John Ayres of London -- but for his responsibilities at home. 
In local politics Winchilsea still had an important role which he took seriously. His second wife's brother-in-law, Lord Treasurer Southampton, had kept his lord lieutenancy of Kent warm for him from 1662 until Southampton's death in 1667. Winchilsea was reappointed in 1668, but jointly (to his dismay) with the third duke of Richmond. Richmond, however, died in December 1672, and the following month Winchilsea became sole lord lieutenant (and also vice-admiral of Kent until December 1687). From 1675 to 1683, during the minority of the sixth duke of Somerset, he also held the lord lieutenancy of Somerset. He was clearly regarded as a safe pair of hands, and indeed was active in mobilizing support for the king during the exclusion crisis of 1679-81, the Rye House plot of 1683, and Monmouth's rebellion in 1685, after his reappointment by James II. But he was always a staunch Church of England man, and was among the royalist Anglicans purged by James from the lieutenancy. Then on 12 December 1688, when the king made his first attempt to escape and was detained by the fishermen at the Queen's Arms in Faversham, he heard that Winchilsea was in the neighbourhood and sent to him for help. The earl arrived that night and provided a more suitable guard and lodging. But he welcomed James's successful second attempt, voting in the Convention that the throne was vacant and should be offered to William and Mary. They restored him as lord lieutenant and 'custos rotulorum' of Kent, and in August 1689 William ordered him a pension of $500 a year for life. Already ill, Winchilsea died on 28 August before he could receive the first payment and was buried on 4 September in the family vault at St Mary's Church, Eastwell. Of his twenty-seven legitimate children eleven were stillborn or died in infancy, but he had devoted his best years to providing for the others. In his official capacity he was successful, yet in his own terms he was perhaps a failure. He died so heavily in debt that his widow and daughter-in-law fell out over the sparse furnishings of his house, and only their consent to arbitration by the second earl of Nottingham prevented his marriage bed from being sawn in two. In 1729, on the death without children of the last of Winchilsea's sons, Nottingham himself at the age of eighty-two succeeded to Winchilsea's title and estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 9435


Finch, Heneage, first earl of Aylesford (1648/9-1719), lawyer and politician, was born the second son of Heneage Finch, first earl of Nottingham (1621-1682), and Elizabeth Harvey (died 1675). He studied at Westminster School and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 18 November 1664, aged fifteen, and then pursued law in the Inner Temple. In 1673 Finch received his call to the bar, on 10 July 1677 was made king's counsel, and in 1678 became a bencher of the Inner Temple. Having established a prosperous practice, he moved into politics, though he failed in his first electoral effort, a parliamentary by-election for Leicester in early 1677. On 16 May 1678 Finch married Elizabeth Banks, daughter of Sir John Banks, a merchant and financier of Aylesford, Kent; they had nine children. 
Charles II named Finch his solicitor-general on 13 January 1679 after dismissing Sir Francis Winnington from the post. Late in the following month, with the support of his father (now the lord chancellor), Humphrey Prideaux of Christ Church, and Dr John Fell, bishop of Oxford, the University of Oxford chose Finch as their member of parliament in a keenly contested election. Many thought Finch would become attorney-general after the resignation of Sir William Jones in October 1679, but Finch declined the offer, reportedly acting on his father's advice. Though one observer remarked early in 1680 that Finch 'is run high into the popular way' (Thompson, 1.224), he did not seek a parliamentary seat in late 1679 nor in 1681. 
As solicitor Finch assisted Attorney-General Sir Robert Sawyer in many of the leading political prosecutions of the 1680s. He summed up the evidence in the treason trials of William, Lord Russell and Algernon Sidney, insisting that convictions would preserve 'the best government in the world, and the best and most unspotted religion... the greatest liberty, and the greatest security for property that ever was in any nation' ('State trials', 9.631). But Burnet condemned Finch's arguments as more full of 'vicious eloquence, and of ingenious malice... than of solid or sincere reasoning' ('Burnet's History', 2.376). Finch also pleaded the crown's case in the London 'quo warranto' in 1683, and helped to convict Titus Oates of perjury in 1685. 
With royal support Finch made an unsuccessful bid for a parliamentary seat at Newport, Isle of Wight, in 1685. Having bought the manor of Albury in Surrey in 1680, he found himself a seat at nearby Guildford, though questions arose about the legitimacy of his election. Finch proved energetic in the Commons, showing his support of the new king by helping to draft a loyal address after the duke of Monmouth's rebellion. Less loyally, he also chaired a committee that prepared an address opposing the appointment of Catholic officers. In April 1686 the king dismissed Finch as solicitor after he refused to pass a warrant for appointing a Catholic to the mastership of an Oxford college. Finch continued his support for the anti-Catholic cause, providing legal advice to prevent the grant of a Cambridge MA to a Benedictine. In 1688 he was one of the counsel who successfully defended the seven bishops, though Sir William Williams, who argued the king's case, tried to undermine Finch in court by his negative reflections on Finch's actions when he served in the same office Williams now held. 
After James II fled in December 1688, Finch was consulted by the provisional government about the prevailing legal situation. The University of Oxford again chose Finch for a seat in the convention of 1689 -- a seat which he retained until ennobled in 1703. Having argued throughout James's reign against the royal dispensing power, Finch now contended that the king's departure had not made the throne vacant. Still feeling bound by his oath of allegiance to James, he recommended a regency rather than the grant of the crown to William and Mary. 
Rumours in the early 1690s suggested that Finch might be given the great seal, either as lord keeper, or as a commissioner of the seal in 1692, but this did not happen. In the Commons he frequently spoke against crown interests. In 1696, when parliament approved the new association oath after a plot against William III, Finch apologized for being one of the eighty-nine members who refused to swear it. In 1701, in the debate on the 'Act of Settlement', Finch again showed his discomfort with the revolution of 1688 when he spoke against a clause for abjuring the prince of Wales. Finch also promoted a bill against occasional conformity in early 1703. 
Most of Finch's house at Albury was destroyed by fire in 1697, but this loss was made up two years later when he inherited property at Aylesford from his father-in-law. Queen Anne made him Baron Guernsey in 1703; from 1703 until 1708 Finch served on the privy council, returning again to council service in 1711. Despite his long-standing tory ideals, Finch embraced the Hanoverian succession, retained his council seat in 1714, and was created earl of Aylesford and chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster soon after the arrival of George I. He died on 22 July 1719 and was buried at Aylesford. 


@@@@@


doc= 9436


Finch, Sir Henry (c.1558-1625), author and lawyer, was the third born but second surviving son of Sir Thomas Finch (d. 1563) of Eastwell, Kent, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Sir Thomas Moyle. After the death of Henry's soldier father his mother married the puritan lawyer and member of parliament Nicholas St Leger, who in 1572 arranged for his stepson's admission to Christ's College, Cambridge, under Laurence Chaderton. Besides consolidating Finch's godly zeal, his tutor encouraged him to study Hebrew and embrace the dialectical method of the French philosopher Peter Ramus, whose influence pervades a Latin commentary on Horace's 'Odes' presented to his stepfather in 1577. After graduating BA and serving briefly as sub-lector of Christ's, Finch entered Gray's Inn. There his legal studies led to the composition ('c'.1585) of 'Nomotexnia', a brief but ambitious treatise which sought to systematize English common law along Ramist lines, as well as bringing it into closer conformity with the laws of Moses. 
The precise date of Finch's call to the bar is unknown, but it possibly occurred during a reading in Lent 1585. Following his mother's death in 1587 Finch (now married to Ursula, the daughter of John Thwaites, of Boxwell, Kent, with whom he had a son Edward Finch) began a protracted legal struggle with his elder brother Moyle over the family's Kentish estates. While this bitter dispute conceivably led to Henry's future bankruptcy, for the moment his rising professional and public stature were signalled by appointments as standing counsel to the city of Canterbury in 1590, and to the Cinque Ports in 1593, when he also became an ancient of Gray's Inn (where he served as inn of chancery reader), and won a fierce electoral contest for one of Canterbury's two parliamentary seats. Here, and again in 1597, Finch emerged as the chief House of Commons spokesman for a now somewhat defensive puritan cause. He thereby confirmed a stance dating back to 1584, when he had participated prominently in a Kentish delegation's protests to Archbishop Whitgift against the suspension of such preaching ministers as Josiah Nicholls, who probably contributed the preface and extensive marginalia to a Ramist exposition of Calvinist theology which Finch published anonymously in 1590 as 'The Sacred Doctrine of Divinitie'. 
Finch's public identification with zealous protestantism helps to explain his failure to win further promotion over the first decade of the new century, apart from his call to the bench of Gray's Inn in 1604, and inclusion on the commission of the peace for Canterbury in 1608 (he had served as JP for the county of Kent since the early 1590s). Domestic and financial distractions doubtless contributed to his relatively low profile, as did also the legal and theological studies which bore fruit in 1613 with the appearance of two books, the only examples of Finch's writings to be published under their author's name in his lifetime. 'The Sacred Doctrine of Divinitie' was a self-censored reissue of the text of 1590, without marginalia, preface, or specifically presbyterian content, but adding in some versions an obsequious signed dedication to Lord Chancellor Ellesmere; it also included a substantial treatise on the 'Old Testament' as prefiguring Christ's revelation. 'Nomotexnia; Cestascavoir: un description del common ley Dangleterre solonque les rules del art', a handsome law-French folio with a fulsome dedication to James I, expands the two books of the 1580s manuscript to four, adds copious explanatory material and citations, but drops all explicit reference to remodelling English law along Mosaic lines. Comparison of this volume, the posthumously published English 'Law, or, A Discourse Thereof' (1627), and numerous manuscript variants indicates that the law-French text of 1613 actually postdates all surviving English drafts as the final stage of Finch's prolonged efforts to formulate a comprehensive overview of England's common law. 
In 1614 Finch returned again to parliament, this time for the borough of St Albans, thanks to the patronage of Francis Bacon, his colleague and close contemporary at both Cambridge and Gray's Inn. Finch's energetic service was rewarded shortly after the Addled Parliament's dissolution by promotion to serjeant. Within two years more he became king's serjeant and was knighted, although missing a Welsh judgeship. In 1617 he also gained the high stewardship of Faversham, having held an equivalent position at Sandwich since 1613; in 1619 he was mentioned as a possible chief baron of the exchequer. Unfortunately Finch's financial difficulties had now reached crisis point, exacerbated by a failed attempt to pay off his debts with profits from the office of 'custos brevium' in king's bench. Although a chancery injunction protected Finch and his barrister sons, John Finch and Nathaniel, from common-law actions launched by their creditors, this expedient was cited in the parliament of 1621 among the grounds for Bacon's impeachment. Yet Finch was nevertheless asked, although not a member of the house, to help the Commons' committee charged with codifying statute law, a formidable project yet 'being in some readiness by the private studie of Serjeant Finch' (Notestein, Relf, and Simpson, 4.48) on a working party initiated by Bacon five years before. 
Finch's financial problems and law reform activities were now temporarily overshadowed by reaction to his last and most controversial publication, 'The Worlds Great Restauration, or, The Calling of the Jewes', which appeared in March 1621. This bulky volume of scriptural exegesis foretold the imminent return of the twelve tribes of Israel to the Holy Land and the establishment of a universal Judaeo-Christian empire as a glorious end in itself, not merely a prelude to Christ's second coming. His book was condemned by convocation and the high commission, and its author briefly imprisoned in the Fleet; according to a contemporary joke, he 'so enlarged the future amplitude of the Jewish state that thereby he occasioned a confining to himself' (Katz, 96). Yet after a formal and somewhat vague apology, Finch resumed practice, remaining king's serjeant (his patent renewed at Charles I's accession), and serving as legal adviser to the newly appointed lord keeper, Bishop Williams. Nor do his professional pursuits seem to have been further disrupted before he succumbed to the plague at his sister's house at Boxley on 11 October 1625. He was buried at Boxley two days later. When John Finch became serjeant in 1634, his father was remembered as 'excellently lerned in the lawes of the realme, and a great linguist and generall scholer' (Baker, 'Serjeants', 372); in the next century Blackstone acknowledged Finch's 'happy progress in reducing the elements of the law from their former chaos to a regular methodical science' (Blackstone, iv-vi). 


@@@@@


doc= 9437


Finch, Henry (bap. 1633, d. 1704), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Standish, Lancashire, where he was baptized on 8 September 1633. The son of Peter Finch and his wife Katherine, he was educated at the grammar schools of Standish and Wigan. It is possible that he matriculated at St Mary Hall, Oxford, in November 1650; but he was admitted to Clare College, Cambridge, in October of the following year and graduated BA in 1652. 
Finch subsequently preached in the Fylde country of Lancashire. A member of the fifth presbyterian classis of Lancashire, he is known to have refused the engagement. He was presented to the vicarage of Walton on the Hill, Lancashire, on 25 November 1657 by Robert Eaton. In 1659 he took an active part in the royalist rising under Sir George Booth. His property was seized by the parliamentary sequestrators and not restored. In the same year, on 11 October, Finch married Mary Hammond of Warrington. Their three eldest children were baptized at Walton on the Hill: Mary (1660), Peter (1661) ['see below'], and Tabitha (1662). 
Finch was ejected from his living by the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662, his successor at Walton being instituted on 29 January 1663. He retired to Warrington and lived with some of his wife's relations. The 'Five Mile Act' (1665) compelled him to leave and he took up residence in Manchester, where he supported himself by keeping a school. There his four younger children were baptized: Nathan (1665), Hannah (1667), Elizabeth (1670), and James (1672). At both Warrington and Manchester he attended the ordinary services of the established church, preaching only occasionally on Sunday evenings in his own dwelling to such restricted gatherings as the law allowed. With the passing of the indulgence he was licensed a presbyterian on 30 April 1672, as of Manchester. He began ministering at Birch chapel, in the parish of Manchester, which was licensed on the same date as a meeting-place for presbyterians and congregationalists. Although in the hands of Thomas Birch and treated as a 'private oratory', the chapel was legally the property of the Manchester collegiate church. On 29 October 1672 Finch took part in the first ordination conducted by the protestant dissenters in Lancashire, in the house of Robert Eaton in Deansgate, Manchester. In June 1683 the warden of the collegiate church managed to preach in Birch chapel but Finch was reported as preaching there again in July. He was imprisoned in Chester during Monmouth's rising in 1685. 
With the passing of the 'Toleration Act' Finch attempted to license Birch chapel, along with his house, as a meeting-place for protestant dissenters at the Lancashire quarter sessions held at Manchester on 25 and 26 July 1689. The warden objected and the entry in the quarter sessions register was crossed out. The Common Fund survey of 1690-92 summarized the none too promising situation for Finch: 'Att Birch Chappell, where in the former Liberty hee continued 11 years and conti is now there, the allowance in considerable, the charge of his horse will goe a great way in his allowance from the people, yet complains not.' He remained in the chapel until the death of Thomas Birch the younger in 1697. Birch's son George had Finch removed and ceded the chapel to its legal owners, presenting a conforming minister in 1699. Finch then preached at licensed houses in Platt and Birch townships until his friends erected a meeting-house in Platt, which opened in the latter part of 1700. The opening discourse was preached by James Grimshaw, minister to the Lancaster protestant dissenters, who had married Finch's daughter Hannah. 
Finch was a member of the Lancashire provincial meeting of united ministers (presbyterian and congregationalist), acting as moderator when the provincial met in Manchester on 4 August 1696 and on 13 August 1700. He provided corrections to Edmund Calamy's original 1702 'Account' of the ejected ministers, which were passed on to Calamy by James Grimshaw and acknowledged in Calamy's 'Continuation' of 1727. Though a strong supporter of the revolution of 1688, Finch was 'a charitable contributor' to the distressed nonjurors. He died on 13 November 1704 and was buried at the collegiate church, Manchester, three days later. 
Henry Finch's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 9438


Finch, John, Baron Finch of Fordwich (1584-1660), speaker of the House of Commons and judge, was born on 17 September 1584 at Hoath Farm, Moat, Kent, the son of Sir Henry Finch (c.1558-1625), lawyer, and his wife, Ursula, daughter of John Thwaites. The clergyman Edward Finch was a younger brother. 
Finch was admitted to Gray's Inn on 5 February 1601 after a year at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and was called to the bar on 8 November 1611. The earl of Clarendon said that he 'led a free life on a restrained fortune' and 'a good wit and natural parts, without the superstructure of much knowledge in the profession by which he was to grow' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.130). He was part of the student population that has been characterized as an 'ornamental but essentially irrelevant appendage' (Prest, 40). Finch himself, on his installation as lord chief justice in 1634, publicly confessed before the benchers of Gray's Inn that the first six years of his pupillage were mainly devoted to pursuits other than the study of law (BL, Sloane MS 1455, fol. 10'v'). 
In 1612 he married his first cousin Eleanor, daughter of George Wyatt; she died in 1623 and in 1627 he married Mabel (died 1669), daughter of Charles Fotherby, dean of Canterbury. Finch's only child was a daughter from his first marriage, who was contracted in marriage to Sir George Radcliffe of the privy council of Ireland but died aged ten about 1621. 
In 1617 Finch was elected a bencher of his inn. Chosen assistant reader in June, he was selected as reader on 15 May 1618 and began his summer term lectures on 1 August. He was also appointed recorder of Canterbury in 1617, but was refused entry to the position by the corporation. In a letter dated 4 January 1619 to Lord Zouche, warden of the Cinque Ports, Finch solicited his help with the privy council for a mandamus against the corporation for his reinstatement. The corporation refused to obey the order. On 19 May 1620 its members wrote to the archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Zouche praying that they might not be compelled to re-elect him, as it would be 'against their consciences and their charter, and greatly to the disquiet of the city' ('CSP dom.', '1619-23', 146). The members changed their minds, however, on 28 May, humbly informing the council that they were willing to re-elect Finch as their recorder, craving 'pardon for discontenting their lordships' (ibid., 148). But he held the position for only another year. 
Finch remained an active member of Gray's Inn. He was elected dean of the chapel on 27 January 1625. Appointed king's counsel on 17 March 1626, he was elected treasurer of the inn in 1627, the same year in which he was elected high steward of Cambridge University. In the autumn of 1633 the inns of court provided a grand masque for the entertainment of the king and queen to testify their loyalty and protest against the austere views published by William Prynne in his 'Histrio-Mastix' that year. Finch was elected as Gray's Inn representative to the committee of management. The performance, which took place on Candlemas (2 February) 1634, is described by Bulstrode Whitelocke as a splendid pageant. Finch was subsequently deputed to convey the thanks of the members of the inns to the king and queen for their gracious reception of the masquers. 
The young lawyer was patronized by Sir Francis Bacon from 1614. He defended Bacon's impeachment as lord chancellor in 1621, and became executor of his estate at his death in 1626. He inherited Bacon's library, and was given his chambers at Gray's Inn. Many of Bacon's books were among those that Finch, one of the earliest donors of a collection to the inn, gave in 1634 upon his election as serjeant on 9 October. Throughout these years Finch earned the respect of his colleagues for trying to advance Bacon's programme for law reform. In a controversial incident of 1629 he requested in chancery that an enrolled order be amended. Sir John Salter, master in chancery, called this request an 'insolent carriage towards a court of justice' (Birch, 1.22) and got Finch 'put out of the commons' -- deprived of his residence rights. The benchers of the Inn rebelled, and invited Finch to dine with them daily as their guest (Prest, 104). 
In 1614 and 1620 Finch was elected MP for Canterbury. He was returned to parliament for Winchelsea in February 1624, but was unseated by a petition that claimed certain voters had been excluded by the mayor. A new writ was issued on 19 March, and he was re-elected. He exchanged Winchelsea for Canterbury at the election of 1625. The king visited Canterbury on 25 May 1625, and again with the queen on 13 June. Finch addressed them as recorder with fulsome adulation, and both were reported to be highly impressed. In 1626 he was knighted and appointed king's counsel and queen's attorney-general, receiving an unprecedented grant from the queen's jointure. He returned to sit for Canterbury in the parliaments of 1626 and 1628. 
On 17 March 1628 Finch was elected speaker of the House of Commons. His speech to the throne, couched in the language of the most extravagant loyalty, nevertheless concluded with three petitions: that the house might be assured of the immunity of its members from arrest, that freedom of debate might be respected, and that access to the royal person might be granted on suitable occasions. He spoke at length on the tyranny of the pope, and on foreign problems with the Dutch, Austrians, and the Turks being more important than domestic ones. Later, in addressing the Lords, he spoke eloquently on the virtues of hereditary sovereignty, and the king as an orb of the sun. 
On 14 April Finch presented a petition against the practice of billeting soldiers in the homes of private citizens. Realizing perhaps that the king would not take this kindly, he closed with the comment: 'Sir, you are the breath of our nostrils, and the light of our eyes' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 2.282). On 5 May he conveyed to the king the answers of the Commons to various royal messages, in particular to the king's demand to know whether the house would be content with his promise to redress their grievances. Finch expressed, on behalf of the Commons, their entire confidence in the royal word, and their settled conviction that 'no less than a public remedy will raise the dejected hearts' of the people (ibid., 2.346). 
The censure of the duke of Buckingham was particularly difficult for Finch. In the debate on the royal message of 5 June 1628, enjoining the Commons not to meddle with affairs of state, Sir John Eliot rose to rebut the implied charge of casting aspersions on royal ministers. Finch responded, with tears in his eyes, 'there is a command laid upon me to interrupt any that should go about to lay aspersion on the ministers of state' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 2.402). He advised the house on 11 June that Buckingham should not be named as the author of excessive power and evil, unable to understand how a man elected for the reward of service could be ruined by the same. Eliot sat down, and the house resolved itself into a committee of public safety. Finch then went to the king, from whom he brought a conciliatory message. On this occasion Finch seems to have acted as a mediator between king and Commons. Sir Robert Philips, who replied to the royal message on behalf of the house, lauded Finch as one who had 'not only at all times discharged the duty of a good speaker, but a good man' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/106/55). Afterwards Finch was flummoxed when the king ended the parliamentary session without his foreknowledge in June. In September and October Finch investigated the circumstances in the assassination of Buckingham with Attorney-General Sir Robert Heath. 
Parliament met again in January 1629. On 25 February Finch delivered a message from the king commanding its adjournment. Several members objected that the adjournment was a matter for the Commons to decide. Sir John Eliot proceeded to present a remonstrance on the subject of tonnage and poundage, which Finch refused to read. Eliot then read it himself. Finch, however, refused to put the question. Rising to adjourn the debate, he was forced back into the chair and held there by Denzil Holles and others, Holles swearing, 'God's wounds he should sit still till it pleased them to rise'. Finch burst into tears, exclaiming, 'I will not say, I will not, but I dare not', reminding the house that 'he had been their faithful servant, and would sacrifice his life for the good of his country; but he durst not sin against the express command of his sovereign' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 2.488-90). Coke called him a spy of the king, and his fellow MPs from Kent berated his failure to fulfil his office. Meanwhile, behind locked doors, the substance of Eliot's remonstrance was adopted by the house and declared as carried. Parliament was dissolved shortly afterwards, not to meet again for eleven years. 
Finch was appointed chief justice of the court of common pleas on 16 October 1634, a surprise appointment but for his election as serjeant a few days before. He replaced Sir Robert Heath, who was removed from the bench on 14 September after Attorney-General William Noy's death and Sir John Bankes's appointment. These changes inspired a legal wit to phrase the following couplet: '
Noy's floods are past, the Banks appear, 

The Heath is cropt, the Finch sings there. 
('CSP dom.', '1634-5', 221)' The latter refers to his speeches. Both his acceptance speech and address to Gray's Inn were so filled with flattery that some contemporaries considered them obnoxious. Finch had already as king's counsel and queen's attorney-general served the crown by producing arguments for privy council debates on the exercise of the royal prerogative in various areas. In producing the vast extent of the forests of England at the time of Edward I he delivered a speech on the laws of the Forest of Dean to the king at Gloucester Castle on 10 July 1634. 
Finch's career as a common lawyer was politically at odds with Sir Edward Coke. Their animosity developed in the parliament of 1621, when for ten hours a day they sat on a committee to survey all the statutes. Throughout the 1630s Finch defended the jurisdiction of the conciliar and prerogative courts. He believed, like Sir John Davies, that the common law was custom, and common-law courts were part of a wide range of customary and statutory courts in a pluralistic legal system. Later he faced considerable criticism because he had agreed not to appoint officers of the court without the king's approval. This request was seen as an extraordinary exercise of royal interference in the court's business. So too was his conduct at the Essex assizes in 1635, where he extended the boundaries of the king's forest against local custom, and at the Devon assizes in 1639, where he denounced the treachery of a grand jury finding on a ship-money case. 
The famous case on the legality of ship money, 'R. v. Hampden', was put before the judges in the exchequer chamber on 12 February 1637. Their unanimous opinion was that the king had an uncontrolled discretion in levying the tax. During the trial Finch interrupted Hampden's counsel often and spoke openly in court against the accused. According to Clarendon, Finch was mainly responsible for the opinion, arguing strenuously against his fellow judges Sir George Croke and Sir Richard Hutton, and carrying the majority of his colleagues. He delivered a long and somewhat rambling judgment, concluding with the statement that 'I conceive upon common law, and the fundamental policy of the kingdom, that the king may charge his subjects for the defence of the kingdom... when it is in danger', and 'that the king is sole judge of the danger' ('State trials', 3.1243). Clarendon said that the judgment made ship money 'more abhorred and formidable than all the commitments by the council table, and all the distresses taken by the sheriffs in England' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.127). Later, in 1639, Finch prevented a protest against ship money on grounds of 'common liberty' from going forward at the Exeter assizes (Sharpe, 428-30). 
What marked Finch's tenure as chief justice was his penchant for trying to persuade or threaten his fellow judges to agree with him on the merits of the arguments before the court. Possessing the mind of a politician on the bench, he was often quick to judgment and used his eloquence, rather than legal reasoning, to convince his colleagues. The years he spent in socializing at the inns of court instead of attending moots and readings, and immersing himself in the original and secondary texts of law, took their toll on his legal reputation the more deeply he became involved in adjudication. He was, however, a prominent figure on the bench. He knew law, and contemporary laymen were impressed with his advocacy. 
Finch was heavily employed in Star Chamber and high commission cases in the mid-1630s, a situation that was enhanced with his appointment as chancellor to the queen in 1636. He was engaged especially in the proceedings against William Prynne in Star Chamber in 1633-4, in which he charged him with a libel against the queen under the name of Herodius. On Prynne's second trial (1637) Finch surpassed himself in brutality. He drew the attention of the court to the fact that some remnants of Prynne's ears still remained, moving that they be cut closer and that he be stigmatized with the letters 'S.L.' (seditious libeller) on his cheeks, which proposals were adopted. 
Finch became well known for the height to which he carried the royal prerogative, as well as for the severity of his sentences. When James Maxwell and his wife, Alice, were found guilty (17 April 1635) of libelling the king and lord keeper, a fine of $3000 each was proposed for the offence against king and lord keeper. Finch supported the lord chief baron's motion -- which was lost -- to add a whipping for the woman. In another Star Chamber case (27 January 1637), when Elmstone was sentenced to imprisonment and to stand in the pillory at Westminster, Finch moved to add that he lose his ears: that motion was lost as well. In 1638, in the case of John Langton, a subordinate official of the exchequer charged with abusing the royal prerogative, Finch doubled the fine of $1000 proposed by Lord Cottington, and added the pillory, imprisonment, and disability to hold office, in which the rest of the court concurred (Archbishop Laud, however, was for raising the fine to $5000). 
Finch defended Laud in Bishop John Williams's suit against him for libel, and proposed the highest fine of all the judges. He also added a whipping to the sentence of fine, pillory, and mutilation proposed by Lord Cottington for Pickering, a Roman Catholic found guilty in 1638 of libelling the king and queen as Romanists and sacrilegiously converting part of a churchyard into a pigsty. Throughout he was conspicuously harsh on religious offenders. Once he became chairman of Star Chamber in 1640, his opening speeches warned the country of swarming rogues, treasonous villains, and the subversion of religion, law, and government. 
Finch was sworn of the privy council in March 1639, and promoted to lord keeper at the death of Coventry on 17 January 1640 through Henrietta Maria's influence. He rode to Westminster Hall in great estate, was given Durham House as his local residence, and the court of wards paid off the king's loans to him. His was not the most appropriate appointment, and it was much discussed. Sir Richard Cave wrote to Sir Thomas Roe on 7 February 1640: 'The lord keeper keeps such a clatter in his new place that they are more weary of him in the chancery than they were before in the common pleas' ('CSP dom.', '1639-40', 436). On 7 April 1640 Finch was created Baron Finch of Fordwich, Kent. Sitting on the privy council, he presided over the House of Lords and Star Chamber. 
The new lord keeper focused on extending the court's review of judicial procedure in lesser courts of equity, a problem that many contemporaries had complained of. But he was also accommodating to defendants who sought to restrict the scope of bills in equity. When Lady Cope sued in chancery for her husband's property after his death, Finch refused to hear her petition because it was insufficient in equity, and dismissed her summarily. Unfortunately for his reputation, the House of Lords overruled him and gave her judgment. When he did try to limit the continuation of common-law review of chancery cases that had already been curtailed by the privy council in 1616, he felt the opprobrium of some common lawyers. His use of stern language in his judgments, however, as in Sir William Russell's case of 1640, exacerbated his position. After allowing co-defendants a temporary injunction to try an issue of the case at common law, when the common pleas ruled for the defendants Finch stayed their verdicts, declaring the trial 'vexacious' (Hart, 111-12). 
The Short Parliament of 1640 was opened by the king on 13 April with few words indicating the gravity of the situation. The lord keeper, therefore, was left to expatiate upon the major problems facing the country, which included the Scottish threat and the consequent necessity of obtaining immediate supplies. He enlarged upon these on 20 April, but with no effect. Sir Thomas Aston accused him of eulogizing the king, being impatient with members, inhibiting free speech, and not putting questions to the house (although the French ambassador said his expression was 'gracious, mild, and meek'; Cope and Coates, 305). While the text of his speech was full of praise and glory for the king, Charles did not heed his advice on how to deal with the Scots (Russell, 160). 
The Commons resolved that grievances must take precedence over supply, and on 5 May parliament was dissolved. Finch composed 'His majesties Declaration to all his loving subjects of the causes which moved him to dissolve the last parliament' (1640) to inform the public on why Charles dissolved parliament. A highly selective account, it focused on Charles's patience, good will, and desire to redress grievances, while omitting the named grievances and depicting the Commons as selfish and refusing to compromise. His own editing of the final draft made the distinction between the king's promises and members' refusal to compromise even stronger. Rekindling and perpetuating previous controversies from the tumult in the Commons in 1629, it stood as a focus of attack in the Long Parliament. 
Finch was reported to be in poor health at this time but he moved on with considerably more focus and resolve than he had in earlier parliaments. He kept a firm hand on keeping members in order, steering committee reports and joint conferences, and reporting to the king. His speeches on the necessity of supply were more balanced and direct, and they were copied widely: that of 1 May before a joint conference of parliament was finely crafted and detailed, and provided suggestions to resolve the problem of grievances or supply. He still spoke, however, with too much generalization and excessive repetition. In the end he was seen as lacking force and using inadequate political tactics. 
In the difficult months between the Short and Long parliaments, Finch supported the king's attempt to devalue the currency, dissuade a London petition calling for a parliament, and request a loan of $200,000 for his troops. Finch gave a forecast of future royal policy when he told the queen that Charles would not adhere to any treaty longer than it was convenient to do so. 
Finch was brought to his knees by the Long Parliament. His opening speech presented a one-sided history of England, with a glorious account of Charles and his wife. He seemed unprepared for the forty Commons committees for grievances. When a motion accused the earl of Strafford of treason, Charles asked Finch to prepare the defence. Finch, as lord keeper, was seen as Strafford's protector. Thus it is not surprising that the Commons exhibited articles of impeachment against Finch as chief justice of the court of common pleas and as lord keeper. The principal counts in the indictment for subverting the fundamental laws of the country were writing and publishing the 'Declaration' after the dissolution of parliament, arbitrary conduct as speaker on Eliot's motion on tonnage and poundage, malpractices on the bench in 1635 for extending the royal forest in Essex, and his conduct in Hampden's case. He was accused of 'false and malicious slanders' and working to 'incense his Majesty against parliaments' (Rushworth, 4.138). 
Finch appeared at the bar of the House of Commons during the preliminary stage on 21 December and made an elaborate extemporaneous speech in his own defence that was both artful and eloquent. Unfortunately for him, the Commons had possession of the queen's letter to Catholic subjects for them to work with the king against the Scots, a letter written in Finch's hand. His friends in the house, however, delayed the vote until after noon, when the Lords left for the day. The Commons voted for his committal before the Lords for the next morning. That night, the lord keeper gave the great seal to the king and fled to the Netherlands before the order could be delivered. Perhaps he saw the writing on the wall when John Pym moved against the man who would have been Finch's son-in-law, Sir George Radcliffe, confidant of the earl of Strafford. 
According to Clarendon the house was 'wonderfully indisposed to hear anything against' Finch though Lord Falkland denounced him as the 'chief transgressor' in the matter of ship money (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.311, 526) and gave a highly vindictive speech against him. While Finch was impeached, the Lords said that they wanted him to appear and answer the accusations, but not to surrender himself to confinement. His estates in Kent and Middlesex, estimated at an annual value of $338, were sequestrated in 1644 but his wife was permitted to occupy them at an annual rent of $100, so long as they were in sequestration. It has been presumed that they were subsequently redeemed for a composition of $7000. 
During his exile Finch lived principally at The Hague. John Evelyn met him there in 1641, lodging for a time with him and a Brownist sectary in the same house, where, says Evelyn, 'we had an extraordinary good table' (Evelyn, 26 July, 19 Aug 1641). Letters to Finch from Henrietta Maria, Elizabeth of Bohemia, and the countess of Winchester, with whom he went shooting, show the intimate terms on which he stood with them. On 14 July 1647, when taken ill again, he petitioned the House of Lords for leave to return home to die in his native country. The petition was ordered to be considered, and was entered in the journal of the house. No leave, however, was granted until the Long Parliament allowed him to return to Fordwich just before its dismissal in 1653. 
Finch lived quietly and poorly at Fordwich until the Restoration, when he met Charles II on his return to London. Returning to public office at the Restoration, Finch was appointed one of the commissioners for the trial of the regicides in October 1660. However, he took little part in the proceedings beyond the occasional comment. Although he lived to see most of the regicides executed, he died on 27 November at Fordwich and was buried in St Martin's Church, near Canterbury, where a monument was erected. He was survived only by his wife, Mabel, and his title became extinct. 
Finch was descended from a prominent legal family. His father, Sir Henry's sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons all appeared in the legal profession at Westminster Hall, and Finch's two sisters married into the eminent legal family of the Twisdens. Finch was not a writer like his father, and had little interest in jurisprudence, building his career on political and legal activity. Anthony Wood claimed that he compiled a 'Manuale Mathematicum' on vellum with his own hand, formerly preserved in the Ashmolean Museum, but missing from the Ashmolean collection of the Bodleian Library; given Finch's career path, however, this is highly unlikely. 
His kinsman Sir Peter Heyman condemned Finch as 'the disgrace of his country, the blot of a noble family... whom posterity will remember with scorn and disdain' (GEC, 'Peerage'). Clarendon's account in his 'History of the Rebellion' fixed in print the negative image of Finch. While an outspoken supporter of royal power, there is no reason to suppose that Finch was other than a conscientious man. He always contended that the king must govern by the 'positive laws of the kingdom' (Sharpe, 932). In religion, he considered himself a devout protestant, claiming that in his public life no one doubted 'my affection in religion' (Nalson, 1.693). A Calvinist, he had a high standard of forensic evidence, argued cases on the facts, and was seen by many contemporaries as a pillar of justice and mercy. His view of the duty of a judge was certainly very humble. He was also free of any accusations of corruption. Possessing good social skills, he acquired many friends, retained them throughout his life, and is said to have suffered fools gladly. 


@@@@@


doc= 9439


Finch, Sir John (1626-1682), physician and diplomat, was the fourth of the seven children, and the youngest son, of Sir Heneage Finch (1580-1631), and his first wife, Frances, daughter of Sir Edmund Bell. His mother died in 1627. His father, speaker of the House of Commons, died before the birth of the second child from his second marriage, to Elizabeth Cradock. John Finch was brother of Heneage Finch (1621-1682), subsequently lord chancellor and first earl of Nottingham. He was particularly close to his half-sister, Anne Conway, Viscountess Conway and Killultagh (1631-1679), whose interest in philosophy he encouraged. 
After schooling at Eton College, Finch was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1642. In the same year he commenced his studies at Balliol College, Oxford. He was admitted pensioner of Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1645, under Mr Potts. Returning to Balliol, he graduated BA there in 1647. In the same year he was incorporated at Christ's College, Cambridge, graduating MA in 1649. At Christ's College he came under the influence of Henry More, and became friends with Thomas Baines, who was to remain his constant companion for the rest of his life. In 1651 Finch and Baines set out together to study medicine at Padua, where they studied with Antonio Molinetti, graduating MD in 1657. Finch was elected pro-rector and syndic at the University of Padua in 1656. While in Italy, he became a member of the scientific circle of Prince (later Cardinal) Leopoldo de' Medici, patron of the Accademia del Cimento. From 1659 until 1665 he held the post of professor of anatomy at Pisa. 
On his return to England in 1661 Finch took his MD at Cambridge 'in absentia' (his proxy was Dr Carr). In the same year he was knighted and elected 'socius extraordinarius' of the Royal College of Physicians. In 1663 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society, having been one of the original supporters of the foundation of the society in 1660. In 1662 he returned to Italy via the Netherlands, and was appointed English resident at Florence in 1665. In 1665 he supervised the Italian tour by his nephew Daniel Finch, and remained in close contact with him thereafter. 
While in Italy, Finch travelled to Rome and Naples. Known in Florence as Giovanni Fink, he was distinguished as an anatomist. He performed dissections and demonstrations at the Arcispedale of Santa Maria Novella with such distinguished men as Tilman Trutwijn, Nils Stensen, Francesco Redi, and Stephano Lorenzini. To judge by his letters to Leopoldo de' Medici, Finch had a special interest in the anatomy of the brain. He introduced Leopoldo to the works of Thomas Willis, and conducted investigations of, among other things, the torpedo fish (which brought him into controversy with G. A. Borelli), and vipers. His letters to his sister, Anne Conway, and to Cardinal Leopoldo de' Medici, as well as his notebooks and diary, show that throughout his life he practised as a gentleman scientist or virtuoso, observing and recording natural phenomena, proposing explanations for them, and commenting on the theories of others. 
In 1672 Finch was appointed ambassador to the Ottoman court, succeeding his cousin Heneage Finch, second earl of Winchilsea (died 1689). He set out for Constantinople in 1673, via Italy, accompanied by Thomas Baines. He arrived there in 1674, returning to England in 1681, after the death of Baines. The most important achievement of his embassy was securing confirmation of the privileges for English merchants trading in the Ottoman empire, for which purpose Finch journeyed to Adrianople in 1675. Finch was correspondent of the Royal Society while in Italy and Turkey. He was also an art collector: he commissioned and collected some sixty paintings, including four by Carlo Dolci. He died of pleurisy on 18 November 1682 after his return to England. 
Finch published nothing of importance, but left behind him on his death a large manuscript treatise, evidently prepared for publication, but misattributed to his nephew when the manuscripts were catalogued in 1939. This is a treatise of natural philosophy, which incorporates cultural observations based on his experiences. In it he propounds a materialist view of the natural world and a sense-based epistemology. On both subjects he opposes both Descartes and his teacher Henry More. Along with other letters and papers, including some poems, this manuscript is held at Leicestershire Record Office. The major part of Finch's library, bequeathed to his nephew Daniel Finch, was destroyed in a fire at Burley House. 
In a 'Dedication' among his papers, Finch records his deep affection for his lifelong friend, Sir Thomas Baines, whom he met at Cambridge about 1647. 


@@@@@


doc= 9440


Peter Finch (1661-1754), Presbyterian minister, was born on 6 October 1661 in Walton on the Hill parish. On 3 May 1678 he entered the nonconformist academy of Richard Frankland at Natland, Westmorland. He soon moved to the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MA on 16 July 1680. His first employment was as chaplain in the family of William Ashurst, a city presbyterian (afterwards knighted and a future lord mayor) whose family had strong links with Lancashire. In 1691 Finch was invited to become colleague at Norwich to Josiah Chorley; his first entry in the Presbyterian register of baptisms is dated 1 June 1692. He remained at his post for over sixty-two years, and outlived Edward Crane and Thomas Dixon the younger, both of whom had been designated as his successor. Himself a strict Calvinist, he contributed much, by his love of peace, to preserve concord when doctrinal differences threatened to divide his flock. From 1733 John Taylor, the Hebraist, was his colleague. Finch died on his ninety-third birthday on 6 October 1754 and was buried in the church of St Peter Mancroft, Norwich. His funeral sermon was preached by Taylor, who described him as one of the last of the 300 students educated by Frankland. A small portrait of him hangs in the vestry of the Octagon Chapel, Norwich. His great-grandson, Peter, was mayor of Norwich in 1827. 


@@@@@


doc= 9441


Finch, Robert (1783-1830), antiquary and connoisseur of the arts, was born in London on 27 November 1783, the son of Thomas Finch (died 1810), barrister of the Inner Temple and fellow of the Royal Society, and his wife, Mary (died 1827). His father's family seems to have been remotely connected with the Finches, earls of Winchilsea and of Aylesford. Robert Finch attended St Paul's School, 1795-8, and was thereafter tutored before matriculating at Balliol College, Oxford; he graduated BA in 1805 (MA 1809). He was ordained deacon in 1807 but there is no record of his having proceeded to priest's orders. He served curacies, principally at Maidstone. Two sermons published there in 1809, 'The Crown of Pure Gold' and 'Protestantism our surest bulwark', failed to launch his clerical career, but his father's death left him well enough off to leave his curacy and take pupils. 
He was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1809. In 1813 he travelled in Portugal and from 1814 lived on the continent, mainly in Italy. His manuscript journals show him a cultivated but doggedly observant traveller, expert in Italian history and antiquities. Allegedly for reasons of administrative convenience when crossing frontiers he assumed, about 1815, the title of lieutenant-colonel. Finch's transparent imposture was frequently challenged, but service in the 16th light dragoons became his settled delusion. It was in the character of 'Colonel Finch', reminiscing on his military career in Portugal, that he was first encountered by Mary Shelley in Rome in April 1819, who dubbed him 'Colonel Calicot Finch' after a character in Thomas Moore's 'The Fudge Family in Paris' (1818). Finch recurs in the correspondence of the Shelley circle at this period as a boastful, irascible fellow, but his ample journals have proved a useful source of information on their continental acquaintance. Finch delighted in knowing prominent people, but they usually noted his vanity and pretensions. He extended patronage and hospitality to English artists in Italy -- Severn, Eastlake, Etty, and Pennethorne among them -- and Crabb Robinson knew him well in later years. His main claim to literary remembrance is having sent a description of Keats's death to Gisborne; it was passed on to Shelley, who was much moved by 'the heart rending account of the closing scene of the great genius'. 
A small place in the footnotes of Romantic scholarship gives this pretentious ass a lingering reputation that his collections would never have justified. Funds deriving from Finch's parents' urban property north of Holborn, though less extensive than he wished, enabled him to assemble a collection of works of art. A small gallery of pictures showed but limited discrimination. Its contents (many now in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford) have mostly been deposed from Finch's optimistic attributions to major artists. A 'jackdaw' collection of coins and Napoleonic medals is also in the Ashmolean, but is of no special interest. His library, strong in Italian works, is now divided between the Taylor Institution and the Bodleian Library, Oxford; the latter also holds his journals, correspondence, and collections on classical subjects. 
It was as the Revd Robert Finch rather than as a supposititious officer of dragoons that he died in Rome on 16 September 1830, ending his days at the Palazzo del Re di Prussia -- a location that must have gratified his innocent vanity. In 1820 he had married Maria, eldest daughter of Frederick Thomson, of Kensington. There were no children of the marriage, but Finch took as his heir the young Henry (Enrico) Mayer, whose parents he had met in Italy. He developed a 'purely paternal' affection for the boy (who became a prominent liberal educationist in Italy). Mayer acted as his amanuensis, and inherited a life interest in Finch's collections; in 1840 he arranged a transfer of the Finch collections to the University of Oxford, which, after his death in 1877, became the ultimate beneficiary of Finch's will. Finch's obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' notes that he was an occasional contributor, as he was also to the 'British Critic'. Some Latin poems of his were printed abroad, but his published writings were few. Finch's widow erected an imposing gothick monument to him in the English cemetery in Rome. 


@@@@@


doc= 9442


Finch, Robert Poole (1724-1803), Church of England clergyman, son of the Revd Richard Finch, was born at Greenwich on 3 March 1724. He entered Merchant Taylors' School, London, in 1736, and in 1739 went to Peterhouse, Cambridge, graduating BA (1743), MA (1747), and DD (1772). He was ordained priest in 1748, and was chaplain of Guy's Hospital for thirty-seven years. He was a lecturer at St Bartholomew's Hospital from 1755 onwards. In 1771 he was appointed rector of St Michael Cornhill but resigned in 1784 on becoming rector of St John the Evangelist, Westminster. In 1781 he was made prebendary of Westminster, and remained so until his death. 
Finch published numerous sermons; he was treasurer of the SPCK for over twenty years, and his 'Considerations upon the Use and Abuse of Oaths' (1788) became a standard work among SPCK publications. He died at Westminster on 18 May 1803 and was buried in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 9443


Finch, Sir Thomas (d. 1563), soldier, was the second son of Sir William Finch, knighted for military service in 1513, of The Moat, Canterbury, Kent; his mother was Elizabeth, daughter of Sir James Cromer and widow of Sir Richard Lovelace. In 1547 he married Katherine (died 1587), daughter of Sir Thomas Moyle of Eastwell, Kent; they had at least five sons and one daughter. Their third born son was the author and lawyer Sir Henry Finch. By this marriage he came into possession of Eastwell and Pekmansten in Kent in 1559. His early training was as a soldier, accompanying his father to both Scotland and the continent. On 19 June 1553 he was granted the rights as heir of his father, and he was knighted on 2 October following. 
Finch was involved in the suppression of Wyatt's rebellion in Kent. In 1554 he was given commissions of the peace, of oyer and terminer, and of the sewers, all in Kent, which were regularly renewed during his life. In his position as commissioner for oyer and terminer he was an official at the indictment of several of those involved in Wyatt's rebellion. In 1555 he was employed with Sir Henry Crisp to transport several rebels to the Marshalsea, for which he received a letter of thanks from the council. In August 1557 he was granted a tenement in the lordship of Warkworth, Northumberland. In January 1558 he was commanded to conduct a levy of 100 footmen to Dover. After Elizabeth's accession he was appointed charge of the manor and park of Canterbury in Kent. On 9 December 1558 Alvise Priuli, secretary and executor of the late Cardinal Pole, wrote to Cecil requesting that Finch be directed to deliver Pole's goods from the archbishopric's park and manor. In December 1558 the privy council ordered him to examine an alleged traitor in Ashforth, Kent, and the following February he was appointed to investigate Nicholas Harpsfield, the archdeacon of Canterbury, who was believed to be stirring sedition; Finch examined his armour, household, and transactions. He was MP for Canterbury in 1559, and in October that year he received a commission to survey some of the possessions of the vacant see of Canterbury. 
In 1563, when Elizabeth was aiding the Huguenots and occupying Newhaven (Le Havre) in France, Finch was appointed knight-marshal in place of Sir Adrian Poynings. He sent his half-brother Erasmus Finch and kinsman Thomas Finch to take charge before his arrival. On 19 March he departed for Newhaven on the 'Greyhound' with 200 soldiers, among whom were several notables, a nephew of Warwick, and two brothers of Lord Wentworth. Bad weather drove them back, and the ship sank in Rye Harbour, killing Finch and nearly all on board. There are two accounts of this tragedy. Stow says that Finch and his friends induced the captain to proceed into the haven 'before the tide' thereby causing the disaster. However, Cuthbert Vaughan wrote to Cecil that a fisherman from Rye had warned the captain that it would take two hours for the tide to be high enough for a safe entry -- to no avail, as the captain bade him 'to heed his fish' ('CSP for.', Elizabeth, 6.257). Finch's death caused grief for Warwick, Cecil, and Lord Cobham, and Richard Griffith wrote a ballad about the tragedy. He was buried in Eastwell church, Kent. A loyal servant to the Tudors, he seems to have been happy to conform to the prevailing religious climate. 


@@@@@


doc= 9444


Finch, William (d. 1613), merchant, was a native of London and a servant to Master Johnson in Cheapside. He was agent to an expedition sent in 1607 by the East India Company, under captains Hawkins and Keeling, to treat with the Mughal emperor of India, Jehanghir, known to the English as the great Mughal. On 24 August 1608 Hawkins and Finch landed at Surat in the 'Hector', the first vessel to display the English flag on the Indian coast. Although they were violently opposed by the Portuguese, Finch obtained permission to dispose of the goods they had brought, even though the natives, under Portuguese incitement, were chary of dealing with the English. Finch, ill with the flux, remained in Surat, and Hawkins proceeded to Agra alone. In a letter of 12 July 1609 Finch gave Hawkins an accurate, if cautious, estimate of the capacity of the Indian market in commodities such as broadcloths, kerseys, quicksilver, tin, ivory, coral, and sword blades. He also listed the Indian cloths that would yield most profit in the markets of the Levant and the Barbary coast, and be of use in England for fine quilts and wall hangings. 
Finch joined Hawkins at Agra on 14 April 1610, but refused tempting offers to attach himself permanently to the service of Jehanghir. For at least six months (February-August 1610) Finch was in Lahore, a city second only to Agra in importance in the Mughal empire. Then, on an expedition to Bayana later in the same year, he dared to outbid the agent of the emperor's mother for a supply of indigo, so compromising Hawkins's position at the Mughal court. The two men quarrelled, and Hawkins confiscated the indigo which Finch wanted to move by caravan to Aleppo. Finch, disillusioned about the possibility of establishing English trade in India, decided to return to England and made his way overland to Baghdad, where he died in August 1613 from drinking infected water. His journal was later forwarded to the East India Company and was printed by Purchas; it gave valuable descriptions of Agra and the routes from Agra to Surat and from Lahore to Kabul and Srinagar, gleaned from his own travels or from diligent enquiry of others. 


@@@@@


doc= 9445


Finch, William (1747-1810), Church of England clergyman and theologian, son of William Finch and his wife, Ann, of Watford, Hertfordshire, was born on 22 July 1747 and baptized at St Mary's, Watford, in August 1747. He attended Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1754 to 1764, when he entered St John's College, Oxford; he graduated BCL in 1770 and DCL in 1775. In 1797 he accepted the college living of Tackley, Oxfordshire, and in the same year he was appointed Bampton lecturer. He was also rector of Avington, Berkshire, and a lecturer at St Martin's, Oxford. 
Finch's Bampton lectures were published as 'The Objections of Infidel Historians and other Writers Against Christianity' (1797), together with a sermon preached before the university on 18 October 1795. He also published a sermon preached before the Oxford Loyal Volunteers in 1798. Finch died on 8 June 1810 and was buried at Tackley. 


@@@@@


doc= 9446


Hatton, Edward Finch- (1697?-1771), diplomatist, was born Edward Finch, the fifth son of Daniel Finch, seventh earl of Winchilsea and second earl of Nottingham (1647-1730), politician, and Anne Hatton (1668-1743). After attending Mr Ellis's school in Isleworth, Middlesex, he was admitted fellow-commoner of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1713 and he proceeded MA in 1718. He went on the grand tour to France, Italy, and Hanover from 1720 to 1723 and his hopes of a diplomatic career were met with his appointment as envoy-extraordinary to the imperial diet of Regensburg (September 1724-February 1725). He served in succession as envoy to the Polish court from 1725 to 1727, to the Swedish court from 1728 to 1739, and to the Russian court from 1740 to 1742. 
In 1727 Finch was elected MP for Cambridge University, which he represented until 1768. A fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge (1728-46), he and his fellow MP Thomas Townshend instituted the members' prizes in the university for essays in Latin prose. On his return from abroad in 1742 he declared his support for Lord Carteret and was appointed groom of the royal bedchamber; in spite of the subsequent changes in government, the king ensured that Finch remained in post until 1756. On 6 September 1746 he married Elizabeth Palmer, daughter of Sir Thomas Palmer, fourth baronet, of Wingham, Kent; they had three daughters and two sons. He assumed in 1764 the additional name of Hatton, under the terms of the will of his great-aunt, Anne Hatton, daughter of Christopher, Viscount Hatton. He was appointed master of the robes in June 1757 and surveyor of the king's private roads in November 1760; he retired from the Commons before the general election of 1768. Finch-Hatton died on 16 May 1771. 


@@@@@


doc= 9447


Hatton, George William Finch-, tenth earl of Winchilsea and fifth earl of Nottingham (1791-1858), politician, was born at Kirby, Northamptonshire, on 22 May 1791. He was a grandson of Edward Finch-Hatton, and son of George Finch-Hatton (1747-1823) of Eastwell Park, near Ashford, Kent, MP for Rochester in 1772-84, and his wife (whom he married in 1785), Elizabeth Mary (died 1825), eldest daughter of David Murray, second earl of Mansfield. George William, who had one younger brother and three sisters, was educated at Westminster School and at Christ's College, Cambridge (BA, 1812). In 1809 he became a captain in the Ashford regiment of the Kentish local militia; in 1819 began acting as a lieutenant of the Northamptonshire regiment of yeomanry; and in 1820 was named a deputy lieutenant for the county of Kent. On 2 August 1826, on the death (without legitimate issue) of his cousin, George Finch, ninth earl of Winchilsea, and fourth earl of Nottingham, he succeeded to these peerages. 
Winchilsea was tall, well-built, and black-haired, and in his prime was an imposing figure and an inspiring orator. His integrity and sincerity impressed his contemporaries. He presided at a very large and influential meeting held on Penenden heath, Kent, on 10 October 1828, when strongly worded resolutions in favour of protestant principles were carried. In his place in the House of Lords he was a very frequent speaker and vigorously defended the protestant tory cause. He was particularly noted as being almost the only English nobleman who was willing to identify himself with the Orange party in Ireland, and he was accustomed to denounce in forceful terms Daniel O'Connell and Maynooth College and its system of education. Occasionally he took the chair at May meetings at Exeter Hall, but his protestantism was more political than spiritual and he did not become a leader of evangelicalism. 
The 'Catholic Relief Bill' of 1829 aroused Winchilsea's most vehement hostility, and led him to fight a duel with the duke of Wellington. In a published letter he wrote that the duke, 'under the cloak of some outward show of zeal for the Protestant religion', had carried on 'insidious designs for the infringement of our liberties, and the introduction of Popery into every department of the State'. The duke asked for an apology, and, when this was not forthcoming, demanded satisfaction. The meeting took place in Battersea Fields on 21 March 1829, the duke being attended by Sir Henry Hardinge, and his opponent by Edward Boscawen, Viscount Falmouth. The duke fired and missed, whereupon Winchilsea fired in the air and then apologized for the language of his letter ('Annual Register', 1829, 58-63). 
In November 1830 Winchilsea was a leading figure in the ultra-tory rebellion which led to the downfall of the Wellington government. At this time he professed himself favourable to moderate reform, but in June 1831 he withdrew his support from Earl Grey's administration ('Hansard 3', 4.107-11) and subsequently strenuously opposed the 'Reform Bill' and other whig measures. He was gazetted lieutenant-colonel commandant of the East Kent regiment of yeomanry in 1830, named a deputy lieutenant for the county of Lincoln in 1831, and created a DCL of Oxford on the occasion of Wellington's installation as chancellor of the university in 1834. His protestant convictions continued undimmed in later life, and in 1851, in a letter to 'The Times', he denounced the new Roman Catholic hierarchy and the Russell administration's half-hearted response to it. 
Winchilsea was married three times: first, on 26 July 1814, to Lady Georgiana Charlotte, eldest daughter of James Graham, third duke of Montrose. An 'earnest disciple of the Evangelical school of her day' (GEC, 'Peerage'), she died, leaving a son and a daughter, at Haverholme Priory on 13 February 1835. His second wife, whom he married on 15 February 1837, was Emily Georgiana, second daughter of Sir Charles Bagot GCB; she died childless at Haverholme Priory on 10 July 1848. His third marriage was on 17 October 1849, to Fanny Margaretta (died 26 April 1909), eldest daughter of Edward Royd Rice of Dane Court, Kent. There were three sons, including the politician Harold Heneage Finch-Hatton, and a daughter from this marriage. Winchilsea died at Haverholme Priory, near Sleaford, Lincolnshire, on 8 January 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 9448


Edward Francis Finden (1791-1857), engraver, was born on 30 April 1791. Both brothers were apprenticed to the engraver James Mitan, Edward joining his brother under that master about 1806; William Finden styled much of his early work on that of James Heath, whose atelier later served as a model for that established by the Findens. They were first employed on illustrating works published by John Sharpe and W. Suttaby among others, including (after paintings by Robert Smirke) Mary Smirke's translation of 'Don Quixote de la Mancha' (1818). William Finden's first important commission was to engrave fifteen plates for W. Y. Ottley's 'Engravings of the... Marquis of Stafford's... Pictures' (1818), of which 'Rent Day Feast' after David Teniers earned him a gold medal from the Society of Arts in 1813. On 8 September 1812 he married at St Pancras Church Anne Abercrombie, with whom he had five sons: William Henry ('bap'. 27 June 1813), William Edward ('bap'. 4 June 1823), George Frederick ('bap'. 17 Oct 1827), Edward Francis ('bap'. 1 March 1830), and Harry? ('bap'. 2 Sept 1837). They had five daughters: Louisa Walker ('bap'. 26 June 1822), Emma ('bap'. 29 Sept 1825), Ann Frances ('bap'. 27 June 1832), Mary ('bap'. 27 Aug 1834), and Sophia Ann. In 1810 Edward Finden -- then living at John Street, Fitzroy Square -- was awarded the small silver palette for an outline drawing of 'The Laocoon' by the Society of Arts. His early works include the title-page to volume 2 of an edition of Milton's 'Paradise Lost' published by J. Sharpe in 1817, and one plate, dated 1 July 1817, in Ottley's 'Engravings of the... Marquis of Stafford's... Pictures' (1818). He contributed many illustrations to the annuals, books of beauty, and other sentimental works in vogue at that time. 


@@@@@


doc= 9449


Finden, William (1787-1852), engraver, was born on 9 April 1787, the fifth son in the family of seven sons and three daughters of James Finden and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Perkins, who had married at St Pancras Church, London, on 16 January 1773. His younger brother, 
The large number of book illustrations which bear the names of either William or Edward Finden is due, for the most part, to the industry of the atelier they set up at 18 and 19 Southampton Place, Euston Square, where they took on pupils who included S. Hollyer, T. Philibrowne, G. Price, S. Rawle, S. Sangster, and J. H. P. Stubbs, and assistants including J. B. Allen, J. W. Archer, F. Bacon, C. Rolls, and Lumb Stocks. Robert Staines was both pupil and assistant. While managing a large number of commissions, the two brothers supervised the work of the studio and concentrated on adding the final touches to the steel plates to produce the elaborate finish and precision for which their work had become known. As a result of this studio production commentators have sometimes described their work as cold and mechanical in character. Plates by William Finden are lettered below W. Finden, Willm Finden, and William Finden, and those by Edward, E. Finden, Edwd Finden, and Edward Finden; some plates which appear in their works are lettered below Finden. A founder member of the Associated Engravers' Society -- formed at the house of John Pye in July 1826 in order to foster 'direct intercourse between Engravers, and Patrons of the fine arts' -- William Finden had earlier contributed to the society's project to engrave in line from paintings in the recently founded National Gallery (Fox, 11). His engraving of 'The Village Festival' (1831) after Sir David Wilkie was included in the first part of 'Engravings from Pictures in the National Gallery' (1831). Engraved on copper, the 'Art Journal' and 'The Athenaeum' both later described this as his best work, and as 'lively [and] full of character' ('The Athenaeum', 2 Oct 1852, 1070). 
Well into their thirties, William and Edward Finden began to produce the great series of steel engravings for which they are chiefly known. Basil Hunnisett notes that 'it is difficult to ascertain exactly the amount of work William put into the plates carrying his name, although he was reckoned to be the better engraver of the two brothers' (Hunnisett, 34). While continuing to provide single plates for various annuals -- including 'The Keepsake', 'The Bijou', and 'The Anniversary' -- their portrait, landscape, and topographical engravings and vignettes provided illustrations to the lives and works of the major poets of the day, including Sir Walter Scott, Lord Byron, Thomas Moore, and Samuel Rogers, and, in the previous century, those of Oliver Goldsmith and Samuel Johnson. Their landscape engravings were included in popular series of landscape views which included the British coastline, ports, and harbours, Scotland, Wales, India, Italy, Syria, and America. For these substantial commissions from publishers they worked after drawings by well-known artists including J. M. W. Turner, David Roberts, Clarkson Stanfield, Thomas Stothard, and Samuel Prout. 
Of all these commissions, it was William and Edward Finden's illustrations to Byron that substantially enhanced the status of their work. Following his death in Greece in 1824, their engravings sensitively conveyed to a wide contemporary audience images of Byron's life and work. Initially engaged by Byron's publisher, John Murray, to engrave a portrait of Byron at the age of nineteen by the Scottish painter George Sanders, in J. C. Hobhouse's possession, as the frontispiece to the first edition of Thomas Moore's 'Life of Byron' (1830), William Finden went on to work for Murray on a popular edition of Moore's 'Life and Works of Byron' which was first published in monthly parts. At the same time he conceived his own project to publish with Murray a series of landscape illustrations to Byron. Initially he gained the support of Byron's loyal friend J. C. Hobhouse, who agreed to write a text to accompany the illustrations and provided Finden with a list of subjects for illustration. Finden lost no time in commissioning drawings from Turner and other artists, but then ran into difficulties with Hobhouse, whose protective feelings towards his friend's reputation prevented him from ever publishing his recollections of Byron. Having made a heavy financial commitment towards this, his first publishing venture, and having also secured investment from Murray, Finden pressed on and began negotiations with the publisher Charles Tilt. 'Finden's Landscape Illustrations to the Life and Works of Byron' finally appeared in fourteen monthly parts, with both Murray's and Tilt's names on the paper wrappers, from January 1832. Each part contained five plates; the quarto edition cost 2's'. 6died, and the royal quarto with plates on india paper was issued at 7's'. 6died per part. 
Both the 'Illustrations' and Moore's 'Life and Works' created a great sensation, and led to further projects to engrave the life and works of other poets, and other works of a popular kind such as 'Finden's Gallery of the Graces' (1832-4) after works by Sir Edwin Landseer and A. E. Chalon; 'Finden's Byron Beauties' (1834); 'Finden's Portraits of the Female Aristocracy of the Court of Queen Victoria' (1838-9), after portraits by Chalon, Hayter, and others; and 'Finden's Tableaux of National Character, Beauty, and Costume', edited by Mrs A. [Priscilla Maden] Watts. 
The Findens' relationship with Turner continued in the commission offered by the Findens and John Murray for the series 'Landscape Illustrations to the Bible', first issued in parts and subsequently compiled and published as a set of two volumes in 1836 under the title 'The biblical keepsake, or, Landscape illustrations of the most remarkable places mentioned in the holy scriptures'. This also included engravings after A. W. Callcott, Harding, and Stanfield. Of the hundred engravings, the twenty-six by Turner included fourteen after sketches 'done on the spot' by Sir Charles Barry; of these six were of Jerusalem. 
The large profits from these highly successful works were dissipated, however, in the brothers' most ambitious production, the folio-size 'Royal Gallery of British Art' (1838-40). The beautifully executed and handsomely produced plates, which included 'Interior of a Highlander's House' after Sir Edwin Landseer by William Finden and 'Returning from Market' after A. W. Callcott by Edward Finden, were by some of the finest engravers of the period -- including John Pye, G. T. Doo, Edward Goodall, and J. T. Willmore after works by the foremost painters, including Constable, Wilkie, Eastlake, Mulready, Etty, George Jones, and Francis Danby. The engravers selected were, according to the preface, those 'best suited to translate the characteristics of the painter', and many of the painters 'commented [on] and approved the engravings'. The work did not, however, sell. Despite its lack of financial success, the work remains of lasting importance in publishing 'on a scale and style commensurate with their importance... calculated to present a correct view of the progress of Painting and Engraving in England' ('Royal Gallery', preface). As such, it forms a record of contemporary taste in British art, and the list of facsimile signatures of subscribers published 'in its complete form' by J. Hogarth in 1851 is a roll-call of those who then supported British art. 
Following their earlier successes with illustrations from Byron, an edition of the poet's 'Childe Harold's Pilgrimage' (1842) included twenty-nine vignettes by Edward and a frontispiece engraving by William Finden of Thomas Phillips's portrait of Byron in Albanian dress after the reduced-size copy belonging to John Murray. Twenty plates by Edward Finden illustrated the 'Beauties of Moore' (1846); twenty-two had earlier been included in 'Landscape Illustrations of the Waverley Novels' (1830-31). Though the brothers devoted most of their lives to book illustration, they also engraved some large single plates, including William Finden's portrait of George IV after Sir Thomas Lawrence, for which he received 1500 guineas, according to his obituary 'the highest sum ever paid for an engraving after a portrait' ('The Athenaeum', 2 Oct 1852, 1070). In later years, and probably to relieve the brothers' financial difficulties, he engraved ''The Naughty Boy'' in 1843, and 'The Girl with the Fish' in 1844, both after Sir Edwin Landseer, and the following year 'The Highlander's Return' after Sir David Wilkie. 'The Crucifixion' engraved after the painting by William Hilton for the Art Union was his last plate, for which he received $1470. Edward Finden's single plates included 'The Harvest Waggon' after Gainsborough. 
William Finden was president of the Artists' Annuity Fund, of which he was a founder member in 1810, from 1834 to 1836. In 1845 he was elected to the Council of the Institute of Fine Arts, and in the week before his death he was named as a signatory of a petition to Queen Victoria for the recognition of the claims of engravers to full honours at the Royal Academy. Returning from a meeting of engravers, he caught cold, and together with the pressures of work, this led to a series of heart attacks. Late of Upper Cheyne Row, Chelsea, he died, a widower, at his home, 49 Camden Street, Camden Town, London, on 20 September 1852, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. He was described in his obituary as 'a man of quiet, gentlemanly demeanour, in every way an ornament to his profession' ('Art Journal', 14, 1852, 350). Though it has been suggested that Adam Edward Findon (1824-1846) may have been a son of William Finden (Hunnisett, 35), he was baptized on 15 August 1824 at St Sepulchre's Church, London, the son of Henry Findon and his wife, Sarah. Edward Finden died after a long illness in St John's Wood, London, on 9 February 1857. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 9450


Findlater, Andrew (1810-1885), lexicographical editor, born at Aberdour, Aberdeenshire, was educated at the University of Aberdeen, where he graduated and for some time attended divinity classes. On leaving college he became schoolmaster at Tillydesk, and subsequently headmaster of Gordon's Hospital, Aberdeen. In 1853 he began a lifelong connection with the publishing firm of Messrs Chambers, Edinburgh. In the same year was published his essay 'Epicurus' in the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana'. His first work for Chambers was an edition of their 'Information for the People' (1857). Shortly afterwards he was entrusted with the editorship of Chambers's 'Encyclopaedia', and wrote several articles for the 1860 edition. He prepared for the educational course of the same firm manuals on language, astronomy, physical geography, and physiography, and published new editions of their 'Etymological Dictionary' and 'Miscellanies'. He also contributed a series of essays entitled 'Notes of travel' and various other articles for 'The Scotsman'. In 1864 he received the degree of LLD from the University of Aberdeen. His work is characterized by singular clearness of exposition. He died on 1 January 1885 at 15 Rillbank Terrace, Edinburgh. He married a daughter of Thomas Barclay, sheriff-clerk of Fife; she died in 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 9451


Findlater, Charles (1754-1838), Church of Scotland minister and writer on agriculture, was born on 10 January 1754 in the manse of West Linton, Peeblesshire, the second son of Thomas Findlater (1697-1778) and his second wife, Jean Brown (died 1802), daughter of William Brown, an Edinburgh bookseller. His grandfather, Alexander Findlater, was a native of Moray in the north of Scotland, and had married into the famous Scottish family Kirkaldy of Grange. His father was minister of West Linton, but as he had been presented by a lay patron, his settlement there in 1729 was resolutely opposed by certain of the parishioners, who staged a riot which caused troops to be quartered in the parish. 
Findlater was educated at Edinburgh University, where he graduated MA on 14 November 1770. Having been licensed by the presbytery of Peebles in 1775, he was called to the parish of West Linton, where he was ordained as his father's assistant and successor on 6 March 1777. He remained as minister there until 1790, when he was presented by William, duke of Queensberry, to the neighbouring parish of Newlands, where he was admitted on 24 June. His appointment, like his father's at West Linton, was opposed, and led to the establishment of a seceding congregation. On 26 July of the following year he married Janet Hay Russell (1760/61-1828). 
Findlater belonged to the moderate theological school, and was extremely popular with his parishioners, often inviting his congregation to dinner on Sundays. He was interested in economic subjects, establishing one of the first local savings banks some time after 1791. Findlater's books show him to have been well read in politics and economics. He published 'Liberty and equality: a sermon or essay, with an appendix on Godwin's system of society in his 'Political justice'' (1800), an attack on the principles of the French Revolution, which he saw William Godwin as promoting. Godwin's sympathizers assaulted Findlater, and he was obliged to hide himself until the lord advocate, his friend and neighbour Sir James Montgomery, to whom the sermon had been dedicated, was able to appease the outcry. Findlater also wrote a 'General View of the Agriculture of the County of Peebles', published in Edinburgh in 1802. This is an eclectic, rather than an instructive, work. It states that pigeons and bees are disadvantageous to the Peebles farmers, who are commended for their sobriety and industry; however there is no mention of either the game or the fish of the county. He also published sermons, which dealt with politics and economics, and wrote the entries on West Linton and Newlands parishes which appear in Sir John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account' and the 'New Statistical Account'. 
Following his wife's accidental death on 2 August 1828, Findlater remained as minister of Newlands until his retirement in 1835. He died in Glasgow on 28 May 1838 and was buried at Newlands. 


@@@@@


doc= 9452


Findlay, Alexander George, the younger (1812-1875), geographer and hydrographer, was born in London on 6 January 1812. 
His father, 
As a child and young man Alexander Findlay the younger's interest in geography was encouraged and his training supervised by his father. In 1844 he was elected fellow of the Royal Geographical Society and soon became an active member of its council and committees. In 1842 he published a revised version of Brookes's 'Gazetteer' and 'The Coasts and Islands of the Pacific Ocean'. The latter was the first of many meticulously compiled hydrographical works. His 'Classical Atlas' (1847) was the most widely circulated of his geographical works. His meteorological research attracted the attention of Admiral Fitzroy who invited him to join an official department of meteorology then being established, but Findlay preferred an independent career. 
On the death in 1858 of Richard Holmes Laurie, for whom he, like his father, had done much work, Alexander George Findlay took over that business and directed it to new success -- it became one of the longest running hydrographic publishing houses in Europe. Between 1869 and 1875 Findlay prepared and published six navigational directories which in text, maps, and diagrams documented the winds, currents, coastlines, and other information necessary for navigation in the major oceans of the world. The directories ran to several editions and were regarded as the standard authorities. His interest in lighthouses won him a medal from the Society of Arts and led to the publication of various editions of 'A Description and List of Lighthouses of the World'. Findlay kept up his geographical work and took a keen interest in exploration. As a member of the Arctic committee of the Royal Geographical Society he helped to analyse possible routes taken by Sir John Franklin and gave valuable help in preparing the case which persuaded the government to send out the 'Alert' and 'Discovery' expedition in 1875. He was also active in mapping the discoveries being made in Africa and the quest for the source of the Nile. He was a friend of David Livingstone and made the official maps of the routes taken by Burton and Speke in their journeys in 1858-9. He worked actively for the British Association for the Advancement of Science and gave papers on ocean currents and climatology to its conferences in 1853 and 1869 respectively. He married on 15 October 1850 Sarah (1821-1875), daughter of Samuel Rutley, farmer, of Wrotham, Kent; the marriage appears to have been childless. 
In 1870 the Societa Geographica Italiana elected Findlay to foreign honorary membership in recognition of his services to hydrography and geography. He received the medal of the Congres International des Sciences Geographiques in Paris in 1875. Many of his numerous maps, charts, and scientific papers remained in use long after his death, of heart disease, on 3 May 1875 at 1 Sydney Villas, Dover, where he was visiting, having made his home at Dulwich Wood, London. He was buried next to his father at Hayes. His business, at 53 Fleet Street, City of London at the time of his death, was taken over by two of his nephews, Daniel Walter Kettle (died 1912) and William Richardson Kettle (died 1918) who were probably as children to him: Daniel had accompanied him to Dover and was present at his death. Both were described as nautical publishers on their election to the Royal Geographical Society in 1875 and 1876 respectively. A third nephew, Henry Alexander Kettle (died 1879), described as a hydrographical draughtsman on his election to the society in 1876, worked for the firm in 1876-9. 


@@@@@


doc= 9453


Findlay, Sir George (1829-1893), civil engineer and railway manager, was born at Rainhill in Lancashire on 18 May 1829, the younger son of George Findlay (1793-1858) of Grantown, Moray, and his wife, Agnes (died 1835), daughter of Henry Courtenay of Glasgow. His father, descended from a family of small tenant farmers residing at Coltfield, near Elgin, became an inspector of masonry under George Stephenson, and at the time of his son's birth was engaged in building the famous skew bridge on the Liverpool and Manchester Railway near Rainhill. The younger George lived with his father successively at Liverpool, Coventry, and Halifax, where he attended the grammar school. At the age of fourteen he left school and worked as a mason on the Halifax branch of the Manchester and Leeds Railway, then in course of construction. From 1845 to 1847 he was assistant to his elder brother James, constructing bridges on the Trent Valley Railway. The brothers were employed by Thomas Brassey, who quickly appreciated George's abilities and, during an association which was to last for seventeen years, gave him opportunity to use them. 
On the completion of the Trent valley line in 1847, Findlay travelled to London, and entered the service of the building contractors Bransome and Gwyther by whom he was employed as a mason in the construction of the London and North Western Railway's engine sheds at Camden Town and Chalk Farm. He subsequently joined the contractors Grissel and Peto and worked on the masonry of the new houses of parliament, then under construction. Before the end of 1847 he left London to work on the North Staffordshire Railway under Brassey's agent, Thomas Jones, on the construction of tunnels, tunnel entrances, and bridges. Before the close of 1849 Brassey appointed Findlay assistant engineer under his agent, Miles Day, in charge of the mining and brickwork of the Sutton Tunnel between Frodsham and Warrington, on the Birkenhead, Chester, and Cheshire Railway. 
In 1850, when Messrs Brassey and Field began building the first section of the Shrewsbury and Hereford Railway between Hereford and Ludlow, Findlay was appointed engineer and superintended the construction. On its completion in April 1852 Brassey decided to lease and operate the line himself, and offered Findlay the post of manager, which he accepted after some hesitation. Brassey placed implicit confidence in Findlay, never interfering with his management of the railway and seldom troubling himself about the details of the accounts. In 1853 the railway reached Hereford, where it connected with the Newport, Abergavenny, and Hereford Railway operated by the London and North Western Railway (LNWR). Brassey contracted to supply the locomotive power on this line, and Findlay, as general manager of the Shrewsbury and Hereford Railway, began to work closely with the LNWR and to establish important contacts within that company. 
In 1862 the LNWR and the Great Western Railway (GWR) took a joint lease of the Shrewsbury and Hereford line, and Findlay, who was largely responsible for negotiating this transaction, was taken on by the LNWR as their district manager for Shropshire and mid-Wales. With the concurrence of the LNWR board he also accepted the management of the various railways in mid- and south Wales and the marches operated by Thomas Savin. Savin had ambitious schemes of extension for these railways which Findlay increasingly thought unrealistic; furthermore, when Savin's lines merged to form the Cambrian Railways in July 1864 he saw the possibility of a conflict of interest with his work at the LNWR. In December 1864, he laid his views before Richard Moon, chairman of the LNWR, and procured transfer at the end of 1864 to Euston Station, where he was appointed general goods manager. In 1874 he was advanced to the post of general traffic manager, and in 1880, on the retirement of William Cawkwell, to that of general manager. 
While at Euston, Findlay laid great emphasis on the importance of the LNWR's through traffic between mainland Britain and Ireland, and was largely responsible for the great development of traffic by the Dublin and Holyhead route. He was a familiar figure in parliamentary committee rooms and before royal commissions from 1854 onwards, and enjoyed the reputation of being an admirable witness. He was a strong opponent of the Manchester Ship Canal, appearing as an adverse witness on six occasions. In 1888 several of his suggestions were adopted by government as modifications of the policy in regard to Irish railways, recommended by the royal commission on Irish public works. He also contributed important evidence on behalf of the railways to the Board of Trade inquiry of 1889 into railway rates and charges. In 1891 he declined an invitation to be a member of the royal commission on the relations between capital and labour, but appeared before it as the chief witness on behalf of the railway companies. On the retirement of Sir Richard Moon in the same year, Findlay was offered the post of chairman of the London and North Western Company, but preferred to retain his more arduous position. 
Findlay was well known as a lecturer on railway matters, and he developed a lecture entitled 'Working of an English railway', delivered at the Chatham School of Military Engineering, into 'The Working and Management of an English Railway' (1889), which became one of the most widely studied and influential nineteenth-century books on railway management and operation, both in Britain and abroad; it reached a sixth edition in 1899. 
Findlay was elected an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers on 1 December 1874. He had a strong interest in the military applications of railways, and was a lieutenant-colonel of the engineer and railway volunteer staff corps; he was also a justice of the peace for Middlesex, and from 1889 an alderman of Middlesex county council. At the Paris Exhibition in 1889 he acted as vice-president of a committee dealing with the display of transportation technology, and was created a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. He was knighted in 1892. 
In his later days Findlay was the most prominent figure among railway managers in Britain. He had an admirable talent for organization and direction, and was capable of intense labour. His jocular remark to a committee of the House of Commons that he could manage all the railways in Ireland, and find time for two days' fishing a week, was based on no exaggerated estimate of his own capacity. He was twice married. With his first wife, Annie, daughter of Swanston Adamson of Rugeley in Staffordshire, he raised a large family, of whom four sons and two daughters survived him; she died in 1883. On 5 January 1885 he married Charlotte Jemima, daughter of Pryse Jacob of Bridgend, Glamorgan, who survived him. 
Findlay died on 26 March 1893 at his home, Hill House, Edgware, Middlesex, and was buried at nearby Whitchurch on 30 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 9454


Findlay, John Ritchie (1824-1898), newspaper proprietor and philanthropist, born at Arbroath on 21 October 1824, was the son of Peter Findlay (died 1833?), draper, and grandnephew of John Ritchie ['see under 'Ritchie, William], one of the founders of the 'Scotsman' newspaper. He was educated at Bathgate Academy and the University of Edinburgh. In 1842 he joined 'The Scotsman'; it was then a small paper, published twice a week at the price of 4died He was engaged at first on the commercial side (writing addresses on the covers of the country papers), then took part in editing the paper under the supervision of Alexander Russel and Charles M'Laren (see Findlay's memoir in Cooper, 'Editor's Retrospect'). Findlay was interested in the literary side of the paper; in his youth he was a friend of De Quincey, whose 'Personal Recollections' he edited in 1886. He also wrote on Scottish poverty. In April 1868 he became a partner in the firm, and on the death of his great-uncle in 1870, the bulk of the property passed into his hands. In his later years Findlay gave up the immediate direction of his paper, but never ceased to take a deep interest in it and to control its general policy. The politics of 'The Scotsman' were initially Liberal, but in the home-rule controversy of 1886 it took a very strong unionist line. The adoption of this attitude by the leading Scottish paper, and the main paper of Gladstone's constituency, was a political event of no small import. 
During the period of Findlay's connection with 'The Scotsman' the influence and circulation of the paper greatly increased, and its proprietor became a rich man. But he lived unostentatiously, and regarded his wealth chiefly as a means of benefiting his fellow citizens. He did not approve of posthumous benevolence, but spent large sums on public objects during his lifetime. In November 1882 Findlay anonymously offered $10,000 to get under way the establishment of a Scottish national portrait gallery. He became a trustee of the portrait gallery committee, though without revealing his role as donor, and gave further sums, which by the 1890s amounted to over $60,000. His position as anonymous donor became extremely complicated as he was also on the board of trustees of manufactures and he was secretary of the Society of Antiquaries, both of which were involved in the negotiations, the antiquaries sharing the building in Queen Street, Edinburgh, built with Findlay's money. His identity as donor was announced when the gallery was inaugurated in 1889. Findlay was also active in the affairs of the Scottish National Gallery, to which he gave works of art. He was interested in the history of Edinburgh and paid for the restoration of the Dean Village, with the provision of working-class housing. Findlay was a vehement proponent of the university education of women and was chairman of the Association for the Medical Education of Women. He was a director of the Sick Children's Hospital in Edinburgh, and one of the founders of the Society for Improving the Condition of the Poor. On his estate of Aberlour in Banffshire, which he acquired in 1885, Findlay spent more than he received in reclaiming land, making roads, and building cottages for his tenants. Disliking political elections he never held a municipal office, and he refused a baronetcy in 1896; but the same year he accepted the freedom of the city of Edinburgh. 
On 27 October 1863 Findlay married Susan Leslie, the thirty-year-old daughter of James Leslie, civil engineer, at 2 Charlotte Street, Edinburgh; they had ten children. Their town houses were in Queen Street and Rothesay Terrace, Edinburgh, and they lived for a time at Hatton House, Midlothian, whose history Findlay wrote. He was a member of the Church of Scotland: his religious views were strong, but entirely devoid of sectarianism or bitterness. In person he was somewhat below middle height, spare, and of a fair complexion. His features were sharply cut, his expression shrewd but kindly. He died at Aberlour House, Aberlour, on 16 October 1898, his wife surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9455


Findlay, Robert (1721-1814), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born at Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, on 23 May 1721, the son of William Findlay of Waxford, merchant in the town, and Barbara, daughter of Robert Hodgirt, a Kilmarnock surgeon-apothecary. He was educated at the University of Glasgow, graduating MA in 1737, and at Leiden and perhaps also at Edinburgh. After receiving his licence to preach from the presbytery of Irvine on 5 October 1743 he was ordained to the Ayrshire congregation of Stevenston on 23 August 1744. He was successively the minister of Galston in Ayrshire from 6 June 1745, Laigh Church, Paisley, from 21 March 1753, and St David's Church, Glasgow, from 25 March 1756. While at Galston he married, on 24 April 1745, Annabella (1723-1797), daughter of Robert Paterson of Braehead, the town clerk of Kilmarnock; the couple had three children, one of whom, Robert, survived childhood and rose to become dean of guild in Glasgow. In 1776 Findlay received a DD degree from the University of Glasgow, which he also served as dean of faculty. Two years later he was a candidate for the Glasgow divinity chair but lost it to William Wight by a vote of seven to five among the professors. Wight died in July 1782, however, and on 5 September the faculty elected Findlay the professor of divinity in his place. He assumed his new office in January 1783, when he resigned his charge at St David's. As a divinity professor he was known for delivering a rambling 'course of prelections of portentous range and elaborate execution' (Coutts, 354). In 1800 he also stood fast against the introduction of class fees for divinity students. 
The central theme of Findlay's publications was to uphold the divine inspiration of scriptures. Writing as Philalethes, he published 'A letter to the Rev Dr Kennicott vindicating the Jews from the charge of corrupting Deut. xxvii.4' in 'The Library' for July 1761. After Kennicott replied in the same journal in August, he wrote 'A second letter' and published it with the first in January 1762 under the same pseudonym as 'Two Letters to the Reverend Dr. Kennicott'. The following year he produced a pamphlet on psalmody. In 1778, writing once again as Philalethes, he engaged the Revd John Jebb on the subject of prayer in 'A letter to the Rev Mr Jebb, with relation to his declared sentiments about the unlawfulness of all religious addresses to Christ Jesus', and in 1781 he appended a second letter to Jebb to his anonymous 'Remarks on Mr Lindsey's Dissertation upon Praying to Christ'. In 1770 Findlay returned to scriptural apologetics in 'A vindication of the sacred books and of Josephus, especially the former, from various misrepresentations and cavils of the celebrated M. de Voltaire', a work of some 600 pages that was inspired by reading a selection from Voltaire's 'Philosophy of History' in the 'Monthly Review' in 1765. The same theme defined his last major work, 'The Divine Inspiration of the Jewish Scriptures and Old Testament', which appeared in 1803. Findlay died in Glasgow on 15 June 1814, aged ninety-three. 


@@@@@


doc= 9456


Finet, Sir John (1570/71-1641), courtier and writer, was born at Soulton in Kent, the eldest son of Robert Finet (died 1582), and Agnes Wenlock, daughter of a captain of Calais. His early life is obscure. Whatever his standing, he mixed with the leading Kentish gentry of his day. The Dacres were 'that noble family to whose love I owe so much service' ('Salisbury MSS', 17.322), while to Henry Wotton, Finet was 'mine honest countryman and friend' (Smith, 1.444). In the dedication to his 1606 translation of Rene de Lucinge's 'De la naissance, duree, et cheute des estats', Finet indicates that he had enjoyed the favour of Archbishop Whitgift. In 1588 he matriculated a fellow-commoner from St John's College, Cambridge, and in 1595 he was granted a licence to travel overseas. He seems to have spent the next few years doing so. 
By his early thirties, Finet was undertaking general duties for Thomas Wilson, the earl of Salisbury's principal secretary. On the continent in 1607, he attached himself to the English diplomats in Paris and followed the court. These connections, his recent book, his languages, and travel experience, prompted Finet's appointment as tutor and guardian to Salisbury's son and heir, Lord Cranborne, who toured France from December 1608. Finet's colleague was the physician Lister, but he himself was at this time, according to John Chamberlain, 'a travayler of no note or account' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.268). Henri IV's assassination in May 1610 precipitated an early return to England, but Cranborne and his tutors made an Italian journey a few months later, mainly in Venice, hosted by Wotton. 
Back in England, Finet continued as one of Salisbury's secretaries, attending the treasurer in his last days and remaining in the service of the new earl. In October 1612 he was appointed to assist Sir Lewes Lewknor, master of the ceremonies, the office responsible for the reception and entertainment of diplomats and other foreign dignitaries. Finet's account of the prince palatine's visit that month began a continuous record of protocol and precedent that he would maintain until six weeks before his death. He moved now to Salisbury's St Martin's Lane development, his principal home for the rest of his life. Long-term neighbours included Sir Theodore de Mayerne and close friends Sir Thomas Roe, Sir Benjamin Rudyard, and Sir William Ashton. With few ceremonial duties, he filled various functions. He accompanied Prince Charles to Cambridge in 1613 (receiving an MA) and attended the king there in 1615. Often abroad, he presented gifts to Felipe III at the Escorial in 1614 and accompanied Lady Harrington to visit Elizabeth of Bohemia at Heidelberg in 1617 and to Dunkirk in 1619. 
James knighted Finet on 23 March 1616 'to make me fytter for his service', as Finet told Trumbull ('Downshire MSS', 5.453), or else 'upon pretence he shold have a widow that must needes be a lady', as Chamberlain told Carlton ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.618). Two days before Christmas 1617, Finet married Jane Wentworth (died 1652), a 'lame' daughter of Lord Wentworth and related to his early patrons the Dacres (ibid., 2.126). Her brother Thomas was created earl of Cleveland in 1625, her stepfather, William Pope, earl of Downe in 1628. 
Finet seems to have become a fixture at court, known for writing and singing bawdy songs with Zouche and Goring. One such performance just days after his marriage was so exceptionally offensive that even James was displeased. No examples of its kind are preserved, but Finet's wit and polish stand out in his surviving work. Thriving at court, he incurred Lewknor's jealousy, who felt Finet was encroaching on his job. On 13 September 1619 he was granted the reversion to Lewknor's office. Later that year he attended Lord Treasurer Suffolk's trial for corruption and reported it in detail to Salisbury, providing an important historical source. In 1622 he was present at a confirmation service and dinner held by the bishop of London for Buckingham's family. The following year Buckingham presented him with a three-carat diamond ring in Spain, when he was among those who fetched back the prince and the duke, following the failed Spanish match. Lewknor's death on 12 March 1627 saw Finet become master of the ceremonies. Now there would be no more travel abroad, as he spent his time either following the court or at one of his houses in Westminster and Chiswick. Besides the ridiculous punctilios that every master sometimes had to cope with, he met the additional challenge of an impoverished court, and claimed to have saved the king over $10,000 through proper regulation during his mastership. 
Sensing his age, Finet began putting his affairs in order in 1638, when he sold lands in Lincolnshire to establish a trust for his son William. He continued working until May 1641, when he had his notebooks copied and wrote his will, and died on 12 July with his family around him at home in St Martin's Lane. He was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields. His executors and the overseers of his will, Roe and Rudyard, supervised major bequests to Lady Finet and the children of the marriage, Lucy, Elizabeth, William, Anne, Finetta, and Jane, besides generous gifts to other family and friends. Following his widow's death in 1652, a portion of Finet's notebooks was edited and published by James Howell as 'Finetti philoxenis: Some Choice Observations of Sir John Finet Knight' (1656), which became a major source for Wicquefort and others. Only in 1987 was the bulk of the remainder published, edited by Albert Loomie. Although at least three portraits of Finet once existed, only two copies of one of them are known to survive. These show a handsome Finet in Venice, at the time of Cranborne's tour. The original may have been painted by Domenico Tintoretto, since the two corresponded shortly afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 9457


Finger, Gottfried (c.1655-1730), composer, was born in Olomouc, Moravia, where Georg Finger, his father or brother, was cantor at St Morice. His mother was Marina Finger. Gottfried Finger presumably spent an early part of his career in the service of the prince-bishop Karl Liechtenstein-Kastelcorno, for pieces composed and copied by Finger survive in the prince-bishop's music collection at Kromeriz. 
According to J. G. Walther's 'Musikalisches Lexicon', Finger was in Munich in 1682. He may have arrived in London as early as 1685, performing in a concert with August Kuhnel in November of that year. Certainly there is further evidence to suggest that he was in London by 1686; a manuscript of recorder music containing pieces by Finger, Keller, Courteville, and others contains an inscription on the first folio that reads, 'scripsit Londra 1686' (BL, Harley MS 4899). He was definitely in London by the spring of 1687, when he received a post in James II's new Catholic chapel by a warrant dated 5 July 1687, backdated to 25 March. In 1688 he published his op. 1, a set of twelve sonatas for varied combinations of strings and continuo. He dedicated it to James II, stating that the sonatas were intended for use in the Catholic chapel. 
When James II went into exile in 1688, Finger remained in London and started a successful freelance career. Some of Finger's music, however, accompanied the king to France: airs and sonatas by Finger appear in several manuscripts associated with the Stuart court in exile. Finger quickly became a central figure in London's musical life. He published several collections aimed at the growing amateur music market. 'IV Sonatas or Solos' (1690) was the first collection published in England of sonatas for solo instrument and continuo, containing three for violin and three for recorder; 'A Collection of Choice Ayres' (1691) consists of suites for two and three recorders, and 'A Collection of Musick in Two Parts' (1691) is a varied collection for recorders, violins, and continuo. Finger composed minor-key trumpet music (the earliest known in England) for the St Cecilia celebrations of 1691, composed the ode for 1693, and gave concerts with Giovanni Battista Draghi at York Buildings at least from November 1693. 
Finger's career in the theatre seems to have begun in 1694, when he composed a song, 'Awake unhappy man', for a revival of George Chapman's 'Bussy d'Ambois'. His career as a composer of theatre music was in full swing by 1695, when Thomas Betterton and his colleagues seceded from the United Company and began acting at Lincoln's Inn Fields. He wrote a suite and a song for their first production, Congreve's 'Love for Love' (30 April 1695), and contributed to at least seven more plays between then and the spring of 1697. When Henry Purcell died suddenly in 1695, Finger composed the music for James Talbot's ode 'Weep All ye Muses', performed on 13 January 1696. Talbot, professor of classical languages in Cambridge, seems to have known Finger well, and consulted him for his unfinished treatise on music. Nothing is known of Finger's activities between 8 April 1697 and 17 February 1699, when a concert of vocal and instrumental music was given at York Buildings for his benefit. It is possible that he spent the time abroad in France, Italy, or the Low Countries (or even all three): on 1 December 1701 some music belonging to Finger was advertised as: 'A Choice Collection of Vocal and Instrumental Music in Italian, French and English, composed by several great masters (the Italian music being most of them originals) with a catalogue given Gratis... this being the Collection of a Great Master, who has left the land.' The notice added that the music had been 'made on his travels thro Italy' ('Diverting Post', 1 Dec 1701). 
On his return to London Finger plunged once again into the city's theatrical life, writing music for at least nine plays and two semi-operas mounted by Christopher Rich's company at Drury Lane, though his career in England came to an abrupt end when he entered the competition to set William Congreve's masque 'The Judgment of Paris' and came only fourth, being beaten by John Weldon, John Eccles, and Daniel Purcell; his setting was performed at Dorset Garden on 28 March 1701, and again with the other three on 3 June. According to Roger North, Finger, 'having lost his cause, declared he was mistaken in his musick, for he thought he was to be judged by men, and not by boys, and thereupon left England and has not bin here since' ('Roger North on Music', 312). By December Finger was in Vienna, where the British ambassador reported that, despite complaining that the duke of Somerset had been partial to Eccles and Weldon, Finger planned to perform Eccles's setting in Vienna. 
In 1702 Finger was in Berlin in the service of the queen of Prussia, Sophie Charlotte, where according to Walther he composed more operas; also during this period a number of his instrumental collections were published by Roger of Amsterdam. By 1706 he was in Breslau in the service of Duke Karl Philipp of Neuberg, the younger brother of the elector palatine. He remained in Karl Philipp's service for the rest of his life; in October 1707 he was a 'Kammermusiker' in the Innsbruck court 'Kapelle', and he rose to the position of 'Konzertmeister' in 1708. By this time he was married to his wife Katherina Elizabeth, a harpsichordist. 1708 also saw Finger return to Berlin, where two of his operas, 'Der Sieg der Schonheit uber die Helden' and 'Roxane und Alexanders Hochzeit', were performed. He seems to have maintained his post as 'Konzertmeister' as he followed the court to Neuberg an der Donau in 1717, to Heidelberg in 1718, and to Mannheim in 1720. Finger's last years were largely spent composing chamber music and stage works for the court of the elector palatine at Mannheim and Dusseldorf. His name last appears on the list of musicians in Mannheim in 1723, and he was buried there on 31 August 1730, having presumably died earlier in that year. 
Finger was a formidable bass viol virtuoso, and was appointed to teach the instrument in the abandoned scheme for a royal academy in 1695. He did not publish any solo bass viol music, but a group of manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and a manuscript at Schloss Sunching, Germany, reveal him to have been one of the most important composers for the instrument of his time. Other important manuscripts are in the Hudebni Archiv, Kromeriz, Czech Republic, and at Durham Cathedral Library. Seven, apparently early, suites for baryton and bass viol are the earliest surviving ensemble pieces for the baryton. He also composed some of the earliest surviving music using the viola d'amore. He was heavily influenced by his Moravian and Bohemian contemporaries (Pavel Vejvanovsky and Heinrich Biber in particular). Like many other continental composers who went to England, Finger had to adapt his relatively flamboyant Austro-Bohemian style to suit the more conservative English audiences. He took music from Moravia with him to England, and some of these copies are preserved in Oxford and Durham. Finger's style may have sat strangely with English audiences at first, but he never discarded the central European love for colourful instrumentation and musical inventiveness for which his native land is justly renowned. 


@@@@@


doc= 9458


Finglas, Patrick (d. 1537), judge, derived his patronymic from Finglas in north co. Dublin. In 1503 he entered Lincoln's Inn where, in 1506, he served as Christmas steward. On 20 January 1508 he was appointed the king's serjeant-at-law, and in 1509 he was styled as of Piercetown, Meath. In June 1516 he was promoted to the position of second justice of common pleas and he continued to hold this office until 1520 when he was appointed chief baron of the exchequer by the earl of Surrey. In that year he was commended to Henry VIII for his service by both Surrey and Sir John Stiles, and was dispatched to the court to arrange for a meeting of the Irish parliament. In 1524 he received a new patent as chief baron of the exchequer. He served as a justice of the assize in 1527. 
Finglas first established contact with the king's secretary, Thomas Cromwell, in 1533. Following the death of Sir Bartholomew Dillon in 1533, Cromwell unsuccessfully endeavoured to have Finglas immediately appointed to replace Dillon as chief justice of the king's bench. The prospect of Finglas's promotion aroused the earl of Kildare's animosity on the grounds of Finglas's alleged attachment to the Butler faction. In spite of Kildare's protest, on 8 May 1534 Finglas was appointed to this office, being replaced as chief baron of the exchequer by Gerald Aylmer. Finglas was at court in May 1534 and in the second half of the month he and Thomas Cusack were dispatched to Ireland with instructions for the Irish council. Finglas retained his office as chief justice until 1535 when he was reappointed chief baron of the exchequer for life, with a salary of 40 pounds silver, and in 1537 he was paid an annual salary of $100. He attended meetings of the Irish council until mid-July 1537 and he died that year, in early August. 
In an undated treatise, thought to have been written in the summer of 1534, and entitled 'A breviat of the getting of Ireland, and of the decaie of the same', Finglas presented a set of proposals for the political reformation of Ireland (LPL, MS 600, fol. 204, MS 621, fol. 92; TCD, MS 842, fols. 25-36). He provided a skeletal outline of the history of English conquest in Ireland, the upshot of which was 'a general decay' in the lordship. He specifically advocated reform of the province of Leinster, which could be effected through colonization of the pale maghery, and also suggested that abbeys in outlying areas should be entrusted to English lords and gentlemen. In addition he recommended that English captains be appointed to garrison strategic castles in border districts west of the pale. 
No details of Finglas's marriage are known, but he had a son, Thomas, who was appointed protonotary and chirographer of common pleas in 1534. 


@@@@@


doc= 9459


Finglow, John (d. 1586/7), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was born at Barneby, near Howden, Yorkshire; his parents are unknown. He was educated at the English College of Douai, during its temporary relocation to Rheims, where he was ordained as a priest on 25 March 1581. On 24 April of that year he was sent to northern England as a missionary. He worked to gain converts to Catholicism there until he was apprehended and committed to the Ousebridge Kidcote at York, along with Everard Hanse, Henry Clinch, and a Mr Freeman. He was tried and convicted of high treason, for being a priest according to Roman authority, and for having reconciled some of Elizabeth I's subjects to the Catholic church. He was executed at York on 8 August 1586 or 1587. As was the custom for convicted traitors, Finglow was hanged, drawn, and quartered. He was beatified on 22 November 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 9460


Finingham, Robert (fl. c.1378), canonist, presumably came from Finingham, Suffolk, and became a Franciscan friar at Norwich. His name and convent are given by Bale, who in his 'Index' attributes to him a work 'De excommunicationibus', found as a single work in a Norwich Cathedral priory manuscript and in several sections under separate headings in a copy in Richard Kele's printing shop. Since the first manuscript is extant, as CUL MS Ee.5.11, and has no contemporary ascription, Bale may have found the title in Kele's text. Two other copies, both without ascriptions, survive. All the manuscripts were written in the late fourteenth and early fifteenth century, and reference to the practice of the Norwich diocese on excommunication, as well as the inclusion of a section on Franciscan privileges, confirm Bale's description in his 'Index'. Finingham was clearly a trained canonist capable of citing a wide range of authorities, the latest of which are of the early fourteenth century, except for a reference to Pope Gregory 'of happy memory', probably Gregory XI ('r'. 1370-78). He set out the standard texts and papal decrees relevant to English practice in a handbook possibly most useful for religious orders. Tanner's date, 'claruit' ('flourished') 1460, is unsupported speculation. 


@@@@@


doc= 9461


Finlaison, John (1783-1860), civil servant and government actuary, was born on 27 August 1783 at Thurso, Caithness, the eldest son of Donald Finlayson (1761-1790), fisherman, who had six children, and his wife, Isobel Guthrie, 'nee' Sutherland ('b'. 1761). His parents were both Scottish. As a youth Finlaison produced some lyrical poems of considerable merit, none of which survive. In 1799 he was apprenticed to Donald Robeson, writer (legal practitioner) of Thurso. In 1802 he became factor to Sir Benjamin Dunbar, whose estates, together with those of Lord Caithness, were entrusted to his management when he was only nineteen years of age. In 1804 he went to Edinburgh to study for the Scottish bar and was apprenticed to Alexander Glen (1777-1841), writer to the signet. In the same year he visited London on business and also became attached to Elizabeth (1773-1831), the sister of his employer and the daughter of Alexander Glen (1726-1805). In September 1804 Finlaison eloped to London with Elizabeth and they were said to have married there. 
Finlaison was offered an appointment with the board of naval revision and took up his post in July 1805. Shortly afterwards he became first clerk to the commission, and he filled that office until the board was wound up in August 1808. For some time previously he had also acted as secretary to a committee of the board, and in that capacity, at the age of only twenty-three, he drafted the eleventh and twelfth reports of the commission for revising the civil affairs of the navy and was the sole author of the system for the reform of the victualling departments. The accounts had seldom been less than eighteen months in arrears, but by Finlaison's system they were produced, checked, and audited in three weeks. The saving made in the navy's Deptford yard in the first year alone, 1809, was $60,000. In 1809 Finlaison was employed to devise a plan for arranging the records and dispatches at the Admiralty, and after nine months of hard work he produced a system for analysing and indexing the records so that any document could be found immediately. This plan met with such universal acclaim that it was adopted in France, Austria, and Russia. Its inventor received as a reward the order of the Fleur-de-lys from Louis XVIII, in 1815 (C. Dupin, 'Voyages dans la Grande-Bretagne', 1821, pt. 2, 65-7). In the same year Finlaison was appointed keeper of the records and librarian of the Admiralty, and he became reporter and precis writer on all difficult and complicated inquiries arising from day to day. 
During his twelve years in this post Finlaison was also engaged in many other confidential duties. He was requested by Lord Mulgrave to prepare the materials for a defence of the naval administration before parliament in 1810, and in three months he collected a mass of information which enabled Mulgrave to make a successful defence. In 1811 he compiled an exact record of all the enemy's naval forces, on which accurate information had never before been obtained. Experience proved it to be reliable and it was quoted in parliament as an authority. In the same year Finlaison was employed to investigate the abuses of the 'sixpenny revenue' scheme at the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, a fund for the support of the out-pensioners. In his report he showed that by altered arrangements, as well as by the elimination of abuses and sinecure places, pensions could be considerably increased. 
After the subject of the salaries of government clerks had been raised in parliament, in 1813, the Admiralty secretary John Wilson Croker directed Finlaison to inquire fully into the case of his department. After six months of detailed work Finlaison completed a report which was used to form a new system of salaries in the Admiralty. In 1814 he compiled the first official 'Navy List', a work of great labour, accuracy, and usefulness. It was issued monthly, and Finlaison continued to undertake the task of correcting and editing it until the end of 1821. From 1817 to 1818 he was occupied in developing a biographical register of every commissioned officer in the navy, describing the services, merits, and demerits of each; he grafted this on to his digest and index, which became a valuable reference tool for the lords of the Admiralty. Finlaison also introduced into the naval record office a new attribute of openness towards enquiries from the public. 
As librarian to the Admiralty Finlaison found many valuable state papers relating to the American war. In 1813 he was persuaded to attempt to complete Redhead Yorke's 'Naval history', which was intended to form a part of John Campbell's 'Lives of the Admirals'. He continued the history to 1780, and the work was printed for private circulation, though no further progress was made. In 1815 Finlaison's friend Dr Barry O'Meara, physician to Napoleon at St Helena, started correspondence with him about the former emperor's daily life. In 1824, at the request of the writer, the letters were burnt. However, some copies had fallen into other hands and were published in 1853 as 'Napoleon at St Helena and Sir Hudson Lowe'. 
Since 1812 Finlaison had been working on the establishment of pension provision for the widows and orphans of all who were employed in the civil departments of the Royal Navy. Aided by Lord Melville's intervention, his efforts resulted in the establishment of a fund by order in council on 17 September 1819. The naval medical supplemental fund for the widows of medical officers also owed its existence and subsequent prosperity to Finlaison. He was secretary until 1829, when the directors treated him so badly that he resigned; the fund was ruined by mismanagement in 1860. The success of these charities when under his direction, together with his subsequent investigation into the condition of friendly societies, upon which he was employed by a select committee of the House of Commons in 1824, won Finlaison a private practice among benefit societies; he constructed tables for many of these, prepared the schemes of some, and set up others. Among other societies with which he was connected were the London Life, the Amicable Society, the Royal Naval and Military Life Assurance Company, and the New York Life Assurance and Trust Company. 
In 1808 the government had instituted a new system for raising finance based on the granting of life annuities, the tables used being the Northampton tables of mortality. On 1 September 1819 Finlaison's first report to Nicholas Vansittart, chancellor of the exchequer, stated that in eleven years the government had lost $2 million by granting life annuities at prices much below their value. The report was not printed until 1824, when Finlaison was instructed to make further investigations into the true laws of mortality prevailing in England. These investigations led to the discovery that the average duration of human life had increased during the century and resulted in the first mortality tables drawn from British data to show the difference between the mortality rates of men and women. They were also the first tables to use the technique of adjusted average graduation (a method used to eliminate the random fluctuations that arise from observations). In addition the report featured the first sickness data produced from the study of working classes in London ('Life annuities: report of J. Finlaison, actuary of the national debt, on the evidence and elementary facts on which the tables of life annuities are founded', 1829). 
Before the close of 1819 Finlaison provided the chancellor of the exchequer with a statement of the age of each of the 14,000 individuals in the receipt of naval pensions or half pay, and he deduced the likely number of deaths among them. In 1821 George Harrison employed him for several months in calculations relative to the 'Superannuation Act', and in 1822 he was occupied on matters relating to the commutation of the naval and military pensions and half pay. The measure consequently suggested by him was finally adopted by the Bank of England, which accepted the charge for public pensions in return for payment of the 'dead weight' annuity. Finlaison made all the calculations and it was plainly stated in the House of Commons that there was no one else capable of computing the new annuity at the fractional rate of interest agreed. 
On 1 January 1822 Finlaison moved from the Admiralty to the Treasury. He was appointed actuary and principal accountant of the check department of the National Debt Office, where he remained until 1851. Finlaison, who sought to alert the government to the loss which was caused by the use of erroneous annuity tables, was ignored for many years, and it was only by the accidental production of one of his letters before Lord Althorp's committee of finance in March 1828 that the matter was taken forward. This letter showed that the revenue was losing $8000 a week, and that this loss was concealed by the method of preparing the yearly accounts. The life annuity system was suspended immediately and remodelled on the basis of Finlaison's 1829 report. Instituted in November 1829 the new system made savings of $390,000 over five years. In 1831 Finlaison made some calculations on the life expectation of slaves and Creoles, before compensation was paid to the slave owners on 1 August 1834. He was consulted by the ecclesiastical commissioners on the means of improving church property, on the question of church leases, and finally on the subject of church rates; he made various reports on these matters, and on one occasion was summoned to attend a cabinet meeting to explain his views to ministers. When the 'General Registration Act' was passed in 1837, his opinion was sought on the detailed working of the scheme, and he was the first witness called before the parliamentary committee on church leases in the following year. On the formation of the Institute of Actuaries in 1848, he was elected the first president when Griffith Davies stood down, and he retained that position until his death. In 1848 he wrote two reports on the act for lending money to Irish landlords. His first wife had died at Brighton in 1831, and in 1851 Finlaison married Eliza (1807-1896), daughter of Thomas Davis of Waltham Abbey. He retired from public service in August of the same year and employed his remaining days in his favourite study of scripture chronology, and the universal relationship of ancient and modern weights and measures. He was also interested in electricity, and conducted some experiments with Alexander Bain, the pioneer of telegraphy, at Loughton, Essex, in 1842. He published on the subject the following year. 
Finlaison died of pulmonary congestion and pneumonia at his home, 15 Lansdowne Crescent, Notting Hill, London, on 13 April 1860, and was buried at St Nicholas's Church, Loughton, in Essex. His son, Alexander Glen Finlaison (1806-1892), and his grandson Alexander John Finlaison (1840-1900), also became actuaries. John Finlaison's contemporary reputation was as a skilled practitioner in actuarial analysis addressing questions on life assurance posed by various government departments. His reports showed meticulous application of the theoretical heritage of Richard Price and others. Known to his peers as the government actuary before the title was formally conferred upon Alfred Watson in 1917 and before the government actuary's department was created in 1919, his nomination as first president of the Institute of Actuaries lent weight to the perception of actuaries acting for the public interest beyond mere employment in insurance companies. Before the Assurance Associations Committee of 1853, Finlaison argued for government investigation of life office solvency, which was heeded in 1870. His practical ideas in information retrieval for naval commission records in 1809 were a forerunner of formal library indexing and more modern records management. His contribution to the institute's committee work was unremarkable, but Finlaison as government servant helped to set in train the progression of actuaries from being mere practitioners in the life assurance industry to autonomous professionals able to model financial risk. 


@@@@@


doc= 9462


Finlason, William Francis (1818-1895), legal writer and journalist, was the son of Thomas Finlason of Camberwell, Surrey. He entered the Middle Temple as a student on 5 January 1841. He practised for some years as a special pleader under the bar, and reported as a member of the 'Times' parliamentary corps in the gallery of the House of Commons. He was called to the bar on 21 November 1851, and joined the south-eastern circuit. Although well versed in case law, he was not keen on practice, and turned instead to journalism and treatise writing. Having been converted to Roman Catholicism by Frederick William Faber in 1849, he became a regular contributor in the early 1850s to 'The Rambler'; later in that decade he also wrote numerous legal and historical articles for the 'Dublin Review', vigorously defending Catholic positions and attacking the views of whig historians. In 1852 he published his 'Report of the trial and preliminary proceedings in the case of the Queen on the prosecution of G. Achilli v. Dr Newman', in which he defended Newman and criticized the anti-Catholic attitude of the presiding judge, Lord Campbell. 
Finlason wrote widely on legal subjects. For nearly half a century, he was the chief legal reporter for 'The Times', reporting nearly all the major cases in the queen's bench, albeit sometimes in a manner too florid for the liking of the legal profession. In the aftermath of the suppression by Governor Eyre of the Jamaican insurrection, he wrote a number of treatises on martial law, which put forward the view that at times of insurrection the crown had powers under the prerogative to use military force to suppress what he saw as a state of war. Finlason also brought out an edition of John Reeves's 'History of English Law' in 1869. It was not a job well done, however: contradicting many of Reeves's arguments, Finlason sought to argue that all of the important institutions of the common law were derived from the period of the Roman occupation of Britain, but in doing so he revealed both a lack of historical sense and an approach to the sources which had little intellectual vigour. In 1870 he wrote a 'History of the Law of Tenures of Land in England and Ireland', which was read by Gladstone before he introduced the 'Irish Land Bill' in 1870. Finlason produced a number of other legal works, including a set of 'nisi prius' reports (with T. C. Foster) between 1858 and 1865, and some commentaries on the common law procedure acts of 1852, 1854, and 1860. In addition, he was a frequent contributor to legal periodicals and edited one number of the 'Law Magazine and Law Review' in 1874. Although only a stuff-gown barrister, on 10 May 1887 he was appointed one of the masters of the bench of the Middle Temple. He died on 11 March 1895 at his residence, 12 Campden Hill Road, Kensington, London, leaving a widow, Harriet. 


@@@@@


doc= 9463


Finlay, Francis Dalzell (1793-1857), journalist, was born on 12 July 1793 at Newtownards, co. Down, Ireland, a son of John Finlay, a tenant farmer, and his wife, Jane Dalzell. He began work as an apprentice to Samuel Archer, a Belfast printer. In 1808 Finlay became superintendent printer on the 'Belfast Magazine', founded by William Drennan, one of the leaders of the United Irishmen. About 1815 Finlay, encouraged by Drennan, set up his own printing works, where the quality of his letterpress was said to be far superior to any that had previously been produced in Ireland. In 1824 he founded the 'Northern Whig'. The newspaper was the first in Belfast to call itself Liberal, advocating free trade and civil and religious equality. Finlay championed Catholic emancipation and he also supported legislation to regularize the funds of dissenting congregations, resulting in the 'Dissenters Chapels Act' of 1844. His newspaper supported parliamentary reform, the disestablishment of the Irish church, and the reform of the land laws. The 'Northern Whig' was the first newspaper to publish the proposals of William Sharman Crawford on tenant right. Finlay was a personal friend of O'Connell, though he disagreed with him on his repeal policy and he later rejected the militancy of Young Ireland. 
Finlay was frequently involved in libel cases. In July 1826 he was indicted for publishing a libel on the character of an 'improving' landlord. The libel was contained in a letter purporting to be by a small farmer who denied that improvements said to have been carried out by his landlord were improvements at all, and accusing the landlord of litigiousness. Finlay was sentenced to three months' imprisonment, and the publication of the 'Northern Whig' was suspended from August 1826 until May 1827. Finlay was also involved in a case in 1830, in which Lord Hertford's agent was said to have been libelled by the 'Northern Whig'. The case was suspended when it was found that Daniel O'Connell had agreed to appear for Finlay. Two years later, in July 1832, he was found guilty on a similar charge and sentenced to a fine and three months' imprisonment. 
Finlay was a stern employer. During labour disputes in 1836, when his printers gave him an ultimatum on their wages and conditions, he dismissed them and brought in labour from Scotland and other parts of Ireland. When further trouble arose, he set up a secret printing shop in his house and trained young boys as compositors. 
In 1830 Finlay married Marianne Porter, a daughter of the Revd William Porter, a Presbyterian minister of Newtownlimavady, co. Londonderry. They had at least one son, also named Francis Dalzell, to whom Finlay bequeathed the 'Northern Whig' upon his death on 10 September 1857 at Glenarm, Antrim. He was buried at the new burying-ground, Antrim Road, Belfast. 


@@@@@


doc= 9464


Finlay, George (1799-1875), philhellene and historian, the younger son of Major John Finlay RE FRS (1757-1802) and Helen ('nee' Thomson) and the grandson of James Finlay, a Glasgow merchant, was born on 21 December 1799 at Faversham, Kent. His father died in 1802, and in 1805 his mother married Alexander McGregor. Finlay was educated first at home and then at a Liverpool boarding-school. When his stepfather had to go to America on business, Finlay went to live with his uncle Kirkman Finlay at Castle Toward in Argyll and was educated privately with his cousins. From 1819 to 1821 he shared the cultural activities of Glasgow and read law at the university there. He then continued his studies at Gottingen University. Here he came into contact with enthusiasts for the movement to liberate Greece from Ottoman rule. 
Finlay's philhellene interests prompted him to abandon legal studies and go to Greece. He reached Zante in 1823 and joined a group of philhellenes assembling in Cephalonia. But they were said to be infringing the neutrality of the Ionian Islands (then under British protection) and had to move to the Greek mainland. Here they became involved in the tangled politics of the revolutionary movement. In December 1823 Finlay reached Athens, where he met Frank Abney Hastings, whom he greatly admired. Acting as intermediary in central Greece (Rumeli) between the western Rumeliots and Odysseus Androutzos, leader of the eastern Rumeliots, he went to Mesolonghi, where in February 1824 he and Byron enjoyed long literary conversations. With Androutzos, Finlay participated in an unsuccessful expedition against the Peloponnese aimed at establishing a single revolutionary party. Incensed at the cruelty and rapacity he found, Finlay transferred his allegiance to the western Rumeliots and Alexander Mavrocordatos (Byron had died on 19 April 1824). Finlay was taken desperately ill in late 1824 and left Greece to recover in Italy. 
In 1825 Finlay returned to Scotland and he completed his legal studies (1825-6) but, pressed by philhellene friends, he returned to Greece in 1826 in Hastings's steamship 'Karteria', and for a time settled in Aegina. With the support of the three powers, Russia, France, and Britain, the Greek right to form an independent kingdom was recognized and the boundary, after much dispute, ran from Arta to Volos. While serving as a volunteer on the 'Karteria', Finlay met the American philhellene Samuel Gridley Howe. He joined him in aiding refugees, first on Aegina, then in Howe's supposedly model village near Corinth. In 1829 he went to Constantinople, where his friend Julius Millingen lived. Here he acquired a wife, Nectar Trevinian, an Armenian living in Pera. He does not mention this in his journal but the naval officer and author Adolphus Slade gives a racy account in one of his travel books of how the couple eloped in a merchant brig and got married at Syros 'en route' for Aegina. In 1831 Finlay took Nectar to Britain to visit his relatives. His only child, Helen, was born at Exeter on the way north. 
Before leaving Greece, Finlay had acquired property in Athens, the future capital, and his own house was in the quarter of Hadrianou; in 1832 he brought his wife, child, and the companion Miss Grocott back to live permanently in Hadrianou. Finlay also had fifteen farms at Liosia in Attica which he meant to cultivate himself but had to give up, frustrated by the crippling system of taxation and the disturbed countryside. He had a special interest in the development of the kingdom and his writings reveal activity at a high level. He was at King Otho's hunting and dinner parties (in Albanian dress) but as a liberal was never really in favour at court, though he was commissioned captain, then major, 'a la suite', a commission which he tried unsuccessfully to resign. In July 1834 he was appointed 'commissionaire extraordinaire' to the nomarch of Athens in matters concerning the development of the new capital but in November resigned in despair at perpetual frustrations. Nevertheless, in his own way he continued to promote both cultural and material progress. The university, the library, and the archaeological society were indebted to him for untiring canvassing for support, outside as well as within Greece. He got Edwin Chadwick to make excellent suggestions for a water system for Athens (which were, however, not adopted). 
From June to September 1835 Finlay went as a volunteer under the command of his friend Thomas Gordon to suppress brigandage in central Greece. His journal admirably fills out the brief three-page account of this in his 'History' (7.158-61): Finlay's observant eye took in not only military hazards in a difficult region, but the economic condition of villages and towns and local reaction to Bavarian government, and he could not contain his exuberant appreciation of the splendid mountainous terrain and the striking flora. Like his father, he was a naturalist as well as being concerned with climatic variations and archaeological remains. Finlay's next major expedition was a private venture in 1837 among the islands of the Cyclades with the scholars Ludwig Ross and Karl Ritter. In addition to his usual topographical and archaeological interests he analysed current economic and social conditions island by island, showing that there was prosperity together with widespread discontent with the government. When he was in Athens he explored Attica with problems of classical history in mind, making meticulous notes which were of special interest to his friend the topographer and numismatist W. Martin Leake. 
From 1840 onwards Finlay's major travels were outside the Greek kingdom. He visited Britain and France from 1842 to 1843, missing the threatened rising in Athens in 1843. Then he went to Britain again in 1851 and 1854, when his mother was ill. On all occasions he combined seeing scattered relatives with visits to friends and politicians including Palmerston, to whom he emphasized the pressing needs of Greece. In late 1845 and early 1846 he explored Egypt, Palestine, and Syria, and his journal details travel conditions and local topography, as well as describing the spectacular Egyptian court and shrewdly commenting on the old fox Mehmet Ali. After 1846 Finlay still continued to write up his travels but left nothing like the many informal political comments of earlier journals. From 2 May to 27 July 1850 he visited Ottoman territory in northern Greece and Asia Minor. His journal entry on Trebizond is valuable as a record of material which has since vanished. In the spring of 1853 he went to Rhodes, Kos, Samos, and Chios, making notes on Ottoman administration with a special entry on the monastery Nea Mone in central Chios and its 'hegumenos', who spoke fluent English. In 1858 he was in northern mainland territory, including Volos as well as the islands Skiathos and Skopelos. But his foreign interests centred increasingly on Switzerland, whose constitution he greatly admired. In later life, despite chronic illness, he continued to travel: he visited Vichy and Switzerland in 1859, and Switzerland again in 1868 and 1869, an antiquarian and numismatist as keen as ever and delighted to meet once more his many old friends. 
Finlay's travel journals should not overshadow his activities in Athens. His unceasing concern was to emphasize the need for sound local and central administration with a workable economic system, and from the outset he had pressed for a national bank. From 1836 to 1850 he fought for fair compensation for his land arbitrarily appropriated for royal purposes. He took an active interest in the constant political crises occasioned by Russian-Ottoman relations, the Greek irredentist movement of the Great Idea (of which he disapproved), the Cretan rebellions of 1841 and 1867-9 (which he supported), the Dilessi murders (1870) involving his friends the Noels, and conflicting Slav ambitions in the Balkans (he wrote an extremely well-informed article on the Bulgarian church for 'Blackwood's Magazine'). At the same time Finlay had his place in the everyday life of the community. Though brought up a Presbyterian, he admired 'the divine worship' of the English church service and he took a prominent part in the establishment of the Anglican church of St Paul in Athens. He appreciated a good sermon and when in Geneva or Zurich attended the 'Scotch' church. Though not particularly theologically minded, he could yet enjoy discussing Calvin and Luther with Swiss friends. He freely admitted that he had no aptitude for metaphysics; what most interested him was the nature of the state and the place of justice in the polity. 
Finlay has long been known for his 'History' of the Greek people from 146 BC to AD 1864, providing a particularly valuable contemporary source in volumes 6 and 7 not yet fully exploited. This should be supplemented by the copious material in Athens. Finlay was a keen critic but could also praise. The frequently ignored medieval volumes should not be swept aside as entirely outmoded, as they anticipate certain modern revisions and emphasize the importance of social and economic conditions as distinct from central politics. Letters and reviews received on the publication of the medieval east Mediterranean volumes indicate nineteenth-century interest in the east Roman Empire well before the day of J. B. Bury. 
In the past Finlay has been misrepresented largely because he dramatized himself, belittling his activities, and he was taken at face value particularly by William Miller, who quoted him as declaring, for example, in 1859 that he had 'entirely ceased working' and lived 'in complete retirement' (Finlay MSS, 396). Nothing is further from the truth. Finlay's Swiss journals of 1859, 1868, and 1869 reveal a genial and sociable, though keenly critical companion with a wide circle of friends, busily revising his 'History' and pursuing antiquarian interests. Miller's misleading presentation of Finlay as a 'twice disappointed man' (ibid.) was challenged at the Finlay centenary celebrations, a revision strikingly supported by the subsequent discovery of the Noel-Baker collection of Finlay's letters, 125 of which are to Alice, the daughter of Finlay's friend Edward Noel. These cover her progress from childhood to maturity during the years 1855 to 1873, detail the domestic life of the Finlay and Noel households, and portray a genial if somewhat sardonic man who liked and got on with children and had not been soured by the tragic death of his only child in 1841. At the age of sixty-four he could still enjoy pantomimes, charades, and Christmas parties. There was a very human element behind the scholar, antiquarian, and lifelong philhellene. Finlay died on 26 January 1875 at Hadrianou and was buried in the first cemetery at Athens. 


@@@@@


doc= 9465


Finlay, John (1782-1810), poet, was born to poor parents at Glasgow in December 1782. He was educated in one of the Glasgow academies, and at the age of fourteen entered the university where he studied Latin, Greek, and philosophy. He had as a classmate John Wilson 'Christopher North', who states that he 'distinguished himself above most of his contemporaries' ('Blackwood', 2, 1817-18, 187). While only nineteen and still at the university Finlay published ''Wallace, or, The Vale of Ellerslie', and other Poems' (1802), dedicated to Frances Anna Dunlop, a friend of Robert Burns, which ran into several further editions. Wilson describes it as displaying 'a wonderful power of versification' (ibid., 188) and possessing 'both the merits and defects which we look for in the early compositions of true genius' (ibid., 188). In 1807 Finlay visited London to seek a situation in one of the public offices, and while there he contributed some articles on antiquarian subjects to London magazines. Not finding suitable employment he returned to Glasgow in 1808. In that year he published 'Scottish Historical and Romantic Ballads', mostly old but some original, of which Sir Walter Scott, a correspondent of Finlay, wrote: 'The beauty of some imitations of the old Scottish ballads, with the good sense, learning, and modesty of the preliminary dissertations, must make all admirers of ancient lore regret the early loss of this accomplished young man'. His other publications were an edition of Robert Blair's 'The Grave', a life of Cervantes, and an edition of Adam Smith's 'Wealth of Nations'. He had begun to research a continuation of Warton's 'History of English Poetry' when, in 1810, he left Glasgow to visit Wilson at Ellerlay, Westmorland. On the way he fell ill, and died at Moffat on 8 December, and was buried in the churchyard there. 


@@@@@


doc= 9466


Finlay, Kirkman (supp. c.1802-1828), supposed philhellene, was shot through the head while rallying his men against a sortie of Turks from the fortress of Chios in the Aegean Sea on 29 January 1828, according to his obituary ('GM'); at the time of his death he was said to be 'about twenty-six'. He was said to have been the son of Captain-Lieutenant John Finlay RE, who died at Glasgow in 1802, and brother of George Finlay, and nephew of Provost Kirkman Finlay. He was stated to have gone to Greece to fight in the war of independence, making the acquaintance of Lord Byron, at whose request he had been one of the leaders of an expedition in March 1824 to transport military stores from Missolonghi in support of the rebel chief Odysseus's campaign in the Negropont. Crossing the swollen Phidari River, Finlay was reported to have lost the most valuable part of his baggage and papers, and very nearly his life ('DNB'). 
There is strong negative evidence that this Kirkman Finlay never existed. He has been confused with other members of his family, possibly with his well-known 'uncle', who had agents operating in Greece in the 1820s, and certainly with his 'brother', whose birth, and career in Greece, are well documented, and who did lose his papers in the skirmish at the Phidari. There is doubt also over the attack in Chios in which he was said to have been killed. Z. D. Ferriman carefully examined all the evidence for Kirkman Finlay's career in Greece and found it wanting or confused with that of George Finlay. Kirkman Finlay, he concluded, 'had nothing to do with affairs at Missolonghi'. Ferriman raised serious doubts over his reality, though he scrupulously refrained from dismissing Finlay altogether in case further evidence survived (Ferriman, 65-6). None has been found. The most conclusive evidence against his existence comes from the extensive family papers, accounts, and genealogies, which contain no record of a younger Kirkman. George Finlay, who recalled spending his youth with his cousins at the home of his uncle, Provost Kirkman Finlay, made no mention of a brother. Perhaps, unless new evidence is found, more reliable than the obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of April 1828 which called him into being, 'the second quite imaginary Kirkman Finlay of the 'Dictionary of National Biography' 'who was neither killed in Greece nor born anywhere'' can be safely buried (Fay, 371). 


@@@@@


doc= 9467


Finlay, Kirkman (1773-1842), cotton merchant, was born in April 1773 in the Gallowgate, Glasgow, the second son of James Finlay (1727-1790), a minor Glasgow textile merchant, and his wife, Abigail, 'nee' Whirry, the daughter of an innkeeper at Whitehaven, Cumberland. James Finlay had the foresight to invite Richard Arkwright to Scotland to advise on the erection of spinning mills, and in 1783 he was a founder of the Glasgow chamber of commerce -- the first in Britain. Kirkman Finlay was educated in Glasgow at the grammar school and briefly at the university, and spent six months in Paris in a silk merchant's house before joining his father as a partner in James Finlay & Co., aged only seventeen, as his signature on surviving documents proves -- perhaps in anticipation of his father's death the following year. He raised the annual balance from $11,784 in 1789 to $255,496 in 1800, and increased it steadily thereafter through the manufacture and wholesaling of fine and embroidered muslins and mill-spun yarns to new markets in Europe, the Americas, and India. He bought three large Arkwright-type spinning mills in the west of Scotland, and controlled production vertically from the purchase of cotton in the USA to finishing and marketing. Using the protection of Royal Navy bases he established agents at Heligoland (Patrick Colquhoun) for northern Europe, Gibraltar (John Galt), and Malta (Ritchie and Steuart), who, with four travelling partners, serviced 'upward of 700 correspondents upon the continent of Europe', ranging from St Petersburg through Germany, Spain, Italy, the Levant, Malta, and up the Danube via Turkish Greece to Austria-Hungary. Because of the British blockade of Europe and the Napoleonic Berlin decrees which forbade trade with Britain, much of this trade was doubly illegal. Goods for northern Europe went through the Forth and Clyde Canal to Hull, and from there were forwarded -- smuggled -- by a partner, MacConnel Kennedy & Co., of Manchester. Finlay displaced the board of the Forth and Clyde Canal Company in a takeover in order to facilitate passage of goods from the west of Scotland across the North Sea, and as chairman he printed and distributed to all shareholders the first known annual report and accounts of a British company in a format that became standard. 
From 1806 Finlay opened branches in Charleston, New Orleans, and New York, in partnership with Eason Alston & Co., a Glasgow merchant house engaged in buying raw cotton and selling Glasgow manufactures. He also in 1806 opened a branch of James Finlay & Co. in New Providence, a free port in the Bahamas, to supply South America, which alone made $10,000 profit in its first year. 
In 1812 Finlay used his election as MP for Glasgow burghs and as lord provost of Glasgow, and his status as chairman of the chamber of commerce, as a springboard to attack the trade monopoly of the East India Company. He formed the Glasgow East India Association to promote a national campaign for free trade, and, together with his friend and associate John Gladstone of Liverpool, persuaded government to curb the monopoly of the company and City of London. The cost of government subsidies to the East India Company to offset their territorial gains had not been accompanied by any increase in the company's Indian trade, and five select committees on East Indian affairs had reported inconclusively between 1804 and 1813. Thereafter the renewed charter of the East India Company (1813) permitted licensed free trading from the outports of Britain to compete with the company in India. Finlay and Gladstone immediately fitted out ships. Finlay's 'Earl of Buckinghamshire' was the first ship from the Clyde to India. She sailed in 1816 with Ritchie and Steuart on board to set up a Finlay agency in Bombay; others were later established in Calcutta and Colombo. Two of Finlay's sons followed. To their surprise the initial cargo of Western luxury goods sold badly, but the makeweights of cheap cotton yarns and piece-goods were in great demand. Finlay realized that the potential market for light cottons could not be supplied by indigenous handworkers; his correspondent, Sir Thomas Munro, governor of Madras, confirmed both this and the great demand for cottons. A market greater than Europe opened out. After an initial loss, profits from these sales in India soon exceeded gross sales in all Finlay's other outlets in Europe and North and South America. 
In 1795 Finlay married Janet Struthers, the sister of a Glasgow brewer; they had five sons followed by five daughters. He acquired the large estate of Auchwhillan, and in 1820, to the plans of the architect David Hamilton, built Castle Toward on the shores of the Clyde near Dunoon, where he was a pioneer in large-scale afforestation. His nephew George Finlay the philhellenist recalled a happy childhood there with his Finlay cousins. Finlay was a genial man, popular in social clubs, chairman of the Glasgow Gaelic Society and of the Glasgow Highland Society, which encouraged emigration. He was a JP, rector of Glasgow University, and chairman of the Clyde Navigation Trust. He was also a hard taskmaster in his cotton mills, and campaigned against the 'Ten Hours Act' and the 'Factory Act'. He declared his child workers were privileged as he supplied them with schooling after their day's work of ten hours, and he justified the lower wages paid to mill workers in Scotland, compared with those in Lancashire, because Scotland was healthier and the living cheaper. He put down strikes of textile workers in 1816-17 and 1819-20 with determination, employing spies to gather information about the then illegal trade unions, but not agents to stir trouble. He corresponded closely with Viscount Sidmouth as the Home Office's trusted source of information. However, he always held to the teachings of Adam Smith, and campaigned for freer trade which would lead to fuller employment and better working conditions. His was a brief parliamentary career, as member for Glasgow burghs from 1812 to 1818 and for Malmesbury from 1818 to 1820. Although he declined standing for Glasgow burghs in 1820 and was an unsuccessful candidate for Glasgow in 1830, government continued to consult him on commercial matters throughout his life. On the liberating of the China trade in 1833 he immediately sent a ship (the 'Kirkman Finlay') to Canton (Guangzhou), and opened in York Street the first tea warehouse in Glasgow, in partnership with a commodity broker, William Connel senior. He never traded in opium, a market he considered overstocked. 
Finlay's old age was clouded with religious melancholia and sorrow over the consumption from which his daughters suffered. His youngest daughter was buried with him in Glasgow Cathedral. He died at Castle Toward on 4 March 1842, leaving James Finlay & Co. prosperous but by then static; however, it has continued to diversify and trade from Glasgow under this name to the present. Finlay's epitaph in the 'Glasgow Herald' obituary was 'the beau-ideal of a Glasgow merchant'. 


@@@@@


doc= 9468


Finlayson, George (1790-1823), naturalist, was born at Thurso, Caithness. Nothing is known of his family. He acted as clerk to Dr Somerville, chief of the army medical staff in Scotland, and afterwards to Dr Farrel, chief of the army medical staff in Ceylon, before going to Bengal, where he was attached in 1819 to the 8th light dragoons as assistant surgeon. In 1821-2 he accompanied John Crawfurd's mission to Siam and Cochin China as surgeon and naturalist, returning to Calcutta in 1823. By this time his health was thoroughly broken, and he died soon afterwards on the voyage back to England, of consumption. The journal which he had kept during the mission was edited, with a prefatory notice of the author, by Stamford Raffles, and published as 'The mission to Siam, and Hue, the capital of Cochin China, in the years 1821-2' (1826). Nathaniel Wallich (1785-1854) dedicated a genus of flowering plants -- 'Finlaysonia' -- to his 'very dear friend' and was responsible for distributing the plants which Finlayson had collected during his travels. 


@@@@@


doc= 9469


Finlayson, James (1758-1808), Church of Scotland minister and university teacher, was born on 2 March 1758 at his family's farm at Nether Cambushenie, Dunblane, Perthshire, the eldest son of William Finlayson. He was educated first at a local school in Kinbuck, then at the grammar school in Dunblane, and he began his studies in the University of Glasgow in 1772. He was employed as a private tutor in two families, after which he became an amanuensis to Professor John Anderson. In 1782 he became tutor to two sons of Sir William Murray of Ochtertyre, which enabled him to continue his studies at the University of Edinburgh. Finlayson was licensed to preach in 1785. 
In the same year the duke of Atholl offered Finlayson the living of Dunkeld, which he declined, as it had become likely that the chair of logic in the University of Edinburgh would be offered to him, probably through the efforts of Sir William Murray. After some delay, due to the travels and procrastinations of his predecessor, John Bruce, Finlayson took up the post as its joint holder in the winter session of 1786-7, and as its sole incumbent in 1792, on Bruce's eventual resignation. 
Meanwhile, Finlayson was also offered the living of Borthwick, near Edinburgh, and he was ordained minister of that parish on 6 April 1787. On 29 July 1790 he was presented by the magistrates of Edinburgh to Lady Yester's Church; on 9 January 1794 he succeeded William Robertson at Old Greyfriars Church; and on 14 March 1799, he was appointed by the town council to fill a vacancy in St Giles's Church, Edinburgh as a colleague of Hugh Blair, whose funeral sermon he was called upon to preach less than two years later. Besides Blair's funeral sermon, which was prefixed to some nineteenth-century editions of Blair's popular 'Sermons', Finlayson published another single sermon (1801) and a posthumous collection of sermons (1809). He also printed a pamphlet in 1798 on the establishment of chapels of ease, which was never published. 
This progression of church incumbencies signified increasing recognition of Finlayson's abilities. St Giles's, as the 'Scots Magazine' put it, was 'considered as the most distinguished theatre of pulpit eloquence in Scotland'. Ironically, Finlayson was not considered to be a particularly gifted speaker. He spoke rather monotonously and gave the impression of solidity rather than of brilliance. However, his lucidity, judgement and depth of thought were all greatly admired, whether in the pulpit or in the classroom. He owed his rise within the moderate party in the church to his detailed knowledge of church law and administration, on which he was widely consulted, and which recommended him to the patronage of the Dundas family. The University of Edinburgh conferred on Finlayson the degree of DD on 28 March 1799, and in 1802 he was elected moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. He was also elected king's almoner in the same year, but he resigned this post almost immediately. 
Finlayson was a short, but stout and formidable man, known for his penetrating gaze and gravity of manner. Close friends attested to his kindness and generosity, but others were more struck by his reserve and formality. His diligence was universally acknowledged. In his first parish, Borthwick, he followed Robertson's advice on regular parish visitation, re-establishing it there after a hiatus of nearly thirty years. In the university he was not contented merely to give lectures, as others did, but he regularly taught his students individually as well. 
In 1805 Finlayson's health began to decline. Henry Cockburn, an evangelical who had little liking for Finlayson although he had admired him as a teacher, attributed this to the defeat in March of the moderate party in the election of John Leslie to the chair of mathematics rather than their preferred candidate, Thomas McKnight, since Finlayson had been deeply involved in the politicking over the post. In 1807 he was constrained to accept the assistance of one of his earliest friends, Principal George Baird, who taught his class for the remainder of that session. On 25 January 1808 Finlayson suffered a stroke, which paralysed him, and he died three days later. He was given a public funeral in Dunblane Cathedral, where he was buried, on 2 February 1808. 


@@@@@


doc= 9470


Finleyson, John (1770-1854), disciple of Richard Brothers, was born in Scotland. According to his children he was the second son of Colonel John Hamilton M'Finlay, who about 1765 married Lady Elizabeth Mary Alexander, eldest sister of the fifth and last earl of Stirling. The son was originally a lawyer at Cupar, Fife, and moved from there to Edinburgh. He became convinced of the extravagant claims of the former naval lieutenant Richard Brothers, the 'Revealed Prince of the Hebrews', to be about to restore the Jews to Jerusalem under his own rule. Finlayson printed at Edinburgh a pamphlet in support of Brothers and another on the restoration of the Jews before selling his legal practice for $25,000 and moving to London early in 1798. 
In London Finlayson had a 'considerable practice as a house-agent' and attempted to secure the release of Brothers from a lunatic asylum, which he eventually achieved in 1806. He was responsible for seeing Brothers's works into print during his incarceration; he also drew up and had printed nine large sheets of the ground plan of the New Jerusalem (including its 56 squares, 320 streets, 4 temples, 20 colleges, 47 private palaces, and 16 markets) and twelve sheets of views of its public buildings. In 1808 he married Elizabeth Anne, the daughter of Colonel Basil Bruce, who until his death in 1801 had been (with his father, Stanhope Bruce, vicar of Inglesham) an important follower of Brothers. Brothers persuaded Finlayson to change the spelling of his name by telling him that his ancestors had some 'fine leys' of land granted to them for deeds of valour. Unlike his wife's family, who abandoned Brothers and became followers of Joanna Southcott, Finleyson remained faithful to his master. When, in 1824, Brothers died in Finleyson's house in Upper Baker Street, Marylebone, he made it his dying charge to his friend that he should write against a former disciple, Bartholomew Prescot of Liverpool. This Finleyson did, describing Prescot's 'System of the Universe' as a 'misapprehended mistaken elaborate performance, or book'. 
Finleyson printed a variety of pamphlets reiterating Brothers's views and developing his own peculiar notions of astronomy, for which he claimed a divine origin. The heavenly bodies were created, he thought, partly 'to amuse us in observing them'. The earth he considered to be a perfect sphere, 'not shaped like a garden turnip as the Newtonians make it'; the sun was a created body, 'very different from anything we can make here below', while the stars were 'oval-shaped immense masses of frozen water, with their largest ends foremost'. 
Finleyson was reduced in extreme age to a parish allowance of 3's'. 6died weekly, supplemented by 5's'. from a Mr Busby in whose house Brothers had lived from 1806 to 1815. However, John Mason (a brushmaker), who remained a faithful disciple after the death of Brothers, refused to assist him, but Finleyson persevered in his loyalty to Brothers, publishing several further pamphlets on prophetic subjects, including 'God's Creation of the Universe' (1848) and 'The Last Trumpet' (1849). To Mason's annoyance he even made claims on Brothers's estate. Finleyson's pamphlets are scarce: he deposited his stock with Mason, after whose death it was destroyed. 
Finleyson's wife died in 1848, six years before his own death on 19 September 1854. He was buried in the same grave as Brothers at St John's Wood. Of his ten children the eldest son, Richard Brothers Finlayson, who took the name Richard Beauford, was a photographer at Galway and died there in 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 9471


Finlayson, Thomas (1809-1872), minister of the United Presbyterian church, second son in the large family of Thomas Finlayson, a farmer, was born at Coldoch, Blair Drummond, Perthshire, on 22 December 1809. He received an elementary education at the parish school at Kincardine in Menteith, and then studied classics at a school in Doune, Kilmadock, before entering Glasgow University. Here and at the Divinity Hall of the United Secession church he trained as a minister; he was licensed as a preacher of the gospel in April 1835 by the presbytery of Stirling and Falkirk. Part of his period of study was spent in teaching a school at Dumbarton, where he formed a friendship with the Revd Dr Andrew Somerville, later secretary of the foreign mission of the United Presbyterian church. In November 1835 Finlayson was ordained as minister of the Union Street congregation, Greenock, where he founded a missionary society, and in two years persuaded his people to pay off the large debt of $2500 remaining from building the church. His marriage on 7 and 10 August 1836 to Janet Chrystal of Gargunnock, Stirlingshire, brought them six children. 
After twelve years at Greenock Finlayson was called to be colleague and successor to the Revd John M'Gilchrist of Rose Street Church, Edinburgh; he was inducted to the ministry there in September 1847. The church was an influential one within the Secession and Finlayson soon became a popular figure in it, remarkable for his practical wisdom and open contempt for hypocrisy. He was elected moderator of the supreme court of his church in 1867, and soon afterwards received a DD from the University of Edinburgh. Finlayson devoted much time to ecclesiastic affairs and was an effective fund-raiser. At Rose Street he successfully encouraged his congregation to clear the $2300 debt on their church. An enthusiastic promoter of the manse fund, he was the chief agent in raising $45,000, which led to the spending of $120,000 in building and improving 200 manses. He was also much involved in the management of the augmentation fund, and initiated and organized a scheme for improving ministers' libraries. As a preacher 'he excelled in distinct and powerful exhibition of the truth' (MacEwen, 20): 'his tall, robust frame, his frank open face, [and] the honest ring of his voice' enhanced the impression created by his straightforward and heartfelt sermons (ibid., 13). Whatever he had to say came fresh from his own independent thought, went straight to the heart of the subject, and made an immediate impression on his hearers. 
The early death in 1868 of his eldest son, Thomas, caused Finlayson intense grief, from which he never fully recovered. On 7 October 1872 his congregation celebrated the semi-jubilee (twenty-five years) of his ministry in Edinburgh, presenting him with a gift of $1000. Having gone to Campbeltown to take part in an induction service there, he suffered a heart attack, and was found dead in his bed on 17 October 1872. He was buried in the Grange cemetery, Edinburgh, on 22 October. Two married daughters and one son survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9472


Findbarr mac Amairgin (fl. 6th cent.?), who is commemorated on 25 September in the martyrologies. Findbarr is celebrated in several lives, both Latin and Irish. The two major Latin lives are independent of each other, but derive from a common source that has been dated to the end of the twelfth century and the beginning of the thirteenth. The Irish life was probably composed between 1215 and 1230 and draws on the ultimate common exemplar of the Latin lives. It also contains some other, earlier material. In particular, it depicts the saint as being conceived out of wedlock, a detail glossed over in the Latin lives. In the Irish life the saint's mother is a slavewoman belonging to the king of Eoganacht Raithlind, while his father, Amairgen, is a Connachtman. In all the lives the king plans to kill the couple, but is dissuaded by Findbarr, speaking from the womb. This signals the beginning of the relationship between the Eoganacht kings and the monastery. 


@@@@@


doc= 9473


Findchu mac Finnloga (d. 655/5), son of Finnlug of the Connacht Ui Briuin. His mother, Idnait, was of the Ciannachta. Findchu is celebrated on 25 November in the martyrologies. Most of what is known about the saint comes from his eleventh- or twelfth-century Irish life preserved in the 'Book of Lismore', but originally copied from the lost 'Book of Monasterboice'. According to the life Findchu was baptized by Ailbe, studied with Comgall ['see under 'Ulster, saints of], and succeeded the latter as abbot of Bangor, before eventually founding his own monastery in Fir Maige. The life celebrates Findchu's dealings with all of the Irish provinces, rather than the local doings of Fir Maige. The saint fosters the son of a Leinster king, defeats the Ui Chennselaig, enables a Desi king to go to heaven, and saves Munster from both an Ulster and an Ui Neill invasion. He anachronistically defeats foreigners, characters inspired by the vikings, in Connacht. Findchu is represented as having dealings with several Eoganacht kings, but most especially with Cairpre Crom. Findchu's amazing austerities form another leitmotif of the text. The life, however, seems incomplete and contains no account of the saint's death. There are at least two conflicting traditions. The annals of Inisfallen simply record his death in 655, while the annals of the four masters include him among the many clerics who died from the great plague, the 'buide Conaill' in 665. Of the church of Bri Gobann little remains. Its round tower was destroyed in 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 9474


Finnerty, Peter (c.1766-1822), journalist, was born in Loughrea, co. Galway, the son of a tradesman. Trained as a printer in Dublin, in the late 1790s Finnerty became involved with the United Irishmen. The creation of a radical press was a central platform of their policies. In September 1797 Arthur O'Connor had founded 'The Press', the newspaper of the Dublin United Irishmen which was run with help from Lord Edward Fitzgerald, Thomas Emmet, and William Drennan. 'The Press' provided support to the movement's republicanism by printing the publications of the London Corresponding Society and the activities of United Irishmen in England. However, 'The Press' never had the success of the other United Irishmen paper, the 'Northern Star', probably because its focus was narrower and it tended to be moralistic. 
Finnerty was registered in Dublin as nominal printer and publisher of 'The Press' in September 1797. On 31 October he was arrested for printing a seditious libel and was imprisoned in Dublin's Newgate. At his trial the court was told that he had published a letter signed Marcus which criticized the conviction and execution of William Orr, a presbyterian farmer, for administering the United Irish oath to a private in the Fifeshire fencibles. Finnerty refused to divulge the letter-writer's real name. His counsel, who spoke eloquently in his defence, was John Philpot Curran, who had defended William Drennan in 1794. On 23 December Finnerty was found guilty and was sentenced to two years' imprisonment, fined $20, and bound to give security for future good behaviour for the next seven years. He was also made to stand in a pillory for an hour outside the sessions house in Dublin, where he was supported by a large crowd of sympathizers. After having served the whole of his sentence he went to London, where he wrote for the 'Morning Chronicle' as a parliamentary reporter for over twenty years. The 'Chronicle' was a whig paper, owned and edited by James Perry, who had pioneered the publication of extended parliamentary reporting and whose contributors included William Hazlitt, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and David Ricardo. 
In London Finnerty became part of the group of Irishmen exiled to England after the rebellion of 1798 who worked to keep alive the links with United Irishmen in France and Ireland. In 1802 Finnerty and others involved in preparations for a rising in London fled to Ireland in the wake of the arrest of Colonel Despard. By 1805, however, Finnerty had returned to London and was one of many Irishmen in England who supported constitutional agitation under the leadership of Sir Francis Burdett. At the invitation of Sir Home Popham, in 1809 he went as special correspondent on the ill-starred Walcheren expedition. (For his assignment during this action it is possible that he was the first accredited war correspondent, preceding William Howard Russell by fifty years.) His reports to the 'Morning Chronicle' describing the incompetent handling of the expedition led to his arrest, and he was transported back to England. In a letter to the 'Morning Chronicle' printed on his return Finnerty described the expedition and his rejection of the proposition by Lord Chatham and Sir Richard Strachan (leader of the expedition) that they should censor his reports before publication. He accused Lord Castlereagh of attempting to silence him. He also accused Castlereagh of harsh treatment of the Irish people. In February 1811 Finnerty was put on trial for libelling Castlereagh, sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment in Lincoln gaol, and required to provide substantial securities for good behaviour for five years. In March 1811 Percy Bysshe Shelley, soon to be expelled from Oxford University, published his poem 'Poetical Essay on the Existing State of Things'; the poem, which was discovered in 2006 and made public by the Bodleian Library in 2015, included a declaration that it was written for 'ASSISTING TO MAINTAIN IN PRISON, MR. PETER FINNERTY, IMPRISONED FOR A LIBEL'. In June 1811 Finnerty petitioned the House of Commons about his treatment in prison, and in the debate Sir Francis Burdett, Sir Samuel Romilly, and Brougham spoke strongly in his support. Finnerty's courage in his own defence attracted popular sympathy, and when he was released he was given $2000 which had been raised by public subscription. In 1819 he narrowly avoided arrest once again for taking notes of a debate while in the gallery of the House of Commons. 
Despite his radical tendencies, Finnerty was felt to be an irritant in the side of not only the authorities but also his fellow journalists, who were not sorry to see his removal from the 'Morning Chronicle'. Finnerty died on 11 May 1822 at Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 9475


Finney, Samuel (1719-1798), miniature painter, was born at Wilmslow, Cheshire, in late January or early February 1719 and was baptized in Wilmslow, at the church of St Bartholomew, on 9 February 1719. He was the eldest son of Samuel Finney ('b'. 1696, died after 1764), gentleman, of Fulshaw, Wilmslow, Cheshire, and Esther (1699-1748), daughter of Ralph Davenport of Chorley, who had married at Fulshaw on 29 April 1718. In later life Finney wrote an autobiographical account and a history of his family in 'An historical survey of the parish of Wilmslow' (MS, Chester Archive). His collected letters, both by Finney and to him, including some from his father, who later emigrated to America, are included in the Finney of Fulshaw MSS (Ches. & Chester ALSS). 
Like most British miniaturists at this date Finney was self-taught and took up miniature painting only as an adult. He was educated at Chesterfield grammar school, after which he first trained as an attorney and was admitted in the court of the king's bench. However, a failed partnership left him without funds and disillusioned with the law. On a holiday with an uncle he took up drawing and attempted a portrait in 'Indian Ink', which 'acquired the applause of the beholders' (Finney, 'Autobiographical account', 267-87). From this success he resolved to attempt portraiture as his profession. 
Finney's 'Historical survey' traces his efforts to learn his art by copying miniatures and to establish himself professionally in the years before public exhibitions offered an easy channel to an audience. He first visited Bath, a 'polite watering place', where he advertised his services in the 'Bath Journal' of 25 April 1748. In the same year he moved back to London with his wife, Martha Foster (died 1779), whom he had probably married in 1747. In his account he carefully notes his successes as well as the improvements in his earnings and in the couple's social standing. They frequently upgraded their lodgings and eventually took their own house in Leicester Fields as well as summer lodgings at Richmond, and added 'a Man Servant in livery to their Maid' (Finney, 'Autobiographical account', 287-313). 
Finney referred to himself as a gentleman, and his career was driven by his desire to acquire sufficient funds to reclaim family property, including Fulshaw Hall in Wilmslow, Cheshire, and to re-establish himself in his family's former sphere of influence. In 1769 his perception of the increased competition in miniature painting, the onset of gout, and a successful conclusion to his business arrangements at Fulshaw led to his retirement. Finney resided for nearly thirty years in Fulshaw and was appointed justice of the peace. In a letter of 1779 to Gabriel Mathias he commented that his 'Employment has been [these ten years] in the ruder works of Agriculture, which raise a very different set of Ideas in the mind than the practice of the polite Arts' (Finney, MS correspondence, DFF/34/3). He finally sold his artists' materials in 1777. 
Finney's autobiographical writings and his letters provide a fascinating insight into miniature painting in the 1750s and 1760s. He notes fellow miniaturists Gervase Spencer and Jeremiah Meyer, admiring the former and disliking the latter, whom he called 'that rascal Miers' (Finney, 'Autobiographical account', 385-411). Like them Finney worked in watercolour on ivory and in enamel. He took up enamel painting because he felt that other artists' interest in watercolour on ivory was increasing, leading to a threatening level of competition. Additionally he recognized that watercolour faded and that 'deceitful' watercolour would not ensure his reputation in the future, as would enamels; certainly, despite his prolific output, few of his miniatures have survived or are recognized today as his work. The Victoria and Albert Museum, London, has one miniature by him, a portrait of Queen Charlotte, which, as Finney predicted, has faded. It is none the less an elegant and accomplished work. 
Finney claimed that he taught himself enamel painting, but it is possible that he received technical instruction in that complex art from his friend George Robertson, who was a jeweller. In 1763 he was appointed 'enamel and miniature painter to her majesty', for which he received a salary, in return for his regular attendance at court, and a pension on his retirement. Interestingly Finney noted that the court could find no previous record of an appointment as 'miniature painter'; both court and artist clearly were unaware of the older term of limner. 
Finney's writings also provide a first-hand record of the dramatic changes in the London art world in the 1760s. He exhibited miniatures at the second exhibition of the Society of Artists in 1761, and in 1765 he exhibited a miniature of Queen Charlotte. He was a member of the Incorporated Society of Artists. He was friends with a number of artists, such as Edward Penny and Thomas Hudson, and was also a member of the Turk's Head Society. He died at Fulshaw Hall in 1798 and was buried at Wilmslow. He was survived by his second wife, Ann ('nee' Barlow), whom he had married in 1793. 


@@@@@


doc= 9476


Finnian mac Findloga (d. 549/51), whose feast day is celebrated on 12 December. His pedigree, as given in the genealogies of the saints, attached him to the descendants of Celtchair mac Uithechair, one of the Ulster heroes who provided popular ancestors for saints of uncertain lineage. His obit's ascription of him to a group (what Adomnan called a 'gens') Dal or Corcu Thelduib is paralleled in the ascription of Bishop Colman moccu Thelduib, abbot of Clonard (died 654) to the same people. If the Finnian of Clonard were merely one local manifestation of the Ulster saint Findbarr moccu Fiatach ['see under 'Ulster, saints of], as has been argued, it would be necessary to suppose that he was called 'moccu Thelduib' as a consequence of later connections, illustrated by the obit of Bishop Colman, between Clonard and Dal Thelduib. 


@@@@@


doc= 9477


Fintan (d. 603?) was the founder and patron saint of Clonenagh (Cluain Ednech or Ednig), situated in the territory of the Loigsi (partially represented by the modern co. Laois). Although Fintan's eighth-century life gave his father a different name (Cremthann, Crumthann) from the one in the genealogies (Gabrine or Gabren), all were agreed that, by paternal descent, he was of the Fothairt, a scattered people, principally of Leinster, to which Brigit was also believed to belong. The family background of his mother, Findnait, is unknown. Fintan belonged to the same generation of monastic founders as Columba of Iona and Cainnech of Aghaboe. His short life has as one of its principal concerns the situating of the saint in relation to these other monastic leaders of his generation. Thus, in his infancy, Columba of Iona is said by the life to have prophesied his greatness. This may be a reaction, in part, to the close friendship, attested in Adomnan's life of Columba, between the founder of Iona and another saint of the Loigsi, Bishop Colman moccu Loigse, connected with a church a few miles to the east of Clonenagh. St Cainnech of Aghaboe (only about 8 miles to the south-west of Clonenagh, but in the neighbouring kingdom of Osraige) is likewise shown as an ally; yet he also appears as the leader of a delegation seeking to persuade Fintan to relax the severity of his monastic rule. 


@@@@@


doc= 9478


Finten (fl. 7th cent.), whose feast day is 21 October, was the founder of Tech Munnu (Taghmon, co. Wexford). His four extant lives, all depending on a common original, say that his father, Tailchan, was of the Cenel Conaill (a branch called the Cenel mBoguine, south co. Donegal) and his mother, Fedelm, of the Ui Maine, a people on the River Shannon in the midlands, part of which was absorbed by the Ui Neill. The historically most important part of the biographical information on Finten shows few anachronisms and reflects political relationships in the mid-eighth century among the Fothairt, the Sil Maeluidir, the Sil Cormaic, and the monastery of Taghmon. 


@@@@@


doc= 9479


Firbank, Joseph (1819-1886), railway contractor, was born at Bishop Auckland on the south-western edge of the north-east coalfield, the son of Ralph Firbank (1788-1866), a Durham miner, and his wife, Barbara, 'nee' Thompson (1790-1874). At the age of seven he was sent to work in a colliery, and attended a night school. In 1833 he obtained employment on the permanent way, and in 1841 secured a sub-contract in connection with the Woodhead Tunnel on the railway from Sheffield to Manchester. In 1845 and 1846 he took similar contracts on the Midland Railway. 
The local opposition to railway construction on the part of the aristocracy and landed gentry was so great at this time that on one occasion Firbank was captured while surveying the line and kept a prisoner for twenty-four hours. In 1848 he was engaged on the Rugby and Stamford branch of the London and North Western Railway and lost most of his savings by the bankruptcy of the former contractor of the line. He married, in 1848, Sarah (1820/21-1854), widow of George Fryatt and daughter of William Black, innkeeper and grazier, of Melton Mowbray; they had two sons and a daughter. 
Firbank's first large contract was offered by the Monmouthshire Railway and Canal Company in 1854, following a decision to transform all of the company's mineral tramways and canals into passenger railways. He was recommended by Charles Liddell, the company's engineer, with whom he had worked on the London and North Western Railway contract, and he also took the contracts for maintaining the canals in the town of Newport and for the maintenance of the lines for seven years. The latter contract was renewed continually until the company was absorbed by the Great Western Railway. In 1855 he married his deceased wife's sister, Isabella Black (1829/30-1889), with whom he had two daughters and seven sons. 
Firbank established his home at Newport, where he formed a close friendship with Crawshaw Bailey, the ironmaster, who supported him financially in his early undertakings. He was employed in South Wales for thirty years. In 1856 Firbank undertook a contract for the widening of the London and North Western Railway near London, and between 1859 to 1866 was engaged upon a number of contracts for the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway. He was also engaged upon the Midland Company's Bedford and London extension from 1864 until 1868. Liddell was the consulting engineer for this line and it was on his recommendation that Firbank was awarded contracts no. 2 and no. 3 in the vicinity of Kentish Town and the Brent Viaduct. At the height of constructional activity in 1866, Firbank was employing two thousand men, a figure which rose further when he took over the fourth contract from the Waring brothers. In overall terms, the extension gave rise to considerable engineering difficulties and ultimately cost the Midland more than $3 million. 
In 1870, in consequence of the quality of his work on the London-based contracts, Firbank was engaged as contractor on the Smardale to Newbiggin section of the Settle and Carlisle extension of the Midland Railway, a stretch of line noted for its impressive physical features and geographic isolation. In the face of appalling weather conditions and difficulties of access at least one contractor retired from the project. Firbank completed his work, however, having taken on further responsibilities involving a junction with the North Eastern Railway. After completing this onerous contract Firbank was engaged in the construction of the Birmingham west suburban section of the Midland Railway, a complex undertaking in view of idiosyncratic local geography and the density of human settlement in the area. 
In 1884 Firbank built the St Pancras goods depot of the Midland Railway. The last contract taken by him was for the Bournemouth direct line from Brockenhurst to Christchurch. It proved to be the most troublesome of all his undertakings, and was finally completed by his son. In all, forty-nine lines were constructed by Firbank from 1846 to 1886. Some of them were of decisive importance in extending the railway network of Victorian Britain and his contribution places him in the first rank of railway contractors in company with such towering figures as Thomas Brassey and Samuel Morton Peto. Throughout his career Firbank was a generous and sympathetic employer, anxious to promote the welfare of those whom he employed and to mitigate the worst efforts of their exposure to harsh physical conditions. This was exemplified in the hutted encampment, embracing shops, hospital, reading room, and coffee house, erected in connection with his contract on the Settle and Carlisle line. 
Firbank was assisted in his work, first by his nephew, Ralph, and subsequently by his eldest son, Joseph Thomas Firbank. Ralph Firbank established his own contracting business in 1877, but died five years later, aged forty-six. Joseph Thomas Firbank (1850-1910) was educated at Cheltenham College, served as the Conservative MP for Hull East from 1895 and was knighted in 1910; his son was the novelist Ronald Firbank. 
Firbank died at his home, St Julian's, Christchurch, near Newport, on 29 June 1886. He was described by Samuel Laing as 'an excellent specimen of the class of Englishmen who rise up not so much by any transcendent talents, as by intelligence and energy', and above all by a scrupulous 'honesty, inspiring confidence' ('DNB'). He was tireless in his work, retiring to bed by nine o'clock and rarely rising later than five. His business acumen was considerable. He was a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant for the county of Monmouth. Both of these posts, as well as the office of high sheriff, were also filled by his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 9480


Firebrace, Sir Henry (1619/20-1691), court official, was the sixth son of Robert Firebrace of Derby, successively clerk in the households of Sir Robert Bradbourne and the Roper family of Heanor, Derbyshire, and Susan, daughter of Thomas Jerome, yeoman, of Kegworth, Leicestershire. He was a foundation scholar of Repton School, which he left in 1633. Shortly afterwards his father took the family to London and he was apprenticed in turn to the scriveners Richard Green of All Hallows Barking by the Tower and Richard Rochdale, to whom he was still bound in January 1643. Through her marriage his sister Rebecca had become related to Basil Feilding, second earl of Denbigh and in June 1643 Firebrace was appointed secretary to Denbigh's parliamentarian council of war. 
Firebrace's later narrative of his career records that he had been 'of service' to Charles I at Uxbridge, presumably at the negotiations which opened there in January 1645. In June 1645 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Daniel Dowell, yeoman, of Stoke Golding, Leicestershire, a young woman employed in Denbigh's service. During 1646 the couple seem to have remained with the earl's household at Queen Street, Covent Garden. In March he petitioned parliament for $325 in arrears and expenses for the period up to Denbigh's resignation in April 1645. He was in attendance on Denbigh when the earl arrived in Newcastle on 23 January 1647 as one of the parliamentarian commissioners to receive the person of the king. By his own account the king ordered him 'to... make my application to some of the commissioners that I might be admitted to attend his majesty as one of the pages of his bedchamber, in which I prevailed', almost certainly due to Denbigh's influence. He was able to use the trust in which he was held to appear to combine household duties with those of a guard, while his real role was as a smuggler of correspondence for the king and in the organization of escape plans. 
Firebrace was continuously in attendance on the king during 1647. On 11 November he removed himself from guarding the back stairs while Charles escaped on horseback from his quarters at Hampton Court. With the king again under guard on the Isle of Wight he travelled to London to arrange the transit of messages and, reunited with Charles, was able to deliver 'several dispatches, every week, and conveyed his safely away' (Firebrace, 255). Over the following months several escape attempts were made. On 20 March 1648 the king intended to depart through the window in his bedchamber which contained a central bar; Firebrace feared it would make the opening too narrow. He was proved right for the king stuck fast, unable to press his chest through the gap, or even to withdraw from it. The attempt led to a tightening of security. Ordered to leave Carisbrooke, Firebrace continued to work for the king's escape, and secured nitric acid to dislodge the window bar for an attempt launched on 28 May. Sentries were bribed and plans made for a ship to Holland but at the last moment the plan collapsed. He continued to organize communication between king and supporters and on 21 August his name appeared on the king's list of proposed attendants at Newport and, remarkably, was accepted by parliament. On 29 November, following Charles's rejection of the army proposals and the replacement of Colonel Hammond as commander on the island, he urged the king to take a boat and 'commit yourself to the mercy of the seas, where God will preserve you: and trust not yourself in the hands of those merciless villains who I fear this night will murder you'. Charles rejected his advice. 
Firebrace was not able to accompany the king to Windsor, though he may have been involved in a last attempt to rescue him from St James's Palace in January 1649. A diamond ring, containing a portrait of the king, which passed into the possession of the earls of Denbigh was, according to tradition, given to Firebrace by Charles as he mounted the scaffold. After the execution he returned to the service of Denbigh, who had accepted appointment to the new council of state. When Denbigh retired to Warwickshire in 1651 he accompanied him, acting as secretary and residing at nearby Stoke Golding. 
In May 1660 Firebrace journeyed to London to seek preferment. According to Charles I, whose wishes were conveyed to his son via Bishop Juxon, he was 'a person very faithful and serviceable to him in his greatest extremities' and deserving of favour (Firebrace, 205). He was admitted to the royal household as third clerk of the kitchen in the board of green cloth on 20 July, promoted second clerk in January 1661 (in which capacity he attended the coronation) and chief clerk in early 1667. In 1664 he married Alice (died in or before 1675), daughter of Richard Bagnall, a gentleman usher at court; they moved several times in London, maintaining a permanent residence only at Stoke Golding. In 1677 he was granted a patent of arms and was made assistant warden on the office of green cloth by warrant dated 23 August 1680. 
In 1685 Firebrace married his third wife, Mary (died 1688), daughter of Richard Sergeant of the royal wine cellar. Of his four known sons, all from his first marriage, Henry became dean of Trinity College, Cambridge. Basil, vintner and purveyor of wines to the royal household, was sheriff of London in 1687 and MP for Chippenham in 1690, and was created a baronet in 1698; he went bankrupt in 1707, suffered imprisonment for stabbing a creditor, and died in 1724 unable to recover his fortunes. His father had been appointed clerk controller-in-ordinary of the board of green cloth on 14 March 1685 and chief controller on 12 July; he was knighted before 2 April 1685. He retired, aged sixty-nine, shortly after the accession of William III and died on 27 January 1691. He was buried on 3 February in the chancel of St Margaret's, Stoke Golding, where a marble monument was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 9481


Firmin, Giles (1613/14-1697), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Ipswich, Suffolk, the son of Giles Firmin, an apothecary of Sudbury in the same county, and Martha Dogget, who was related to John Winthrop, afterwards governor of Massachusetts. He underwent a spiritual conversion 'when he was a School-Boy' as a result of the preaching of the renowned puritan John Rogers of Dedham, Essex (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.297-8). He matriculated from Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 24 September 1629, where his tutor was Thomas Hill, afterwards master of Trinity College, Cambridge. However, he did not graduate, turning instead to the study of medicine. On 8 April 1632, aged eighteen, he sailed from Southampton with his father to New England, landing at Boston on 26 May. There he practised medicine. He returned to England in 1633, but arrived back in New England in June 1637. In 1638 he was ordained a deacon of the First Church, Boston, of which John Cotton was minister, and he was present at the excommunication of the antinomian Anne Hutchinson. In January 1639 he moved to Ipswich, Massachusetts, where he was granted 100 acres of land, and that year he married Susanna, the daughter of Nathaniel Ward, then pastor of the church at Ipswich and afterwards rector of Shenfield, Essex. He returned to England in the autumn of 1644, surviving shipwreck on the coast of Spain, when, Calamy reports (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.295), his four-year-old daughter, who had remained with her mother in New England, was distressed by an intimation of his danger of drowning. He was preaching at Colchester in 1645. In 1648 he received presbyterian ordination from Daniel Rogers, Stephen Marshall, and others, and became vicar of Shalford, Essex. 
In the summer of 1654, prompted by the publication of Richard Baxter's 'Apology', in which Baxter expressed (pt 1, p. 106) his high regard for the 'Candour, Ingenuitie, Moderation, Love & Peace' of Firmin's 'Separation Examined' (1651), he wrote to Baxter, to whose 'learned & godly workes' he professed himself no stranger (Keeble and Nuttall, letter 192). He lamented that in Essex 'wee are the deadest County in all the Nation, Gospel-glutted professors' and regretted the lack of church discipline evident in the promiscuous giving of the Lord's supper and the willingness of ministers to baptize the children of parents whose profession of faith was contradicted by their ungodly lives, a practice which he argued against in 'A Serious Question Stated' (1651). Although in his 'Gangraena' (1646) the presbyterian Thomas Edwards had printed letters of August 1645 which claimed that 'Mr. 'F'. an Apothecary Physitian of 'New England'' (Edwards, 1.101) was an Independent opponent of presbyterian domination, Firmin was no friend to congregationalism. Committed to the ideal of a parochial national church, he was dismayed by the spread of what he regarded as separatist principles. In 'Of Schism, Parochial Congregations in England, and Ordination by Imposition of Hands' (1658) he defined (and reproved) schism as 'causeless separation from a particular Church' (p. 3), in contradiction of the view of John Owen, the leading congregationalist, in his 'A Review of the True Nature of Schisme' (1657), that it consisted rather in division between the members of a particular church. In the 1650s Firmin actively promoted a voluntary association of ministers in Essex along the lines of the Worcestershire association established by Richard Baxter. 'The Agreement of the Associated Ministers of... Essex' was published in 1658. 
In 1660, apprehensive about the possibility of an episcopalian ecclesiastical settlement following the Restoration, Firmin wrote to Baxter that 'so they will not force me to owne their power as being of Divine Authoritie, I will not oppose them' (Keeble and Nuttall, letter 660). However, while he could accept modified episcopacy, Firmin could not accept prelatical exclusivity. He argued for the validity of presbyterian orders in 'Presbyterial Ordination Vindicated' (1660) and, many years later in his anonymous 'The Questions between the Conformist and Nonconformist' (1681), distinguished between the 'episcopus praeses' (presiding bishop) who served in the apostolic church 'when Elders in a particular Church were multiplied', and the unacceptable 'episcopus princeps' (pre-eminent, imperial or lordly bishop) which 'is 'our' Case', with 'Superiority of power above 'Presbyters'' (pp. 103-4). In 'The Liturgical Considerator Considered' (1661), a reply to John Gauden's 'Considerations Touching the Liturgy' (1661), Firmin argued against the imposition of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. When the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662 required of ministers both episcopal ordination and subscription to the prayer book, Firmin left the established church, retiring to Ridgewell, Essex, where he again practised medicine. 
Although he regularly held conventicles and was 'a Constant and Laborious Preacher; both on the Lord's Days, and on Week Days too', though not at the time of the monthly sermon in the parish church, which he attended as an auditor (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.296), Firmin was not molested by the authorities, for he enjoyed 'the Favour and Respect' of 'the Neighbouring Gentry and Justices of Peace... on the Account of their using him as Physician' (ibid.). Following the publication of Charles II's declaration of indulgence in 1672 he was licensed in April as a presbyterian teacher at the house of Thomas Bryon in Ridgewell, and in December in his own home there. In July the home of Daniel Ray, the ejected vicar of Ridgewell, was also licensed as a presbyterian meeting-place. Calamy says that in 1672 he and Firmin 'set up a Meeting' at Ridgewell 'together' (ibid., 2.304), but the following year Ray moved to Burstall, Suffolk, and Firmin remained in charge of the single presbyterian congregation at Ridgewell until his death. 
Firmin 'was eminent for the Oriental tongues, well read in the Fathers, Schoolmen and Church History, and the Controversies with 'Papists, Socinians, Arminians'' but, in Calamy's view, 'he did most excel in Practical Divinity' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.297), as evidenced by his 'The Real Christian' (1670). This treatise on conversion, sincerity, and assurance took issue with the introspective thrust of the main puritan tradition and with the formulation of stages of conversion and marks of assurance by such practical English and New England divines as William Perkins, Thomas Hooker, Thomas Shepard, Daniel Rogers, and John Rogers. Firmin argued that faith is compatible with imperfection and uncertainty, and reproved their over-insistence on the scrupulous performance of duties, making (he claimed) those 'no Christians' who failed to meet their standards (Firmin, 'The Real Christian', 311). Among his targets in 'The Real Christian' was Baxter's advice on meditation in 'The Saints Everlasting Rest' (1650) which Firmin held to be 'too strict' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.102, para. 224). Baxter, who would have preferred to conduct the controversy by private letter, replied in 'The Duty of Heavenly Meditation' (1671), to which Firmin responded in 'Meditations upon Mr. Baxter's Review of his Treatise' (1672), still maintaining that Baxter made 'Gospel-Conversion, and Gospel-Conversation' 'more 'difficult' than God hath made them' (Firmin, 'Meditations', 2). In a letter occasioned by this exchange Baxter describes Firmin as 'a man more sound in judgment than most Divines of the age you live in' (Keeble and Nuttall, letter 852). 
In 1693 Firmin was drawn into the controversies which led to the breakup of the 'Happy Union' between presbyterians and congregationalists, writing against the congregational Richard Davis's 'Truth and Innocency Vindicated' [1692] in his 'Brief Review of Mr. Davis's Vindication' (1693). Firmin died (presumably at Ridgewell) in April 1697; no will is known. Both his sons attended Cambridge University and conformed, Nathaniel ('b'. 1648/9) becoming a physician and Giles ('b'. 1650/51) an ordained minister in the established church. 


@@@@@


doc= 9482


Firmin, Thomas (1632-1697), philanthropist, was born in Ipswich in June 1632. His father, Henry Firmin, a butcher, and his wife, Prudence, were both puritans and parishioners of the like-minded Samuel Ward, who, as town preacher, preached at St Mary-le-Tower three times weekly from 1605 to 1635, when he was silenced by Archbishop William Laud and Bishop Matthew Wren. In 1635 Henry Firmin appeared before the high commission court accused of erroneous beliefs and was interrogated by Laud. A posthumous vindication of his son was to note that Thomas Firmin 'looked on liberty of conscience to be the birth right of every Christian' ('The Charitable Samaritan', 9), and the memory of his father's tribulations may well have been the root cause of such a conviction. 
Firmin was an intelligent boy and was apprenticed to a London mercer. His noticeable speed and easy disposition in serving customers earned him the nickname Spirit, and both characteristics were precursors of the abilities in commerce and welfare he showed in later years. His honesty was proven when another apprentice who had accused Firmin of stealing $5 later confessed his guilt. Firmin mastered shorthand and used it to transcribe sermons; from this activity he gained his knowledge and understanding of theological matters. With his master he regularly attended the services of John Goodwin, the Independent Arminian, then at St Stephen's, Coleman Street, and as a result lost the strict Calvinism of his early upbringing. A story that tells of Firmin interceding with Cromwell on behalf of John Biddle, 'the father of English Unitarians', during his apprenticeship seems apocryphal. Firmin certainly knew Biddle before the latter's banishment to the Scilly Isles in 1655, and looked after him in his later illness. Biddle was to have a great influence on Firmin, convincing him of the unscriptural nature of the doctrine of the Trinity, and of the need for investigation into the state of the poor as a necessary concomitant to almsgiving. 
At some time during the later years of the Commonwealth Firmin set up his own business as girdler and mercer with an initial capital of $100. He opened a shop at 3 King's Court in Lombard Street. During this period he also began to make the acquaintance of several key religious and lay figures. Well before 1660 Firmin was entertaining those who were to have a powerful influence on shaping the post-Restoration Church of England. Men such as Benjamin Whichcote, John Worthington, Christopher Fowler, and John Tillotson were regularly to be found at his table. His largess was helped considerably by his first marriage, to a citizen's daughter, in 1660, which brought with it a dowry of $500. 
Firmin had been convinced by Biddle that in dealing with the poor remote almsgiving alone was insufficient. The poor also needed to be visited and the true nature and cause of their condition understood. These visits helped Firmin to see the problem of poverty in a more enlightened way. He realized, unlike many of his contemporaries, that many of the poor suffered their miserable condition not through idleness or choice but because of forces outside their control. He also became firmly convinced that providing work for the poor was a better way to deal with their plight than providing doles which left them dependent, despondent, and prone to begging. His consistent exertions on behalf of the poor were to earn him the epithet of 'almoner-general' among his contemporaries. 
Firmin's first wife, with whom he had a son and a daughter, died in 1662 while he was away on business in Cambridge. On 23 February 1664 he married Margaret (1641/2-1719), daughter of Giles Dent of Newport, Essex. A year later Firmin and his family had to flee London in wake of the great plague. On his return he began his first major experiment in philanthropy. The plague had caused great disruption to trade, and Firmin sought to provide work in clothing manufacture for those affected by the consequent unemployment. It was the only one of his philanthropic ventures which did not make a loss, although, as he himself argued in his only known pamphlet, profitability was to be considered of secondary importance when compared with eradicating the evils of idleness and begging, and subsidized loss was to be preferred to alternatives which provided no return at all. 
In the great fire of 1666 Firmin lost his Lombard Street premises to the flames, but he was able to operate out of temporary premises in Leadenhall Street until they were rebuilt. He seems to have suffered no long-term damage to his business, and the 1670s saw him expand his philanthropic ventures considerably. Having realized that poverty resulted in the deprivation of both food and warmth, about 1670 he began a project to stockpile coal and corn to be sold to the poor at a reasonable price in times of need. It is not clear how long this venture was maintained, nor what success, if any, it experienced. More is known about the other philanthropic activities which were to occupy him for the last three decades of his life. 
The noted Bristol philanthropist Thomas Gouge was a frequent visitor to Firmin's house, and the two men worked together on a number of projects including financing the publication of the 'Bible' in Welsh and arranging for the printing and distribution of 10,000 copies of a simple scripture catechism. With the example and encouragement of Gouge, Firmin developed several schemes aimed at providing work for the poor. In 1676 he started a workhouse in Little Britain to give employment in the linen trade. The employees were well treated, their wages complemented by doles of coal, and their children given a basic education. Firmin was however opposed to any curriculum aimed at bringing the liberal arts to his charges: the children of the poor, especially those who came to the workhouse, were to receive an education that was to be purely vocational and geared to fitting them for their station in life. Firmin was firmly convinced that home working was to be encouraged wherever possible, and his 'Some Proposals for the Imploying of the Poor' (1678), based on his experience, is in part a refutation of those who questioned the wisdom and practicalities of such a proposal. The project in Little Britain was never a financial success, and Firmin seems to have lost over $200 per annum during its period of operation. An attempt at woollen manufacture, a more profitable enterprise than linen manufacture, was abandoned because of a shortage of skills among his workforce. Attempts to widen these ventures through a London-wide Corporation of the Poor eventually failed, but a clear indication of Firmin's standing and recognized expertise is given in the fact that in 1696 the Board of Trade was keen to solicit his advice on various employment projects. 
From the time of his visits to John Biddle and John Knowles ('fl'. 1646-1668) during their periods of incarceration, Firmin had become very aware of the conditions prevailing in prisons and the unscrupulous and rapacious demands of warders. He was keen that the rights of prisoners should be upheld and on more than one occasion initiated prosecutions against gaolers for extortion. He also helped sponsor parliamentary bills for the relief of prisoners held because of minor debts. 
Firmin was an original member of the Society for the Reformation of Manners. His biographer notes that he could not abide swearing or foul language and would 'fine' those who uttered such words in his presence, using the money for his various ventures to alleviate the sufferings of the poor. His skills were recognized in his appointment as one of the governors of Christ's Hospital in 1675 and his election as a common councilman about the same time. Firmin was an indefatigable worker for Christ's Hospital, and in conjunction with his friend Sir Robert Clayton inaugurated several improvements in the fabric of the building, as well as providing some of the finance for these changes. His Sunday evenings were frequently spent in the company of the scholars of the foundation. Further recognition of Firmin's merits came with his appointment as a governor of St Thomas's Hospital in 1693. His business acumen and shrewdness also led to him being named several times as a collector of taxes. 
Firmin seems to have been a whig in politics, and it was almost certainly this identification that cost him his governorship of Christ's Hospital in 1683, although he was reinstated in 1688. At the time of the exclusion crisis Firmin was well known for his opposition to the duke of York. He was held briefly on suspicion of having taken part in a plot to oust James II but was quickly released without charge. He greeted the accession of William and Mary with relief and enthusiasm. 
If Firmin was happy to see charity begin at home he was certainly not content that it should end there. Throughout his life he was constantly engaged in collecting money for refugees fleeing from religious persecution. Interestingly, in the light of later events examined below, the first recipients of such charity were the Polish Socinians driven from their homeland in 1662. (Socinianism was a radical anti-trinitarian form of protestantism.) When their erstwhile persecutors, the Polish Calvinists, suffered the same fate at the hands of their Catholic countrymen in 1681, Firmin organized a collection for them too, despite their previous intolerance. In the same year the French Huguenot refugees were the object of his attentions. Firmin collected over $4000 for their relief and attempted to set them up in the linen business in his native Ipswich. When Irish protestants fled in the wake of James II in 1688-9, Firmin was one of the principal commissioners charged with raising funds for them. Over $56,000 was raised, and eight of the protestant bishops wrote a joint letter of thanks. Firmin's firm belief in the liberty of conscience in matters religious is perhaps best illustrated by the fact that in 1695 he was prevented from raising similar funds for the relief of the nonjurors. According to Wallace, 'he was of the opinion, that, of all objects of charity, those who suffered for conscience sake had the strongest claim upon the sympathy of their Christian brethren' (Wallace, 1.176-7). His views on toleration led John Locke, who stayed with Firmin on several occasions, to have his third letter on toleration sent to Firmin. 
These radical views on religious liberty would have been enough for many of Firmin's contemporaries to label him a Socinian. The powerful influence exerted by John Biddle has been noted above, and according to Nye it was Biddle who convinced Firmin that God was as much a unity of person as of nature. The exact nature of his own anti-trinitarianism is, however, more difficult to concern. His heterodoxy in regard to the doctrine was well known, and he seems to have made little effort to disguise it. Queen Mary herself apparently urged Tillotson, a long-standing friend of Firmin and by then archbishop of Canterbury, to convert him to orthodoxy, and Tillotson's celebrated sermons on the Trinity, originally preached over the winter of 1679-80, were republished to that end in 1693. Even one of Firmin's posthumous defenders freely admitted that 'he was not so orthodox, as I cou'd have wished he had been, in his opinion about the holy Trinity' ('The Charitable Samaritan', 15). Many during his lifetime and after have been content, with varying degrees of opprobium, to label Firmin a Socinian, while others have been more measured in their verdicts. Bishop Burnet commented that 'he was called a Socinian, but was really an Arian' (Wallace, 3.380). Firmin's posthumous biographer, Stephen Nye, was at pains to show that Firmin was opposed to crude tritheism and inopportune terms, which 'heathenizes all the common people' (Nye, 'An Account of Mr Firmin's Religion', 63). While this caveat may well reflect Nye's opinions more than Firmin's, the 'Dictionary of National Biography' happily acceded to this verdict and judged him a Sabellian. 
Whatever the exact nature of his own opinions, Firmin was instrumental in causing at least four anti-trinitarian tracts to be written, published, and disseminated and in financing these. His industry in this regard was not unknown, and he was attacked in 1692 for being 'the bold spreader of Socinian papers' (Milbourne, preface). The controversies surrounding the doctrine of the Trinity which exploded in the established church in the closing decade or so of the seventeenth century were detonated by the first of these tracts. 'A Brief History of the Unitarians, also called Socinians', written anonymously by Stephen Nye, was published first in 1687 and again in 1690. 'Brief Notes on the Creed of St. Athanasius', possibly by Nye, appeared in 1689, the year in which the use of this creed was to be debated in convocation. In 1693 Nye's 'Considerations on the Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity' was a response to Tillotson's lectures noted above. A more eirenic work, 'The Agreement of the Unitarians with the Catholick Church', also by Nye, was published in 1697. 
Firmin died in London of typhoid fever on 20 December 1697, attended in his last hours by his friend Edward Fowler, by then bishop of Gloucester. Firmin died worth about $3000 but had given away that amount many times over during all the years of his philanthropy. He was buried, as he requested in his will, in the cloisters of his beloved Christ's Hospital. But even in death his role in the controversies surrounding the doctrine of the Trinity were a matter of acrimonious exchange. Within weeks of his demise his memory was maligned and his financial rectitude questioned in a poisonous sermon preached by Luke Milbourne. Samuel Pepys noted the disgust felt in society by such low behaviour, especially in regard to one held in high esteem for his charitable works. Three works defending Firmin appeared in 1698, 'The Life of Mr Thomas Firmin', 'The Charitable Samaritan', and 'An Account of Mr Firmin's Religion'. Only the last made much effort to defend Firmin against the charge of unorthodoxy, while the other two laid stress on his good works as a sign of his sincere Christian faith despite his views on the Trinity. This was also the line taken by Fowler, who composed Firmin's epitaph. The original memorial however had to be quickly removed so that a phrase which seem to suggest such a justification could be altered. Firmin's biographer sums up his life in a nutshell: 'a person of middle extraction and slender beginnings, who raised himself to the honour of a very great number of illustrious friendships... like our Saviour he went around doing good' ('The Life of Mr Thomas Firmin', 77-8). 
A portrait of Firmin given to Christ's Hospital by John Cary was unfortunately destroyed in the Second World War, but the frontispiece to 'The Life of Mr Thomas Firmin' may well be a likeness. His only known publication, 'Some Proposals for the Imploying of the Poor', was revised and expanded in 1681. His amended memorial may still be seen in Newgate Street. 
All Firmin's children by both marriages died in infancy except for his son 


@@@@@


doc= 9483


Firth, Mark (1819-1880), steel manufacturer, was born at Sheffield on 25 April 1819, the eldest son of Thomas Firth (1789-1850), steel manufacturer. After education at Eadon's academy, Redhill, he joined his father in 1833 at Sanderson Brothers & Co., where his father was chief smelter. His younger brother Thomas (died 1858) followed, and in 1842 both left, setting up in steel smelting at Portobello works, Charlotte Street, Sheffield, with six employees and a six pothole furnace. They were joined by their father, and head smelter Joseph Bridden. 
After slow beginnings trade expanded, with more than twenty-five employees of Thomas Firth & Sons (as the business was called) by November 1846. Management and technical problems were handled by Firth's father and brother, while he sought sales. Their crucible steel and finished products obtained an enviable reputation, and sales outlets in North America, Europe, and Australia. 
The Portobello works was soon outgrown, and in 1849 a new 13 acre Norfolk works was begun in Savile Street. Thomas Firth died in 1850, Mark Firth became head, and a third brother, John, joined the partnership. By September 1851 the Norfolk works consisted of file works, crucible furnaces, rolling mill, and Sheffield's biggest steam engine. By 1857 the business employed 500 men and joined Cammell's Cyclops and Brown's Atlas works in Sheffield's shift eastwards. Elsewhere they leased Claywheels forges at Wadsley Bridge (1849-58) and after 1856 developed the 22 acre site at Whittington Moor, Chesterfield, complete with forge, rolling mills, iron refining, foundry facilities, air melting furnaces, and pattern and fitting shops. Tee sections and angles were rolled from puddled steel. Crucible steel depended still upon Swedish bar iron, landed at a wharf at Norfolk works. 
Changing markets demanded responsiveness. File and edge tool sales to Russia weakened in the Crimean War, so Firth increased American sales, secured orders for crinoline hoops, then switched to armaments, specializing in gun tubes and projectiles. By 1860 Armstrongs, Vavasseurs, and Woolwich arsenal were major customers, and Whittington Moor sent steel telegraph poles to India, made other steel fabrications, and supplied plant for Sheffield. There a new West Gun works by 1863 produced bigger guns and shells, using two 25 ton steam hammers, on anvil blocks of 160 tons. Manufacture of edge tools and files was subsequently moved to Windsor Street, Sheffield, and rifle barrel production began with a few American machines. Forty or fifty new boring machines from Whittington Moor subsequently replaced them with capacity to make 300 barrels a day. 
With Vickers Brothers, Firths became the biggest crucible steel maker in Sheffield. Projectile and gun sizes grew, from 68 lb shot in 1860 to 700 lb in 1871, and this required investment in much new plant. The 'Woolwich infant' gun of 1871 reputedly required 1000 crucibles to cast its outer and four inner tubes, and naval guns were manufactured for the British and French navies. Land guns reached 100 tons, with 16 in. gun blocks and 2000 lb projectiles, and were sold to Gibraltar, Malta, and Italy. In addition, Firths led the way in attempts to manufacture compound armour plate. By 1871 1000 men were employed, producing turnover of $421,109, though it fell in depressed 1879 to $187,484. 
Firth worked until his death, a popular local figure, exemplifying nonconformist paternalist business leadership. A founder of the Iron and Steel Institute in 1869, he remained active in its affairs thereafter. He married twice; first, on 15 September 1841, to Sarah Bingham (died 1855); and second, in September 1857, to Caroline Bradley, daughter of the mayor of Nottingham. Four daughters and five sons survived him. Among the more civic minded of Sheffield steel manufacturers, he became councillor for St Peter's ward, Sheffield, in 1860, he served as a school board member from 1863 to 1874, and was master cutler from 1867 to 1869. He was elected mayor and alderman in 1874, and hosted the prince and princess of Wales at his home, Oakbrook, Ranmoor, Sheffield, in 1875. The prince opened a 35 acre park on 16 August, which Firth donated to the town. In January 1875 Firth donated $20,000 towards building Firth College in Leopold Street, adding a further $15,500 endowment, and $150 for a chemistry professor. Opened in 1879, this institution was the embryo of the later Sheffield University. 
A Methodist of the New Connexion, Firth taught at Sunday school at South Street Chapel as a youth. He contributed $500 to Broomhill Chapel, and later an endowment of $1000. In 1860 he added $1000 to his brother Thomas's legacy of $5000 to the New Connexion College at Ranmoor. In 1869 he spent $30,000 on thirty-six almshouses at Nethergreen, not far from Oakbrook, 'as an expression of his gratitude to the Almighty God for his favouring providence, and as a means of benefitting many of the aged and indigent of his native town' (Marshall and Newbould, 33). However, help was restricted to protestant denominations. In 1872 J. M. Martin wrote on Firth's behalf about Salford model housing to the duke of Norfolk, who had stayed at Oakbrook in 1869: 'I believe the erection on our Model would soon produce a social revolution in Sheffield. We should not suffer a Tavern, Beerhouse, or dramshop on the property. Every house would be supplied with water, gas and a separate yard and dryash closet. The property would be thoroughly drained and each house ventilated from foundation to roof. (Arundel Castle MS S484)' A Liberal, Firth declined the chance of standing for parliament when J. Roebuck retired in 1876. After a stroke at work, he died twelve days later at Oakbrook on 28 November 1880 from apoplexy and paralysis and was buried in Sheffield general cemetery on 2 December. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 9484


Fischer, Johann Christian (1733-1800), oboist and composer, was born in Freiburg im Breisgau. Little is known of his early life, but Burney reports that he was 'brought up at one of the common reading schools... where all the children learn music, with reading and writing' (Rees). An annotation on the manuscript of an oboe concerto in G by Alessandro Besozzi (1702-1793) states that it was 'performed by Mr Fischer... in 1757 at Warshow [Warsaw]' (BL, Add. MS 34717, fols. 20-29b). This performance may have been Fischer's introduction to Augustus III, king of Poland and elector of Saxony, whose 'Kapelle' he joined at Dresden in 1760. He remained there until about 1764 before proceeding to Berlin for a brief sojourn at the court of Frederick the Great. By 1765 he had travelled to Italy, where he studied with Besozzi and, according to Fetis, perfected his taste through studying the style of the greatest singers of the day. Fetis also notes that he performed at the Concert Spirituel in Paris, and other reports establish that he visited Mannheim and the Netherlands about the same time. The nine-year-old Mozart, for example, was impressed by him at The Hague in 1765. By 1766, however, Fischer was back in Dresden, followed by a second period with Frederick the Great in 1767, allegedly in succession to C. P. E. Bach. 
At some time in 1768 Fischer arrived in London, where he gave his first solo public performance at the Thatched House tavern on 2 June 1768 -- a concert notable for J. C. Bach's performance on the pianoforte, its first public outing as a solo instrument in England. His reputation as an outstandingly gifted oboist spread rapidly throughout Britain, leading to his participation at all London's concert series and pleasure gardens. According to Charlotte Papendiek, by 1774 he had joined the 'private quarttet parties' ('Court and Private Life', 1.65) at court, and about 1781 he was appointed one of Queen Charlotte's chamber musicians with a yearly salary of $180. He was also active outside London, performing in Bath several times between 1768 and 1790 and in addition visiting Dublin, Bristol, Manchester, Oxford, Worcester, Hereford, Gloucester, Salisbury, and Winchester. 
Fischer's prodigious success was due to a combination of technical ability, musicality, and innovation, aided by his introduction to England of a new German design of oboe. In comparison with previous oboes, the instrument he introduced had a dramatically reduced bore, resulting in a lighter, more delicate tone, with raised fundamental pitch and an extended range. Enthusiastic reports of Fischer's playing abound, but focus particularly on the quality and clarity of his tone, his ability to manipulate it, and his technical abilities, particularly the playing of extremes of register. 
At Bath in the summer of 1775 Fischer became acquainted with Mary (1748-1826), elder daughter of the artist Thomas Gainsborough. Gainsborough was not in favour of the liaison, which began in secret, but the couple married on 21 November 1780. Within a year the couple had separated, the blame apparently resting entirely upon the 'occasional aberrations of mind' of the bride (Parke, 1.335). Mary did not die until 1826, when she bequeathed her father's famous portrait of her husband to George IV. 
Written in the 'galant' style of his friends J. C. Bach and Abel, Fischer's compositions seem to have been mostly well received, Burney, for example, praising his 'very original and ingenious productions' (Burney, 'Account', 105). Other commentators criticized 'his desire to be original' ('ABC Dario Musico', 21), noting that it 'often produces thoughts whimsical and outre' (ibid.), and in 1787 Mozart suggested that the concertos were excessively long and repetitive. These nine concertos for oboe, published between 1768 and 1785, were Fischer's most successful works. In 1774 Mozart used the minuet theme from Fischer's first concerto in C as the basis for his twelve variations for clavier, K. 179/189a, J. C. Bach and Johann Schroeter made keyboard arrangements of several of the concertos, and a further unknown concerto in E[flat] ('c'.1795) was transcribed by the London-based Dutch composer John Lewis Hoeberechts. Fischer's other extant compositions are rather unremarkable works for various chamber groupings. 
Despite Fischer's impressive rendition of Handel's '4th oboe concerto' at the 1784 Handel commemoration in Westminster Abbey, George III did not appoint him as either court oboist or master of the king's band when these posts fell vacant, and perhaps for this reason Fischer returned to the continent in 1786. Mozart heard Fischer for a second time in Vienna in 1787, but was disappointed by the experience, and it may be that his abilities were declining at this time. Fischer's return to Britain about 1790 does seem to have marked the end of his public career, apart from an isolated concert for his own benefit at the Pantheon in 1792; however, he remained a popular participant in the musical activities at court. 
Many anecdotes regarding Fischer's life are recounted in the writings of his contemporaries, but that by Burney is perhaps most apt. 'Fischer was the most pleasing and perfect performer on the hautbois, and the most ingenious composer for that instrument that has ever delighted our country during full sixty years', but 'he had not a single grain of sense but what he breathed through his reed' (Rees). His students included many of the best-known performers of the day, and his influence on countless others is clear. 'ABC Dario Musico' noted of William Parke that 'he need not blush to own that he owes much of his improvement to Fischer' (p. 38), and it is apparent from other contemporary comments that his technique was the yardstick by which that of other players was judged. 
In a concert at the Queen's House on 29 April 1800 Fischer 'executed his first movement in a style equal to his best performance during any part of his life', but then had an 'apoplectic fit'. He was taken to his home in Frith Street, Soho, and assisted by the king's own physicians, but died about an hour later (Parke, 1.334; Sainsbury, 1.249). His last request was that his compositions be presented to the king, and these manuscripts now form the major source of Fischer's music. Other manuscripts with certainty ascribed to Fischer can be found at the Bautzen Museum, Bautzen, Germany; the Benediktinerstift, Melk an der Donau, Austria; the Badische Landesbibliothek, Karlsruhe, Germany; and the Furstlich Thurn und Taxisische Hofbibliothek, Regensburg, Germany. His place of burial is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 9485


Fischer, (Johann Georg) Paul (1786-1875), miniature painter, was born in Hanover, Germany, on 16 September 1786, the youngest of the three sons of a line engraver who died very soon after the birth of his youngest child, leaving his family in poverty. At the age of fourteen he was placed as a pupil with the Hanoverian court painter J. H. Ramberg, by whom he was employed in painting portraits, theatrical scenery, and generally assisting his master. He started to work independently, primarily as a miniature painter, but he also produced some landscape watercolours and in 1810 went to England, where he soon enlisted the patronage of the royal family through his Hanoverian connection. His royal commissions included miniatures of George IV when prince of Wales and many of his siblings, as well as 'the very first portrait of [Queen Victoria] when in her cradle', painted in August 1819 (Millar, 318). He also painted a series of twenty-three military watercolours for the prince regent at the same date (Royal Collection). He exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists between 1817 and 1852, working principally in London and Cheltenham. He married Jane Smith of Edmonton, Middlesex, on 7 December 1830. Long suggested that he may have visited India about 1848 because of the identity of some of his subjects at that period (Long, 153-4). 
Fischer was a prolific but second-rate artist. Two small pencil portraits by him of William Hunt and his wife are in the British Museum and a miniature of George IV when prince of Wales is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. He also published a few etchings and lithographs. He died, leaving no children, at his home, 4 Upper Spring Street, Portman Square, London, on 12 September 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 9486


Fish, Simon (d. 1531), religious controversialist, was born according to some accounts in Kent. It has been claimed that he attended Oxford University, but there is no conclusive evidence for this, and the first event that can be approximately dated in his life is his entering Gray's Inn about 1525. Very few details survive of his career, but it is clear that, following his arrival in London, Fish forged fraternal bonds with other like-minded young men, some of whom would come to be prime movers of the English Reformation. His participation in the performance at Gray's Inn of a Christmas play satirizing Cardinal Wolsey during the 1526-7 season aroused the cardinal's wrath, and forced Fish into a first period of exile in the Low Countries. After his return to London Fish continued to challenge the cardinal's authority by smuggling proscribed books, including Tyndale's 'New Testament', and distributing them from his house by the Whitefriars. This activity again provoked Wolsey's ire, and prompted Fish to withdraw once more to the relative safety of the continent late in 1527. It was during this second exile that he translated and published at Antwerp 'The Sum of Holy Scripture' ('STC', 2nd edn, 3036) from a French version of Henricus Bomelius's 'Summa der godliker scrifturen', and penned his famous satire against purgatory and the intercessory clergy entitled 'Supplication for the Beggars'. 
This short and violently anti-clerical tract challenged the existence of purgatory and presented cruel and wildly exaggerated accounts of clerical abuses done in the name of the souls, and in doing so introduced new strategies for controversial debate into the early stages of the English Reformation. Fish's treatise was first printed at Antwerp, possibly by J. Grapheus, but its exact date of publication remains uncertain ('STC' 10883). According to dubious and contradictory accounts contained in John Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments', the 'Supplication' was introduced into England by either of two means. In one account Anne Boleyn presented a copy of the book to Henry VIII who 'kept the book in his bosom for three or four days' and who then embraced Fish 'with a loving countenance' when he appeared at court, took him hunting for several hours, and gave him a signet ring to protect him from his enemies. In an alternative account that diminished Fish's importance significantly, Foxe reported that the 'Supplication' came into the hands of two London merchants, George Robinson and George Elyot, who then showed their copy to the king ('Acts and Monuments', 4.656-8). 
From these tales it has been suggested that the 'Supplication' was printed sometime late in 1528 or early in 1529, arrived in London soon afterwards, and began to circulate during the spring and summer of 1529. Certainly, the tract was freely available by November, as on the first day of the Reformation Parliament copies of Fish's 'Supplication' were 'scattered at the procession in Westminster' and distributed throughout the city's streets ('Acts and Monuments', 4.659, 666-7). The first edition of the text to be published in England appeared seventeen years later, and was most likely produced by London's influential protestant printers John Day and William Seres, who bound it together with Henry Brinkelow's 'A Supplication of the Poor Commons' ('STC' 10884). Later editions were made available in 1680 in a revised version entitled 'The Very Beggars Petition Against Popery' ('STC' F983) and in F. J. Furnivall's collection of Reformation-era treatises prepared for the Early English Text Society in 1871. 
Couched in the form of a plea coming from the outcasts of society and directed to the king, Fish's 'Supplication' was a sensational call for Henry to undertake a policy to save his kingdom from falling into the hands of Rome. Making no pretensions to a spirit of even-handedness or reconciliation, the lepers, sick, needy, and impotent on whose behalf Fish wrote all cried out to the king that they were dying of hunger because of the holy beggars and vagabonds who had taken into their hands fully one-third of the kingdom. In exchange for all these riches, the clerics claimed that they alone could deliver souls out of purgatory; yet as Fish pointed out, learned men had challenged the existence of such a place, and had argued that it was merely an invention of the covetous Roman church. 
In framing this critique, Fish was among the first English humanists to link popular pamphleteering, already practised elsewhere by reform-minded writers, with the royal interests. Previous to the problems raised by Henry VIII's divorce struggle, the English humanist community was primarily academic, and its writers and rhetoricians were regarded as useful and prestigious adjuncts to the princely court. The king's pressing needs demanded innovations; thus Fish crafted the 'Supplication' for a readership that included not only the political elite but the whole of the English people. The work's depiction of the English clergy as parasites and traitors certainly was designed to appeal to Henry's desire to subjugate the clergy, and to reinforce his growing conviction of his own power over cleric and layman alike in the realm. Its brevity and satirical tone, however, were also designed to appeal to readers who might struggle to follow the often complex theological and political debates in more lengthy and sophisticated tomes and who could ill afford the expense of such books. In this regard Thomas More's refutation of Fish's text was telling. His 'Supplication of Souls' ('STC' 18092), published at London before 25 October 1529 by William Rastell, was more than ten times the length of Fish's work, and its point-by-point rebuttal, of a kind appropriate to learned debate, although movingly written, failed to attain the rhetorical power of Fish's more populist tract. 
During 1529 Fish returned to England and took up residence within the precincts of London, where he found himself accused of heresy, and saw his book condemned by Archbishop Warham. According to More, Fish experienced a change of heart following his return from exile, so that he 'repented himself, and came into the church again' ('English Works', 881). The nature of Fish's opinions at this stage remain unknown, since he was struck down by plague while in London, dying suddenly in 1531. After his death his widow married James Bainham, an outspoken proponent of reform who was himself burnt as a heretic in April 1532. 


@@@@@


doc= 9487


Fish, William (1775-1866), composer and instrumentalist, was born in Norwich. He began his career as a violinist in the orchestra at the local theatre. After studying with the oboist Michael Sharp and with Hugh Bond, formerly organist of Exeter Cathedral, he performed as principal oboist at the public concerts in Norwich and as lead violinist for the principal professional concerts in the city and the annual oratorios at the cathedral, for the benefit of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital. Following his marriage he was appointed organist of St Andrew's Church, opened a music warehouse, and became well known locally as a teacher, his pupils including Edward Taylor and George Perry. Fish's published compositions include 'A Grand Sonata for the Pianoforte', op. 1 (1803), and a number of less interesting piano pieces; some ballads (words and music by the composer), among which may be singled out 'The Morning Star' (1804?); an oboe concerto; and some fantasias for the harp. Among his unpublished works are a 'Cantata for the Harp or Piano forte' (1840?), to words by Mrs Opie, and some pieces played at the Norwich Theatre Royal. Fish died in Norwich on 15 March 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 9488


Fishacre, Richard (d. 1248), Dominican friar and theologian, was probably born in the first decade of the thirteenth century in Exeter -- a Merton College manuscript identifies him as 'Exoniensis'. The name Fishacre was prominent among the gentry of Devon, being mentioned in the records over 160 times between the twelfth century and the death of the last Fishacre, Sir Edward, in 1433 or 1434. Of the three places in south Devon that include the name, none is recorded until after 1228, so it probably began as a nickname for a Norman knight-turned-landowner who used fish to manure his fields. Fishacre entered the order of Preachers not long after their arrival in the British Isles in 1221. Wherever he studied the arts (and there is no evidence that it was anywhere but England), he incepted in theology under the Dominican master Robert Bacon (died 1248) at the Oxford studium. About the year 1240 Fishacre became master of sacred doctrine and embarked on his most ambitious project, a commentary (soon to be published by the Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften) on Peter Lombard's four books of 'Sentences'. This work was the first of its kind to be composed by an English Dominican, and indeed by any Oxford master, and drew a swift and hostile reaction from Robert Grosseteste, bishop of Lincoln (died 1253). Grosseteste was ostensibly complaining about the scheduling of lectures, but the subtext was his worry that Fishacre was introducing at Oxford the Parisian custom of using Lombard's text as the basis for purely speculative theology, thus threatening the pre-eminence of sacred scripture. Fishacre's enterprise, however, was defended by the pope, Innocent IV, in a strongly worded letter to Grosseteste, and eventually the 'Sentences' became the set text in the theology faculty at Oxford as they had done at Paris. 
In his commentary, Fishacre conceives of the Aristotelian sciences as being preliminary to the science of theology, analogous to Abraham's needing to have relations with the slave Hagar before Sarah could conceive. He was therefore open not only to the newly translated Aristotelian philosophy but also to the commentaries of Averroes 
(Ibn Rushd; died 1198)
. Having finished the commentary by 1245, in the remaining three years of his life Fishacre composed several 'opuscula'. Among these was a work on heresies ('Adnotationes in s. Augustini librum de haeresibus'), which attempted a rational refutation of the heresies listed and described by St Augustine in his work by that name. He also composed a question on the ascension of Christ, which made use of the concepts of Aristotelian physics and cosmology to explicate this theological teaching. There also survive, in more recent manuscripts of his commentary, four 'quaestiones' (on the eternity of the world, on the nature of light, on the division of the waters at creation, and on the nature of the heavens), all most probably products of disputations dating from the last three years of his life. Besides a number of Latin sermons nothing more from Fishacre's pen has been identified. Though Nicholas Trevet credits him with postils on the 'Psalms' (nos. 1-70), this text seems not to have survived. For the remaining works ascribed to him by later bibliographers, namely, a commentary on the parables of Solomon, a 'De poenitentia', 'Quodlibeta', and a 'De fide, spe et caritate', there exists no earlier nor more reliable testimony than that of John Leland (died 1552). 
Though a final judgement regarding Fishacre's influence will have to await the edition of his commentary on the 'Sentences', it is safe to assert that his mark on his own and the following generation of theologians at Oxford and at Paris was significant. His students included Simon of Hinton, who succeeded him in the chair of theology, Master R. of Stanington, and Robert Kilwardby (died 1279). He is cited extensively in a pastoral manual composed about 1250 by a Master Galienus, and referred to frequently by the Franciscan Richard (Rufus) of Cornwall, for whom Fishacre was something of a 'bete noire'. A colophon in a Paris manuscript asks for the reader's prayers for Friar Richard, describing him as infirm in mind and body, and indeed his weak constitution seems to have led to his early death in 1248, the year that also saw the death of Robert Bacon. Both were buried at the new Dominican priory outside the walls of Oxford. The chronicler Matthew Paris (died 1259), who generally wasted little affection on the mendicants, asserted in an encomium on Fishacre and Bacon that in theology and in the other sciences they had no living superiors nor even equals; they had lectured eminently in the same faculty for many years, and to the people they generously preached the word of God. 


@@@@@


doc= 9489


Fischer, Catherine Maria (1741?-1767), courtesan, was probably the Catharine Fischer born on 1 June 1741 in London, the daughter of John Henry Fischer (died in or before 1766) and his wife, Ann, who was baptized in St Anne's, Soho, Westminster, on 10 June 1741. Kitty Fisher's first names were recorded as Catherine Maria in the burial register and she signed herself 'Cath. Maria Norris heretofore Fischer' in the St George's, Hanover Square, marriage register. Her father was said to have been German (and Bleackley says that he was a Lutheran) and his trade was variously reported as stay-maker and silver-chaser. Ann Fischer was listed as a widow in the application for a special licence for the marriage on 22 March 1766 of John Pollard to Sarah Louisa Fischer, minor, presumably a younger sister to Catherine. 
Little is known of Kitty Fisher's early background, although she is recorded as having lived in Paddington before she became famous. Her parents were described as poor, and she was said to have started work in a milliner's shop. Her career as a courtesan allegedly began after she was seduced and then deserted by Ensign (later Lieutenant-General) Anthony George Martin. The 'Town and Country Magazine' for September 1771, however, claimed that Captain (later Admiral) Augustus Keppel first launched her career, while Edward Thompson in the satirical poem 'The Meretriciad' declared that there were too many candidates to identify him. 
By the winter of 1758 Kitty Fisher was in the public eye, and for the next five years she was referred to as one of the top courtesans in London, if not the most prominent of all. Numerous satirical poems and essays, such as Charles Churchill's 'The Ghost' and the anonymous 'Kitty's Stream' (1759), as well as newspaper and magazine articles and private correspondence paid tribute to the 'celebrated' Kitty Fisher whose beauty and lively sense of humour and adventure captivated a diverse array of observers. She soon became associated with the most fashionable activities and prominent men in London. According to Horace Walpole she was recognized in a London park by both the young Prince Frederick William and his elder brother the prince of Wales (afterwards George III). On another occasion George II apparently had her introduced to William Pitt as a joke. Casanova was impressed by her magnificent dress and charm, while Dr Johnson expressed regret that he had missed meeting her. 
Well known for riding through St James's Park and the Mall, Kitty Fisher prompted a flurry of publicity when she fell from her horse there in March 1759. A poem 'On K -- F -- 's Falling from her Horse' reminded her that this was not her first 'fall' and that she should reform her behaviour ('Universal Magazine', March 1759, 152). More strident was the broadside 'Horse and away to St James's Park, or, A trip for the noontide air. Who rides fastest, Miss Kitty Fisher or her gay gallant' [1760?], which argued that her luxurious life was 'enough to debauch half the Women in London'. This apparently spawned a satirical print, 'The merry accident, or a print in the morning. A chair, a chair for the lady. Who rides fastest, Miss Kitty Fish-r, or her gay gallant', which depicts Fisher after her fall. She lies on the ground, her dress disordered and her legs visible. Several of the male spectators comment on her situation, including one who repeats the criticism made in the broadside -- that her example will lead other women to become whores. Her influence was lamented by observers as diverse as the satirical poet Edward Thompson and Lady Caroline Fox, who wrote dismissively of the 'Kitty Fisher style... in dress or manner, which all the young women affect now' (Lady Caroline Fox to countess of Kildare, 25 Oct [1759], 'Correspondence of Emily, Duchess of Leinster', 1.262). In 1760 a pamphlet declared: 'You, Madam, are become the Favourite of the Public and the Darling of the Age' (Trusty, 6). 
For more than perhaps any other eighteenth-century courtesan, oil portraits helped to boost Kitty Fisher's fame. Sir Joshua Reynolds painted at least four portraits of her between 1759 and 1766, prompting rumours that they were lovers. A portrait which depicted her in an elegant dress with lace sleeves, seated before an open letter inscribed '2 June 1759 / My dearest Kit', was said to be the model for Allan Ramsay's 1761 portrait of Lady Caroline Fox's niece, Lady Susan Fox-Strangways. Another portrait, which depicted her as Cleopatra dissolving the pearl in a wine cup, also attracted attention. Someone wrote under the painting: '
To her famed character how just thy right! 

Thy mind as wanton, and thy form as bright 
(Leslie and Taylor, 163n.)' while Thompson claimed: '
E'en 'Cleopatra' with her orient grace, 

Was but a 'Gypsie' to thy lov'lier face. 
(Thompson, 'The Meretriciad', 14)' This portrait was apparently painted for Sir Charles Bingham, bt. Both of these paintings were engraved, and these reproductions along with other engravings further publicized her career. Nathaniel Hone's portrait of 1765 depicts the courtesan seated beside a bowl full of goldfish, in which a cat is attempting to fish. This scene is a clever pun on her name, her love of gold, and her relationships with men. It recalls titles such as 'Kitty's Stream, or, The Noblemen Turned Fisher-Men' (1759), and 'Fun upon fun... Miss Kitty Fisher's merry thought. No joke like a true joke. Come, who'l fish in my fishpond?' The latter was the title of plate 12 of Paul Sandby's 'Cries of London' (1760), which depicts a street hawker selling an actual pamphlet, 'Kitty F -- r's Merry Thought, or, No Joke Like a True Joke' (1760). The painting also recalls Thomas Gray's poem of 1747, 'Ode on the Death of a Favourite Cat, Drowned in a Tub of Gold Fishes': '
What female heart can gold despise? 

What cat's averse to fish? 
(Gray, 'Ode', ed. Lonsdale, 28)' Several other portraits are said to be of her, all depicting a young woman of medium build with brown hair and blue eyes, although, as John Kerslake notes, 'there has been a tendency to identify girls by Reynolds with a retrousse nose as Kitty Fisher' (Kerslake, 1.75). The extent of her fame was demonstrated through a letter signed C. Fisher published in the 'Public Advertiser' on 30 March 1759 which complained that she had been 'abused in public papers, exposed in print-shops, and... some wretches... would impose upon the public, by daring to publish her memoirs' ('Annual Register', 1759, 168). 
Kitty Fisher's extravagance was legendary. One probably apocryphal story recorded that she once ate a $100 bank note (Casanova gives its value as 1000 guineas) on buttered bread. Another claimed that she ordered that Prince Edward, duke of York, should not be re-admitted to her house (possibly in Carrington Street, Mayfair, or Cranbourne Street, Leicester Square) after he left a less generous than expected payment of 50 guineas. The members of White's Club were said to have raised a subscription to fund her extravagance, while all the members of Arthur's Club were reported to have enjoyed her pleasures. She is said to have had liaisons with the minor politician Sir Thomas Medlycott; George, Baron Anson of Soberton, the admiral; Thomas Bromley, second Baron Montfort, a notorious spendthrift; Joseph Salvador, merchant; and John Montagu, fourth earl of Sandwich, the politician. The 'Tete-a-tete' series in the 'Town and Country Magazine' claimed that two leading army officers, Field Marshal John, Earl Ligonier, and William Stanhope, second earl of Harrington, had affairs with her because she was the most prominent courtesan at the time. Despite her popularity among noblemen, only two were reported ever to have considered marrying her, and both -- John, second Earl Poulett, and Henry Herbert, tenth earl of Pembroke -- were said to have thought better of the idea, although the latter (who would have to have first met her at an early stage in her career, as he married in 1756) allegedly paid her an annuity of $1000. On 19 August 1763 her coachman, Matthew Dodd, was hanged for raping a farmer's daughter. Crowds delayed the execution, causing George III to comment on the immorality of the times. She was next recorded as living with a young gentleman, Mr Chetwynd, passing as his housekeeper Mrs Brown, until his death from consumption in the south of France. 
In 1766 Kitty Fisher married John Norris (1740-1811), MP for Rye from 1762 to 1774, captain or governor of Deal Castle from 1766 to 1774, and son of John Norris, former MP and landowner, of Hemsted, Benenden, Kent. The marriage took place first in Scotland on 25 October 1766 in Trinity Church, Haddington, and then by special licence of the archbishop of Canterbury (obtained by the bridegroom on 2 December 1766) on 4 December 1766 in St George's, Hanover Square, London. News of the marriage disappointed contemporaries such as Lady Mary Coke and the bridegroom's father. Other reports credited the new Mrs Norris with reforming her husband's dissolute habits and shaky finances. She was said to be a kind benefactor of the local poor, and to amaze villagers with her prowess as a horsewoman, jumping every gate rather than opening or going round it. Three months later, however, she was reported as 'in a decline' (Bleackley, 92), apparently from consumption, although lead poisoning from the use of cosmetics and smallpox were also blamed. 'En route' to the Bristol Hotwells for relief, she apparently collapsed at Bath on 9 March 1767 and died next day at the Three Tuns tavern in Stall Street 'in her husband's arms' (Bleackley, 93-4). She was reported to have been laid in state in her best dress and to have been greatly mourned by her husband. Her burial (which according to Bleackley took place in the family vault in the chancel of the parish church) was recorded in the register of Sts George and Margaret, Benenden, Kent, on 23 March 1767. 
Edward Thompson marked Kitty Fisher's passing with a humorous poem, 'On the Death of Kitty Fisher', which describes 'St Kitty' as being 'put to the shift!' and as 'the Fisher of Men' (Thompson, 'Court of Cupid', 2.130), while an epigram entitled 'On Kitty Fisher's Dying Soon after she was Married' ran: '
She wedded to live honest -- but, when tried, 

the experiment she liked not -- and so died. 
('Epitaphs', collected by T. Webb, 1775, 2.108, quoted in Hardy, 86)' Henry Harington published a song in three parts, entitled 'An Elegy: on Kitty Fisher Lying in State at Bath' (1780?) which paid tribute to her beauty. In 1782 George Selwyn recorded receiving verses on Kitty Fisher. And in 1788 Henry Swinburne described a French noblewoman's appearance 'like an embalmed Egyptian queen, or Kitty Fisher, when exposed full dressed, after her death' (Swinburne, 43). The character of the obliging courtesan Kitty Willis in Hannah Cowley's 1781 comedy 'The Belle's Stratagem' was based upon her. Her name also lived on in the expression 'My eye, Kitty Fisher!' ('N&Q', 3rd ser., 8, 1865, 82) and a nursery rhyme, which began: '
Lucy Locket lost her pocket, 

Kitty Fisher found it: 

The deuce a farthing was there in't -- 

Only the binding round it. 
(ibid., 155)' While Kitty Fisher was only one of many courtesans to gain public acclaim in mid-eighteenth-century London, the depth as well as breadth of her celebrity set her apart from her contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 9490


Fisher, Daniel (1731-1807), Independent minister and tutor, was born at Cockermouth. He was educated at Plaisterers' Hall Academy in London, where he was a student from 1748 to 1751. From 1752 to 1771 he was minister to the Independent congregation at Common Close, Warminster, where he also kept a school. 
In 1771 Fisher was appointed tutor in classics and mathematics at Homerton College, where he became in 1781 divinity tutor. He was described by one of his students, William Walford, as 'grave, regular and punctilious', but lacking 'ingenuity and imagination' (Walford, 104-5). 
Fisher was a rigid Calvinist and staunch dissenter. He married twice. Little is known of his first wife, Mary, other than that they had a daughter, Martha. In 1803 he married Elizabeth Toms (died 1831), the second daughter of Isaac Toms of Hadleigh. Fisher died at Hackney on 13 August 1807 after a lingering illness, and was buried on 20 August at Bunhill Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 9491


Fisher, David (II) (1788-1858), actor and musician, was born on 29 December 1788 in St Giles's, Norwich, the eldest of the five surviving children of David (I) Fisher (1760-1832), who was at that time a singer and actor at the Norwich Theatre Royal, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Burrell (1761/2-1814), an actress. When in 1792 David (I) Fisher left Norwich to set up a travelling company with William Scraggs, one result was that his young sons received their early education at successive local schools on the circuit. The playwright Edward Fitzball, in 'Thirty-Five Years of a Dramatic Author's Life' (1859, 1.16), recalls them as schoolfellows at Newmarket. 'Didn't I envy them', he writes, 'the possession of the tin daggers they sometimes stealthily brought up their sleeves to astound the boys with!' Later they were boarded at Dr Binfield's academy in Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire, where they received a classical education, supplemented by separate tuition in music, dancing, fencing, and French. Acting and other arts of the theatre were learned on the training ground of the circuit. The younger David turned out to be a gifted actor, an excellent musician, and a versatile painter. He was also a lively and personable young man. A former member of the company recollected him as 'remarkably good-looking -- curly hair, blue eyes, florid complexion... a graceful dancer and a charming singer' (Carver, 11). More than one young woman wrote to him proposing marriage. Growing up in the company with him were his three younger brothers, Charles, George, and Henry (who, however, died in 1815). An only sister, Elizabeth, had died in 1808, aged eighteen. 
By his early twenties Fisher was a leading actor in the company, as well as its chief scene painter, and also carried out the interior decoration of the new theatres his father had begun to build. It was about this time that a love affair began between him and the Hon. Mary Wilson, young daughter of Baron Berners. Marriage across such a wide social gulf was unthinkable and was forbidden by both fathers; an attempted elopement was frustrated, and in September 1815, against his inclination, Fisher was married to Miss F. B. Bane (1788/9-1818) of Pulham, Norfolk. A son, David (III) Fisher, was born the following July, and later a daughter, Elizabeth. 
In 1817 the committee of Drury Lane Theatre invited Fisher to play in place of Edmund Kean in several of the star's key roles during his indisposition. It was an invidious honour. On 3 December he played Macbeth; on the 5th and 6th, Richard III; on the 8th, Macbeth again; and Hamlet on the 10th -- on which day the playbills announced Kean's imminent return, in the role of Richard III. There was no second performance of Fisher's Hamlet, though it and his Macbeth and Richard had been well received by both audience and press, apart from a small faction intent on dismissing any young aspirant who might invite comparison with Kean. The situation was summed up by 'The Sun' of 8 December 1817, when, after reviewing Fisher's second performance of Macbeth, it concluded: 'his errors were very few and very trifling, and sink to nothing in comparison with his general merits. He had evidently some enemies in the house, but their feeble and ill-directed hostility only served to draw forth a liberal and zealous support from the audience in general.' In the event, he was offered a permanent engagement at Drury Lane alongside Kean, with whom he was said to have been on good terms. During the next season he was very successful in such parts as Jaffier in 'Venice Preserv'd', Bassanio in 'The Merchant of Venice', Lord Townly in 'The Provoked Husband', and Titus in Payne's new play 'Brutus'. Then, on 26 December 1818, his wife died, leaving him with two small children; also, he was being sorely missed on the home circuit. In February 1819 he threw up his London engagement and rejoined the Norfolk and Suffolk Company, in which -- with occasional appearances elsewhere -- he performed for the next ten years, while also working with his father on successive new theatres. His theatre interior at North Walsham is recorded in two contemporary watercolour sketches in the Fisher theatre collection. He also painted landscapes and family portraits, which are still in the possession of descendants. 
The outstanding musical ability of the family was widely recognized at the time. The three brothers were, for instance, leading members of the orchestra of the Norwich triennial music festivals from their inception in 1824. David was also for some time leader of the band of the Norwich choral society. In 1831 he gave up the stage in order to teach music and dancing. On 15 December 1824 he had married a second wife, Sarah Howard, an actress, who, however, died a few years later, leaving two young daughters, Sarah and Harriet. 
David (I) Fisher died in 1832, the management of the company then devolving on the second son, Charles. After a few years it, like other theatre companies, was hit by recession, and business declined. David (II) Fisher, who had retired from teaching in 1841, returned to the company over the winter of 1841-2 to lend support, but the odds were too great: by 1844 the circuit was closed, the theatres sold. 
Fisher was now living in retirement in Woodbridge, a respected member of society and of the literary coterie surrounding his friend Edward Fitzgerald. Here, too, lived Mary Wilson. A provision of her father's will, disinheriting her should she wed Fisher, had prevented their ever marrying. She had paid for the education of Fisher's children and grandchildren, and now, in Woodbridge, she looked after him until he died there on 20 August 1858. Sixteen years later she was buried by his side in Woodbridge cemetery. 
In its obituary notice of 29 August 1858, 'The Era' wrote of Fisher's 'wonderful versatility' and of the 'absolute success' of his Drury Lane appearances, concluding: 'His talent as an actor was universal, and had the London audience had the same opportunity as others, of witnessing his less ambitious but more varied and genial performances, he would have been lamented by the London world as he will now by a circle of provincial friends. ('The Era')' 



@@@@@


doc= 9492


Fisher, David Nunn (1816-1887), actor and musician, was born in July 1816 at East Dereham, Norfolk, the first child and only son of David Fisher (1788-1858), actor, musician, and painter, and his first wife, F. B. Bane, (1788/9-1818). He grew up on circuit in the family company, the Norfolk and Suffolk Company of Comedians, in which, at the age of seven, he made his 'first appearance on any stage' in a solo hornpipe at his father's benefit. As a boy performer he acted, danced, and played the violin in the company's orchestra. He himself later recorded what then followed: 'When my father left the stage in 1831, I, a boy, went with him to teach music. I studied the violin; played solos in St Andrew's Hall, Norwich; played in the orchestra under Benedict, Spohr, etc. An accident, by which I broke my leg, seemed to banish me from the stage, but on recovery I joined Glover at Glasgow. ('The Theatre', 1 April 1880)' Meanwhile he had proved himself an outstanding violinist (comparable, said the press, to Paganini) and, with his father, had established a respected school of music and dancing. During this period he had also married, his wife's family name being Batchelder. She died while still young, however, and he then married a second Miss Batchelder, who was stated to have been his late wife's sister; if so, their union was not at that time sanctioned by English law. Few details are recorded of the births of Fisher's children, but his family eventually included at least three sons and four daughters, born probably between 1841 and 1859. 
By 1849 Fisher's leg had healed, though he never lost a slight lameness, and he returned to the stage in Glasgow, before an audience with no preconceptions regarding the name David Fisher. 'We have been taken by surprise', wrote the 'Glasgow Citizen' in November 1849, 'by the acting of a Mr Fisher,' adding: 'we have no hesitation in pronouncing him a decided acquisition to Mr Glover's clever company'. Others agreed, dubbing him the best light comedian they had seen, apart from Charles Mathews. Reporting his first benefit on 20 March 1850, the 'Glasgow Advertiser' described him as 'uproariously entertaining and original'. He had appeared in the play, been cheered in the farce (which he had written himself), sung a duet 'in excellent style', and then 'electrified the house by his performance on the violin'. Furthermore, he was unanimously agreed to be 'gentlemanly'. The critics predicted his early departure for the metropolis; but it was only after what he termed 'four years constant study before the footlights of Glasgow' ('Northern British Daily Mail', 25 Aug 1854) that he accepted a London offer and joined Charles Kean at the Princess's Theatre. 
Fisher made his London debut on 1 November 1853, in the part of Victor de Courcy in 'The Lancers', to measured approval from the press. Queen Victoria, endorsing Glasgow opinion, told Kean that his new performer was 'the most gentleman-like actor' she had ever seen ('Suffolk Chronicle', 4 March 1854). His second part, Windsor Brown in the afterpiece 'Away with Melancholy', gave scope to his comic and vocal gifts, confirming 'The Sun' (15 March) in the view that he did indeed rank next to Charles Mathews as a light comedian. During the rest of the season he was well received as Faust in 'Faust and Marguerite'; as a coarse peasant, Krootz, in 'From Village to Court'; and as a 'dandy robber' in 'The Courier of Lyons'. In the five further years that he remained at the Princess's, playing also in court performances at Windsor, he established himself as a superb light comedian and versatile character actor. He also gained recognition for his musical virtuosity, turned to entertaining account in parts he wrote for himself, like the eccentric violin-playing Poppleton Pertinax in his 'Music Hath Charms' of June 1858. 
In 1859 Fisher moved to the Adelphi, under Benjamin Webster, acting in more powerful roles, notably that of the villainous Abbe Latour in 'The Dead Heart' by Watts Phillips, which won him great acclaim from the critics, some of whom contended that this was his true metier, and for a while he did in fact appear in heavier parts, such as Hulks in 'The Willow Copse' and Kyrle Daly in 'The Colleen Bawn'. But his greatest successes were always to be in eccentric comedy, to which his small but elegant stature, expressive features, and incisive delivery were particularly well suited, and which gave full scope to his unerring sense of character -- and of the ridiculous. 
In March 1862, after a disagreement with the management, Fisher left the Adelphi and spent the rest of the year in the provinces. When, in the following April, he reappeared in London, it was at the Hanover Square Rooms, in an 'entertainment' entitled 'Facts and Fancies, Musically and Dramatically Illustrated', a non-stop succession of burlesques, songs, and character sketches, in which he kept packed audiences laughing, as the 'Morning Star' (20 April) put it, 'to the extreme point of endurance'. It was hailed by an astonished press as the event of the season. By the winter, however, he was back on course at the Princess's, with George Vining, playing parts as diverse as the scoundrel Abel Honeydew in Watts Phillips's 'Paul's Return' and the fiddler Mozart Smith in his own 'Heart Strings and Fiddle Strings'. 
In 1865 Fisher was very appropriately cast in the leading part of 'Orpheus in the Haymarket', J. R. Planche's adaptation of Offenbach's opera. According to Planche himself: 'He played Orpheus with intelligence and 'the fiddle like an angel'' (Planche, 249). He spent most of the next two years as stage manager and celebrity performer with H. J. Byron in Liverpool, returning to London for the opening of the new Globe Theatre on 28 November 1868, when he played Major Treherne in Byron's new play, 'Cyril's Success'. After the first night, the 'Sunday Times' expressed the hope that he would not again leave London. Nor, for some time, did he do so, but appeared at various theatres in a succession of mainly new plays, his most brilliant performance being in the role of the roue and gamester Major Jorum, in Boucicault's 'Formosa' at Drury Lane, on 5 August 1869. 
With his intelligence and versatility, he was much in demand by playwrights such as Dion Boucicault, H. J. Byron, Watts Phillips, Tom Taylor, J. B. Buckstone, and W. S. Gilbert, who made a point of engaging him for principal parts in his comedies. Yet some of his richest characterizations were in classical comedy roles such as Sir Peter Teazle, Sir Harcourt Courtly, Autolycus, and Polonius, some of them being first seen out of London. Though a London star, he took the country theatres seriously and, throughout his career, kept in touch with his own provincial roots. He returned often to Glasgow, which had nursed his talents, and to East Anglia, performing, as when a boy, in theatres that his grandfather had built. After 1876 he worked mostly in the provinces, his last London appearance being in a lively performance of Sir Toby Belch in the Lyceum production of 'Twelfth Night', in July 1884. 
Fisher's health was now beginning to fail, however, and he became unable to undertake more than occasional concerts of dramatic readings and music. What was probably the last of these took place at the Camden Athenaeum on 24 January 1887, when his powers were said to have been undiminished. On 4 October of the same year, after an illness lasting nine weeks, he died at his home, 6 St Augustine's Road, Camden Town, and four days later was buried in Highgate cemetery, his quiet funeral unattended by the profession. The press paid tribute to a remarkable career. His death, wrote 'The Times', had 'deprived the stage of one of its best and most artistic comedians'. 
Fisher's third son, 
Fisher's major-general was a notable comic achievement, a blend of true characterization and sure-fire comedy which, during the next nine years, became the hallmark of his successive interpretations of: Sir Joseph Porter ('HMS Pinafore'), King Gama ('Princess Ida'), John Wellington Wells ('The Sorcerer'), Koko ('The Mikado'), Bunthorne ('Patience'), and Wilfred Shadbolt ('The Yeomen of the Guard'). In May 1889, while playing Shadbolt at Liverpool, he was suddenly taken ill during a performance and died ten days later on 25 May, aged forty-four. The 'Liverpool Daily Post' of 27 May said of him: 'As a comedian he displayed a deep knowledge of character, and a high command of the expressions.' It has been observed that these qualities marked the Gilbertian tradition for a further generation, notably in the performances of Henry Lytton, who acknowledged his debt to Fisher in a letter to the latter's widow, Caroline, 'nee' Hinton, in 1932. 'Looking back', he wrote: 'It was good to have been your husband's understudy in 'Princess Ida' -- he was a fine actor -- and watching his fine work, put me on the right road -- I shall ever be thankful that fate brought me in touch with so great an artist.' 



@@@@@


doc= 9493


Fisher, Edward (b. 1611/12, d. in or after 1656), political and religious controversialist, was the eldest son of Sir Edward Fisher (died 1654), knight, of Mickleton, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Maria (died 1642), daughter of Sir Thomas Challoner. On 25 August 1627, aged fifteen, he was admitted to Brasenose College, Oxford, graduating BA on 10 April 1630. The following year, it is recorded, there was 'Given by Edward Fisher Bachelor of Artes, a great Colledg pott' ('Brasenose College Quatercentenary Monographs', 5, p. 18). At university Fisher acquired a reputation for his knowledge of ecclesiastical history and his skill in ancient languages. He supported the royalists in the civil war, issuing (anonymously) in autumn 1643 his 'Appeal to the Conscience', a work of some political sophistication. Here he sought to demonstrate the illegality of rebellion against the sovereign, and to rebut a range of counter-arguments, on the basis of religious, political, and legal principles, citing both an impressive range of scriptural precedents and such authorities as Bracton, Sir John Fortescue, and even Sir Edward Coke. Fisher may have moved to the royalist headquarters at Oxford, issuing there in 1644 'The Feast of Feasts, or, The Celebration of the Sacred Nativity', a defence of the festivals of the church, especially Christmas, against puritan charges of popery, in which he pilloried the parliamentarian side as 'a rabble of all opinions', most of them heretical (p. 2). Here and in 'A Christian Caveat to the Old and New Sabbatarians' (1649) he also attacked sabbatarianism. 
Fisher's whereabouts after the civil war are uncertain, but he may soon have returned to Gloucestershire. He was certainly there soon after his father's death on 29 December 1654, tangling with George Collier of Bocking over the power of ministers to refuse communion to the ignorant and scandalous of their flock; Collier mentions Fisher's having attended a religious lecture at Chipping Campden in March 1656. In 'An Answer to Fifteen Questions Lately Published by Edward Fisher' Collier wrote to his friend Thomas Overbury of Bourton on the Hill, Gloucestershire, that Fisher had 'sent abroad these questions, containing a parecel of passionate and bitter insinuations against suspending ministers as he calls them' (sig. A2'r'). Fisher opportunistically sought to curry favour with Independent opinion, by presenting the practice of exclusion as an aspect of 'binding and loosing': it was 'a sinful usurpation, and a high presumption for any man under the fictitious title of church officer' thus to exclude (Fisher, 'Questions Preparatory to the Better, Free, and More Christian Administration of the Lords Supper', 1655, 2). This startled his opponent, who knew Fisher's Anglican record: 'with me, tis a wonder, that he should once question this practice, since the Service book and Canons warrant, nay require it' (Collier, 'An Answer', 9). Fisher had inherited his father's estate at Mickleton but it was heavily encumbered with debt, and in 1656 he sold it to a Richard Graves. This did not put an end to his financial difficulties. Fisher decamped to Carmarthenshire, where he taught a school, but his creditors tracked him down, and he fled to Ireland. Anthony Wood was told that he died there at an unknown date, his wife (whose name is unknown) having predeceased him, and that his body was taken to London for burial. 
Despite earlier controversy among historians, it cannot now be seriously doubted that Edward Fisher of Mickleton must be distinguished from 
Authorship of 'The Marrow' was claimed by the person who wrote 'A Touchstone for the Communicant' (1647) and 'London's Gate to the Lord's Table' (1648), both concerning the question of exclusion from the sacrament. (The same man probably also wrote 'Faith in Five Fundamental Principles' of 1650, a contribution to the common front of orthodox Christians against those radicals who were questioning the fundamentals of the faith.) He appears in these works as 'E. F.'; his surname is known only from an allusion to it in Samuel Pretty's preface to the second edition of 'The Marrow'. The prefatory addresses in this work by Pretty, Joshua Sprigge, William Strong, and Jeremiah Burroughs indicate that the author was a zealous puritan of their acquaintance, and therefore not identifiable with Edward Fisher of Mickleton. In 'A Touchstone', 'Simon' tries to persuade his minister to exclude his neighbour 'Zacheus' for sinfulness and ignorance; but Zacheus has committed only one great sin, of which he has repented. The minister is made to respond that Simon has 'come hither with a high conceit of himself' as a man reputed to be 'of great knowledge and strict life' but that he has 'too nearly resembled the Pharisees crowing over and undervaluing of the poor publican', and that he himself is unworthier of the sacrament (pp. 54-5). Here and in 'London's Gate' the author seeks to articulate zealous, Independent reservations about the rigours of presbyterian discipline. 
In his epistle to 'The Marrow', Fisher says he is 'a poor inhabitant of London', yet he had resources enough to acquire and study an impressive number of books for 'The Marrow'. His reference to a consultation, after twelve years in error, with Thomas Hooker, the puritan minister who had fled England for the Netherlands in 1631 before taking ship two years later to New England, suggests a man already mature in the early 1630s; he nowhere claims to be a clergyman, but records that he was an ordinary member of a congregation. On 14 November 1626, an Edward Fisher was made free of his master Richard Marshalsey of the Company of Barber-Surgeons, and this was certainly the Edward Fisher who appears in the poll tax returns for 1641, as a barber and member of that company, resident in the parish of St Sepulchre. This was the only person so named recorded among members of all the London companies in the returns of that year. It seems likely, in the light of Hadow's later assertion, that this was indeed the author of 'The Marrow'. 
Very little more can be hazarded about Fisher. Two of his patrons in the late 1640s were Sir Henry Rolle, chief justice of common pleas, and Colonel John Downes, MP for Arundel, Sussex. Fisher wrote in 1648 that Rolle had accepted 'the office of a ruling elder when you were chosen, in that congregation whereof you have been pleased to admit me a member', making the writer a lay member of a gathered congregation in or near London -- but nothing more is known at present about his life (E. F., 'London's Gate', preface). 


@@@@@


doc= 9494


Fisher, Edward (bap. 1722, d. in or before 1782), mezzotint engraver, was the son of Mary Lambe and Charles Fisher (died 1752). He was baptized on 18 November 1722 at St John's Church, Dublin. In the year preceding Edward's birth, his father, Charles, following in his own father's footsteps, was appointed master of the Feltmakers' Company. This may explain why it has sometimes been assumed that Edward started his career as a hatter, but the records of the Feltmakers' Company show no record of this. Fisher arrived in London in 1758 and spent some time in the studio of James McArdell. Shortly after that date his talent in mezzotint was recognized by Joshua Reynolds, who selected Fisher to engrave his portrait 'Commodore Augustus Keppel' in 1759. Reynolds recognized how closely his fortunes were linked to the wide dissemination of prints after his work, and it was essential he choose a skilled and sympathetic engraver to ensure the print's popularity. 
After the success of 'Commodore Augustus Keppel', Fisher engraved nearly thirty more of Reynolds's paintings including 'Lady Sarah Bunbury Sacrificing to the Graces' (1766) and 'Garrick between Tragedy and Comedy' (1762). Fisher was favoured for his technical skill, his bold modelling, and his accuracy; indeed, Northcote (1818) recounts how Reynolds once criticized Fisher for being 'injudiciously exact' (Lennox-Boyd and others, 144). Fisher was important to Reynolds's portrait print business, as the painter's pocket book records. Alongside the entry for the novelist Laurence Sterne's final sitting in April 1760 can be found the words 'Mr Fisher Engraver', indicating that the portrait should be sent immediately to the engraver. From successive entries in Reynolds's pocket book it is known that it took Fisher five weeks to complete this subtle and effective mezzotint. Additionally, from a reference in one of David Garrick's letters it appears that Fisher would also have been responsible for selling on prints after Reynolds, as those of Garrick were available directly from the engraver who 'Lives in Leicester Fields' ('Letters', 2.343). 
Fisher was a member of the Society of Artists and throughout the 1760s and 1770s regularly showed engraved portraits after painters such as Benjamin West, Nathaniel Dance, and Francis Cotes at their exhibitions. 
Although the circumstances are unknown, Edward Fisher died before 13 July 1782. After that date his surviving plates were dispersed by his widow, who may have been called Anne. It is said that many were then tampered with to produce false proofs. 


@@@@@


doc= 9495


Fisher, George (1794-1873), astronomer, was born on 31 July 1794 at Sunbury, Middlesex, a son of James Fisher (died 1797), surveyor, and his wife, Henrietta. One of a large family left to the care of a widowed mother, he received little early education before joining the Westminster Insurance Company at the age of fourteen. There his perseverance at mundane tasks won him the respect and rewards of his employers. His scientific aspirations had, however, been fostered by Sir Humphry Davy, Sir Joseph Banks, Sir Everard Home, and other eminent men, and he entered St Catharine's College, Cambridge, in 1816, graduating BA in 1821 and MA in 1825. His studies were interrupted by serious illness, which continued to plague him in later years, and by his appointment, on the recommendation of the Royal Society, as one of the astronomers to the Admiralty's Arctic expedition of 1818. 
This expedition was dispatched in response to reports from Greenland whalers of open water extending much further north than in previous years. Four ships were sent out, two in search of a north-west passage, the other two, HMS 'Dorothea', on which Fisher sailed, and HMS 'Trent', being directed to sail past Spitsbergen towards the pole, in the hope of finding a passage to the Bering Strait. Before they returned, defeated by ice and bad weather, Fisher set up an observatory to establish the correct position of Spitsbergen; he had made a series of gravity pendulum experiments there, which he used to calculate the degree to which the earth was flattened at the poles. He also measured the effect of shipboard iron on the going rate of the chronometers, a matter of vital concern to navigators. His findings were read to the Royal Society in 1820. 
After taking orders Fisher formally entered the Royal Navy, being appointed acting chaplain and astronomer to William Edward Parry's expedition in search of the north-west passage in 1821-3. A portable observatory, embarked on HMS 'Fury', was set up, first at Winter Island, later at Igloolik, on Melville peninsula. Parry testified to the 'unabated zeal and perseverance' (Parry, 'Journal', xviii) with which Fisher, despite frequent illness, pursued numerous wide-ranging experiments. Those of value to navigators in high latitudes included comparative tests of compasses, and numerous observations to determine refraction when stars were observed near the horizon in very cold weather. Fisher took advantage of the extremely low temperature to measure the contraction of a series of bars of different metals, and the behaviour of various chemicals. He also measured the velocity of sound. Fisher's naval service continued in HMS 'Spartiate', 1827-30, and in HMS 'Asia' in 1831, posted in the Mediterranean and in Portuguese waters. In 1832-3 he was assigned to HMS 'Victory' at Portsmouth, after which he retired on half pay. 
Fisher was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1825, and of the Astronomical Society in 1827, where he served several times as vice-president and was a member of council from 1835 to 1863. He was elected fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1830 but resigned in 1840. His ideas concerning the aurora borealis were conveyed in 1834 to the Royal Society, which declined to publish them, as his paper 'has so few facts' (W. H. Pepys, RS, RR 1.67-8), and to the British Association in Cambridge in 1835. Fisher adhered to the general belief that the aurora was an electrical phenomenon, but, like his contemporaries, had no inkling of its true origin as a stream of ionized solar particles made visible on reaching the atmosphere. He supposed that it originated in mid-atmosphere, caused by the abrupt changes in temperature and humidity above the polar ice margin, which accounted for its circumpolar distribution. 
In 1834 Lord Auckland, as first lord of the Admiralty, offered Fisher the choice between the living of Falstone in Northumberland or the chaplaincy and headmastership of Greenwich Hospital school. Fisher accepted the latter. About this time he married Elizabeth Alicia Woosnam; they had two daughters, the eldest of whom was the nurse Alice Fisher, and a son. During Fisher's headship he raised the school from its previous low state to be the best of its kind. He wrote textbooks on algebra and geometry to introduce modern methods into the school and he planned and superintended its astronomical observatory, observing there the solar eclipse of 18 July 1860, the year in which he became principal. 
Fisher retired in 1863, sold many of his books, and moved to Rugby, Warwickshire, where he died at 19 Hillmorton Road on 14 May 1873. An obituarist described him as 'Always of a singularly childlike and contented disposition, the companionship of those dearest to him and his books were all he needed for happiness' ('Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society'). 


@@@@@


doc= 9496


Fisher, James (1697-1775), a founder of the Secession church, was born on 22 January 1697 in Barr, Ayrshire, the eldest son of Thomas Fisher (1669-1721), the minister of Barr at the time of his birth, and Susanna Menzies. In 1699 the family moved to Rhynd, Perthshire, where his father remained the minister for twenty-two years. Fisher attended the universities of Glasgow and St Andrews and then studied divinity in Edinburgh. After his father's death he moved with his mother and sisters to the proximity of Portmoak and attended Ebenezer Erskine's ministry there. He was licensed by the presbytery of Perth on 31 October 1722 and was subsequently called to Kinclaven, Perthshire, on 5 October 1725, and ordained there on 23 December. On 4 July 1727 he married Ebenezer Erskine's daughter Jean (died 1771), with whom he had fifteen children, seven of whom survived to maturity. 
Fisher joined in signing the representation and petition presented to the general assembly of 1732, complaining of the assembly's disregard of that call and consent by the Christian people which is necessary to establish a pastoral relationship, as well as of innovations in preaching. He also joined the protest submitted against the refusal of the committee on bills and overtures to transmit the representation and petition to the assembly itself. In October 1732 his father-in-law preached in Kinclaven, according to local tradition delivering the same sermon he preached before the synod a few days later. The sermon had a very different effect on the two audiences: the synod's admonition ultimately forced Erskine from the Church of Scotland, but in the parish it prepared most of the people to leave it voluntarily. 
Fisher played an active part in the process that led to the formation of the Secession church in Scotland. Though the 1733 assembly refused to hear him because he was related by marriage to Erskine, who stood accused, he joined his father-in-law in signing the protest against the assembly's judgment and in consequence was loosed from his charge along with Erskine in November. He subsequently took part in the December meeting at Gairney Bridge at which the Associate Presbytery was formed. As clerk of the Associate Presbytery he assisted William Wilson in preparing the presbytery's 'Testimony to the doctrine, worship, government and discipline of the Church of Scotland, or, Reasons... for their protestation' (1734). 
The congregation at Kinclaven formally joined the Associate Presbytery in October 1736, though they continued in possession of both the kirk and the manse until August 1741. A meeting place was then built for the church there, but Fisher was called to a newly formed congregation in Glasgow. This grew considerably in the course of his ministry, and a substantial church building was erected. Shortly after his translation to Glasgow, Fisher took part in the controversy over the revivals in Cambuslang and Kilsyth. In 'A Review of the Preface to a Narrative of the Extraordinary Work at Kilsyth' (1743), he questioned the genuineness of the supposed conversions. He joined with the Associate Presbytery in renewing the covenants in 1743 and in supporting the government during the Jacobite rising of 1745. He believed that taking the burgess oath was lawful, though he asserted that no view of the matter should be imposed as a term of communion. Consequently, in the split which followed he adhered to the Associate (Burgher) Synod, and published his views. When Alexander Moncrieff, who had been training candidates for the ministry for the Associate Presbytery, joined in forming the General Associate (Anti-Burgher) Synod, it was necessary for the Associate (Burgher) Synod to choose another professor. Ebenezer Erskine was assigned that duty initially, but Fisher was instructed to prepare himself to succeed him in the office, and he served in that capacity from 1749 to 1764. He exercised a considerable influence in the synod as one of its most senior and respected figures, and enjoyed a successful ministry in Glasgow until his death there on 28 September 1775. 
Although Fisher published several sermons and pamphlets the single work for which he is best known is 'The Assembly's Shorter Catechism Explained, by Way of Question and Answer', which was published in two parts in 1753 and 1760. Conceived as a project of the Associate Synod it contained contributions from both Ralph and Ebenezer Erskine, though Fisher was the primary author and editor. In 1768 he revised the work, which was frequently reprinted in Britain and America. It was used widely in the Secession churches and in the larger Presbyterian churches as well, and was still in print early in the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 9497


Fisher, Jasper (1590/91-1643), Church of England clergyman and playwright, was the son of William Fisher of Carleton, Bedfordshire, deputy auditor for the county of York, who was descended from a Warwickshire family, and Alice Roane of Wellingborough. Fisher matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 13 November 1607, aged sixteen; he was admitted BA on 28 January 1611, MA on 27 January 1614, BD and DD on 4 December 1638. In 1613, while still at Oxford, he contributed a Latin poem to 'Epithalamia', the university's volume honouring the royal wedding of Princess Elizabeth and the elector palatine. In 1623 he wrote commendatory verses for Simon Wastell's 'A True Christian's Daily Delight' and the following year he became rector of Wilsden, Bedfordshire. On 6 February 1627, at Little Stoughton, Bedfordshire, he married Elizabeth, daughter of the Revd William Sams of Burstead, Essex. The couple eventually had two children baptized at Wilsden: Elizabeth, on 8 October 1640, and Jasper, on 29 June 1642. 
Fisher's one considerable work, a play entitled 'Fuimus Troes, Aeneid 2, the True Trojans', depicts the defence of the Britons against the invasion of Julius Caesar, with ghosts, songs by a chorus of bards ending each act, and a masque halfway through. It was printed anonymously in 1633 with a title-page declaring that it had been 'Publickely presented by the gentlemen students of Magdalen College in Oxford'. There is only Wood's authority for the attribution to Fisher but this has been accepted by all later commentators. The Huntington Library copy of the quarto has a manuscript attribution 'By W. Rider', but this is dismissed by Bentley because nobody of that name was associated with Magdalen in the seventeenth century. 
Fisher's only other publication was the sermon 'The priest's duty and dignity, preached at the triennial visitation in Ampthill 1635. 18 Aug. by Jasper Fisher, presbyter and rector of Wilsden in Bedfordshire' (1636). According to Oldys's manuscript notes to Langbaine, Fisher became blind, whether from old age or an accident is not known. Wood calls him 'an ingenious man, as those that knew him have divers times informed me' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.619). Fisher's nuncupative will is dated 8 October 1643 and was proved nineteen days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 9498


Fisher, John (c.1469-1535), bishop of Rochester, cardinal, and martyr, was born at Beverley, Yorkshire, the son of Robert Fisher, a mercer of Beverley, and his wife, Agnes. In the early 1480s he went up to Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1488, aged about twenty, and proceeded MA in 1491. Having become a fellow of Michaelhouse, he was ordained priest that same year in York. 
Fisher advanced rapidly in the university, serving as senior proctor in the academic year 1494-5. It was while on official business as proctor, visiting the king's court at Greenwich, that he met Lady Margaret Beaufort, the mother of Henry VII, an event which changed the course of his life. His talents obviously impressed her, for he was recruited to her service, becoming in due course her spiritual director. His first ecclesiastical preferment came through this connection, as in 1499 he was presented to the rectory of what was recorded as Lith by Sir Ralph Bigod, himself a client of Lady Margaret. However, Fisher continued to play an active part in university life, lecturing in the 1490s and taking his doctorate in theology in 1501. In that same year he was elected vice-chancellor of the university -- no doubt on account of his influential connection with Lady Margaret -- and in 1502 he became the first incumbent of the professorship of theology which she founded at Cambridge. In the meantime Fisher was also making other powerful friends. Richard Fox recommended him to the king, and in 1504 Henry VII made him bishop of Rochester, with papal provision following on 14 October and consecration on 24 November. In recognition of his new eminence and long service, the university promptly elected him chancellor, a post to which he was continually re-elected until 1514, when he tendered his resignation in order to allow the university to hitch its wagon to that glorious workhorse, Thomas Wolsey. When Wolsey declined this distinction, the university re-elected Fisher for life. 
Fisher did everything to justify the confidence which the university placed in him and his powerful connections. Then, as now, academic leadership consisted to a large extent of fund-raising, and he delivered the goods. Lady Margaret's patronage had been divided equally between the universities until she met Fisher. Thereafter, her attention focused ever more exclusively on Cambridge, and her household was increasingly staffed by Cambridge graduates. She had already given money for lectureships at both universities, but under Fisher's influence these became formal endowments under royal licence. She went on to found two colleges in Cambridge, Christ's and St John's. It is impossible to document Fisher's influence on her benefactions directly, but his contemporaries were convinced that it was crucial. In later years he was at some pains to emphasize that the credit for founding St John's College belonged not to him but to Lady Margaret, an anxiety which itself reflects the common perception of his role. It has also been plausibly suggested that it was Fisher, by means of an oration delivered in the presence of Henry VII and Lady Margaret in 1507 in the as yet unfinished chapel of King's College, who persuaded Henry to bequeath $5000 for the completion of that chapel. 
Academic leadership also had its intellectual aspect, and Fisher busily fostered the progress at Cambridge of what is now called Renaissance humanism (known in its own day as 'good letters', 'bonae literae', or 'studia humanitatis'). As early as 1506 arrangements were made for Erasmus to teach at Cambridge, and it is likely that Fisher was behind them. The plans miscarried, as Erasmus was lured to Italy instead, but it was certainly thanks to Fisher that the great humanist at last reached Cambridge to lecture in Greek and theology in 1511. Erasmus resided in Queens' College from 1511 until 1514, and this too probably reflects the influence of Fisher, who had been president there from 1505 until 1508 (presumably in order to provide him with a base when visiting Cambridge on business to do with Lady Margaret's various foundations and benefactions). 
It was through his role in the establishment and organization of St John's College, though, that Fisher had his most enduring impact upon the academic life of Tudor Cambridge. Formally founded in 1511, the college was beset with problems from the start, as both Lady Margaret's former household servants and the king struggled to get a share of the vast endowment she had settled on the college. Fisher led Lady Margaret's executors in resisting these predatory raids, albeit with limited success, since Henry VIII insisted on having his share. St John's finally opened for academic business on 29 July 1516, and in that year Fisher first promulgated statutes for its governance. These statutes made his intentions clear: St John's was to be a 'trilingual' college along the lines of the humanist Collegium Busleiden at Louvain University. Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, the 'sacred' languages, were the only tongues to be used by members of the college within its precincts (a provision surely more programmatic than practical). Over the next few years Fisher did his best to translate these pious aspirations into reality. He persuaded Henry VIII to disburse moneys for the support of university lectureships in Greek and Hebrew. The first incumbents of these unestablished posts, Richard Croke and Robert Wakefield, both became fellows of the new college. In due course, Wakefield came to hold his fellowship on a chantry foundation which Fisher himself established within the college from his own resources. Neither man performed entirely to Fisher's satisfaction. Croke fell into dispute with his colleagues, and thus with Fisher, over his idiosyncratic approach to teaching and his cavalier attitude to the conventions of college life, while Wakefield had to spend much of his time abroad perfecting his own knowledge of Hebrew and other semitic languages before taking up his public duties as a lecturer in 1524. Moreover both men chose to follow the lead of Henry VIII, rather than of their original patron, in the controversy over the king's marriage which divided English politics in the later 1520s. 
Fisher's chantry foundation in St John's, besides testifying to his entirely conventional confidence in the traditional theology and intercessory power of the Catholic church, made important contributions to the progress of humanism in St John's, which, thanks to the succession of considerable scholars whom it housed -- Richard Croke, Robert Wakefield, George Day, Ralph Baynes, John Redman, John Seton, Thomas Watson, John Cheke, Roger Ascham, John Christopherson, and many more -- was, until Henry VIII's foundation of Trinity College in 1546, foremost among the colleges of Cambridge. 
Nor were Fisher's interests in humanism limited to patronage. Through his association with Erasmus, Fisher became ambitious to learn Greek, and for a while, in 1516, he had Erasmus himself for a tutor, as the latter stayed briefly at Rochester during his last visit to England. While he probably never attained great proficiency in the language, he acquired at least a working knowledge, enough to enable him to use Erasmus's edition of the Greek 'New Testament', and to argue points of Greek with his opponents in the theological polemics which occupied so much of his attention in the 1520s. At the same time as he was beginning Greek, he also made a start upon Hebrew. Erasmus had helped to interest him in the work of the great German Hebraist, Johannes Reuchlin, and became an intermediary between them. As a result, Fisher began to study Hebrew under the guidance of Robert Wakefield. Again, it was at best a working knowledge that he acquired -- but this was to come in handy during the controversy over Henry VIII's marriage. Like many early Tudor bishops Fisher employed part of his revenues to exploit the new opportunities afforded by the printing press and accumulate a magnificent library. His collection was reckoned one of the greatest of its day, and he formally donated it to St John's, to be delivered after his death. Sadly for the college, his library was seized by royal commissioners with all his other goods when he was attainted of treason, and the college, despite years of pleading, never vindicated its claim (Roger Ascham was still writing plaintive letters about this to the duke of Somerset more than ten years after Fisher's execution). 
The see of Rochester was commonly given to worthy theologians, and Henry VII seems to have made this particular nomination in a fit of conscience, seeking to make some amends to God for his habitual exploitation and manipulation of the episcopate for political or merely financial purposes. Certainly Fisher never showed any intention of emulating the political careers of bishops like John Morton and Richard Fox, but then he was (unlike them, both lawyers) a theologian. It was later reported that Fisher turned down offers of translation to wealthier sees, such as Lincoln and York, and this would indeed be in character although the reports are much later and may be mere pious legend. In the conduct of his episcopate Fisher set out to be an exemplary bishop, and later generations looked back on him as such even in the fervour of the Catholic Reformation. His record of residence was impressive, although given that his see was so close to London and that he had no diplomatic and few governmental responsibilities, there was little enough to draw him away. It is significant that the only time Fisher was considered for weighty service abroad was in the context of the Fifth Lateran Council, for which he was twice nominated by Henry VIII as one of the English delegation. Each time, hostilities between England and France frustrated his mission. Fisher left England only once, to attend the summit meeting of the kings of those two countries on the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520. Characteristically, the only allusion to that magnificent display in his writings is as an image for the transience of worldly glory. 
The evidence for Fisher's pastoral zeal is both anecdotal and archival. His dedication to duty was praised in his own lifetime by no less a critic than Erasmus, who frequently cited the bishop of Rochester as a model of his calling. The early biography of Fisher asserts that he was assiduous in pastoral work, and the evidence of his episcopal register confirms this, showing that he traversed the diocese regularly and held formal visitations every three years, in accordance with canon law. Unlike many bishops, he personally carried out almost all the ordinations in his diocese, besides presiding regularly in person at abbatial elections and personally performing many of the special sacramental and ceremonial functions which his fellow bishops often delegated to suffragans. He had a high regard for the priestly office, and his vigilance in the matter of clerical appointments is suggested by the facts that his diocese had a higher than average proportion of graduate clergy and that the clergy he himself collated within the diocese were almost all scholars, usually from Cambridge and mostly from colleges with which Fisher himself was associated, such as St John's, Christ's, and Queens'. 
Preaching was one of John Fisher's foremost pastoral and academic concerns. The early biography commented upon his activity as a preaching bishop, and the statutes he drafted for St John's College made the training of preachers one of its express aims. As vice-chancellor of Cambridge he had induced Lady Margaret to endow a preachership as well as the theology professorship, and he had secured from Rome papal privileges enabling the university to license graduates to preach anywhere in the kingdom. Lady Margaret herself esteemed him highly for his preaching, and his first published work was a series of ten sermons on the seven penitential psalms which were originally delivered in her household, and which were printed at her request. These sermons, based on a widely used devotion, were frequently reprinted and proved remarkably popular until the English Reformation superannuated a theology which was suffused with the sacramental and penitential practices of late medieval Catholicism. Fisher was high on the list of preachers suitable for great public occasions, and his other surviving sermons are mostly set pieces. In 1509 he preached at the funeral of Henry VII and at the 'month's mind' (thirty days after the funeral) of Lady Margaret. In 1521 he preached at the promulgation in London of the papal bull against Martin Luther, and in 1526 at the recantation of Robert Barnes. All his sermons combine the tripartite structure favoured by the scholastics with a concern for the appropriate exegesis of scripture which was becoming more fashionable, thanks to the influence of humanism. Although his prose is somewhat excessively decorated and elaborate for modern taste, it was clearly to the taste of his time, and his apt and effective images testify to a genuinely creative intellect. 
The image of Fisher abetting Archbishop Warham of Canterbury in torturing the Lollard martyr John Browne by applying hot coals to his feet is doubtless a figment of the imagination of John Foxe's informant. But Fisher certainly experienced considerable anxiety over the emergence of protestant heresy (he showed nothing like the same degree of concern with native Lollardy). He preached at the first burning of Luther's books in England in May 1521, and enthusiastically followed his sovereign's lead in writing against Martin Luther. He took part in the proceedings against Robert Barnes early in 1526, preaching at the friar's recantation, and in those against Thomas Bilney and Thomas Arthur in 1527. Heresy at Cambridge was particularly worrying for him. In 1521 he made several trips to Cambridge to preach anguished sermons calling for the repentance of a student who had defaced a poster announcing indulgences for those who 'with word and deed withstood this new develish and pernitious doctrine set forth by Luther' ('Vie Du bienheureux Martyr Jean Fisher', 10.229-35). And in 1527 the identification as a heretic of Thomas Arthur, a fellow of his beloved St John's College, disturbed him so much that in the next recension of the college statutes (1530) he introduced an extraordinary provision permitting the master and senior fellows to eject from the college summarily any member so much as suspected of heresy (this power was never in fact used). He also supported the efforts to combat heresy in Cambridge made by his friend Nicholas West, bishop of Ely. 
The anguish which the very idea of heresy induced in Fisher helps explain why, in the 1520s, he devoted so much of his time to combating the new 'evangelical' doctrines (which would come to be called 'protestant') that were spreading from Germany and Switzerland throughout much of Europe. However, Fisher's first essays in polemical theology were in fact contributions to a humanist controversy. The French humanist Jacques Lefevre d'Etaples had questioned in print the traditional identification of Mary Magdalene with both Mary of Bethany (the sister of Martha and Lazarus) and the sinful woman who anointed Christ's feet in the house of a Pharisee ('Luke' 7). Lefevre's challenge to the tradition which underpinned the immensely popular cult of Mary Magdalene provoked a scandal. It was by no means obvious that Fisher would take issue with Lefevre. He had supported both Reuchlin in the controversy over Hebrew books and Erasmus in the controversy over the Greek 'New Testament', and his initial response to the Magdalene controversy (voiced in an earlier conversation with Cardinal Campeggi) was to agree with Lefevre that two distinct women had been conflated in popular tradition. However, invited to reconsider the matter by the bishop of Paris, Etienne Poncher, who was in England on diplomatic business in 1518, Fisher examined it in more detail and concluded that Lefevre was wrong. Discovering just how far back the identification of the two women as one could be traced (at least to the time of Origen) led him to reclassify it as an ecclesiastical tradition sanctioned by both high scholarship and public worship. It cannot be emphasized too strongly that his judgement should not be seen as knee-jerk obscurantism. When, in a subsequent pamphlet, Lefevre went on to question another, more recent, popular belief, that St Anne was the mother of another three Marys (the Virgin Mary, Mary the mother of James and John, and Mary the wife of Cleophas), Fisher felt able to endorse his scepticism, while still insisting on the far more venerable tradition about the Magdalene. The Magdalene controversy was in the event rapidly eclipsed by the dramatic emergence of Martin Luther, and the obscurity into which it fell is sufficiently indicated by the fact that only one of Fisher's three books on the subject came into the hands of the compiler of his 'Opera omnia' in 1597. But the high sense of the authority of the church and of ecclesiastical tradition which Fisher formulated in that first controversy characterized all his later polemics. 
Fisher's reputation as a theologian rests on his writings of the 1520s, against Martin Luther and later Johannes Oecolampadius. It was Henry VIII himself who led the way, composing his 'Assertio septem sacramentorum' early in 1521 as a refutation of Luther's famous diatribe, 'The Babylonian Captivity of the Church'. With Henry's approval, the papal bull against Martin Luther, 'Exsurge domine', was formally promulgated for England by Cardinal Wolsey in a grand ceremony outside St Paul's on Sunday 12 May 1521. Fisher was chosen to preach the sermon, which was published soon afterwards. The bishop was in fact already at work on a much lengthier and more scholarly refutation of Luther, and the sermon, an effective little rebuttal, adumbrates some of its main lines of attack. In particular, it was notable for picking out three of the fundamentals of Luther's doctrine: the thesis of justification by faith alone, the ultimate appeal to scripture alone, and the denial of papal authority. The same three points received exhaustive attention in his 'Assertionis Lutheranae confutatio' (1523), as did the issue of free will (together with shorter discussions of a number of lesser issues). The defence of, and subsequent appeal to, the authority of the church were fundamentals of Fisher's response. But equally important was his whole analysis of Luther's theology which played a major part in shaping not only the Catholic response to Luther but also the Catholic understanding of Luther. Fisher's 'Confutatio' was one of the most frequently reprinted and widely quoted Catholic polemics against Luther, and many of the bishops and even theologians at the Council of Trent knew whatever they knew of Luther largely from Fisher's refutation. 
The early 1520s saw Fisher compose two other works against Luther: 'Defensio regiae assertionis', a defence of Henry's 'Assertio' against Luther's vitriolic counter; and 'Sacri sacerdotii defensio', a vindication of the Catholic understanding of the priesthood. These were published together at Cologne in 1525. In the meantime, he had also published another treatise, the 'Convulsio calumniarum Ulrichi Veleni' (1522) which maintained, quite effectively, against a challenge mounted by a central European evangelical humanist, Ulrich Velenus, the traditional report that the apostle Peter had exercised a ministry in Rome and met his death there. 
Fisher's other major work was his 'De veritate corporis et sanguinis Christi in eucharistia' (1527), a massive reply to a pamphlet by the Swiss evangelical humanist Johannes Oecolampadius, which had tried to argue on scriptural and patristic grounds against the doctrine of the real presence of Christ in the consecrated elements of the eucharist. Like the earlier 'Confutatio', the 'De veritate' was one of the most widely cited Catholic polemics of its time and was much used at the Council of Trent. Although hardly decisive in the context of a theological controversy which has raged without intermission to this day, its remorseless thoroughness (clearly dependent on Fisher's excellent library) exposed many holes in Oecolampadius's much vaunted patristic scholarship, and subsequently served many later Catholic polemicists (for instance, Richard Smyth and William Peryn) as a convenient handbook for arguments and proof texts on the subject. 
Fisher's career as a polemical theologian closed, as it had opened, with a humanist rather than a Reformation controversy. Richard Pace, the dean of St Paul's, had studied Hebrew under the guidance of Robert Wakefield in 1527, and published as the first fruits of his study a sort of extended flyer for a new Latin version of the book of 'Ecclesiastes', revised against the original Hebrew: the 'Praefatio in Ecclesiasten recognitum ad Hebraicam veritatem' ([1527]). This pamphlet sought to justify the new translation in advance, and in doing so launched a pre-emptive strike against the most powerful counter-argument, namely the contention that the 'Septuagint' version of the 'Old Testament', on which the 'Vulgate' 'Ecclesiastes' was based, was itself an inspired text, and therefore equivalent in authority to the Hebrew. Fisher's problem with this was again based on ecclesiastical tradition -- in this case a particular tradition of venerable antiquity. Observing, in general rightly, that the 'New Testament' tended to follow 'Septuagint' rather than Hebrew readings in citing the 'Old Testament', he maintained both that the inspiration of the 'New Testament' thus presumed and endorsed the inspiration of the 'Septuagint', and in turn that denial of the inspiration of the 'Septuagint' would undermine the credibility of the 'New Testament' itself. He also demonstrated beyond doubt the high regard in which the early Christian fathers held the 'Septuagint' version. In the event, his quarrel with Pace seems to have been amicably settled. Pace's 'Ecclesiastes' never appeared, Fisher's refutation of his preface was never published and survives only in one autograph manuscript, and even Pace's 'Praefatio' survives in only one copy, suggesting that it may have been withdrawn from the market. 
By this stage Fisher seems to have decided that polemical theology was not the most effective means of dealing with heresy. He may even have realized what was certainly the case, that refutations could help spread the ideas they sought to suppress. At any rate, when Johannes Cochlaeus, an indefatigable German Catholic controversialist, urged him to write against the ideas of the Anabaptists, he replied that he was no longer interested in such activities, and that he wished henceforth to devote himself to prayer and to his pastoral duties. 
What radically changed the proposed course of what Fisher doubtless already saw as his final years, as it radically changed the course of English, British, and perhaps even European history, was 'the King's Great Matter', Henry VIII's decision in the later 1520s to rid himself of his post-menopausal first wife and marry a younger woman in the hope of begetting a son. His grounds were of course that, as Katherine of Aragon had previously been married to his late elder brother, Prince Arthur, her second marriage to Henry contravened divine law, and was therefore, despite a papal dispensation, invalid. As the realm's most respected theologian, Fisher was inevitably consulted at an early stage, in 1527. Politically, he did not get things right. The case was initially aired as a scruple of the king's conscience, and Fisher naively set out to allay Henry's fears. Although he conceded that the scriptural evidence regarding marriage to a deceased brother's wife was ambiguous, he was unshakeable in his confidence in the scope of papal authority both to resolve doubts about scripture and also to grant matrimonial dispensations from all but the most fundamental of kinship restrictions. In effect, Fisher emerged from the start as the principal supporter of Katherine, whose Spanish and royal upbringing led her to insist imperiously and inflexibly upon the legitimacy of her marriage and her rank. As the extent of Henry's personal investment in this matter became apparent, Fisher devoted more and more effort to the scholarly questions it raised about scriptural interpretation, divine and natural law, and papal power. He lost count of the treatises he wrote on the case, and later commented that he had never put so much effort into anything else. A printed book ('De causa matrimonii', 1530), three substantial manuscripts, and various other fragmentary texts still survive to bear out his comment. 
In the first years of the Great Matter, before its full potential for political upheaval became clear to those involved, Fisher's contributions were primarily theological. He worked on a statement of the case for the validity of the marriage (in the form of a scholastic 'quaestio', asking 'Whether a marriage in which the pope has granted a dispensation for a man to marry his brother's wife is firm and indissoluble?') which set the agenda for discussion in this phase of the story. The task of finding answers to Fisher's arguments fell, ironically, to Fisher's former protege, Robert Wakefield, who was recruited to the king's cause in the summer of 1527. This inevitably led to a sharp cooling of feeling between the two men. Fisher seems to have regarded Wakefield's transfer to the king's service in this matter as a betrayal, and Wakefield's initially respectful tone towards the bishop soon gave way to efforts to edit Fisher out of accounts he gave of his own career. Wakefield found himself displaced on Fisher's foundation in St John's College by a more reliable Hebraist, Ralph Baynes, who loyally followed Fisher's lead on religious matters in the years ahead. Wakefield and Fisher continued to exchange views through 1528 and into 1529, when, in the run-up to a formal public trial of the case, Fisher heard rumours that Wakefield had found something new, and allegedly decisive, in the Hebrew 'Bible'. 
The first stage of opposition culminated in a tribunal to consider the validity of the king's marriage which was held in the London Blackfriars in summer 1529 under the aegis of cardinals Campeggi and Wolsey. The hearing itself was inconclusive, as Katherine refused to recognize its jurisdiction and appealed immediately to Rome, while Campeggi, after a few days of inconsequential business, revoked the case to Rome. But the proceedings did see the tabling of various written statements on behalf of the two parties, and the most notable episode, after the majestic appearance and disappearance of Katherine herself, was an outspoken oration by Fisher in defence of the marriage. Avowing himself willing to die for the sanctity of the marriage bond, and likening himself on these grounds to John the Baptist (whose feast day was nigh), Fisher implicitly cast Henry VIII as Herod and Anne Boleyn as Salome -- motifs taken up by Fisher's later hagiographers. Fisher had a tendency to say exactly what he thought, especially at moments of high emotion. 
Having come out in public against the king at the Blackfriars tribunal, Fisher was Henry's most consistent English opponent over the next six years. The parliament which was summoned later in 1529 to complete the overthrow of Cardinal Wolsey, whose policy had now so spectacularly failed, also saw Henry begin the inexorable process of pressurizing the English clergy to get into line over his matrimonial affairs. Bills were introduced by the king regulating various clerical malpractices, but thus also infringing the legislative liberty of the church. When these bills were sent up from the Commons, Fisher's speech against them displayed his underlying anxieties. The only explanation he could find for the legislation, he averred, was 'lack of faith' (that is, heresy), and he held up before his peers the example of Hussite Bohemia as a warning of the providential chastisements which might follow national apostasy. The Commons were enraged and perhaps also felt a little threatened, by the implicit charge of heresy, and complained to the king, who compelled Fisher to explain himself in what amounted to a humiliating climb-down. The bills were passed, and Fisher, along with John Clerk (bishop of Bath and Wells) and Nicholas West (bishop of Ely), appealed to the pope against them: all three bishops were promptly gaoled, albeit briefly. 
Fisher was to the fore again in 1531, leading resistance in convocation to the recognition of Henry VIII as supreme head of the church. He may well have suggested the saving clause 'quantum per legem Christi licet' ('as far as the law of Christ allows'), a measure with an inherent latitude of interpretation) with which the submission of the clergy was qualified. It is noteworthy that the delegates in the lower house of convocation who, even so, signed a protestation against the grant, included many of his associates, such as Robert Ridley, Nicholas Metcalfe, and Robert Shorton. Opposition to the divorce in Cambridge also tended to revolve around a few key figures (such as Dr John Watson, master of Christ's) close to Fisher. Fisher himself was becoming a veritable thorn in the king's flesh. The last attempts to win him over on the matter of the divorce were made in January 1531, when he and some others met for a disputation with a team led by John Stokesley. The failure of this move led some to consider more decisive solutions. An attempt was made in February to poison the bishop's soup, but it misfired. The ascetic Fisher passed the entire meal straight to his servants and to the poor who were accustomed to be fed at his gates, leaving two dead and the rest sick. On another occasion, an unknown assailant took an optimistic potshot at him in his Lambeth house from across the Thames. There is no reason to believe that Henry was involved in these plots. His own horror of poisoning was such that in response he passed a law making poisoning punishable by boiling alive, a mode of execution inflicted upon Fisher's unfortunate cook, who had been unwittingly tricked into the deed. The chances are that some less scrupulous client of the Boleyns was behind these attempts. 
By 1532 Fisher's health was beginning to fail, and he was unable to attend the convocation which granted Henry a right of veto over ecclesiastical legislation in May that year (although letters were sent to canvass his opinion, and some headings of an argument on the authority and dignity of the priesthood which survive in his hand suggest that he at least commenced a formal and hostile response). By now, Fisher was well under way with an exhaustive response to the 'Gravissimae censurae', the pamphlet which had published Henry VIII's case for the divorce in 1531. Fisher's 'Brevis apologia' was smuggled out of the country in sections by Eustace Chapuys, and no longer seems to survive in its entirety. It was clearly intended for publication, but quite possibly the 'fait accompli' of the divorce, decreed by Thomas Cranmer in April 1533, rendered it pointless to proceed with what would have been an enormously expensive printing. Fisher remained a perceived threat to the regime throughout these months. He managed to attend the convocation in April 1533 which passed a denial of the pope's power to dispense for marriage to a brother's widow, himself dissenting from the majority. When, shortly afterwards, he spoke out in public against the imminent divorce, he was promptly arrested and put into the custody of Stephen Gardiner, where he remained safely immured until the middle of June, by which time Anne had been crowned queen. 
Throughout the early 1530s Fisher was in close communication with Katherine of Aragon's most determined political supporter, Eustace Chapuys, the ambassador in England of her nephew, Charles V. Chapuys had come to England just after Wolsey's fall, and within a few months he had managed to convey one of Fisher's treatises on the divorce out of the country. He was kept right up to date with Fisher's literary enterprises on the subject, and was the channel by which several works by Fisher and others reached a wider audience. It was probably thanks to Chapuys that Fisher's only published tract on the divorce, the 'De causa matrimonii', found its way into print. As the lengths to which Henry was prepared to go in pursuit of the divorce became clearer, so too Fisher began to contemplate more radical opposition. He showed himself receptive to the potentially inflammatory message preached by the 'Holy Maid of Kent' (Elizabeth Barton), granting her an audience, and listening to her predictions of disaster for Henry and his kingdom should the divorce go ahead. 
The Holy Maid had a remarkably wide following among the clergy and nobility of the realm, or at least among those portions of those two estates who were sympathetic to the cause of Queen Katherine, a sympathy which tended to be combined with profound hostility to the sort of religious reform already becoming fashionable among the circles sympathetic to Anne Boleyn. It was among this 'Aragonese' faction (as it has sometimes been called) that Chapuys began to canvass support for possible imperial and papal action against Henry VIII should he proceed with his plans. By the beginning of 1532 Fisher was receiving instructions and advice from Charles V via Chapuys. Their contacts had clearly gone far beyond merely publishing treatises. By the end of September 1533 Chapuys was transmitting to Charles V Fisher's opinion that the papal condemnation of Henry's divorce and remarriage would be ineffectual unless supported by the might of the empire, and that such intervention would be tantamount to a crusade. Fortunately for Fisher, the king and his ministers never discovered his contacts with Chapuys -- or at least, never found any evidence about their treasonable content. 
That the regime might well by this stage have entertained the most profound suspicions about Fisher's loyalty is shown in the way that he was implicated in the proceedings now being taken against the Holy Maid of Kent. After she had been induced to confess publicly to fraud, proceedings were expedited by act of attainder, and Fisher was by the same act convicted of 'misprision of treason' and sentenced to confiscation of goods and imprisonment at the king's pleasure for having concealed the predictions she shared with him (these were all of course, as Fisher vainly pleaded in his own defence, public knowledge). Even now the regime had not abandoned all hope of -- if not winning Fisher over -- at least cowing him into submission. Had he been willing to take the 'oath to the succession' (an oath required in 1534 of all adult males, recognizing Henry's divorce and second marriage, and implicitly repudiating papal authority), he would doubtless have been restored to full honours. But he was not, and in April he was therefore confined in the Tower of London. About the end of the year a further act of attainder deprived him of his preferments, including the see of Rochester. In the course of 1535 pressure was put on him to affirm or deny Henry's status as 'Supreme Head of the Church of England' (which had been recognized by act of parliament late in 1534). Eventually, he seems to have uttered a denial of this title (possibly elicited by chicanery), which left him liable to the penalties of high treason under a new treason act passed that year. And so in June 1535 he was indicted, tried, convicted, sentenced, and, on Tuesday 22 June, decapitated on Tower Hill. His death, which Catholic Europe unanimously interpreted as martyrdom, was of no small importance in perpetuating after his death the reputation as a theologian which he had acquired earlier in his life. Now his witness against the innovations of his time was sealed in the blood of martyrdom -- and death for the truth was no longer the exclusive preserve of the protestant reformers. 
After his death Fisher was immediately classified as a martyr by the Catholic authors and theologians of Europe. In England, the initial stirrings of a martyr's cult were promptly suppressed by a vigilant government, which forbade preachers to discuss Fisher and Thomas More as anything other than traitors. Nevertheless, the report that Fisher's head (displayed for public scorn on London Bridge) was daily growing rosier and more lifelike in appearance soon spread from England to the continent, and was recorded in a pamphlet by the Catholic polemicist Johannes Cochlaeus which attacked Henry VIII and proclaimed his victims martyrs. One of Henry's ablest propagandists, Richard Morison, was commissioned to respond to Cochlaeus's claims. The systematic elimination of Fisher's memory at St John's College, Cambridge, should properly be seen as part of the government's attempt to strangle the potential martyr's cult at birth. The tomb Fisher had built for himself in the college chapel was dismantled, his heraldic emblems (fishes and ears of wheat), liberally scattered around it, were defaced, and the college statutes were in due course redrafted to eliminate all mention of him and of the scholarships and lectureships he had founded within the college. Nevertheless, once Mary Tudor had secured the throne in 1553, Fisher's domestic reputation soon rose again. A circle of Catholic humanists associated with St John's College set about compiling materials for a biography. Although their work was unfinished when Mary died, it was carried on under the new regime, and before Elizabeth's reign was over a life of Fisher was circulating widely in manuscript. It was first printed in 1655. A critical edition by Francois van Ortroy was published by the Bollandists in two volumes, 1891-3. 
Despite (or perhaps because of) an ascetic and uncompromising disposition, Fisher was evidently a man of considerable personal charisma. It is perhaps not surprising that a pious noblewoman of Lady Margaret's character took him up as her spiritual director: the early modern era is full of such spiritual relationships. But Fisher, like Thomas More (though in a different way), also kindled loyalty and affection in relatives, colleagues, and friends. His half-sister, Elizabeth White, remained loyal to her monastic vocation long after the closure of Dartford Priory, while scattered sources speak vaguely of relatives of Fisher who took refuge abroad after his execution. The few men who tried to stand up and be counted in resisting Henry VIII's policies in the early 1530s were for the most part connected with Fisher personally or professionally. Yet, given the relatively limited resources of Rochester, it should be concluded that it was the force of his personality rather than of his patronage which elicited this loyalty. Although St John's College was eventually to become notorious as a centre of Calvinistic puritanism, in the years immediately following his death it remained loyal to his memory, celebrating his exequies and bringing down upon itself the unwelcome attentions of the government, which, as well as systematically erasing all traces of Fisher there, compelled his right-hand man Nicholas Metcalfe to resign the mastership and overruled the college's own choice of a successor. The compilation of the early life of Fisher was the work of former fellows of St John's or episcopal chaplains, such men as John Young, Thomas Watson, and Robert Truslowe. Fisher's senior chaplain, John Addison, deserted him only at the bitter end, under the pressure of attainder and imprisonment. Another of his chaplains, George Bucker (alias Adam Damplip), fled to Rome after his master's execution (although he subsequently became a protestant and died for his beliefs). One of the fellows on his foundation at St John's, Ralph Baynes, likewise fled the country rather than take the oath to the succession. John Stokesley, Fisher's opponent over Henry's divorce, was said to have lamented on his deathbed his failure to stand by Fisher in the crisis over the break with Rome. Few of his friends and clients actively turned against him. Two of these, Richard Croke and Robert Wakefield, were, for all their talents, fundamentally unpleasant men, whose arrogance and unscrupulous ambitiousness made both of them many enemies and put fairly low ceilings on both their careers. At the end, in 1535, even Fisher's political enemies hesitated about his destruction. Archbishop Cranmer himself urged mercy. 
Fisher's fate ultimately hinged on his relationship with Henry VIII, which went back many years. There is no evidence for the claim which is sometimes made that Fisher had been for a while Prince Henry's tutor. There may well be truth in another story, that Fisher was one of those to whose guidance Lady Margaret recommended her grandson from her own deathbed, after the death of Henry VII; certainly Fisher appeared a few times on the king's council in the next few years. If so, then he was also one of those clerical councillors (along with the more influential Warham and Richard Fox) from whose tutelage Henry in effect emancipated himself by taking England into war with France in 1513. And there were other tensions around this time, as Henry refused to allow the endowment of St John's College to the full extent stipulated by Lady Margaret's will, insisting on retaining a greater share of her lands for himself. Yet Fisher did well in this context, securing respectable compensation from Henry and persuading him to make some substantial outlays for the benefit of the university -- which all suggests that he maintained a good working relationship with his sovereign. Moreover, Fisher was still of value to the king. Henry VIII held him in the highest esteem as the foremost theologian of his realm, as Cardinal Pole later reminded him. In the context of the campaign against Luther in the early 1520s, Henry even bestowed upon him the ultimate mark of royal affection, the companionly arm around the shoulders. 
Fisher was one of a series of theologians from whom, at one time or another, Henry requested a commentary on the 'Psalms'. Fisher's elaborate attempt, incomplete, and probably interrupted by the distraction of the king's Great Matter, remains in tatters among the state papers. Another of Fisher's works, the so-called 'king's psalms' (a dozen or so Latin meditations in the style of psalms, perhaps best described as devout pastiche or sacred parody), may have been a down payment on the larger project, and seem to have gone down well with the king. Many years later, Katherine Parr was to translate them into English and publish them under the title by which they are now known (tactfully passing over their authorship). It was another sign of royal esteem that Fisher was among the very first theologians to be approached for an opinion about the validity of the king's first marriage. This of course was what ruined their relationship. Although Fisher continued to express respect for the king's conscientious scruples, his outburst at Blackfriars in 1529 showed the way his mind was headed with its implicit likening of Henry to the tyrant Herod. Over the next few years, Henry gradually gave up on his attempts to win over or overawe Fisher, and from 1533 resorted to defamation and imprisonment; and Fisher in his turn had abandoned polite argument and persuasion in favour of strictly treasonable discussions with foreign powers. In the end, vindictive and self-righteous as ever, it was Henry himself who insisted upon the humiliation and destruction of his old friend and servant, now a sick and dying man. 
The final provocation was, ironically, probably an attempt to save Fisher's life. On 21 May 1535 Pope Paul III added Fisher's name to the group of scholarly and reforming bishops whom he was recruiting as cardinals in the early years of his pontificate. Presumably he hoped to deter Henry from extreme measures by giving Fisher the status of a prince of the church. If so, he misread the game whose stakes he was thereby raising. Upon receiving the news of this promotion, Henry, with some black quip, variously reported, to the effect that he could give Fisher a red hat of his own, or else see he had nowhere to put it, gave orders for Fisher's execution -- merciful only to the extent of substituting beheading for the usual barbarities. 
The suppression of English Catholicism which was achieved by Henry VIII and his younger daughter ensured that for centuries there would be no political pressure to regularize through canonization the reputation of martyrdom which immediately adhered to Fisher's name. However, once English Catholicism emerged from the shadows in the nineteenth century, in a world in which kings were becoming less and less relevant, formal proceedings were commenced, leading to Fisher's beatification in 1886 and his canonization in 1935. Together with Thomas More he is now commemorated by the Roman Catholic church on 22 June, the anniversary of his execution. 


@@@@@


doc= 9499


Percy, John (1569-1641), Jesuit, was born on 27 September 1569 in co. Durham, in the village of Holmside, the son of John Percy, yeoman, and Cecilia Lawson, both protestants. At the age of fourteen he was sent to live with a Roman Catholic woman and due to her influence and the persuasions of a local Catholic priest he converted to Catholicism and in 1586 crossed the channel and entered the English College at Rheims. In 1589 he matriculated at the Jesuit-run English College at Rome, and on 13 March 1593, by papal dispensation, was ordained a priest before the full canonical age. In May 1594 he was admitted into the Society of Jesus and began his noviciate at Tournai. In the following year, however, he became ill due to overwork, and was ordered to England to recuperate. Upon arrival in London he was arrested and committed to Bridewell prison, where after seven months he managed to escape with two other priests and seven laymen. After hiding for a short time in London he was sent to Yorkshire and in 1598, after reportedly reconciling his mother and sister to the Catholic faith, he joined John Gerard as a chaplain in the Vaux household at Harrowden. In carrying out his pastoral duties there Percy became confessor to Grace, the wife of Sir John Fortescue, son of the chancellor of the exchequer. The young Jesuit was also instrumental in the conversions of members of the Digby family, including Sir Everard Digby, his wife, Mary, and John Digby of Rutland. In 1599 he became the Digbys' household chaplain. Although not involved in the Gunpowder Plot of 1605 he was considered by government officials to be guilty by association with the Digby and Vaux families, and also because he had accompanied some of the conspirators on a pilgrimage to St Winifred's Well in Wales. Nevertheless, he was not apprehended and remained hidden at Harrowden until 1610. 
In the years between 1605 and 1610 Percy emerged as an important apologist for the Roman faith. Although he used Fisher as an alias, in 1605 he published 'The Treatise of Faith' using the pseudonym A. D. The 'Treatise' was primarily a 'reductio ad absurdum' negation of protestantism. 'There must be one true faith which has existed visibly in all ages', Percy's argument went. Since Catholics could show a visible apostolic pedigree and protestants only a church since Luther, the Catholic faith must be true while protestantism was novel and therefore false. Answering Percy's question 'where was your church before Luther?' became a provocative challenge for protestants and both Anthony Wotton, lecturer at All Hallows Barking by the Tower in London, and John White, chaplain to the king, published replies in 1608. 
In November 1610 Harrowden was raided and Percy, along with Elizabeth Vaux and Nicholas Hart SJ, was arrested. Percy and Hart were sent to the Gatehouse prison at Westminster while Mrs Vaux was thrown into Fleet prison. The affair was widely reported in news dispatches and Gilbert Pickering, the JP who arrested the trio, was knighted. Though the two Jesuits received death sentences, James I commuted them to exile and in 1612 Percy and Hart left for Flanders. Percy remained very active in exile. In 1613 he was appointed vice-regent of the English mission in Flanders as well as professor of holy scripture at the Jesuit noviciate house in Louvain. In 1612, from the secret press at St Omer, he published 'A Reply to Mr. Anthony Wotton and Mr. John White, Ministers'. The appendix contained 'A Catalogue of Divers Visible Professors of the Catholike Faith', to which Percy added 'A Challenge to Protestants' to display their own historical pedigree. In 1614 John White replied again to Percy with his 'Defense of the Way to the True Church'. 
In 1615 Percy again travelled to England, only to be seized and thrown into the New prison. Since the king was now actively pursuing the favour of Spain, English Catholics were receiving numerous gestures of leniency. Along with other Jesuit prisoners Percy was allowed a daily furlough outside the prison and he regularly ministered in the homes of wealthy courtiers. He also became involved in the distribution of Catholic tracts. John Gee, a convert to protestantism, reported that Percy's secret London residence contained 'a greater store of books... than I ever beheld in any stationers ware-house' (Gee, 24). Even inside the prison Percy kept his personal library, celebrated mass, and actively engaged in debate with protestant churchmen, among whom were puritan ministers George Walker and Henry Burton. 
The reputation of 'Fisher the Jesuit' grew in the years between 1622 and 1624. In 1622 the countess of Buckingham, mother of George Villiers, the duke of Buckingham and the king's favourite, announced her conversion to Catholicism. Several members of her family also converted and, according to William Laud, the duke was wavering in his religious commitments. Percy was directly involved as he was by this time the chaplain in the Buckingham household, and the countess's confessor. In the wake of growing protestant protests against the Spanish match the king needed to squelch the rumours of these conversions. Publicly, the countess and her female kindred were quickly confirmed by the bishop of London. Privately, the king arranged a series of three debates with Percy, held before the Buckinghams on 24-6 May 1622. On the first day he was called to debate with the dean of Carlisle, Francis White, the brother of John White. On the second day he debated with the king himself, and on the third day with William Laud, then bishop of St David's. After the debates the king delivered a note to the Jesuit, containing 'the principal points which with-hold my joining unto the Church of Rome' (Percy, 'Answere to the Nine Points', title-page). In 1624 White wrote 'A Replie to Jesuit Fishers Answere to Certain Questions' and Laud published the 'Answere to Mr. Fishers Relation of a Third Conference'. Laud's work was attributed to his chaplain Robert Baillie, but in 1639 Laud admitted that he was the author and published an enlarged version. The 'Relation of a Conference between William Laud and Fisher the Jesuit' became a celebrated text in Anglican theology and forms part of Laud's collected works. With the assistance of his fellow Jesuit John Floyd, Percy formally responded to the debates in 1625 with the 'Answere unto the Nine Points of Controversy'. 
In 1623 Francis White and Daniel Featley, chaplain to Archbishop Abbott, engaged Percy and his fellow Jesuit John Sweet in another debate held at the home of Sir Humphrey Linde before a large audience of London's elite society. This debate also resulted in numerous publications including Featley's 'Fisher Catched in his Owne Net' (1623), Percy's 'Answere to a Pamphlet' (1623), and Featley's response, 'The Romish Fisher Catched and Held in his Owne Net' (1624). Featley's work prompted another reply by Percy in 1625 entitled 'A Reply to D. White and D. Featley'. About 1625 Percy persuaded William Chillingworth, the well-known Oxford scholar and godson of William Laud, to become a Roman Catholic. Even though the conversion was widely celebrated by Catholics, Chillingworth renounced this new found faith by 1630. After Charles I married Henrietta Maria in 1625 Percy was granted a pardon. Nevertheless, in 1634 he was arrested and ordered to depart the realm. When he refused he was again confined in the Gatehouse until August 1635 when the queen interceded and he was released. Shortly after this he began to suffer from cancer and on 3 December 1641 he died in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 9500


Fisher, John (1748-1825), bishop of Salisbury, was born at Hampton, Middlesex, the eldest of the nine sons of the Revd John Fisher (1696-1787) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Laurens ('bap'. 1720), a Huguenot heiress. The elder Fisher was successively vicar of Hampton, Middlesex, of St John the Baptist, Peterborough (1748-66), and of Preston, Dorset; he was also rector of Calbourne, Isle of Wight, from 1766 to his death, and prebendary of Preston in the cathedral of Salisbury from 1759 to 1779. He was made chaplain to Bishop John Thomas, the preceptor of George III, on his appointment to the see of Peterborough in 1747. The younger John was educated at the free school at Peterborough, and moved to St Paul's School, London, when aged fourteen. In 1766 he entered Peterhouse, Cambridge, on a Pauline exhibition, and was made scholar in 1767. The leading theologian (and one with Arian sympathies) Dr Edmund Law was at that time head of the college, and Fisher became the friend of his two distinguished sons, Edward, later Lord Chief Justice Ellenborough, and John, later bishop of Elphin. 
In 1770 Fisher took his BA and was placed tenth wrangler; he was also respected for his skills as a classicist. In 1773 he proceeded MA and was appointed to a Northamptonshire fellowship at St John's College, Cambridge, where he acted as tutor and undertook his duties well enough to win approval from colleagues and students alike. He had meanwhile been ordained deacon on 26 May 1771 and priest, in the diocese of Winchester, on 1 May 1773. Fisher acted as curate of Hampton, his native parish, and was vicar of Preston with Sutton Poyntz, in Dorset, from 1773 to 1780, the year in which he was made BD. 
On the recommendation of Bishop Richard Hurd, Fisher's patron, George III appointed him in 1780 preceptor to his son Prince Edward, later duke of Kent, and in 1781 he became a chaplain to the king and deputy clerk of the closet. He held this appointment until 1785, when his pupil went to continue his education in Germany, and he also gave Princess Elizabeth some instruction in drawing. Fisher thereupon travelled in Italy and Switzerland, sketching and sightseeing. In Italy he became known to Mrs Piozzi, who described him as 'a charming creature, generally known in society as 'the King's Fisher'' ('Letters and Literary Remains', ed. A. Hayward, 1861, 2.367). In 1786 he was recalled from Naples upon his nomination by George III to a canonry at Windsor (installed 14 July), where he took up residence. During his seventeen years in the chapter he acted as treasurer and helped to oversee the restoration of the choir. His simplicity, courteous manners, and amenable temper made him a favourite with George III, whose esteem he also gained through his loyalty and unaffected piety; by 1804 he was acting as one of the deputy clerks of the closet. 
Fisher married, on 6 September 1787, Dorothea ('bap'. 1761, died 1831), only daughter of John Freeston Scrivener ('c'.1732-1797) of Sibton Abbey, Suffolk, with whom he had one son and two daughters. The match increased Fisher's wealth by between $1600 and $1700 p.a., the estate eventually descending to his wife and then to their eldest son. In 1789 he took the degree of DD. Fisher gained further parochial preferment while a canon of Windsor. On 5 August 1790 he was instituted to the rectory of Langham, Essex (and instituted again on 20 April 1793 and on 10 August 1796, having received further parochial preferment and possibly having obtained a special dispensation from the archbishop of Canterbury so that the terms of the 'Pluralities Act' were respected); this post was in the gift of the duchy of Lancaster. From 1793 to 1796 he held the vicarage of Nether Stowey, Somerset, and on 29 July 1796 he was instituted as rector of Hartley Wespall, Hampshire (a post he held until 1807); both livings were in the gift of the Windsor chapter. Fisher was chosen by the king as bishop of Exeter on the death of Bishop Henry Reginald Courtenay and was consecrated in Lambeth Chapel on 16 July 1803. He thereupon resigned his Windsor stall. 
In March 1805 the king appointed Fisher to superintend the education of Princess Charlotte of Wales, rather against her father's preferences. It was a difficult undertaking, especially since the princess was not at first overfond of the bishop's company and there were problems with Lady de Clifford, the princess's governess, over female appointments in her household. Fisher tried to be patient, gentle, and firm, and gradually to train the princess to develop a sense of self-command. Quite early in his tutorship he was in contact with Hannah More, who had published anonymously 'Hints towards Forming the Character of a Princess'. After an interview with the bishop, More wrote that he 'appeared to have a proper notion of managing his royal pupil, and of casting down all high imaginations' ('Memoirs of the Life and Correspondence of Hannah More', ed. W. Roberts, 2nd edn, 1834, 3.230). Fisher was less popular with others at court. Charlotte Knight wrote that his visits three or four times weekly were basically to arm the princess against Roman Catholicism and whiggery, 'two evils which he seemed to think equally great', insisting, against the general consensus, that the bishop's 'temper was hasty, and his vanity easily alarmed'. She gave him credit only for his 'taste for drawing, and a love of the fine arts' (C. Knight, 'Autobiography', 1.232-3). Fisher held the appointment to Princess Charlotte until 1817. 
In 1804 Fisher accepted office as vice-president of the British and Foreign Bible Society; he also found time to hold a visitation of the Exeter diocese. Three years later, on the death of Bishop Douglas, he resigned all his other preferments on translation to Salisbury (enthroned 29 July 1807), where he won respect and affection for his administrative dedication and competence, and where he revived the office of rural dean in 1811. Fisher worked hard to ensure clergy either undertook residence personally or paid a curate above the bare legal minimum, telling George Augustus Herbert, eleventh earl of Pembroke, that 'In all cases of lay Patronage the joint efforts of the Patron & the Bishop may do much' (19 Aug 1810, Wilts. & Swindon HC, Pembroke MS 2057/F4/45). Fisher was dignified, unostentatious, and charitable, and lived on his private means; episcopal revenues were used for acts of benevolence and he left no more than $20,000 on his death. In 1818 he visited the Channel Islands, under a commission from the ailing Brownlow North, bishop of Winchester. It was the first time since the Reformation, when the islands were placed under the jurisdiction of the Winchester diocese, that they had received an episcopal visitation. Fisher held confirmations and consecrated a church. He acted as chancellor of the Order of the Garter and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1819. 
Fisher died at Seymour Street, London, on 8 May 1825, after a long illness patiently borne, and was buried in St George's Chapel, Windsor, on 16 May. He published nothing beyond his primary charges as bishop of Exeter, and some occasional sermons. In his charges of 1804 and 1805 he declared himself against intolerant treatment of Roman Catholics but he also refused to make them any legal concessions beyond bare toleration; such, in his view, was all that peaceable and conscientious dissenters from the Church of England had any claim to. He there also declared his opposition to repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' and repudiated the alleged Calvinism of the Church of England, which, he argued, was flatly contradicted by the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. Fisher was well liked for his 'gentlemanly, easy, and unassuming manners' (Farington, 'Diary', 10.3539, 13 Sept 1809) despite his high offices; these traits, coupled with a strong sense of duty and a facial likeness, made Mrs Fisher call the bishop 'her Fenelon'. The couple were highly regarded, not least by Fanny Burney, who knew the bishop for nearly forty years and for whom he was 'my very aimiable & constant friend' (to Esther Burney, 2-7 Oct 1818, in 'The Journals and Letters of Fanny Burney (Madame d'Arblay)', vol. 11, 1984, 2); he ordained her son Alexander d'Arblay in 1818. 
John Fisher was also a highly cultured prelate, a generous patron of both authors and artists, and a capable sketcher; he was chaplain to the Royal Academy in 1807 and helped to set up the British Institution the previous year. For the last twenty-five years of his life he was one of John Constable's leading patrons. The two men had first met at Langham about 1798; Constable became a regular visitor to the palace at Salisbury and familiar with the bishop's wider family, giving drawing lessons to Dorothea, his eldest daughter, and becoming the close friend of archdeacon John Fisher, the bishop's nephew and domestic chaplain. Fisher's widow died on 5 September 1831 and was survived by a son, Edward (who died unmarried in 1836), and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 9501


Fisher, John Abraham (1744-1806), violinist and composer, was born in Dunstable, Bedfordshire, the son of Richard Fisher. He was brought up in the home of James O'Hara, second Baron Tyrawley, in Blackheath, and had violin lessons from Thomas Pinto, principal violinist at the King's Theatre, Haymarket, London. He was admitted to the Royal Society of Musicians in 1764. Fisher made his debut at the King's Theatre on 25 January 1765, playing a violin concerto, and started playing at Covent Garden Theatre in 1767. From about 1769 he was leader of the band at Covent Garden Theatre, and also performed violin concertos there. 
During the 1770s he composed the music for a number of stage works performed at Covent Garden, including 'Harlequin Jubilee' (1770), a pantomime, the first with all the music written by only one composer; the incidental music for the play 'Zobeide' (1771) adapted by Joseph Cradock from Voltaire's 'Les scythes'; the very successful overture for Kane O'Hara's burletta 'The Golden Pippin' (1773); the overture for Edward Thompson's masque 'The Syrens' (1777); music for the pantomime 'The Norwood Gypsies' written by James Messinck (1777); and music for the witches' scenes in the first act of 'Macbeth' (1780). 
In the summers Fisher played in concerts at the Marylebone Gardens and other pleasure gardens, and he published collections of pleasure garden songs, including four books of Vauxhall songs. His orchestral music included six symphonies, published in 1772. 
On 27 February 1772 Fisher married Elizabeth (died 1780), 'nee' Branston, widow of William Powell (1735-1769), actor and manager of Covent Garden Theatre. They had one son, Charles Longford Fisher. Through his marriage Fisher acquired a one-sixteenth share in the theatre, and he was involved in its management in the 1770s. He matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 26 June 1777 and was awarded the degrees of BMus and DMus on 5 July 1777, two days after he led the orchestra in the first performance of his oratorio 'Providence' at the Sheldonian Theatre. 
After his wife's death, Fisher sold his share in the theatre and set off on a continental tour during which he performed in France, Germany, and Russia. In Berlin he published three very difficult violin concertos about 1783. In the autumn of 1783 he reached Vienna, where he met the soprano Ann Selina (Nancy) Storace (1765-1817), daughter of Stephen Storace ('c'.1725- 'c'.1783), the Neapolitan double bass player, and sister of Stephen Storace, the composer. She was 'prima buffa' at the Burgtheater, and it was for her that Mozart created the role of Susanna in 'Le nozze di Figaro'. Fisher wooed her by drinking innumerable cups of tea with her mother, and they were married on 29 March 1784. The marriage had lasted only a few months before Emperor Joseph II ordered Fisher to leave Vienna because of his ill treatment of his wife, which had caused a public scandal. There was one child of this marriage, a daughter, born in June 1784, who died of neglect after a few weeks. Although the marriage was never annulled, Nancy Storace reverted to her maiden name after his departure. 
Fisher returned to England and moved to Ireland, where he taught the violin and played in concerts at the Rotunda in Dublin. With William Heron he directed a series of six subscription concerts at the Rotunda in 1790. In his final years Fisher taught music to the family of Owen Wynne of Hazelwood, near Sligo, and he died in Wynne's house in June 1806. 


@@@@@


doc= 9502


Fisher, Sir John William (1788-1876), surgeon, son of Peter Fisher of Perth and Mary, daughter of James Kennay of York, was born in London on 30 January 1788 and was apprenticed to John Andrews, a surgeon. After studying at St George's and Westminster hospitals he was admitted member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1809 and became a fellow in 1836. The University of Erlangen, Bavaria, conferred on him the degree of MD in 1841. He was appointed surgeon to the Bow Street patrol in 1821 by Lord Sidmouth, and promoted to the post of surgeon-in-chief to the Metropolitan Police at the time of its formation in 1829, which position he held until his retirement on a pension in 1865. He was knighted by Queen Victoria at Osborne on 2 September 1858. 
Fisher married twice. On 18 April 1829 at St James's, London, he married Louisa Catherine, eldest daughter of William Haymes of Kibworth Harcourt, Leicestershire; she died in London on 5 October 1860; on 18 June 1862 he married Lilias Stuart, second daughter of Colonel Alexander Mackenzie of Grinnard, Ross-shire. Fisher died at his home, Grosvenor Gate, 33 Park Lane, London, on 22 March 1876 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 29 March, when six of his oldest medical friends were the pallbearers. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9503


Fisher, Jonathan (d. 1809), landscape painter, was born in Dublin, and was originally a draper in that city. Apparently self-taught, Fisher was first recorded in 1763 when awarded a premium of 10 guineas by the Dublin Society for a landscape. He continued to show works at various Dublin venues until 1801, including the first exhibition of the Society of Artists in 1765. His landscapes, which sought to imitate nature, were too mechanical and cold in colour to be popular. They were, however, very well suited for engraving, and in 1770 he published six large views of Killarney, the first of a number of series of views of Ireland. The first series of six landscapes was published by Fisher from his house in Ship Street, but engraved by various London-based artists. His connections with London remain obscure, though he is believed to have visited the city when young. He also had some contact with the London-based landscape and scene-painter P. J. de Loutherbourg, who painted 'Morning' and 'Evening' for Fisher in 1778, and it is evident that he maintained strong business connections there. In 1772 six views of Carlingford were published and finely engraved in London by Thomas Vivares, James Mason, and other eminent landscape engravers of the day. In 1789 Fisher published a folio volume dedicated to his friend and patron John, first earl of Portarlington. The views were engraved in aquatint by Fisher, and the volume expanded and reissued as 'A picturesque tour of Killarney, consisting of 20 views engraved in aquatinta, with a map, some general observations, &c' in 1790 (Dublin) and 1791 (London). He also published other illustrations of scenery in Ireland, including sixty plates issued first as a series, and then as a single volume in 1796. 
Fisher did not find art profitable, and about 1778 was fortunate enough to obtain a situation in the stamp office, Dublin, which he continued to hold until his death in 1809. He married a Miss Price, and for many years shared his house with his pupil and then assistant Henry Graham, who was left $20 a year in Fisher's will (proved 8 December 1809). A sale of Fisher's collection of paintings was held in Bishop Street and included works by de Loutherbourg, Thomas Gainsborough, Richard Wilson, and Angelica Kauffman. There is a landscape by Fisher in the Victoria and Albert Museum, 'A View of Lymington River, with the Isle of Wight in the Distance'. 


@@@@@


doc= 9504


Fisher, Joseph (1655-1704), Church of England clergyman, was born at Whitrigg, Cumberland, the son of Richard Fisher. He entered Queen's College, Oxford, in 1674 aged nineteen, graduating BA in 1679 and MA in 1682. He was elected a fellow of the college in 1682, and there established a reputation for his extensive knowledge of oriental languages. 
In 1692 Fisher was licensed by the bishop of London as lecturer in the parish of St Benet Fink in the City of London, living in a merchant's house in Broad Street to be near his work. Two years later he preached at Sevenoaks at the marriage of his friend and former pupil Thomas Lambard. This sermon, worked up into a treatise twenty-five pages long, was published in London in 1695 under the title 'The honour of marriage, or, The institution, necessity, advantages, comforts and usefulness of a married life'. This work is remarkable for the breadth of its sources, biblical, rabbinic, classical, patristic, and contemporary, quoted in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and with Chaldee, Syriac, and Samaritan allusions. It might be taken as a vain parade of learning, but the author explicitly states his concern to demonstrate 'in this Prophane and Profligate age' how widely marriage had been honoured in other ages and cultures. 
Fisher moved from London to Westmorland in 1695 upon his appointment as vicar of Brough under Stainmore. Twelve months later, on 2 May 1696, he married there Isabell Kidd ('bap'. 1679, died 1737), who at sixteen was twenty-four years his junior. They had no children. Ill health dogged Joseph Fisher's life at Brough, where William Nicolson described the vicarage as 'low, moist and smoaky' (Ferguson, 48). 
On 9 July 1702 Fisher was collated as rector of Salkeld and installed as archdeacon of Carlisle in succession to Nicolson, the new bishop, but he did not move into the recently rebuilt rectory at Great Salkeld. Instead he stayed at Brough, where he remained vicar, and reports of his ill health persisted. In August 1704 he was suffering from dropsy, and on 14 or 15 November he died, aged forty-nine, 'pining away in grief and melancholy', according to Thomas Hearne (Magrath, 2.45). He was buried in Brough on the fifteenth. In his short will, dated the fourteenth, he left everything to his 'tender and loving wife'; she married his successor as vicar of Brough, Francis Thompson, with whom she had three sons. She died in 1737. Joseph Fisher's life after its bright start was sadly unfulfilled. His published sermon on marriage, seeking to counteract liberal and libertine attitudes of his day, is now his main claim to remembrance. 


@@@@@


doc= 9505


Fisher, Mary (c.1623-1698), Quaker missionary, was born near York; her parents are not known (though the name Fisher appears to be her maiden name), and her date of birth derives from the description of her age as about thirty in 1653. A servant in the house of Richard and Elizabeth Tomlinson of Selby, she became a Quaker before 1652. Shortly afterwards she was imprisoned in York Castle for having rebuked the minister of Selby at the end of public worship, shouting at him, 'Come downe, come downe, thou painted beast, come downe. Thou art but a hireling, and deluder of the people with thy lyes' (Raine, 54). She signed, with five fellow prisoners, 'False Prophets and Teachers Described', a tract published in 1652. Released after sixteen months, she then went on a missionary journey to the south and east of England with Elizabeth Williams, an older unmarried woman. In December 1653 they visited Cambridge. Preaching in front of Sidney Sussex College the two were stoned by the 'scholars', whom Fisher addressed as a cage of unclean birds. The women were arrested and, on the instructions of the mayor of Cambridge, were stripped naked to the waist and whipped at the market cross 'far more cruelly than is usually done to the worst of Malefactors, so that their Flesh was miserably cut and torn' (Besse, 1.85). Shortly afterwards Mary Fisher was again imprisoned in York Castle for having reprimanded the 'priest' of Pontefract. After six months she was released but she was then imprisoned for another period of three months, at the request of the mayor of Pontefract, for being unrepentant and refusing to give securities for good behaviour. 
In 1655, while travelling in the ministry in Buckinghamshire, she was imprisoned for several months for rebuking the 'priest' of Newport Pagnell. Later the same year she set out to visit the West Indies and New England with another woman older than herself, Ann Austin, who was married and the mother of five children. After some time in Barbados the two Quakers went to Boston in July 1656. There the deputy governor, Richard Bellingham, and the council refused to allow them to land, and searched their baggage for books and papers, confiscating more than 100 volumes, which were burnt by the common hangman. They were then taken ashore and confined in the common gaol. The master of the ship which brought them was compelled to pay for their support and to give a bond that he would remove them. During their imprisonment they were deprived of writing materials, and their beds and bibles were confiscated by the gaoler for his fees. They were stripped naked 'not missing head nor feet, searching betwixt their toes, and amongst their hair' to see if they had witch-marks on their persons (Norton, 7), and would have been starved if some inhabitants had not bribed the gaoler to be allowed to feed them. They were held incommunicado for five weeks, and banished back to Barbados. Mary Fisher returned to England in 1657, but visited the West Indies again at the end of that year. 
In the summer of 1657, together with John Perrot, John Luffe, and three other Quakers, Fisher started a journey, probably intending to go to Jerusalem. After two weeks in Leghorn the six Quakers sailed to the Ionian island of Zante (Zakynthos). From there Fisher set out with three friends for Smyrna, which they reached in November. At the end of February 1659 Fisher and her companions left Turkey, forced out by the English representative, Sir Thomas Bendish, who felt that their behaviour was bringing disgrace to the English nation and religion. From Zante Fisher went to the Morea accompanied by Beatrice Beckley. The two women wanted to speak with Mahomet IV and so went to Adrianople where the Ottoman sultan lay encamped with his army. George Bishop in 'New-England Judged' (1661) gives a vivid account of the meeting with the sultan. Fisher spoke through an interpreter, whom the sultan heard with much patience and gravity, and when she concluded acknowledged the truth of what she said. Asked what she thought of Mahomet, she admitted 'that she knew him not' but 'That they judge of him to be true or false, according as the Words and Prophesies he spake were true or false' (Bishop, 20). The sultan offered her an escort of soldiers to Constantinople, which she declined. She afterwards journeyed on foot to Constantinople, where she obtained passage on a ship. She was in Leghorn in December 1658 and from there set out for England. In March 1659 she wrote to three Yorkshire Quakers and their wives reflecting on her mission to the Mediterranean: 'I have borne my testimony to the king unto whom I was sent, and he was very noble unto me... He received the words of truth without contradiction, they do dread the word of God many of them... The English [in Italy and Turkey] are more bad most of them yet there hath a good word gone through them, and some have received it but they are few. (Mack, 170)' In 1662 Fisher married the shipmaster William Bayly of Poole, Dorset, a prominent Quaker preacher and writer. The same year she was arrested on St Martin's Street, London, and though she was pregnant she was roughly ill treated by the officers. While Bayly lived Fisher seems to have followed her preaching mission mainly in and around Dorset. When in June 1675 Bayly died at sea returning from Barbados, three of their children were living: William, Mary, and Susanna. On 19 September 1678 at Horslydown, Southwark, Mary married John Cross, a Quaker cordwainer of London. They lived in London until 1682, when they emigrated to America. Cross died about December 1687. Ten years later, in February 1697, the Quaker Robert Barrow, who had escaped from a shipwreck, writing from Charlestown to his wife in England referred to his 'landlady and nurse', 'one whose name you have heard of, a Yorkshire woman, born within two miles of York; her maiden name was Mary Fisher, she that spake to the great Turk afterward Wm Bayly's Wife' (Vaux, 'Robert Barrow's shipwreck' 278). Mary Cross made her will on 28 August 1698 and died before the end of the year in Charlestown (the will was proved on 19 November 1698). Her children married and settled in South Carolina. Her granddaughter Sophia Hume, nee Wigington (1702/3-1774), daughter of Susanna Bayly and Henry Wigington and wife of Robert Hume, became a noted Quaker preacher. 


@@@@@


doc= 9506


Fisher, Payne (1615/16-1693), Latin poet, was the eldest son of Payne Fisher ('fl'. 1616-1645) of Nettleton, Dorset, and Chilton Candover, Hampshire, and Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas Neale of Warnford, auditor to James I and Charles I. Fisher's career owed much to the generosity of his mother's extended family. Despite being the scion of an established gentry family (he was the grandson of Sir William Fisher), his father may have fallen on hard times, and Fisher later recalled that it was to his great-uncle, Sir Thomas Freke, that he owed his 'breeding and generous education' (Fisher, 'Tombes'). Fisher's education began at St Paul's School, after which he was admitted to Hart Hall, Oxford, in September 1634, at the age of eighteen. After three years he migrated to Magdalene College, Cambridge, from where he graduated in 1638 as a pupil of John Puleyn. According to Anthony Wood, however, Fisher had 'a rambling head' and he apparently left Cambridge for Brabant, 'and trailed a pike in the garrison of Bolduc' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.377). He returned to England to serve as an ensign during the bishops' wars, where he befriended the cavalier poet Richard Lovelace, before serving in the English army in Ulster after the outbreak of the Irish revolt. He served as an ensign under Sir John Clotworthy from December 1641 until September 1642, and subsequently became lieutenant. It was from this period in the field that Fisher's earliest verses survive. Largely written in Latin, and preoccupied with recent military events and renowned individuals of his day, they set the trend for his later works. 
From Ireland Fisher joined his father in the service of the royal cause during the first civil war. While his father served as a captain of the king's lifeguard and was awarded an honorary MA at Oxford in April 1645, Fisher himself became a major in the regiment of foot under Sir Patrick Curwen, with the help of a letter of recommendation from the earl of Chichester. The evidence from unpublished poetry composed during this period -- which included an elegy on Viscount Falkland -- reveals Fisher to have been distinctly anti-puritan, and a supporter of the church policies of Archbishop William Laud. Fisher served the king in the field at Marston Moor, but following the royalist defeat he was conveyed as a prisoner to London and incarcerated in Newgate. There he was able to concentrate his efforts on writing, spending the period from July 1645 to July 1646 composing new verse and revising older poems. 
It may have been through his pen, and the assistance of Clotworthy, that Fisher secured release after the end of the first civil war. As Wood noted, Fisher lived in London 'by his wits, favoured by his pen the successful rebellion, and as a true time-server (incident to most poets) ingratiated himself with the great men then in power' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.377). By October 1647 Fisher had reconciled himself to the parliamentarians and may have been considered for service in Ireland once again. He certainly published a substantial piece on recent Irish history ('Hyberniae lachrymae') in 1648. Although he published a poem in opposition to the execution of Charles I in April 1649 ('Chronosticon decollationis Caroli regis'), he soon ingratiated himself with the republican government, with a poem inspired by the parliamentarian victory at Marston Moor, published in April 1650. This and Fisher's subsequent poems appeared under the name Payne (Pagani) or Fitzpayne (Fitzpaganus) Fisher (Piscatoris). 
In December 1651 the council of state considered how to encourage Fisher's efforts, and in the months that followed he published verses in honour of Cromwell's victories ('Veni, vidi, vici' and 'Irenodia gratulatoria'), which were dedicated to men such as John Bradshaw and contained evidence of assistance from republican authors such as Marchamont Nedham. Fisher was awarded $50 and considered for employment in April 1652. Having petitioned the council for financial assistance with his writings, and to enable him to make a journey to Scotland, Fisher was awarded a further $100 in September 1652, and allowed a pass to travel. Fisher was employed as historian of the victories achieved by the republican armies, and once in Scotland sought to secure information from regiments with which to compile his work. All that survives of his efforts, however, is a pictorial plan of the battle of Dunbar, and 'A perfect registry of all the collours taken from the Scots'. The latter incorporated the arms of the members of the council of state, Fisher styling himself 'historiographer of his highnesse warres in Ireland and Scotland' (BL, Harley MS 1460, fol. 2). 
Fisher subsequently penned verses to commemorate naval victories in 1653 ('Pro navali Anglorum') and a series of panegyrics on prominent political figures. Most importantly, he produced poetry to laud Oliver Cromwell on his assumption of protectoral power in 1654 ('Panegyrici Cromwello' and 'Inauguratio Olivariana'), and to commemorate the anniversaries of his inauguration ('Oratio anniversaria', 1655, 'Oratio secunda anniversaria', 1657, and 'Paean triumphalis in secundam inaugurationem', 1657). Such work represented the fulfilment of his role as 'poet laureate', and it was published by official printers, with official backing, and with dedicatory verses by other Cromwellian authors. In 1655 Fisher styled himself 'Historiis et Satellitio Domini Protectoris' ('Apobaterion'), and it was reported that he prepared verses in expectation of the crowning of Cromwell in 1657. He certainly continued to present works to his employers in the hope of retaining official favour. In 1658 he published verses in memory of Admiral Robert Blake ('Epitaphium Roberti Blakii') and delivered an elegy for Archbishop James Ussher in Oxford ('Armachanus redivivus'). Later in the year he attended Cromwell's funeral and published a series of poems in honour of the protector, at least some of which were dedicated to the new protector, Richard Cromwell ('In obitum serenissimi potentissimique principis', 'Threnodia triumphalis', and 'Panegyricus Cromwelli'). However, Fisher also used his talents as a means of ingratiating himself with the regime's most powerful individuals, by commemorating their political, military, and diplomatic deeds, as well as notable events in the lives of their families. 
Arguably, Fisher sought to use both public and private elements of his career in order to secure financial rewards. He certainly petitioned the council for a pension late in 1654, and received $100. He was also rewarded with employment as a gentleman of the lifeguard of General George Monck in Scotland, some time before November 1655. However, Wood also claimed that Fisher used his pen 'to shark money from those who delighted to see their names in print' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.377). The result is an unclear distinction between his public and private, published and unpublished, poetry, and an uncertain corpus of work. Some works written for specific individuals were printed but not published, although they occasionally reappeared in collections such as his 'Piscatoris poemata' (1656), while officially inspired works could also be used, with suitable additional insertions, as a means of personal lobbying, in the hope of securing pecuniary benefit from powerful patrons. Fisher also used his pen in order to secure rewards from foreign powers. In 1656 he wrote verses to commemorate the Venetian victory over the Turks ('In celeberrimam Naumachiam'), and presented them to the Venetian ambassador in London in expectation of a reward, which proved forthcoming in the form of a medal (worth $12) struck at the expense of the doge. In 1657 Fisher also dedicated one of his works to Cardinal Mazarin ('Paean triumphalis in secundam inaugurationem') and in 1658 he commemorated the Anglo-French victory over Spain at the battle of the Dunes, and the capture of Dunkirk, in another work dedicated to Mazarin ('Epicinion vel elogium'). 
At the Restoration Fisher turned his coat once again, and sought preferment within the new regime, not least by drawing attention to his royalist military service. In 1661 he and Nedham published a satirical account of 'The speeches of Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton, and John Bradshaw, intended to have been spoken at their execution at Tyburne, Jan. 30. 1660', on the cover of which they were styled 'servants, poets and pamphleteers to his infernal highness'. Fisher used presentation copies of his books in order to win the favour of, and secure loans from, men such as Samuel Pepys, and prepared verses in honour of both the English and French monarchs, copies of which were sent to Clarendon ('Chronosticon in decolationem Caroli regi'). Fisher also published poetry by James Howell in 1663 ('Poems on Several Choice and Various Subjects'), and continued to issue elegies regarding specific individuals, including a memorial for Monck, in order to secure financial rewards ('Heic jacet bellicosissimus ille Robertus Bartu', 1668, 'Elogium sepulchrale pro victoriosissimo Georgio Monacho', 1670). 
It was perhaps as a commercial venture that Fisher embarked on what proved to be one of his most substantial projects, and his most important historical achievement, the attempt to catalogue funeral monuments, tombs, and gravestones, as well as armorial and heraldic information, from around London, most notably the pre-fire St Paul's Cathedral ('The catalogue and account of many memorable persons who had visible tombs', 1668; 'The catalogue of most of the memorable tombes, grave-stones, plates, escutcheons or atchievements', 1668). By July 1673, however, Fisher had been imprisoned in the Fleet for debt, after which his financial situation worsened along with his health. During 1675-6 he sought once more to use his pen in order to secure the financial resources necessary to gain release, hoping to enlist the support of Joseph Williamson, to whom he sent manuscript copies of his heroic verses on the connection between church and state, published as 'Deus et rex' and 'Rex et episcopus'. Although Fisher remained in prison until at least 1684, he persisted in publishing ventures ('Impressio secunda carminis heroici', 1675; 'Impressio novissima carminis heroici', 1677; 'Utriusque primariis et publicis academiae luminibus', 1677), and produced substantial volumes such as 'A Synopsis of Heraldry' (1682), 'The Atchievements of the Kings of England' (1682), and 'The Tombes, Monuments and Sepulchral Inscriptions, Lately Visible in St Pauls Cathedral' (1684), which he continued to use in order both to flatter the monarch and to secure potential patrons with presentation copies. 
Such efforts at personal advancement appear to have proved fruitless, however. Fisher probably remained in prison, or within the liberty of the Fleet, for much of the remainder of his life, and certainly remained in an impoverished state. Increasingly he used his published works in order to commemorate his own family. He had always used print in order to honour prominent kinsmen ('Miscellanea... in memoriam fratris Ferdinandi Fisheri', 1655; 'Integerrimo vere viro', 1657; and 'Juxta suorum cineres repulverescit', 1690), but after 1660 this came to be a feature of even his most important books. Such comments serve to provide much of the information on which Fisher's biographer must rely, and which is otherwise lacking. However, documentary evidence is available to confirm that Fisher died at Bishops Court, Old Bailey, on 2 April 1693, and that he was buried three days later in the parish of St Sepulchre, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 9507


Fisher, Samuel (bap. 1604, d. 1665), Quaker preacher and writer, son of John Fisher, a hatter and later mayor of Northampton, was baptized in Northampton on 9 December 1604. He matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, in 1623 and graduated BA in 1627. Ordained deacon by the bishop of Peterborough on 1 January 1628, he proceeded MA from New Inn Hall in November 1630 and was for a short period of time chaplain to Sir Arthur Hesilrige. On 25 March 1643 on the petition of the inhabitants he was presented by parliament as lecturer at Lydd, Kent. His wife's name was Elizabeth (died 1657?) and their son Samuel was baptized in June 1643 at Rye and buried in October 1644 at Lydd without prayer book rites. By 1645 it appears that Fisher was appointed vicar of the parish of Lydd but before 1649 he resigned the vicarage (reputedly worth $250 in 1647) to join the Baptists, with whom he had already shown sympathy; he supported himself, his wife, and two children by farming, and though apparently still living at Lydd he became pastor to a congregation at Ashford. Fisher was a noted disputant, engaging on 27 July 1649 with several other ministers at Ashford, on 10 September 1649 with Matthias Symson, in 1651 with Francis Cheynell at Petworth, in March 1651 with John Reading at Folkestone, and on at least six other occasions in the next two years. He was one of those who initiated the national association of General Baptist churches, and at their meeting in London in September 1654 was the first of thirteen 'Messengers' to sign a manifesto approving civil government and disavowing the Fifth Monarchy movement. By that date he had already converted to Baptist views William Allen, a member of John Goodwin's church, who together with the merchant Thomas Lambe organized a major Baptist congregation in Lothbury. 
After a meeting at Lydd with the Quakers William Caton and John Stubbs in March 1655, and shortly after with Ambrose Rigge and George Fox, Fisher joined the Society of Friends and soon became a 'publisher of truth'. On 17 September 1656 Fisher attended the meeting of parliament, but was prevented from speaking. He subsequently attempted to address the members of parliament at a fast-day service in St Margaret's Church, Westminster, on 24 September. Throughout 1657 Stubbs tried to convince Fisher to carry a Quaker witness to Rome, Turkey, and the East but he was reluctant to do so, pleading the needs of his sick wife (whose recovery Stubbs in September 1657 doubted). Eventually in October 1657 Stubbs left London for the Netherlands, where after a few months Fisher joined him, and possibly collaborated with Spinoza on the translation of two works written by Margaret Fell. From the Netherlands Stubbs and Fisher set out for Rome on foot. During their journey they were received at Heidelberg by the elector palatine. In April 1658 they reached Venice, where they stayed for more than two months. Their activities did not pass unnoticed and between June and August 1658 the Inquisition in Venice interviewed those who had had contact with the two Quakers. They eventually set out for Rome in July. In Venice and Rome they preached to both Jews and Catholics. 
In September 1658 Fisher was again in London, where he signed a paper addressed to Richard Cromwell in support of liberty of conscience. According to Besse he was 'much abused' in Kent in 1658, and in February 1659 he was pulled out of a meeting at Westminster by his hair and severely beaten (Besse, 1.289). In May he went with Edward Burrough to Dunkirk, where they preached to Catholics and English soldiers. Later that year Fisher was imprisoned in Newgate. 
Fisher became as notable a disputant among the Quakers as he had been among the Baptists. In April 1659 he held three disputes with Thomas Danson at Sandwich, in which he defended Quakerism. His disputatious spirit was also expressed in his published works with their ironic, punning titles such as 'Baby-Baptism Meer Babism' (1653) against infant baptism; 'Rusticus ad academicos... the rusticks alarm to the rabbies, or, The country correcting the university and clergy' (1660) in which he opposed the four leading divines John Owen, Thomas Danson, John Tombes, and Richard Baxter; 'Apokrypta apokalypta velata quaedam revelata' (1661), in answer to a series of questions concerning God, the devil, man, heaven, and hell; and 'Episkopi aposkopos the Bishop Busied beside the Businesse' (1662) against Bishop John Gauden. Fisher's main work, 'Rusticus ad academicos', a tome of some 900 pages, has been described as 'the most important piece of Quaker controversy belonging to the Commonwealth period' (Braithwaite, 1.288). In this work Fisher argued, with scholarship, erudition, and wit, that the light within and not the mere letter of the scripture was the word of God and he submitted the 'Bible' to remarkable criticism, questioning the reliability of the modern biblical text and claiming that the 'Apocrypha' could be as divinely inspired as the canonical writings. 
After the Restoration Fisher suffered a series of arrests and imprisonments. In June 1660 he signed 'A declaration and an information from... to the present governors, the king and both the houses of parliament', a document elaborated by Margaret Fell and signed by thirteen Friends, in which it was clearly stated that Friends 'do deny and bear our testimony against all strife and wars and contests'. He was also one of the twelve prominent Quakers who signed the 'Declaration Against All Plotters and Fighters in the World' issued on 21 January 1661. His final imprisonment in White Lion Prison, Southwark, lasted more than two years until shortly before his death from plague on 31 August 1665 in the house of Ann Travers, a Quaker, at Dalston, near London. He was buried in Bunhill Fields the same day. His son Hallelujah Fisher married Abigail Antrobus in 1677. 
The most remarkable work of Fisher's Baptist period, 'Baby-Baptism Meer Babism', was republished under the title 'Christianismus redivivus, Christ'ndom both Unchrist'ned and New-Christ'ned' in 1655 and again in 1669 (notwithstanding his conversion to Quakerism). His most important Quaker writings were reprinted in 1679 under the title of 'The Testimony of Truth Exalted', with 'testimonies' to him by Ellis Hookes, Luke Howard, William Penn, and his son Hallelujah. The lapsed Quaker Francis Bugg put both Samuel and Hallelujah in his 'Cage of unclean birds' but assigned no reason thereof (F. Bugg, 'Pilgrim's Progress', 1698, 130). William Penn, who was well acquainted with him, praised Fisher's 'sweetness of Temper', and 'great Self-Denyal and Humility' (Fisher, sig. c2). According to the historian Christopher Hill, Fisher was one of the most radical 'Bible' critics of the seventeenth century and 'deserves greater recognition as a precursor of the English Enlightenment' (Hill, 215). 


@@@@@


doc= 9508


Fisher, Samuel (1605/6-1681), clergyman and ejected minister, was the son of John Fisher of Northampton. From the ages given in the preface to a published sermon and in his will he was born between 8 November 1605 and 10 March 1606. He matriculated as a plebeian at Trinity College, Oxford, on 5 December 1623, aged eighteen; the congruence between the date of birth derived from the matriculation record with that from other sources confirms that it refers to him rather than to the future Quaker of the same name with whom he has been confused. Fisher graduated BA on 6 June 1627 and proceeded MA from New Inn Hall on 19 November 1630. When the Warwickshire Anglican John Hinckley suggested in 1671 that many ejected ministers 'have little more learning than your 'English' books have taught them, as great Strangers to the Writings of the first Centuries, as they have been to the Universities', Baxter rattled off a list of west midland nonconformists to disprove Hinckley's innuendo, Fisher among them (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.116). 
On 18 December 1640 Fisher wrote to the leading puritan gentleman Sir Robert Harley asking for action to be taken against Francis Rowley, a seminary priest of Whitchurch, Shropshire, who had called the peers who had petitioned the king for a parliament the summer before as 'a company of Puritan rascalls, base fellows and base scabbs' ('Portland MSS', 3.70). By this time Fisher was curate of the parish of Withington, near Shrewsbury, under its puritan vicar, Thomas Blake, and had a patron, one Mr Barker. In the summer of 1642 Fisher, then living at the neighbouring parish of Upton Magna, made several unavailing attempts to persuade Sir Richard Newport to take up arms for parliament. 
Shrewsbury was firmly in royalist hands from the autumn of 1642 until February 1645, and it is possible that Samuel Fisher went to London. On 3 March 1643 the House of Lords confirmed an order of the Commons of 23 January which provided that a man of that name should replace the sequestered William Watts as vicar of St Alban, Wood Street. This person resigned in 1646, and it was on 21 August of that year that a Samuel Fisher was admitted as curate of St Mary's Church, Shrewsbury. Named in 1647 as one of the ministers of the first Shropshire classis, Fisher confirmed his convictions by signing the 'Testament' of ministers in that county in 1648. Fisher shared the presbyterian hostility to the regicide and the new regime. On 23 August 1650 the council of state ordered the governor of Shrewsbury to secure and examine Fisher as to his record, and towards the end of the year he was removed from St Mary's after refusing the engagement. 
Fisher spent a period as preacher at St Bride's, London, where he provided the funeral sermons for two citizens' wives -- Mrs Holgate and Mrs Baker -- which he published in 'A Love-Token for Mourners: Teaching Spiritual Dumbness and Submission under Gods Smarting Rod' (1655). His prefaces to these sermons, and to 'An antidote against the fear of death' which he published in the same volume, convey the scars and bitterness left by the dangers he had faced in Shrewsbury. 'I have not wanted strong provocations [to go into print] from the vinegar fretting pens of other men who have endangered my liberty by traducing my Doctrine, wresting my words, and charging me (beyond what I ever thought) with that which their own wicked hearts had forged.' In the margin he named 'Mr Studley and some others' (Fisher, 'To the reader', 'Love-Token'). Studley presumably means Peter Studley, the contentious Shropshire Anglican, or perhaps (as he had died in July 1648) a relation of his; Fisher may have been referring to the events which drove him from Shropshire to London during the first civil war rather than later events. Fisher also recalled how the 'Antidote' was composed from 'Some Thoughts, which the Author used to flatter and allure my Soul to be well-pleased with Death' during the dangerous summer of 1650 when he and Thomas Blake 'stayed in Shrewsbury (in the time of Gods last visitation of that Place by the Pestilence) to execute their Pastoral Office amongst their people that did abide there in that doleful time where they were under the continual expectation of arrest. (Fisher, 'Love-Token', 183)' Fisher settled at Thornton in the Moors, Cheshire, a living to which, as he recalled in 1673, he was presented by Sir George Booth. At Thornton one Richard Bowker, ordained in July 1653, seems to have acted as an assistant. Fisher, however, was not formally admitted to the rectory until 25 May 1654. In November 1656, in a letter advising him to move from Manchester to Shrewsbury, Richard Baxter admitted to Henry Newcome that the one argument that he could not refute was the advice of the latter's neighbouring ministers, singling out 'judicious and honest Mr Fisher' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.233). 
After his ejection in 1662 Fisher seems to have settled at Birmingham. He married, though nothing is known of his wife. Of his children at least three, Samuel, Charles, and Hannah, reached adulthood. In 1672, the king wrote to Robert Blayney, enclosing a petition of April 1672 signed by ten inhabitants of Birmingham in which they and 'Mr Samuel Fisher, Master of Artes of the Presbyterian persuasion' sought permission for the town hall and his house to be licensed as meeting places (Turner, 1.279). On 1 May, a licence was granted for Fisher's house. He was still resident at Birmingham on 8 November 1677 when his will, which includes a bequest to his dear friend Richard Blayney, was signed. By this time both his wife and his son Charles Fisher were dead. The testator recorded with heartfelt warmth the devotion of his one surviving daughter, Hannah, who had 'continued in her virginity to be a help and comfort to her parents even in and to their old age', naming her his chief beneficiary. Samuel Fisher died in 1681 and was buried at St Martin's, Birmingham, on 5 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 9509


Fisher, Thomas (1515/16-1577), member of parliament and landowner, said to be aged thirty-three in 1549, was the son of Thomas Hawkins or Fisher of Warwick, a man of complete obscurity. Dugdale states that the son adopted the alternative surname Fisher because his father was a fishmonger, but this seems an inherently unlikely move for a man moving up the social scale; Dugdale's anecdotal material on Fisher reproduces some unreliable gossip and it is much more likely that Fisher's father bore the surnames of both his own natural father and a stepfather. A family named Fisher was prominent in Warwick between the 1520s and the 1580s, with three generations each headed by a Richard Fisher, and although no formally documented link can be established, it is possible that the Fisher surname may have been added by intermarriage with this family. Early references to Thomas use one or both surnames, most often in the version 'Fisher alias Hawkins', but in later life the 'alias Hawkins' is usually omitted. His younger brother John, who served as town clerk of Warwick between 1563 and 1590, used the Fisher surname alone. 
Nothing is known of Thomas Fisher's early life, though his later career would presuppose some educational or professional attainment, possibly involving the law, like his brother. The first that is heard of him is as an official of John Dudley, then Viscount Lisle and later to be successively earl of Warwick and duke of Northumberland; in May 1542 Fisher was rewarded by him with the stewardship of Kibworth Beauchamp, Leicestershire. Shortly after this he must have transferred his loyalties to Edward Seymour, then earl of Hertford and later duke of Somerset. 
From 1544 onwards Fisher rose rapidly in Hertford's service, flourishing as his master's power increased and becoming his secretary in 1547. In or shortly before that year he married Winifred (died 1557), daughter of William Holte of Aston, a north Warwickshire gentleman with court connections whose father had served as MP for Warwick in 1529; the possibility of such a marriage into the county elite must reflect the very substantial rise in Fisher's social standing which had followed his connection with Hertford. Fisher served with the army in France in 1546 and acted for Hertford in the campaigns against Scotland of 1547-9, fighting with distinction at the battle of Pinkie, working to establish English garrisons in the Scottish lowlands, and taking part in diplomatic negotiations. When Seymour, now duke of Somerset, governed England between 1547 and 1549, Thomas Fisher naturally acquired the political influence which led to an impressive accumulation of offices and property. His position in Warwick was established by his becoming steward of the castle and bailiff of the manor, while he had obtained the site of the dissolved Austin priory of St Sepulchre, just outside the town walls, in 1546. He served as member of parliament for High Wycombe in 1547, presumably through Seymour's influence, and became keeper of Banbury Castle and bailiff of its hundred in 1550. 
There is little record of any official activity in London in these years, but Fisher served as a tax commissioner in Warwickshire in 1550 and, more significantly, as a chantry commissioner for that county and Leicestershire in 1548, and it was from his privileged access to the confiscated lands of the guilds and chantries that he was able to establish himself as a permanent member of the Warwickshire gentry. In 1548 and 1549, Fisher acquired a number of blocks of these lands, mostly in northern Warwickshire and often in association with John Dabridgecourt. More significant than these often small and scattered holdings was the takeover in 1549, apparently after the exertion of pressure, of lands held by the bishop of Coventry and Lichfield in Tachbrook, Bishops Itchington, Chadshunt, and Gaydon, south-east of Warwick. This provided him with a consolidated estate which could be developed -- the priory lands, leased sections of the castle estate, and Tachbrook formed one unit, while at Bishops Itchington a policy of depopulation and the demolition of a redundant church provided the site and materials for the building of a substantial manor house. At the same time four manors in Sussex and Surrey were acquired from the bishop of Exeter. 
However, as Fisher had been carried upwards by the rise of his master, so the fall of Somerset in 1549 dragged his servant down, for despite an apparent attempt by Fisher both to persuade Somerset to conciliate the earl of Warwick and to build bridges with the latter on his own account, the new ruler's determination to eradicate the Somerset faction led to Fisher's being imprisoned in 1549-50 and having to pay a fine of $1000. He was still assisting with the administration of Somerset's estates in August 1550 and was pardoned early in 1551, when he is described as resident in London as well as Warwick, but he went back to prison again in the winter of 1551-2, until in May 1552 Northumberland (as Warwick had now become) conceded that he had been punished sufficiently. But the property and local standing which Fisher had built up survived this eclipse unscathed, and with the collapse of Northumberland's power when Mary became queen, his sufferings must have helped him to establish a reputation as a loyal Marian supporter. Dugdale's story of Fisher being given treasure by Northumberland to finance the Lady Jane Grey coup must be dismissed as absurd in the light of what is known of Fisher's career before and after this point. It was during the reign of Mary that Fisher's local standing reached a peak. He was appointed a JP for Warwickshire in 1554 and served as MP for Warwick in all but the first of Mary's five parliaments, a position which must reflect his domination of the town, and so of its council, which constituted the electorate, and a good deal of influence among the county gentry, who would be potential competitors for such a position. In 1554, after six years of fruitless effort, the town acquired a fresh charter, which established its full legal status as a municipal corporation, and it would be strange if its parliamentary representative had not played an important role in the negotiations surrounding such a major constitutional milestone -- indeed Fisher may have used the promise of such assistance to encourage his election. Some such inducement would have been advisable, for he had recently quarrelled with the town while trying to buy its burgh hall. During these years he must have been engaged on the building of his mansion on the site of St Sepulchre's, which became his seat and was known as The Priory. Its appearance is known only after its remodelling in the seventeenth century, but the house which Fisher completed about 1566 was a large one; with the castle dilapidated and lacking up-to-date accommodation, Fisher's Priory must have been the most impressive house in the locality. 
In 1557 Winifred Fisher died, leaving one son, Edward. Her husband remarried; his second wife was Susanna, the daughter of John Horneyhold, of Hanley and Hartlebury, from an influential Worcestershire gentry family; there were no further children. Following the accession of Elizabeth, Fisher at first seems to have enjoyed further marks of official favour, being reappointed to the county bench in 1558-9 and serving as escheator for Leicestershire and Warwickshire in 1559-60, but apart from acting as exchequer receiver in these two counties from 1559 until 1572 or later, he did not sit in parliament again or hold any other significant office. His religious position seems to have been conservative, which would sit easily with his career under Mary, but there is no hint of any recusancy which might have compromised his later career, while he must have established good relations with the Dudleys at an early point in their resurgence under Elizabeth, for they are recorded as acting as his patrons and assisting his son after his father's death. Fisher's declining years were crowned by formal visits to The Priory by Robert Dudley in 1571 and by the queen in 1572, during her journey from Kenilworth, despite the fact that he was confined to bed with an attack of gout. He died on 12 January 1577 and was buried with his first wife in St Mary's Church, Warwick, under a tomb bearing effigies of the pair which has since been destroyed but is illustrated in Dugdale's 'Warwickshire'. Dugdale claims that Fisher left an estate with an annual income of $3000, a huge sum in contemporary terms which must be a gross exaggeration; it may be confused with the total value of his estate. 
Fisher's property was inherited by his only child, 


@@@@@


doc= 9510


Fisher, Thomas (1772-1836), artist and antiquary, was born on 24 February 1772 in Rochester, Kent, and baptized there on 20 March at the church of St Nicholas. He was the second son of the two sons and one younger daughter of Thomas Fisher (died 1786), printer, bookseller, and alderman of Rochester, and his wife, Jane (died 1796). His father was the author of 'The Kentish Traveller's Companion' (1776) and, with Samuel Denne (1730-1799) and William Shrubsole, of 'The History and Antiquities of Rochester' (1772). 
At the age of fourteen Fisher was given employment by the East India Company at East India House, Leadenhall Street, in the City of London. In 1789 he was appointed as an extra clerk, and in 1816 he was placed on the establishment in the newly created post of searcher of the records in the examiner's department. The position provided him with a reasonable income, raised in 1825 to $700 a year, and when the post was abolished in 1834, he retired with a pension of $473 a year. 
Fisher is best-known for his scale drawings, which record interior church monuments with considerable accuracy and care over details. He used his summer leave to tour the country, taking rubbings of brasses and making sketches; during the rest of the year, in the early morning, he worked up the finished watercolours and made copies. In 1814 he estimated that he had taken about 5000 drawings in the course of twenty years' travelling and recording unpublished architectural and genealogical antiquities. His earliest drawings were of Kent monuments; some of Rochester Cathedral, made when fifteen, illustrated Samuel Denne's memorials published in John Thorpe's 'Custumale Roffense' (1788). He also provided Samuel Denne with drawings of watermarks found on documents in Rochester town hall, and published in 'Archaeologia' (1796). Richard Gough (1735-1809) used Fisher's work in the second volume of 'Sepulchral Monuments' (1796), and commissioned him to record monuments such as those in Moreton Corbet, Shropshire, in 1807. The most notable of his Kent drawings were of the fine series of brasses in Cobham church. Three of his drawings were exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1804 and 1808. While touring Warwickshire in 1804, Fisher recorded the medieval paintings just discovered in the chapel of the Guild of Holy Cross in Stratford and which were soon afterwards whitewashed over or destroyed. 
Fisher was interested in ways of reproducing his drawings and was one of the first to advocate the use of lithography, or 'polyautography' as it was then called in Britain; he wrote articles for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1808 and 1815 on its advantages and development. He was possibly the first to reproduce a non-latin script by this means, when he published in June 1807 a drawing of the Babylonian characters found on the Hillah stone in the East India Company's museum. He issued several other lithographs of brasses and monuments at this time, but the most important series was of the Stratford paintings, which he published under the title of 'A series of antient... paintings... on the walls of the chapel of the Trinity at Stratford-upon-Avon' (parts 1 and 2 lithoprinted in 1807; additional plates engraved in 1809). Fisher assembled an important collection of early examples of lithography and continued to experiment with the process, occasionally supplying prints to illustrate books and publishing his own. 
Fisher was the first to attempt a systematic visual record of the historical monuments of Bedfordshire, noting that few illustrations of the county had been previously published. He was helped by his colleague at the East India Company Henry Humphrey Goodhall, the antiquary, often stayed with the Revd Orlebar Marsh in Felmersham, and received commissions from the eccentric collector Sir Gregory Osborne Page Turner of Battlesden. He made several tours between about 1811 and 1823, suffering the hazards of working in cold and wet weather, sleeping in unaired beds, and being robbed of his possessions. By 1812 he had made about 200 drawings of the county's antiquities and began publishing a selection of engravings under the title of 'Collections, Historical, Genealogical and Topographical for Bedfordshire' to illustrate the Bedfordshire volume of Daniel and Samuel Lysons's 'Magna Britannica' (1806). Five parts were issued by 1816 before the series was abandoned; he published a volume of lithographs, 'Monumental Remains and Antiquities in the County of Bedford' (1828), and only took up the engravings again in 1836. The original series was reissued with additional plates shortly after his death. 
Most of Fisher's literary work was published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', his earliest being a description of The Crown inn, Rochester, published in December 1789 under the pseudonym Antiquitatis Conservator. He was a regular contributor until his death but many of his book reviews and memoirs were published anonymously and can only be identified from the publisher's files. He wrote several memoirs of Anglo-Indians and missionaries, including one of Charles Grant (1746-1823), published in 1823 and reprinted in 1833, and of the Revd Robert Morrison (1782-1834), published in 1835. He was also said to have been a frequent contributor to the 'Asiatic Journal', and the 'European Magazine' occasionally published items from him. 
It was Fisher's intention to add letterpress to his illustrations of the Stratford paintings to provide a history of the guild, and to the 'Collections... for Bedfordshire'. However, he believed that publishers of small editions were financially put at risk by the requirement of the copyright law that copies of any literary work could be demanded by legal deposit libraries. He campaigned against the law by petitioning parliament in 1814, writing in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1817, and using his preface to 'Monumental Remains' (1828) to denounce this provision in the 1818 'Copyright Act'. He restricted himself to the publication of books of plates without letterpress as this was exempt from the legal deposit requirements. His account of the Stratford guild appeared separately in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1835, and a reprint by John Gough Nichols of his Stratford illustrations with some additional plates was published the following year, after his death. Fisher's lack of any substantial published work probably accounts for his having to wait until late in life for recognition. Although he had no known interest in Scottish antiquities, he became a corresponding member of the Literary and Antiquarian Society of Perth in 1821. He was elected a member of the Royal Society of Arts in 1823 and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in May 1836. 
Fisher's religious beliefs were staunchly nonconformist. He edited the detailed statistical series which covered Bedfordshire to Derbyshire in the first seven volumes (1818-23) of the 'Congregational Magazine'. He was a director of the London Missionary Society, an active member of his local 'Bible' society committee and of the committee of appeal for Highbury College, to which he gave generously. He was a strong supporter of the campaign to abolish slavery in the British colonies, writing and publishing a pamphlet for children, 'The Negro's Memorial, or, Abolitionist's Catechism' (1825). 
Fisher never married and lived for most of his life with his sister in the Hoxton district of Shoreditch, London, at 163 Hoxton Street from at least 1804 until about 1820, and then at 6 Gloucester Terrace (later incorporated into Pitfield Street). He was a guardian of the poor for Shoreditch. The writer of his lengthy obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (October 1836) suggested that his life had probably been shortened by the earnest pursuit of his work on the 'Collections... for Bedfordshire'; however, a dog bite, mentioned in his will of April 1836, may have contributed. Fisher died at Stoke Newington, Middlesex, on 20 July 1836 and was brought from Gloucester Terrace to be buried at Bunhill Fields burial-ground, City Road, Finsbury, on 26 July. His extensive collection of drawings, prints, and books was sold by auction (at Southgates on 15 March and from 31 August, and by Evans from 30 May 1837) and dispersed. One item in Southgates' second sale, believed to have been owned by Thomas Fisher, was the Henry de Blois dish, now in the British Museum, and regarded as the greatest of the museum's medieval enamels. 


@@@@@


doc= 9511


Fisher, William (1780-1852), naval officer, second son of John Fisher of Yarmouth, Norfolk, was born on 18 November 1780, and entered the navy in August 1795. After serving in the North Sea, at the Cape of Good Hope, and in the Mediterranean, and as acting lieutenant of the 'Foudroyant' on the coast of Egypt, he was confirmed in the rank on 3 September 1801. In 1805 he was lieutenant of the 'Superb' during the chase of Villeneuve to the West Indies; and in 1806 he was promoted commander. In 1808 he commanded the 'Racehorse' (18 guns) in the channel, and then, in 1809 and 1810, in the survey of the Mozambique Channel. At the end of the survey, in May 1810, he married Elizabeth, sister of Sir James Rivett Carnac, bt, governor of Bombay; they had a daughter and a son. 
In March 1811 Fisher was promoted captain; during 1816 and 1817 he commanded in succession the 'Bann' and the 'Cherub' (each 20 guns) on the coast of Guinea, in both of which he captured several slavers and pirates, some after desperate resistance. While on the 'Cherub' he proposed to the Admiralty an improved method of watering ships, which was officially adopted. 
From March 1836 to May 1841 Fisher commanded the 'Asia' (84 guns) in the Mediterranean, and in 1840, during the operations on the coast of Syria, was senior officer of the detached squadron off Alexandria, with the task of keeping open the mail communication through Egypt. For this he received the Turkish gold medal, sword, and diamond decoration. He had no further service afloat, but became, in due course, rear-admiral in 1847. During retirement he wrote two novels: 'The Petrel, or, Love on the Ocean' (1850), and 'Ralph Rutherford, a Nautical Romance' (1851), which combined improbable love stories with exaggerated, stilted language. He died at his residence, 38 Blandford Square, London, on 30 September 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 9512


Fisher, William Webster (1797-1874), physician, son of John Fisher, was born at Thrimby, Westmorland, and attended school at Thorp Arch, Yorkshire. He studied medicine at Montpellier, in France, where he befriended Auguste Comte. He took the Montpellier MD degree in 1825, submitting a thesis on inflammation. On 12 December 1825 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, of which his brother, John Hutton Fisher, was a fellow and assistant tutor. In 1830 he moved to Downing College, where he graduated MB in 1834. In 1837 he was elected to a fellowship, which he held until his appointment as Downing professor of medicine, in 1841, the year in which he proceeded to the MD. 
During the 1830s Fisher carried out research on tuberculosis, and on the development of the nervous system and its derangement in conditions such as spina bifida. Several of his papers on the latter subject were published in the 'Philosophical Magazine'. His interests put him in the vanguard of a vibrant movement in British neuroscience which was challenging long-held views about the functions of the brain and of nerves. He also taught medical students at the college, and told the electors to the Downing chair that he intended to study the medical topography of Cambridge and its surroundings, a project apparently never undertaken. 
Historians have regarded Fisher as an indolent character, largely on the basis of an anecdote told of his lecturing to students in his bedroom, but he was clearly diligent in his preparation of lectures on clinical medicine, medical jurisprudence, and materia medica, which he delivered regularly from 1842 until failing health forced him to relinquish them to his deputy, Peter Wallwork Latham, in 1868. He served as physician to Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, from 1845 until 1861, and on his resignation was appointed consulting physician to that institution. His research ceased in the late 1840s, possibly because he was devoting most of his time to his college duties, but he remained a fellow of the Cambridge Philosophical Society and a contributor to its 'Transactions'. 
Fisher was one of several young physicians whose presence in Cambridge in the 1830s and 1840s saved the university's medical faculty from extinction, but his appointment as Downing professor of medicine may be regarded as a lost opportunity for the medical school, which could instead have secured the services of one of the leading physicians of the day, Thomas Watson, who had also applied for the position. Fisher remained highly esteemed in the university for his professional attainments and his conversational powers. According to 'The Times', 'His politics were anything but conservative' (quoted in Venn, 'Alum. Cant.'). Fisher, who was married to Catharine M. Woodham, died at his lodge in Downing College on 4 October 1874. 


@@@@@


doc= 9513


Fisk, William (1796-1872), portrait and history painter, born at Thorpe-le-Soken, Essex, was the son of a yeoman farmer at Can Hall in that county, of a family which dated back to the days of Henry IV. Drawing became Fisk's favourite occupation very early, but his inclination to art was discouraged by his father, who sent him to school at Colchester and placed him at nineteen years of age in a mercantile house in London. Fisk remained in this profession for ten years, though he never neglected his artistic talent, and in 1819 sent the Royal Academy a portrait, 'Child and Favourite Dog'. About 1826 he married Margaret Thomas and after the birth of his eldest son, William Henry Fisk, soon afterwards devoted himself seriously to art as a profession. In 1829 he sent the Royal Academy a portrait of William Redmore Bigg RA (1755-1828), and he continued to exhibit portraits there for a few years. At the British Institution he exhibited in 1830 'The Widow', and in 1832 'Puck'. About 1834 he started producing the large historical paintings for which he is now best-known. These compositions, although later seen as 'a failure from an artistic point of view', have been seen to possess value from the care Fisk took to obtain contemporary portraits and authorities for costume, which he faithfully reproduced on his canvas. Some of them were engraved, and the popularity of the engravings led to his painting more. They included 'Lady Jane Grey, when in Confinement in the Tower, Visited by Feckenham' (exh. British Institution, 1834), 'The Coronation of Robert Bruce' (exh. RA, 1836), and 'The Conspiracy of the Pazzi, or, The Attempt to Assassinate Lorenzo de Medici' (exh. RA, 1839). The last-named painting was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Manchester Institution for the best historical picture exhibited in its gallery. About 1840 Fisk commenced a series of five paintings connected with the reign of Charles I, namely, 'Cromwell's Family Interceding for the Life of Charles I' (exh. RA, 1840); 'The Trial of the Earl of Strafford' (never exhibited, engraved by James Scott in 1841, and now in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool); 'The Trial of Charles I in Westminster Hall, 1641' (exh. RA, 1842); 'Charles I Passing through the Banqueting-House, Whitehall, to the Scaffold' (exh. RA, 1843); and 'The Last Interview of Charles I with his Children' (exh. British Institution, 1844). Other later paintings Fisk exhibited at the Royal Academy, which were of literary subjects, were 'The Rivals' (exh. 1844) and 'Sir Roger de Coverley, Will Honeycomb, &c, in the Temple Cloisters' (exh. 1845). Fisk also showed paintings frequently at the Suffolk Street exhibition. He eventually retired to Gay Bowers, a property he had purchased at Danbury, Essex, where he died on 8 November 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 9514


Fisk, William Henry (1827-1884), landscape and historical genre painter and drawing teacher, was the son of William Fisk (1796-1872), a painter of portraits and historical subjects, and his wife, Margaret Thomas; he was baptized on 23 June 1827 at St Mary's, Marylebone Road, Middlesex. Fisk studied with his father, and attended the Royal Academy Schools. He first exhibited at the Society of British Artists, Suffolk Street, in 1846, and continued to show there until 1862. He also exhibited at the Royal Academy (1850-73), and the British Institution (1856-63). Among the works exhibited at the Royal Academy were a number of scenes from the history of the French Revolution. 
In 1849 Fisk was one of the first of several watercolour painters invited to Balmoral to paint for Queen Victoria. He produced a folio of 'Finished Water-Colours Copied from Nature' from which the queen chose four paintings: 'Abergeldie Castle: Distant View', 'Birkhall', 'Crathie Church: Distant View', and 'Loch Muick: the East End at Noon' (all Royal Collection). These were added to one of the souvenir albums which the queen and the prince consort had compiled after their marriage in 1840. The paintings are not particularly original, but they do have noteworthy and attractive qualities. Both 'Abergeldie Castle' and 'Loch Muick' show that Fisk handled the effects of light and shade particularly well, and in the former work there is a pleasing use of colour in the hills in the distance, where soft shades of green and brown are blended with sensitivity. The composition and perspective in all four paintings are well executed, and the colours used in 'Birkhall' convey the freshness and brightness of the outdoors. The obituaries for Fisk in 'The Times' (21 November 1884) and 'The Athenaeum' (22 November 1884) both comment upon his having produced a series of drawings of trees for Victoria which were 'much admired', but their whereabouts are unknown. 
Fisk's 'Ben Nevis from above Navin' (1868; V&A) is a more assured and skilful example of his work but shares qualities with those he painted at Balmoral nineteen years earlier. In 1868, however, his use of colours, rendering of sunlight, and wide composition (as in 'Crathie Church') to include as much of the surrounding landscape as possible have been developed and refined. It was not only as a landscape painter that Fisk found success. He designed the figures, in oil on canvas on a gold ground, of Albrecht Durer and Lorenzo Ghiberti for a series of mosaics which were installed in the South Kensington Museum grill room in 1869. His masterpiece was considered to be the 'Last Night of Christ in his Nazarene Home', painted in a detailed style influenced by the Pre-Raphaelites, which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1864, and at the Universal Exhibition in Paris in 1867. 
Fisk taught drawing and painting at University College, London, for nearly forty years. He was remembered as an 'extremely active, conscientious, and successful' teacher whose services as head drawing-master were of 'manifest benefit to the establishment' ('The Athenaeum', 22 Nov 1884). Fisk used his skills as a draughtsman well, being appointed anatomical draughtsman to the Royal College of Surgeons, and teaching the study of 'living and draped models' (Millar, 322) at the Society of Female Artists in 1868. He wanted to improve the standard of drawing 'in our great Public Schools' (ibid.) and with this in mind he obtained permission to study the old master drawings in the Royal Collection in November 1871. He occasionally contributed articles on painting to national newspapers and journals, and was also a lecturer on the practical aspects of art whose 'clear and logical' style attracted large audiences in London and the provinces ('The Athenaeum', 22 Nov 1884). 
Fisk died suddenly of heart disease on 13 November 1884 at his London home, 27 Church Row, Hampstead. His obituary in 'The Athenaeum' states that his paintings 'attained considerable popularity about forty-five years ago' and notes that it was as a very able teacher of drawing and painting that he 'became best known' ('The Athenaeum', 22 Nov 1884). 


@@@@@


doc= 9515


Fisken, William (1812-1883), Free Church of Scotland minister and inventor, was born on Gelleyburn Farm, near Crieff, Perthshire, on 16 September 1812, the son of Thomas Fisken, a farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth Gray. After attending school at the neighbouring village of Muthill, he studied for the ministry at St Andrew's College, under Professor Duncan. He then attended the University of Glasgow, and after 1843, the Divinity Hall of the Free Church. While there he taught at a school at Alyth, near his birthplace. Upon receiving licence in the presbytery of Dundee, he began his career as a preacher in the Free Church. He visited various places throughout the country, including the Orkney Islands, where he would have received a call had he cared to accept it. He was next sent to the presbytery at Newcastle upon Tyne, and preached as a probationer at the nearby village of Stamfordham, where in 1847 he received a call, and was duly ordained, ministering there until his death. As governor and secretary he did much to promote the success of the scheme of the endowed schools at Stamfordham. 
Fisken and his brothers Thomas ('b'. 1815), a schoolmaster at Stockton-on-Tees, and David ('b'. 1802) studied mechanics. Thomas and he designed a steam plough. Messrs Fowler, implement manufacturers in Leeds, contested their claim to have invented the steam plough, but the Fiskens won the ensuing case. William Chartres of Newcastle upon Tyne, the Fiskens' solicitor, used to tell how the two brothers wrote to him on the same day about the final discovery, which they made independently but simultaneously, but that he received William's letter first. William also invented a potato-sowing machine, a safety steam boiler, a propeller, an apparatus for heating churches, and the 'steam tackle', patented in July 1855, which helped to make the steam plough practically useful. This system of haulage obtained second prize at the royal show at Wolverhampton and was exhibited in Scotland in 1852, at Carlisle in 1855, and at the show of the Royal Agricultural Society of England in 1863; but it had largely been superseded by the time of Fisken's death. It worked on the fly-rope system: an endless rope, set into motion directly by the flywheel of the engine, drove windlasses of an ingenious type, which set the mechanism in motion. Fisken was the author of two undated pamphlets, 'The Cheapest System of Steam Cultivation and Steam Cartage' and 'On the Comparative Methods of Steam Tackle' which gained the prize of the Bath and West of England Society. 
Fisken was a man of liberal views, widely read, and popular with his contemporaries. On 8 September 1880 he married Mary Isabella (1843-1907), widow of William Turnbull and daughter of John Tillman, shipowner. He died at his manse at Stamfordham, on 28 December 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 9516


Fitch, Ralph (1550?-1611), merchant and traveller, whose origins and date of birth are obscure, is first heard of when, by the age of twenty-four or twenty-five, he completed an apprenticeship in London and became a member of the Leathersellers' Company. In 1575 the company extended a loan of $50 to him, interest-free for two years, as part of a fund to assist young members in establishing a business. Eight years later he had accrued capital of at least $140. 
Fitch was the first Englishman to make an extensive journey through India and south-east Asia. He travelled in 1583 with John Newberry, a merchant, John Story, a painter, and William Leeds, a jeweller, as far as Fatehpur Sikri, the court city of Akbar, the Mughal emperor ('r'. 1556-1605). From there he left his compatriots and sailed first down the Ganges and then to Bengal, Burma, and as far as Malacca, returning by way of Ceylon and Cochin. Fitch wrote an account of this journey, which was published by Richard Hakluyt in his 1598 edition of 'The Principal Navigations... of the English Nation'. 
Fitch's journey to Asia was part of an attempt to break Venetian and Portuguese control of the pepper and spice trade. In 1578 Richard Staper and Edward Osborne had provided the financial and William Cecil, Lord Burghley, the political backing for William Harborne to negotiate commercial privileges and establish a trade with the Ottoman empire. In 1581 this same group founded the Turkey Company. At the same time John Newberry, twice between 1578 and 1582, explored the commercial potential of the overland route, including the Euphrates valley, Armenia, and Persia. A similar motive to negotiate commercial privileges can be inferred for the journey of 1583 from the official letters of Elizabeth I which Newberry and Fitch were to present to the Mughal and Chinese emperors. 
In February 1583 Fitch, Newberry, Story, Leeds, and two merchants, John Eldred and William Shales, left London on the merchant ship 'Tiger'. From Aleppo it took them three weeks to reach Basrah, where Eldred and Shales remained behind to trade. Unable to find a suitable translator who could speak the 'Indian tongue', presumably Hindustani, the other four in the group proceeded to Hormoz, a Portuguese island city at the mouth of the Persian Gulf. 
With working capital of 9000 reales, or over $2000, Fitch and Newberry tried to exploit some of the commercial opportunities available to them in Basrah and Hormoz. Among the commodities they sold, some to Don Mathias de Albequerque, the governor of Hormoz, were a set of gilded cutlery, emeralds, woollen cloth, and kerseys. Greater experience of the markets would have to be gained before profits could be assured, however: 'There is much of our things', wrote Fitch in a letter, 'which sell very well and some we shall get nothing for.' 
Whatever commercial contacts Fitch and Newberry made with Albequerque, the governor nevertheless incarcerated them, after a week in Hormoz, on charges of sedition. According to Newberry, a Venetian, Michael Stropeni, had spread rumours of their support for the pretender to the Portuguese throne, Dom Antonio. Albequerque shipped the Englishmen to the viceroyalty of Goa to face the charges before the chief justice. 
In Goa, after three weeks in gaol and after the intercession of local Jesuits, the four Englishmen were released from prison on a bond of 2000 ducats. Story took a commission offered by the Jesuits to paint St Paul's Church. Hearing rumours that trumped-up charges were being prepared against them, Fitch, Newberry, and Leeds fled to neighbouring Bijapur. They journeyed northwards to Agra in order to seek an audience, of which we know nothing, with Akbar in Fatehpur Sikri. 
After three months at court the three members of the group separated. Leeds took service as a court jeweller. Newberry was to set off on an overland journey to Aleppo. Fitch was to travel down the Jumna and Ganges rivers in order to explore Bengal, Burma, and Malacca. Fitch and Newberry arranged to meet in two years' time at Pegu, the principal court city in Burma. Newberry disappeared, however, and presumably died either in the Punjab or in Persia; and so, after waiting for a year beyond the agreed time, Fitch made his own way back to London. 
An itinerary of the principal places Fitch visited shows the extent of his explorations. In September 1585 he left Agra on a fleet of boats taking goods to Bengal: the journey down the Jumna and Ganges took five months, as he passed though Allahabad, Benares, and Patna before arriving in February 1586 in Hooghly, the principal Bengalese factory of the Portuguese. He then explored the towns of Bengal, and by November 1586 had arrived in Chittagong and Serampore. From there he sailed east to Pegu. Besides these largely coastal explorations, he made month-long treks into the interior of Bengal, at Cooch Behar, and of Burma and Jangomes (Chiang Mai). In February 1587 Fitch reached the furthest east he would go on his travels, having arrived at Malacca, where he stayed for at least a year. 
Beginning in April 1588 Fitch made his way from Malacca progressively, if slowly, to the west, first sailing for Pegu, then in September for Hooghly, in March 1589 for Ceylon and Cochin, and in November for Goa and Chaul. After a delay in securing passage he sailed for Hormoz, and travelled overland through Armenia to Aleppo. When in April 1591 he arrived back in London he had been travelling for eight years. On his return he found that, because he had been missing for over seven years, he had in February 1590 been declared dead by his family and his first will had been proved. 
Fitch recollected his journey at the behest of Hakluyt, and it was first presented to Burghley before publication in 'The Principal Navigations'. Like many early travellers Fitch reiterated or copied the details of previously published accounts. One of his principal sources was the 'Viaggio' (1587) of Cesar Federici, a Venetian merchant, which Thomas Hickock translated and published in London in 1588. 
Following largely though not exclusively from Federici, Fitch concentrated on observations of commercial or anthropological interest. Cotton cloth, for example, was produced in Patna and Orissa, and was of the best quality in Serampore; jewels, including rubies, emeralds, and sapphires, could be found in places such as Caplan in Burma; Pegu and Malacca were the two places he visited where pepper, spices, drugs, and jewels from Java, Borneo, Timor, and China might be found. Otherwise he recounted the beliefs, customs, and exotic appearance of those he encountered. Women often wore elaborate necklaces, earrings, and bracelets, such as those made, for example, in Benares of silver, copper, or tin and set with amber or agate. In Burma, at Jamenhy, people who recovered from illness celebrated by offering meat to the devil; and at Pegu, people would eat animals that were taboo in England, including dogs, cats, rats, and snakes. Underlying recollections such as these was an inability to accept unfamiliar religions and incompatible beliefs. Fitch identified many of the people he encountered as idolators. Most harmful were the charlatans who took advantage of credulous people, such as the one in Patna who posed as a prophet; Brahman priests were 'a kind of crafty people, worse than Jews'. 
In the final twenty years of his life Fitch traded in or to Aleppo, acted as a consultant to the East India Company, and held office in the Leathersellers' Company. In new deeds of incorporation signed in 1592 the Levant Company laid claim to the overland trade to Basrah and Hormoz, explored by Fitch, Newberry, and Eldred, and in that deed Fitch was named as a member of the company. In 1595 the general court elected him consul at Aleppo, a position he declined; but in that year, nevertheless, he went there to trade. On his return to London in 1599 he paid a $10 fine to avoid service in the Leathersellers' Company as warden of the yeomanry and was shortly thereafter admitted to the livery. When the East India Company was established in 1599, despite having made the first explorations of Asia, Fitch did not become a founding member. He intermittently assisted the directors, none the less, translating official letters into Portuguese or providing, in 1606, the appropriate titles for Akbar's successor, Jahangir ('r'. 1605-1627). Through the Leathersellers' Company he loaned money for ventures to Virginia and Ireland. In 1608 the company elected him to be an assistant, and at the same time he performed the duties of renter warden. In August 1611, at the age of sixty-one, he was elected warden, but served only two months before his death in October that year. 
In his final years Fitch lived in the parish of St Katharine Cree, just off Leadenhall Street. In neither of his wills does he mention a wife or offspring. Instead he left $1000 in bequests to the descendants of a brother, Thomas, and a sister, Frances, and his principal beneficiaries were grandnephews, Talbot and Thomas Fitch. Among the bequests were small sums for poor children at Christ's Hospital and to the Leathersellers' Company for honorary silver spoons and drinks. 


@@@@@


doc= 9517


Fitch, William Stevenson (1792-1859), antiquary and thief, was born at Ipswich on 17 November 1792, the eldest of the five children of Samuel Fitch, druggist, and his wife, Elizabeth Stevenson. After five years at Ipswich grammar school (1802-7) he joined the family business and later took over the shop on his father's death in 1815. An early and consuming fascination with old documents, autographs, prints, and coins, particularly those relating to Suffolk history, brought him into contact with other East Anglian antiquaries and collectors, most importantly Dawson Turner of Yarmouth, with whom he corresponded over three decades and to whom he presented and sold many important manuscripts. 
By 12 July 1824 Fitch had secretly married Rachel Alexander, a gamekeeper's daughter whom he described to Turner as having been brought up and educated by Wilbraham Tollemache, sixth earl of Dysart; at the time of the marriage Rachel was responsible for the running of Ham House, Surrey, the principal home of the earl's sister and heir, Louisa, seventh countess. Both Ham House (first visited by Fitch in 1821) and Helmingham Hall, the Tollemache family property near Ipswich, were possessed of important archival libraries, to which Fitch gained intimate access and from which he appropriated, apparently without the knowledge of the aged countess, a large quantity of manuscript and early printed material. 
From Ham House Fitch abstracted a portion of the papers of John Maitland, first duke of Lauderdale and second husband of an earlier countess of Dysart, to whom the Lauderdale papers had descended in 1682. Fitch's spoils included some of Lauderdale's own correspondence, as well as an important collection of primary documents from the time of Mary Stuart, many of them associated with Mary's secretary William Maitland of Lethington. In 1833 he arranged for the printing of thirty copies of 'Maitland's narrative of the principal acts of the regency during the minority, and other papers relating to the history of Mary queen of Scotland', dedicated to Dawson Turner. Some of the original manuscripts themselves later passed to Turner, who cannot have been unaware of their provenance; in 1859 many were purchased for the British Museum at Turner's posthumous sale. Fitch also plundered the Helmingham Hall library, where in the eighteenth century the third and fourth earls of Dysart had added substantially to the collection formed by Sir Lionel Tollemache, first baronet, around 1600. By 1832 he had sold (for a pittance) the Helmingham collection of about 160 early broadside ballads to the London collector George Daniel, who ceded approximately half to Richard Heber; Daniel's retained moiety passed eventually, through Henry and Alfred Henry Huth, to the British Museum, and Heber's to Britwell Court and the Henry E. Huntington Library. Other Helmingham 'finds', such as the manuscript of Alexander Nowell's large catechism, went to Dawson Turner, and still others directly to the British Museum; the only extant poetical holograph of George Peele, his 'Anglorum feriae', which Fitch published in 1835, may stem from Helmingham or Ham House as well. 
Also in 1832 Fitch sold to the sixth duke of Devonshire the manuscript of John Bale's morality play 'King Johan'; the sale was negotiated by Turner, to whom Fitch explained that the manuscript had come from the Ipswich corporation chest, but had been considered 'useless lumber'. Other early documents deriving from the Ipswich muniments were listed by Fitch in a privately printed catalogue (1843) and appeared in the three auction sales of his collections held in 1855 and 1859, when some were claimed by town authorities and withdrawn. 
Despite the irregularity of his activities, and the almost certain knowledge of them among contemporaries such as Turner, Hudson Gurney, and Sir Frederic Madden, Fitch was respected in his time for his knowledge of Suffolk antiquities and was an active member of both the British Archaeological Association and the Suffolk Institute of Archaeology. In 1837 he was appointed postmaster of Ipswich, a post which he held until 1859. He died on 17 July 1859 at Ipswich, where he was buried three days later, survived by his wife, two of his three sons, and a daughter, all of whom emigrated (to America and New Zealand) by 1868. His widow died on 14 January 1870 at Troy, New York state. 


@@@@@


doc= 9518


Fitchett, John (1776-1838), poet, the son of a wine merchant at Liverpool, was born on 21 September 1776, and orphaned before he was ten. He was then removed to Warrington by his testamentary guardian, Mr Kerfoot, and sent to Warrington grammar school under the Revd Edward Owen. In 1793 he was articled to his guardian, was then admitted as an attorney, and taken into partnership with him, and later rose to a high place in his profession. His first published work, 'Bewsey, a Poem' (1796), written at eighteen, had considerable success. He afterwards wrote many ephemeral pieces, collected and printed at Warrington in 1836 under the title of 'Minor Poems, Composed at Various Times'. 
The great work of Fitchett's life, which occupied his leisure hours for forty years and to which he devoted unwearied industry and research, was a romantic epic poem on the life and times of King Alfred. It was printed at Warrington for private circulation at intervals between 1808 and 1834, in five quarto volumes. It included a biography of Alfred, an epitome of the antiquities, topography, religion, and civil and religious condition of the country. A partial revision was unfinished at his death. He left money for printing a new edition, a work undertaken by his pupil, clerk, and friend Robert Roscoe (son of William Roscoe of Liverpool), who added 2585 lines, making the entire work more than 131,000 lines long. This prodigious monument of misapplied learning and mental energy was published by Pickering in 1841-2, in six volumes, and entitled 'King Alfred, a Poem'. 
Fitchett died unmarried at Warrington on 20 October 1838, and was buried at Winwick church in Warrington. A sum of $8000 was left to his sister Ann. His large, select library was left to his nephew John Fitchett Marsh, with whose additions it was sold at Sothebys in May 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 9519


James Fittler (1758-1835) was born in London in October 1758. In 1776 he exhibited two sketches, including a portrait of General James Wolfe, with the Free Society of Artists, giving his address as 'At Mr Fittler's, Wells Street, near Germain Street, St James's'. He enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools as a student of engraving in April 1778, giving his age as '22 next Oct.', and in 1781 married Elizabeth Johnson. He exhibited at the academy from 1788 to 1824 and was elected an associate in 1800. Fittler was appointed marine engraver to George III. He also contributed one large plate and four small illustrations to the 'Shakspeare Gallery'. In 1790-91 he co-published with John Love 'Views of Weymouth', and he was copublisher with Robert Bowyer in 1795 of an illustrated 'Bible', losing, according to Farington, $1500 in the venture. None the less, he later appears as publisher of engravings after John Claude Nattes's views of Scotland (1804) and a folio set of reproductions of Raphael's 'Cartoons' (1810). According to Farington, his daughter married a hatter who went bankrupt, further aggravating Fittler's financial difficulties. His last published works were illustrations to Dibdin's 'Aedes Althorpinae' (1822), after which he appears to have retired from art; his drawings and prints were sold off at Sothebys on 14-16 July 1825. He died at Turnham Green on 2 December 1835 and was buried in the churchyard of St Nicholas, Chiswick. 


@@@@@


doc= 9520


Fitton, Alexander, Jacobite Baron Fitton (d. 1699), politician and Jacobite sympathizer, was probably born in Dublin, a younger son of William Fitton of Awrice, co. Limerick, and his wife, Eva, daughter of Sir Edward Trevor of Brynkinallt, Denbighshire; he was great-grandson of the Elizabethan adventurer Sir Edward Fitton (1527-1579) of Gawsworth, Cheshire, who founded the Irish branch of the family and grandson of Alexander Fitton, who settled there. William was drawn back to England in 1643 by the prospective inheritance of the ancestral estate in Cheshire, and he brought Alexander with him. It was in the struggle over the Fitton property in Cheshire and Lancashire that Alexander first came to prominence. 
Sir Edward Fitton, second baronet (1604-1643), great-grandson of the adventurer, grandson of Sir Edward Fitton (1548/9-1606), and head of the Cheshire line, died without leaving a son or living brothers in August 1643. Though Sir Edward had seven sisters, by a settlement of 1641 he left his estate to his Irish relatives, who would perpetuate the Fitton name. In 1649, upon Alexander's marriage to Ann Joliffe (died 1687) of Coston Hackett, Worcestershire, mortgages encumbering the estate were cleared, and upon the death in January 1655 of Felicia, Lady Fitton, Sir Edward's widow, William and his son took possession of the property, over the strenuous objections of the other heirs. William's decision to send his son to the Inner Temple in 1655 must have been at least in part a result of his concern over his title to the estate. Alexander was eventually called to the bar on 12 May 1662, and needed all his legal skills to defend his inheritance. 
Following the Restoration, Charles Gerard, Lord Gerard of Brandon (c.1618-1694), son of Sir Edward's eldest sister Penelope, returned from his royalist exile and produced a will dated 16 August 1643, revoking the 1641 settlement. This document gave Gawsworth and all the Fitton lands to Gerard. A series of lawsuits ensued, in which the inheritance was disputed in courts from Cheshire to the House of Lords. The case became a 'cause celebre', and both sides accused the other of forgery. Gerard produced a witness, Abraham Granger, who testified that he forged the 1641 settlement. In November 1662 king's bench declared Fitton's possession illegal and awarded a verdict for Gerard. Despite this defeat Fitton continued to pursue his case, publishing in 1663 'A true narrative of the proceedings in the severall suits in law that have been between the Rt. Hon. Charles Lord Gerard of Brandon and Alexander Fitton, esq.' This pamphlet, supposedly published in The Hague, purported to be Granger's confession. In it he claimed that Gerard had forced his testimony with a mixture of threats and the promise of a pension. The pamphlet claimed that Gerard's 1643 will was in fact a forgery. Granger, well known in London as a forger, was hardly a reliable witness for either side, and determining the truth of either claim is difficult. The courts sided with Gerard when his stock at court was high, and later, when the political winds changed, Fitton received gentler treatment. 
Overall, however, Fitton suffered most. He lost possession of Gawsworth in 1663; on 9 July in the same year the House of Lords declared the 'True Narrative' a scandalous libel, fined Fitton $500, and gaoled him until he found sureties for life. Gerard, not long afterward promoted earl of Macclesfield, seems to have held a grudge, for the hapless Alexander remained imprisoned until 1684, by which time Gerard, a close associate of the duke of Monmouth, had lost the king's favour. 
James II's accession dramatically reversed Fitton's fortunes. He used his new-found liberty to revive his case against Macclesfield. In this second round of the dispute Fitton hoped for more success. The Lords heard his petition on 23 May 1685, when Macclesfield was in deep disfavour; by September he had fled the country and was outlawed. Fitton, by contrast, became, to the surprise of many, the king's choice for lord chancellor of Ireland. In January 1687 his appointment was announced, and shortly afterward he was knighted. His salary was raised from $1000 to $1500 in April 1687, a boon which closely followed his conversion to Roman Catholicism. 
During his short period as lord chancellor, Fitton seems to have served conscientiously, and he was a loyal agent of Lord Deputy Tyrconnell. He opposed the revolution, and on 1 May 1689 James raised him to the peerage as Baron Fitton of Gawsworth -- though his new rank was never recognized in England. In 1690 the exiled king named him one of the three lords justices of Ireland. By July 1690 he had joined the court at St Germain and was attainted by parliament. In exile Fitton continued to play a role in James's counsels. In January 1699 the king's will appointed him, along with eight others, to a council which would advise Queen Mary after his death. In England Fitton's lawsuits against Macclesfield foundered upon the rock of his own Jacobitism and the earl's influence with William III; he never regained possession of Gawsworth. He died at St Germain in November 1699. 


