@@@@@


doc= 9521


Fitton, Sir Edward (1527-1579), administrator, was born on 31 March 1527, the eldest son of Sir Edward Fitton (died 1548) of Gawsworth, Cheshire, and Mary, daughter and coheir of Guicciard Harbottle of Northumberland. He was brother to Thomas, Francis (died 1608), Anthony, George, Mary (died 1591), who married Sir Richard Leveson, and Margaret (died 1567), who married John Englefield. His formal education is not documented, but he had scholarly interests and translated a text by Martin Luther into English. Fitton married Anne (1527-1574), second daughter of Peter Warburton of Areley, Chester, on 19 January 1540. They were then 'in the 12 yere of their age and lyved together in true and lawfull matrymonie just 34 yeres' (monument, St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin). They had nine sons and six daughters: the eldest son, Edward Fitton, was born in 1548 or 1549. 
Fitton served as a JP in Cheshire, was a member of parliament for Cheshire in 1553, and was knighted on 19 October 1553. He entered on his Gawsworth lands in May 1557, his mother having died on 2 December 1556. He disposed of his interest in the manor of Moreley in Sussex, and with Robert Tatton paid $2600 for the reversion of the manors of Aldford, Echeles, and Alderley in Cheshire. By August 1568 he was being proposed by Sir William Cecil for the newly created office of president of Connacht and Thomond, and was appointed by patent on 1 June 1569, at an annual fee of $133 6's'. 8died sterling. 
Fitton arrived in Ireland on 19 May and Sir Henry Sidney accompanied him to Connacht in mid-June. Though appointed as a civil administrator, with the support of just thirty horsemen, twenty footmen, and one lieutenant, he soon fashioned the presidency into a primarily military post. He had completed a circuit of counties Roscommon and Galway by early January 1570, enforcing the common law. At first he had the co-operation of the earl of Clanricarde, already dependent on English support. However, he encountered resistance from the O'Briens in Thomond. Conor O'Brien, third earl of Thomond, went into rebellion in February 1570, and by April Fitton was requesting increased military support. His assistant Ralph Rokeby agreed that 'it is not gentleness that will win them nor clemency nor mercy, nor the name of a lord president and council... it must be fire and sword' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/30, no. 44). Fitton had some success in the summer of 1570, capturing the strategically important castle of Shrule, though being injured himself. Soon afterwards he and his provincial council were virtually besieged by Thomond at Galway. Reporting in March 1571 on an expedition to north Connacht during which he had indicted the Burkes of Mayo, O'Connor Don, and McDermot, he made the wildly optimistic claim that by Easter term the queen might be entitled to half Connacht. 
The departure of Sir Henry Sidney as lord deputy in March 1571 left Fitton without influential backing in the Dublin administration. The new deputy, Sir William Fitzwilliam, disapproved of provincial presidencies but was impressed by Fitton when they met in Dublin in May 1571 to deal with the earl of Clanricarde. Fitzwilliam reported to Cecil that Fitton 'doth bear a good upright and Godly conscience. A wise and sober man he is, and such a one as doth not shew to be moved with passions' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/32, no. 44). From May 1571, however, Fitton repeatedly requested to be recalled from Connacht. He had a clear understanding of the difficulties he faced. He realized that billeting soldiers on the province caused more problems than it solved, yet was unable to envisage how to avoid using force. His soldiers had not been paid since September 1569, and when the earl of Clanricarde's sons went into rebellion in April 1572, Fitton initially did not have the military capacity to deal with them. Fitzwilliam challenged Fitton's handling of the revolt and insisted on releasing Clanricarde from Dublin Castle, thereby forcing the president to concede the superior authority of the earl within the Clanricarde lordship. Discouraged by failure, Fitton departed for England in December 1572, and Sidney's plans for a provincial presidency were temporarily shelved. 
The office of president of Connacht was suspended, though Fitton was allowed to retain his lease on Athlone. He was appointed vice-treasurer and treasurer-at-wars, in place of Sir William Fitzwilliam, from January 1573. Returning to Ireland, he was given responsibility for escorting home the earl of Desmond and his brother John, eventually reaching Dublin on 25 March. He had also been entrusted with transporting $4000. Fitton eventually took up office as vice-treasurer in early May 1573. A fresh controversy arose in June when one of his servants was murdered in retaliation for an earlier assault. Fitton disputed Fitzwilliam's handling of the incident. Tension between the lord deputy and the vice-treasurer was such by mid-June that Fitton refused to co-sign any papers bearing Fitzwilliam's signature. Fitton found himself imprisoned in Dublin Castle, charged with contempt. He instructed his son Edward to obtain a copy of any letter the lord deputy wrote concerning him. It soon emerged that the queen favoured Fitton rather than the lord deputy in this dispute, but Fitzwilliam retaliated by requesting that Fitton be removed from the office of treasurer or that a deputy be appointed. 
Fitton retained the office of vice-treasurer until his death, and was normally based at Whitefriars, Dublin. One of his five brothers, Anthony, was based in Galway, where he was collector of the customs. He employed another brother, Francis, and his own sons Edward and Alexander in official duties, to the extent that on his death his eldest son regarded it as essential that he take charge of the office of receiver-general. From 1573 Fitton had combined some responsibility for Connacht with his duties as vice-treasurer. He accompanied Fitzwilliam to Kilkenny to deal with Sir Edward Butler, but refused to proceed into Munster to deal with disturbances likely to arise following the escape of the earl of Desmond. He was discharged from his authority for Connacht soon after the return of Sir Henry Sidney as lord deputy in 1575. He accompanied Sidney on his expedition to Carrickfergus in autumn 1575. His journey to Connacht in June 1576 was probably his last, and he had relinquished his interest in Athlone Castle to Sir Nicholas Malby by July 1576. 
The years 1573 to 1575 were years of tension between Fitton and the lord deputy, Fitzwilliam, exacerbated by shortage of money to meet the government's debts. The lavish funeral held for his wife on 17 January 1574 depleted Fitton's personal resources as well as prompting a dispute between the Ulster king at arms and the vicars-choral at St Patrick's Cathedral. Nevertheless, Fitton enjoyed the support of William Cecil, whose favours extended to Fitton's family, and he was able to have personal meetings with Queen Elizabeth. William Drury reported Fitton's death on 3 July 1579 'from the disease of the country', caught during an expedition to Longford. Drury recorded that he was: 'in many men's opinions over careful of his posterity, and was not without enemies that sought to interpret that to his discredit; but I wish in his successor that temperance, judgment, and ability to speak in her Majesty's causes that was found in him. (TNA: PRO, SP 63/67, no. 25)' A summary of his personal accounts signed on 1 July 1579, just two days before his death, indicates that his resources had been reduced by half by his ten years service in Ireland. He had, however, purchased land called Hazelwood to the value of $888 for his eldest son, Edward. His will, made in 1574 and proved on 2 December 1579, left his lands and goods to his son Edward. Under the terms of the will Edward junior was required to pay his father's outstanding debts, provide $400 for each of his unmarried sisters, and provide for the education of his brothers William and Francis. 
Fitton was buried on 21 September 1579 in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, beside his wife, Anne. A brass monument in the south choir aisle of the cathedral depicts the couple with their fifteen children all in attitudes of prayer, and contains a brief summary of his career. 


@@@@@


doc= 9522


Fitton, Sir Edward (1548/9-1606), administrator, was the son and heir of Sir Edward Fitton (1527-1579) of Gawsworth, Cheshire, and his wife Anne Warburton (1527-1574) of Arley, Cheshire. Born into one of the most prominent gentry families in Cheshire, he was the eldest surviving son in a family of nine sons and six daughters. He was educated at Brasenose College, Oxford, graduating BA on 6 April 1566, and he subsequently studied at Gray's Inn. He married Alice (died 1626), daughter and sole heir of Sir John Holcroft of Holcroft, Lancashire; they had two sons, Edward and Richard, and two daughters, Anne ['see 'Newdigate, Anne] and Mary. Their eldest son and heir, Edward, was born on 3 December 1572. Their younger daughter, Mary Fitton, baptized in 1578, became a maid of honour to Queen Elizabeth in 1595. 
During the 1570s Fitton was an active participant in his father's administrative career as vice-treasurer and treasurer-at-wars in Ireland and was occasionally employed to transport money into Ireland. From his Gawsworth home he kept in contact with Lord Burghley concerning Irish affairs. On his father's death in July 1579 it was reported that Fitton, then aged thirty, expected to inherit the office and he was adamant 'that none shall mixe with my father's reckoning but my self' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/67, no. 55). He was appointed receiver-general for Ireland in that year in succession to Edward Waterhouse. On 11 October 1579 he was knighted at Dublin Castle by the newly appointed lord justice, Sir William Pelham, and on the following day was issued with a passport to return to England with his company and his goods. His father's accounts were still a subject of debate in the Dublin administration well into the 1580s. 
Under the terms of his father's will Sir Edward inherited his father's entire estate on condition that he pay any outstanding debts, support his sisters until they married, and provide dowries for them when their marriages were arranged, and provide for the education of two of his younger brothers, William and Francis. Besides the principal family estate at Gawsworth he also inherited his father's interest in the manors of Aldford, Echeles, and Alderley in Cheshire; he entered on his Gawsworth lands on 25 April 1583. He served as a JP in Cheshire until his death, as his father and grandfather had done, and through the influence of powerful friends he served as MP for Wigan in 1572, and for Boroughbridge in 1589. 
In the mid-1580s Fitton became involved in Ireland again, this time as a key promoter of the plantation scheme for the forfeited lands of the earl of Desmond in Munster. He actively recruited gentlemen from Cheshire to become involved as principal settlers in Munster, and on 3 September 1587 he and Thomas Fleetwood became the first undertakers to receive patents in the Munster plantation. He received lands totalling 11,515 acres, principally in the seigneury of Knockainy in co. Limerick, and also at Aherlow in co. Tipperary and Kilmanahan in co. Waterford. The acquisition of the Kilmanahan lands, at the expense of Richard Power, demonstrated the importance of Sir Edward's well-established contacts with influential office-holders. He was also actively involved with Sir Valentine Browne in discovering 'concealed' Munster lands, and campaigned to ensure that such lands were included in the patents issued to undertakers. 
The Cheshire settlers recruited for the Munster plantation scheme by Fitton acted as a group in the early years. Two of his own brothers, Richard and Alexander, were also undertakers in the scheme. Sir Edward continued to travel frequently between Ireland and England, cultivating his contacts at court while simultaneously working to secure title to his lands in Ireland. He repaired and inhabited the former Desmond castle of Knockainy, which had been destroyed during the Desmond rebellion. He invested in agricultural improvement, advocating a transition to tillage farming, and importing English bulls onto his Limerick lands. He raised a company of twenty-five horsemen in England and brought them to Munster. However, by the end of 1588 Sir Edward had become disillusioned with the Munster project and claimed to have lost $1500 on his investment. Like other undertakers, he had failed to meet the conditions of his patent; like other English Elizabethan gentlemen in Ireland he had hoped to serve his own interests as well as those of the monarch, but found service in Ireland financially unrewarding, despite enjoying the support of Lord Burghley. He returned to live more or less permanently at Gawsworth and petitioned Lord Burghley for remission of rent on his land in Ireland. His brother Alexander, however, was still in residence in Munster in 1598 and acted as his agent. The Munster rising of 1598 resulted in most of the settlers being dispossessed, and in December 1598 Edmund Fitzgibbon (the white knight) attacked Sir Edward's household in Kilmanahan. Earlier that year Sir Edward had been nominated by Burghley for the post of treasurer of Ireland, following the death of Sir Henry Wallop, but was not appointed. 
Fitton died on 4 March 1606 and was buried on 3 April in Gawsworth church, where his widow erected a monument to his memory depicting parents and four children kneeling. In accordance with the terms of his will, his son and heir, Edward, sold the Fittons' Irish lands to pay off family debts. The Limerick lands were bought by Donough O'Brien, fourth earl of Thomond, and some local Old English landowners. Sir Edward's will also made provision for his two daughters but none for his younger son, Richard. His widow died on 5 February 1626. 


@@@@@


doc= 9523


Fitton, Mary (bap. 1578, d. 1641), courtier and gentlewoman, was baptized at Gawsworth, Cheshire, on 24 June 1578, the younger daughter of Sir Edward Fitton (1548/9-1606) and his wife, Alice Holcroft (died 1626). At some point between July 1596 and early 1598 she went as a maid of honour to the court of Elizabeth I. The comptroller of the royal household, Sir William Knollys, promised her father that he would play 'the Good Shepperd & will to my power deffend the innocent lamb from the wolvyshe crueltye & fox-like subtletye of the tame bests of this place' (Warks. CRO, CR 136, B244). Occupying the chamber next to the maids, he was well placed to do so, but he soon fell in love with Mary, thirty years his junior. Spurned (he was also married), he confided the pains of unrequited love to Mary's sister Anne Newdigate (1574-1618), who was living in Warwickshire, in a series of frank letters replete with images of frost, desert, and purgatory. In this relationship, as in others later, there is no direct evidence of Mary's feelings: Lady Fitton complained to Anne on 3 July 1598 that 'I never harde from her' (Warks. CRO, CR 136, B118), and Mary's two surviving letters, addressed to Anne, are affectionate but formulaic. 
Knollys remarked on Mary's proneness to melancholy and nervous disorder. By 12 January 1600 she had left court in bad health and retired to her father's London house. She was still there just before 21 February, when she was visited by Lady Sidney. Any prospect of marriage was hindered by the fact that $1200 intended for her portion was in the hands of Sir Henry Wallop, one of Sir Edward's debtors. However, by early summer Mary was back at court, her presence there a valuable asset to her father, who was often absent in the north-east transacting sensitive business between Sir Robert Cecil and the earls of Derby. Before 5 August she warned him that he had been 'maligned' behind his back, and advised his presence 'to purge' himself ('Salisbury MSS', 10.265). 'Mistress Fitton' herself was established in the public eye. When the clown William Kempe of the Lord Chamberlain's Men dedicated to Anne Fitton his 'Nine Dayes Wonder' (1600), Mary was probably his intended target. Her most prominent appearance was as the leading masker, Affection, in the festivities surrounding the marriage on 16 June of fellow maid of honour Anne Russell and Henry Somerset, Lord Herbert. 
By this time Mary had become the mistress of William Herbert (1580-1630), also styled Lord Herbert, eldest son of Henry Herbert, second earl of Pembroke. When she was revealed to be pregnant the following January, the queen's wrath fell on the maids' chamber as a whole, and Mary was committed to the care of Lady Hawkins. By 5 February 1601 her lover, now third earl of Pembroke, had confessed his responsibility, but Cecil reported that 'he utterly renounceth all marriage' (Brewer and Bullen, 4.20) and predicted that they would both go to the Tower. In March Pembroke was sent to the Fleet prison, where he remained for some weeks, while Mary gave birth to a son, who died soon afterwards. On 18 May Sir Edward wrote to Cecil that Mary, who seems to have been convinced that she had been promised marriage, was still confident in her claim before God, but he was himself pessimistic. Knollys, still regretting 'hyr whom I have so much loved', shared his gloom, writing furiously to Anne Newdigate that, after he had taken so much care to manure the soil, 'the man off synne' spoiled the harvest, 'havyng in the night sowed tares amongst the good corne' (Warks. CRO, CR 136, B238). On 6 June Sir Edward appealed again to Cecil 'to let me taste your old and good favour to me and all my children' ('Salisbury MSS', 11.218), but to no avail: the earl would not be forced into a socially and financially disadvantageous marriage. 
By autumn 1601 Mary seems to have retired to the country, leaving behind a damaged reputation. Probably in October a Mistress Martin of Ludgate, London, misremembered 'when Mrs Lytton was in favour... and the Earl of Pembroke favoured her, she would tuck up her clothes, put on a white clock, and march out of court like a man, to meet him' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1580-1625', 411). Within a few months Mary found a new lover in her kinsman, naval officer Sir Richard Leveson (c.1570-1605) of Lilleshall, Staffordshire, whose wife, Margaret, became insane about 1601-2. Leveson installed Mary on his estate at Perton, in the parish of Tettenhall, also in Staffordshire, and in 1603 she gave birth to their daughter, Anne; but he died in London of smallpox on 2 August 1605. A short-lived, possibly posthumous son, William, was buried at Tettenhall on 8 January 1608. 
Against her parents' wishes, but with the powerful encouragement of the Egerton family, early in 1606 Mary married Captain William Polewhele, who had served under Leveson. They continued to live at Perton and had two children, (another) William (1606-1654), baptized at Tettenhall on 1 December 1606, and Frances, baptized and buried in February 1609, before Polewhele died later that year, between 19 September, the date of his will, and 26 September, when he was buried; Mary's pregnancy, noted in the will, subsequently resulted in another daughter, Mary (died 1667). About 1612 Mary at last married a gentleman of similar social status to her own, John Lougher (died 1636) of Tenby, Pembrokeshire, a former MP with legal training who had served on the northern high commission court at York. They had at least three children -- Elizabeth (died 1640x47), John, and Lettis (died 1678) -- and lived mainly at Perton, keeping close contact with the Newdigate family even after Mary's sister's death in 1618. 
Mary's later life, of which little else is known, saw a series of lawsuits with members of the Leveson family. Sir Richard Leveson had settled his estates on the sons of his cousin Sir John Leveson on condition either that whichever was the heir married his illegitimate daughter Anne Fitton or that they give her a $4000 portion. However, the inheritance was encumbered by debt and the Levesons expressed doubts about Mary's suitability as a mother. In 1609 Polewhele failed to obtain through the court of chancery $1000 due to his wife and in the same court between 1619 and 1624 the Loughers failed to secure Anne's rights. Anne finally married Robert Charnocke of Astley in Chorley, Lancashire, at Tettenhall on 4 April 1625. John Lougher, who was sheriff of Pembrokeshire in 1626-7, died intestate on 8 January 1636. Mary died in 1641 and was buried at Tettenhall on 19 September. Her will, drawn up on 19 December 1640, left the lease of Perton to her son William Polewhele and leases in Pembrokeshire to Elizabeth Lougher. Lettis Lougher, who is not mentioned, had already married Thomas Denton, and was the mother of Thomas Denton (1637-1698) ['see under 'Denton, John] and Henry Denton (d. 1681). 
At a meeting of the New Shakspere Society on 13 June 1884, Thomas Tyler argued for the identification of Mary Fitton as the 'dark lady' of Shakespeare's sonnets. For some years, since her first lover, Pembroke, was himself identified as 'Mr W. H.', the theory gained wide acceptance. In his article on Mary Fitton in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', Sidney Lee pronounced it 'ingenious' but yet to be proven; long before the second edition of 1908, in which he discounted it altogether, he and others had changed their minds. The chief cause was the appearance in 1897 of Alice Emily Newdigate-Newdegate's 'Gossip from a Muniment Room', which included reproductions of portraits of Mary at Arbury Hall. In an extended discussion appended to the second edition of this work (1898), G. C. O. Bridgeman supported Lady Newdigate-Newdegate's suggestion that Mary's colouring, with brown rather than black hair and light eyes, rendered her an unlikely 'dark lady', and others, reviewing this and the shaky identification of 'W. H.', concurred. In 1910 George Bernard Shaw prefaced his interlude 'The Dark Lady of the Sonnets', in which the heroine was Mary Fitton, with a statement that this was a mere convenient fiction. However, some authors perpetuated the original theory, and Mary Fitton figured prominently and imaginatively in Charles Creighton, 'Shakespeare's Story of his Life' (1904), Frank Harris, 'The Man Shakespeare' (1909) and 'The Women of Shakespeare' (1911), and Ernest Jones, 'Hamlet and Oedipus' (1949), and probably longer in the popular mind. 


@@@@@


doc= 9524


Fitton, Michael (bap. 1765, d. 1852), naval officer, was born in Gawsworth, Cheshire, and baptized there on 29 December 1765. He was probably the son of Henry Fitton and Ann, 'nee' Kelsall, the youngest of five children. It was claimed that he was a descendant of the ancient family of Fitton, once of Gawsworth Hall, but there is no evidence for the connection and Fitton or Fytton was a common name in that area of Cheshire. 
In June 1780 Michael Fitton entered the navy as captain's servant to George Keppel in the 'Vestal'. Fitton's family may have had some connection with the Keppels but the action which ensured that he received the lifelong support of his captain, George Keppel, arose from his keen observation and quick thinking. The 'Vestal' had stopped an American packet and from aloft, seeing an object fall overboard from the detained ship, Fitton immediately alerted the deck below. The 'body' proved to be a bag containing a secret treaty between American revolutionary forces and the Dutch, the discovery of which led directly to the outbreak of the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War. Captain Keppel was commended in parliament and clearly never forgot the quick reactions of his young protege. Fitton followed Keppel to successive ships and finally to the 'Hebe' in December 1782. He was promoted master's mate but when Keppel was superseded by Edward Thornbrough, Fitton clearly became increasingly unhappy and proceeded to desert his ship. Thornbrough wrote at the time 'Fitton Ran from Her Majesty's Ship 'Hebe' under my command at Plymouth on 13th January 1784 and it does not appear to me in my present opinion that he is deserving of relief' (TNA: PRO, ADM 36/10694). Thornbrough was not an officer to cross, having been entrusted with the naval training of the future William IV. 
Fitton next appeared in naval records on 25 September 1794 as an able seaman, joining the 'Defiance', Keppel's first command following the outbreak of war with France (TNA: PRO, ADM 36/11908). It is not known what Fitton did in the intervening period. However, in June 1795 Keppel was promoted to flag rank and went on to half pay, thereby restricting Fitton's chances of obtaining another berth as a sea officer. In December 1796 he therefore accepted the position of purser in the 'Stork' which left the Nore for the West Indies at the height of the mutiny. A somewhat far-fetched story is told of how: 'as the 'Stork' passed the line of battleships she was hailed by the mutineers who ordered her to heave to or be blown out of the water. 'If you fire so shall we' responded Fitton. The 'Stork' passed along the line unmolested. (Fytton, 26)' After serving for two years in the 'Stork' Fitton managed to obtain an appointment as acting third lieutenant in the 'Abergavenny', not a desirable berth since the flagship in Jamaica spent most of her time at Port Royal plagued with yellow fever. However, it was from here that Fitton was able to carve out an extraordinary reputation in capturing or sinking numerous enemy privateers and pirates. In seven years, with a short break during the peace of Amiens, vessels under his command captured or destroyed forty enemy ships and damaged many more. From 1799 to 1802 he commanded tenders of the 'Abergavenny', often capturing vessels significantly more powerful than his own. At the peace, however, he was sent home, still only a master's mate. This was probably the consequence of his desertion and possibly through the hostility of Edward Thornbrough, now an active flag officer. Keppel no longer had influence and was to die in 1805. 
On the recommencement of hostilities Fitton returned to the West Indies. First in the 'Gipsy' and later in the 'Pitt' he continued his successful campaign against enemy privateers. However, it was for his part in a combined operation against Curacao, which failed, that he was finally confirmed as a lieutenant on 9 March 1804. Possibly his most remarkable exploit was against the 'Superbe', one of the most successful of all Caribbean privateers. After a 67-hour chase Fitton finally caught up with his more powerful enemy, forced her ashore, captured and then burnt her. Soon afterwards he was superseded by an Admiralty nominee on the orders of the commander-in-chief of the Leeward Islands. He returned to England 'not to be promoted to the rank of Commander but to be turned adrift as an unemployed Lieutenant' (James, 4.184). Certainly he was shabbily treated, notwithstanding his desertion. Despite spending $400 of his own money in the purchase of the 'Pitt', all he received in return was the thanks of the Admiralty and a sword valued at $50 from the Patriotic Society. 
It was not until 1811 that Fitton obtained another appointment -- to the command of a brig, the 'Archer' -- and then he moved to another brig, the 'Cracker', on the channel and Baltic stations. With the coming of peace, along with the overwhelming majority of elderly lieutenants, he received no further seagoing appointments. In 1831 he was appointed to the ordinary in Plymouth and he later received a Greenwich pension. 
During these years Fitton wrote naval articles for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and other publications. His will leaves details of his wife, Mary Margaret, and their four children. The eldest son became a clerk in the Royal Navy and died in the West Indies. Another son worked in the merchant seaman's office and his youngest daughter married the son of Sir Richard Dobson, inspector of hospitals and fleets. Fitton died at his home in Clifton Road, Peckham, Surrey, on 31 December 1852. In his will he left the little property he had to his wife, in trust for his daughter Emily Mary Ann. 
Michael Fitton's fame rests primarily on the extraordinary actions he carried out against enemy privateers and pirates in the Caribbean between 1799 and 1806. His success was such that the mid-twentieth-century novelist Showell Styles wrote a popular series of thirteen novels fictionalizing his exploits. Accounts of Fitton's successes also appear in all early-nineteenth-century naval histories. Some of these scholars knew Fitton as a Greenwich pensioner and swallowed his yarns complete. They even included an account of Fitton and his crew plunging overboard, their swords between their teeth, to overwhelm and capture a dangerous privateer. However, he clearly inspired his crew and won a large number of outstanding victories. The reluctance to promote him to a permanent lieutenancy until 1804 is understandable in light of his desertion from the 'Hebe' in 1782. The treatment he received in 1806 is less comprehensible. According to Francis Fytton he was superseded from his last command, the 'Pitt', due to the machinations of the prize master whom he had accused of trading with the enemy. Styles suggests that Vice-Admiral James Richard Dacres, commander-in-chief in Jamaica, was responsible for the treatment he received ('Mr Fitton's Commission', 1977, and other titles), though this does not tally with the glowing report on Fitton that Dacres sent to the Admiralty. Most likely the key factor was the opposition of Edward Thornbrough, a flag officer in close touch with the Admiralty. Whatever the cause, Michael Fitton has now achieved posthumous fame in the writings not only of Showell Styles but also those of Joseph Allen, E. P. Brenton, William James, J. K. Laughton, and W. R. O'Byrne. 


@@@@@


doc= 9525


Fitton, William Henry (1780-1861), physician and geologist, was born on 24 January 1780 in Dublin, the son of Nicholas Fitton, a lawyer. Fitton was educated at the school of Samuel Whyte (1733-1811) -- the English Grammar School -- at 75 Grafton Street. In 1794 he entered Trinity College, Dublin. He was senior classical scholar from 1798 to 1803 and graduated BA in 1799. Fitton's first intentions were to enter the church, although he was already interested in mineralogy -- an interest which led to his travelling to both Cornwall and Wales before 1807. His first publications were on Irish rocks with the Revd Walter Stephens ('c'.1773-1808). From 1808 Fitton revised Stephens's notes on 'The Mineralogy of... Dublin', publishing them in 1812. The accompanying 1:240,768 map only showed petrography, while the text revealed the difficulties Fitton faced in relating Irish rocks to Wernerian formations. 
In 1808 Fitton entered Edinburgh University to study medicine; he graduated MD in September 1810, with a thesis on pneumonia. At Edinburgh he attended lectures by both the Wernerian Robert Jameson and the Huttonian Thomas Charles Hope. From Scotland Fitton moved to London and was introduced to his first meeting of the Geological Society there, late in 1810. The following year he was admitted as licentiate of the London College of Physicians, and set out to establish himself in medical practice. Although East Anglia was an early choice, in 1812, with the help of Sir Joseph Banks and others, Fitton moved to Northampton with his widowed mother and three sisters, one of whom was Sarah Mary Fitton ['see below']. He incorporated the same MD degree from Cambridge University in 1816. In 1815 he was elected FRS and, in 1816, member of the Geological Society and FRCS. 
In Northampton, Fitton helped restore St Peter's Church, and supplied fellow geologists with mineralogical information. However, he reported in 1812 that he was 'sorry to say Northamptonshire has no food for mineralogists -- the country is composed of low rounded irregularities and intersected by slow streamlets but there is nothing like a hill and nothing favourable to the exposition of rocks'. He had only seen 'a stupid kind of sandstone and a shelly limestone' (Fitton to Greenough, 12 Nov 1812, Greenough MSS, University College, London). On 8 June 1820 Fitton married Maria James, who brought him sufficient wealth to retire from medicine, return to London, and devote his time fully to geology. The couple later had eight children. 
Between 1822 and 1824, the period immediately following publication of William Conybeare's and William Phillips's influential 'The Geology of England and Wales', Fitton proved an energetic secretary of the Geological Society. He carefully investigated the stratigraphy of rocks below the Chalk in the south of England, the stratigraphic relations of which were still in a confused and debated state, despite revelations from Gideon Mantell in Sussex that they were full of fossils and of remarkable interest. Fitton started publishing the results of his researches in 1824. These culminated in his memoir of 1836 'On some of the Strata between the Chalk and Oxford Oolite'. This clearly defined the confused positions of, and differing marine to freshwater natures of, these strata. Fitton separated an Upper and Lower Greensand from its middling Gault. The work was rightly hailed as a model of stratigraphic geology. 
Fitton was also active as a geological polemicist and historian. Having studied both Wernerian and Huttonian geology in Edinburgh, he was able to publish a balanced assessment, entitled 'The Geological System of Werner', in 1813. He next investigated William Smith's researches. The true interest of Northamptonshire rocks, of which Fitton had been so dismissive in 1812, had been revealed by Smith's 'Geological Map' of 1815. Fitton demonstrated the true value and originality of Smith's contributions to English stratigraphy in a review published in 1818. Fitton's views opposed those of the founder, and then president, of the Geological Society, G. B. Greenough. They soon clashed again over mutual plans to publish elementary texts on geology, of which only Greenough's appeared, in 1819. 
The 1820s were a highly political period in Geological Society history. Fitton's attempt to get Smith elected honorary fellow of the Geological Society in 1822 failed and his 1821 printed reappraisal of Smith's importance could only be issued as 'Notes on the History of English Geology'. As president of the society from 1827 to 1829, Fitton had at last been able to release Greenough's grip on it. His innovations included encouraging full discussions of papers delivered at meetings and starting the publication of its 'Proceedings' from 1827. In these Fitton inaugurated annual reviews of progress as 'presidential addresses'. Fitton was also an active participant in the failed attempt to have a scientist (John Herschel) elected president of the Royal Society in 1830. 
Fitton continued to review, in clear and analytical prose, important English books such as Buckland's 'Reliquiae diluvianae' (1823), Lyell's 'Elements of Geology' (1839), and Murchison's 'Silurian System' (1841). These are some of the first properly historical assessments of the development of British geology. Fitton had copies of his 1817-49 'Edinburgh Review' articles reissued with a special title-page in 1849, to leave no doubt of their authorship. His only other separately published work was a 1833 'Geological Sketch of the Vicinity of Hastings'. He was awarded the highest honour of the Geological Society, the Wollaston medal, in 1852 for services to geology. He died on 13 May 1861 at his home, 4 Sussex Gardens, Hyde Park, London. 


In later years Sarah Fitton wrote short stories as well as books for children, including 'Conversations on Harmony' (1855), which was translated into French in 1857. She spent some time in Paris; her 'Four Seasons: a Short Account of the Structure of Plants' (1865) consists of lectures 'written for the Working Men's Institute in Paris', and one of her stories about the penurious circumstances of an English teacher in France suggests firsthand experience. Her last book was published in 1866. In 1865 Eugene Coemans, the Belgian botanist, named a genus of perennial flowering shrubs 'Fittonia' in honour of the two sisters. Sarah Fitton died on 30 March 1874 at 15 rue Ville l'Eveque in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 9526


Henry fitz Ailwin (d. 1212), first mayor of London, was of English descent, as may be seen in the names of his father Ailwin, or AEthelwine, and grandfather Leofstan. The latter, who was later believed to have been the reeve of London associated with the royal foundation (1108) of Holy Trinity Priory, Aldgate, may have been the domesman who died in 1115 and was buried in Bermondsey Priory. It was in the house of Ailwin son of Leofstan that the London husting court was meeting before 1130, the year in which Robert son of Leofstan accounted for the London weavers' guild. Henry fitz Ailwin and his brother Alan succeeded to their father's land, probably at Watton-at-Stone, Hertfordshire, in 1164/5. Like many wealthy citizens Henry had estates strategically situated around London. His chief country seat was at Watton, and his land at Edmonton, Middlesex, probably served as a staging post. He also had lands in Surrey and by the Thames in Kent. His headquarters in the city occupied a large site on the north side of Candlewick (now Cannon) Street, adjoining the church of St Swithin, whose patron he was, and extended into the parish of St Mary Bothaw. Apart from his dwelling it included a horse mill and tenters for stretching cloth. He also held many properties in the eastern half of the city, including a quay next to London Bridge. The distribution of his holdings suggests that as well as drawing rent he was active in trade, including the distribution of rural produce. Candlewick Street was the focus of London's woollen textile industry, and there were many dubbers (in this context possibly dyers) among his neighbours. That circumstance, together with his tenters and his presumed uncle's association with weavers, suggests that he and his family had a direct interest in making, finishing, and selling cloth. 
Henry fitz Ailwin was an alderman of London by 1168, and from then on appears frequently as a witness with other chief citizens. His equestrian seal, resembling that of the influential William Bucuinte, is expressive of claims to status and ancestry. He had a close connection with the sheriff Richard fitz Reiner, a key figure in the emergence of the commune in the early 1190s. Henry's appearance at the head of a group of four men of rank -- 'nobiles' of the city -- who included Richard, indicates his role as civic leader. He is first certainly identified as mayor in 1194. Initially that position may have been informal, for even after that year he sometimes witnessed in an official capacity without being styled mayor. But no other person is named as holding the mayoralty during his life time, and there can be no doubt that Henry held it until his death. No other mayor of London has held office on a life term. As mayor Henry fitz Ailwin embodied the interests of the leading citizens, sometimes in opposition to the majority -- who found a vociferous spokesman in William fitz Osbert (died 1196) -- but he was also the king's man, as is evident from his frequent association with the justice Roger fitz Reinfrey. Throughout his mayoralty he was regularly accompanied by Roger fitz Alan, his successor as mayor and probably his nephew. On a few occasions about 1205 he was designated 'dominus', a style not generally accorded to mayors of London until a later date. 
Henry fitz Ailwin's recorded actions illuminate his public role rather than his personal character. In 1193 he was one of those entrusted with the money collected for the king's ransom, and in 1194 he arrested a foolish messenger from the king's brother. In 1208 he negotiated for the use of ground outside the walls as a burial-ground for Londoners during the interdict. After the great fire of 1212 he and other barons of London issued a code governing rebuilding. He was a pious benefactor to the church and, probably after 1199, endowed obits at Holy Trinity Priory, St Bartholomew's Hospital, Westminster Abbey, London Bridge Chapel, and the nunneries of Clerkenwell and Godstow. He also contributed to the foundation of St Mary Spital, and was remembered as the founder of a chapel at Watton. Appropriately, he was buried in the entry to the chapter house at Holy Trinity Priory. 
Henry fitz Ailwin died on 19 September 1212, probably in London. Henry's wife, Margaret, who survived him, was probably the mother of his four sons. The eldest of these, Peter, married Isabel, daughter of Bartholomew de Chennay and heir to estates in Surrey and Sussex; she predeceased her husband and was buried in Bermondsey Priory. But Peter himself died before his father, who about a year before his own death divided his lands between his surviving sons, Alan, Thomas, and Richard. Peter's surviving daughter, Joan, inherited her parents' properties and then those of her uncles. Her second marriage brought the Candlewick Street site into the knightly Aguillon family, whose members used it as their London base until 'c'.1286. In the meantime her grandfather's reputation remained high. By 1274 the complex body of city customs known as the assize of buildings had come to be attributed to the beginning of Henry fitz Ailwin's mayoralty, then dated to 1189. His obit continued to be observed, and his tomb was still recognizable in the sixteenth century. A later observer noted monuments to him at St Mary Bothaw. 


@@@@@


doc= 9527


Fitzalan, Bertram (d. 1425), Carmelite friar and theologian, was of unknown origin. There is no evidence to support suggestions that he was related to the earls of Arundel. He joined the order's house in Lincoln. He commenced his studies in York, being ordained acolyte there on 21 December 1370 and deacon on 12 March 1373. He then proceeded to Oxford, where he was BTh by 1392, when he was one of the Carmelite theologians present at the trial for heresy of the Cistercian Henry Crump at Stamford. Later he incepted as DTh. On 12 October 1393 he is recorded as receiving a bequest of 40's'. in the will of Elizabeth, Lady de la Warr. William Quaplod, a fellow Carmelite from Lincoln, was a long-time friend and patron. In his later years Fitzalan returned to Lincoln, where he built a new library for the Carmelite community, and where, after a long life, he died on 17 March 1425 and was buried there. It is claimed that Fitzalan studied Aristotle's works and that he had a great devotion to the Virgin Mary. He wrote a commentary on the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard, and collections of theological questions and of sermons. None of these works survives. A manuscript entitled 'Excerpta super 28 quodlibetis', in the library of Balliol College, Oxford (MS 58), has been attributed to him, but is now known to be the work of Bertrand de Alen, an early fourteenth-century Franciscan who was not English. 


@@@@@


doc= 9528


Fitzalan, Sir Brian (d. 1306), baron, was descended from a younger branch of the counts of Brittany and earls of Richmond and has been described as 'an English baron of more reputation than fortune' (Barrow, 'Bruce', 35). Following participation in the Welsh war of 1282, and also attendance at a royal council held at Gloucester in 1287, Fitzalan was given custody of the castles of Forfar, Dundee, Roxburgh, and Jedburgh during the adjudication of the Great Cause, holding them from 1291 until 1292. In 1291, also, he was elevated to the position of guardian of Scotland, to work beside the Scottish guardians, and along with Sir John Comyn (died 'c'.1302) of Badenoch and the bishop of St Andrews he received the fealties of the Scottish nobility at Perth. As an auditor in the Great Cause, Fitzalan duly surrendered the documentation relating to his office to John de Balliol when the latter became king. Sir Brian then returned to his career as an English baron, receiving a summons to fight against the Welsh in 1294 and attending the English parliament of 1295. Since his lands were mostly in the honour of Richmond, Fitzalan's regular calls to parliament are indicative of his usefulness to the government, rather than of his status as such. 
Although he held no office in Edward's government of Scotland instituted in 1296, Fitzalan found himself almost constantly occupied in the north after the resumption of war in 1297. Despite a summons to go to Flanders with the king, he was appointed captain of royal fortifications in Northumberland on 12 July 1297 in expectation of a Scottish attack. On 29 July, however, he was offered the post of lieutenant of Scotland, a position eschewed by the earl of Surrey, the current incumbent. On 4 August Fitzalan wrote to the king, effectively turning down the offer for lack of an income sufficient to sustain the required retinue of fifty armed men and their horses. Surrey had received, or was supposed to receive, $1333 13's'. 4died, but Fitzalan was being offered a mere $1128. Nevertheless, the English regency evidently regarded the matter as settled, issuing letters patent to Fitzalan as lieutenant on 18 August; on the 28th all the sheriffs north of the Trent were ordered to help him in his new office. 
Although the receiver in the north of England, Robert Beaufey, received $200 from Fitzalan as 'keeper of the said kingdom' (TNA: PRO, E159/71, m. 102), the latter did not go north until news of Surrey's defeat at Stirling Bridge reached London. On 1 November he and others were thanked by the regency for their efforts to protect the north of England against forays made by the victorious Scots. Fitzalan again occupied the post of captain of royal fortifications in Northumberland and he remained as such throughout 1297 and 1298. He certainly fought at Falkirk, but was not one of those summoned from Berwick to come to a secret meeting at York on Scottish affairs in April 1298. The resumption of war meant that there was no further need for the office of lieutenant; the position was not filled again until 1305, when most Scots had submitted to King Edward once more. 
Fitzalan himself fought against the Scots in 1299, 1300, and, for the last time, in 1303. He died in 1306, before he could attend parliament for the knighting of Prince Edward. He and his wife, Matilda, had two daughters, Matilda (or Agnes) and Catherine, his coheirs. 


@@@@@


doc= 9529


Fitzalan, Edmund, second earl of Arundel (1285-1326), magnate, born on 1 May 1285 at Marlborough Castle, Wiltshire, was the son of Richard (I) Fitzalan, first earl of Arundel (1267-1302), and Alasia (Alice), daughter of Thomas, marquess of Saluzzo in Piedmont (causing one chronicler to remark that he was descended from 'the impious Lombards'). In 1302 his wardship and marriage were granted to John de Warenne, earl of Surrey (died 1304), whose granddaughter Alice (the daughter of William (V) de Warenne) he married in 1305, after initially refusing her. He was granted seisin of his inheritance in April 1306, and knighted by Edward I on 22 May, along with the prince of Wales, the future Edward II. 
Following Edward I's death Fitzalan witnessed Piers Gaveston's creation as earl of Cornwall on 6 August 1307, and at the new king's coronation on 25 February 1308 he acted as butler and bearer of the royal robes. He soon joined the opposition to Gaveston, however, failing to attend the Stamford parliament of 1309, and in the parliament of March 1310 he was chosen to be one of the twenty-one lords ordainer commissioned to reform the realm. When Gaveston returned from exile in January 1312, Fitzalan joined the league which swore to hunt him down, and in June he was one of the four earls present at Gaveston's trial in Warwick Castle, following which the favourite was summarily executed on nearby Blacklow Hill. Although formally pardoned by the king in 1313, Fitzalan remained disaffected; he refused to accompany the royal campaign to Scotland which ended in disaster at Bannockburn in June 1314, and was prevented by Edward II from acquiring the lordship of Caus from Sir Peter Corbet in 1315. He was also appointed to the commission of reform set up by the earl of Lancaster in February 1316. During the next year or two, however, perhaps disillusioned with Lancaster, he gradually returned to the king's side: on 19 November 1316 he was appointed warden of the Scottish march, apparently against Lancaster's wishes, and he helped to negotiate the treaty of Leake of August 1318, which temporarily healed the breach between Lancaster and the king, and in which he was nominated as one of the council to be about the king's person. 
Fitzalan was with the king at the siege of Berwick in September 1319, and when the 'Despenser war' broke out in the following year, he declined to join the marcher coalition, so that in 1321 his castle at Clun was attacked by the Mortimers. By this time his adherence to the king's party had been sealed by the marriage, on 9 February 1321, at the king's manor of Havering atte Bower, of his eldest son, Richard, to Isabella, daughter of the younger Hugh Despenser. Although he agreed -- out of fear, so he said -- to the exile of the Despensers in August 1321, three months later, having taken part in the siege of Leeds Castle in October, he advised the clergy on the king's behalf to revoke the sentence. In the winter of 1321-2 he joined the royal campaign to crush the marcher rebellion. He was appointed justice of Wales on 5 January 1322, and persuaded the Mortimers to surrender in the same month; he agreed to the proclamation of Lancaster and his adherents as traitors on 11 March, and he was one of the judges who condemned Lancaster to death at Pontefract Castle on 22 March. Fitzalan was well rewarded for his loyalty with the forfeited estates of rebels, including the Mowbray lordships in the Isle of Axholme and the Mortimer lordship of Chirk, which bordered his patrimonial lordship of Oswestry. He took part in the Scottish campaign of 1322, remained justice of Wales until 1326, and had his reversionary right in the inheritance of John de Warenne, earl of Surrey, confirmed in the same year. 
When the revolution of 1326 came, therefore, it was inevitable that Fitzalan would be one of Isabella and Mortimer's prime targets. He fled west with the king but was captured at Shrewsbury by John Charlton of Powys, taken to Queen Isabella at Hereford, and charged with being an accomplice of the Despensers, consenting to Lancaster's death, and plotting against the queen. He was beheaded -- at Mortimer's insistence, so it was said -- at Hereford on 17 November, by the hand of a worthless wretch ('vilissimi ribaldi') who, according to the Llandaff chronicle, took twenty-two strokes to sever his head (BL, Cotton MS Nero A. iv, fol. 57'v'). His body was later removed to Haughmond Abbey, the traditional burial place of the Fitzalans. His considerable store of treasure was looted from Chichester Cathedral and the priory of the Holy Trinity in London, and much of it eventually found its way into Isabella's and Mortimer's coffers; he was convicted of treason and his heir disinherited. His castle and honour of Arundel, said to be worth $600 per annum, was given to the earl of Kent, and all his lands in Shropshire and north Wales to Roger Mortimer. He was survived by, probably, six children: Richard (II) Fitzalan, who succeeded to the earldom following Mortimer's downfall in 1330; Edmund and Michael, who both entered the church; Alice, who married John de Bohun, heir to the earldom of Hereford, in 1325; Aleyne, who married Roger Lestrange of Knockin ('c'.1338); and Jane, who is said to have married Lord Lisle. 
Although Fitzalan is frequently criticized by historians for his changes of allegiance, these were far from untypical of the peerage during Edward II's troubled reign, and the accusations levelled against him after his death concerning his complicity in the 'Despenser regime' were the inevitable consequence of its circumstances. He provides, in fact, a rare example of Edward II's ability to win to his side, and retain the allegiance of, a magnate who had earlier opposed him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9530


Fitzalan, Henry, twelfth earl of Arundel (1512-1580), magnate, was born on 23 April 1512, the only son of William Fitzalan, eleventh earl of Arundel ('c'.1476-1544), magnate, and his second wife, Anne ('b'. in or before 1485, died 1552), daughter of Henry Percy, fourth earl of Northumberland (c.1449-1489), magnate, and his wife, Maud. He had a sister, Katherine Fitzalan. His father was close enough to the crown for Henry VIII to stand as godfather to Henry Fitzalan. Though holder of England's premier earldom, and perhaps the fourth richest earl, the eleventh earl of Arundel made little impact on national affairs. He was nominated on 23 April and installed on 25 June 1525 as a knight of the Garter (held by his own father and grandfather), but achieved this only through the intercession of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey. He was the only lay peer to join the spirituals in opposing the bill in conditional restraint of annates in 1532, but then prudently absented himself from parliament, naming Boleyns as his proxies. In 1538 a papal report declared that Arundel was of 'great power, little wit, and less experience', while his son was 'young and lusty, of good wit, and likely to do well' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/2, no. 732). 
In his fifteenth year, according to his posthumous biography, Henry Fitzalan preferred to become page to the king rather than to Wolsey, knowing the latter 'to be but of a very lowe and base birth' (Nichols, 'Life', 12). Inadvertently this may have been a useful political decision, taken on typically snobbish grounds. He joined his father with the king at the Calais meeting with Francois I in September 1532. Before November he married Katherine ('b'. in or after 1509, died 1542), second daughter of Thomas Grey, second marquess of Dorset (1477-1530), and his second wife, Margaret. They had one son, Henry, later Lord Maltravers (1538-1556), and two daughters, Jane Lumley (1537-1578) and Mary Howard, later duchess of Norfolk (1539/40-1557). The second part of the family marriage alliance proved abortive, however. Dorset's heir, Henry Grey, later third marquess of Dorset and duke of Suffolk (1517-1554), refused to marry Katherine Fitzalan. The exact stage at which the match was broken off is unclear, though Grey certainly provided a financial settlement. William Paget, first Baron Paget, when Suffolk fell in 1553, alleged that Suffolk's children were illegitimate because of a precontract to Katherine Fitzalan 'per verba de praesenti'. 
Fitzalan was summoned to parliament on 5 February 1534 during his father's lifetime under the subsidiary family title of Baron Maltravers or Mautravers. He was expected to make himself more useful than his father had done, for instance sitting four times to try peers in Henry's reign, while Arundel joined him only for the trial of Anne Boleyn on 15 May 1536 (although the earl should have had claims to consideration for the presiding office of high steward). 
On 2 July 1540 Maltravers replaced Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, as deputy of Calais, receiving a basic fee of $300 per annum rather than $100 per annum. He was reported to be 'a silent, reasoning, cunning man and a good judge' but melancholic ('The Lisle Letters', ed. M. St C. Byrne, 6 vols., 1981, 6.160). He presided over several threatening border incidents, and was appropriately suspicious and 'not unliberall to winne intelligence': the privy council complained six months after his recall, 'since the earl of Arundel's coming from Calais, no espials' news out of France has been sent hither' (Nichols, 'Life', 13; 'LP Henry VIII', 19/1, no. 401). He had other problems besides melancholia: smallpox in summer 1543 and by late 1545 a 'quarteyne' ('LP Henry VIII', 18/1, no. 496, 20/2, no. 490). 
By now, whatever his religious conservatism Maltravers was taking the opportunity to acquire former monastic property on favourable terms from the court of augmentations: in 1542 he offered $1000 for his ancestral foundation of Arundel College but was allowed it for two-thirds of that sum. Lady Maltravers died on 1 May 1542. The king accepted his succession as twelfth earl of Arundel on 23 January 1544 as justifying his return to England. He was elected knight of the Garter on 24 April and installed on 18 May and in July joined the French campaign as marshal of the field under Charles Brandon, first duke of Suffolk. He served at the capture of Boulogne on 14 September, though the idea of his leading an assault seems to be an exaggeration. 
During the invasion scare of summer 1545 Arundel acted as commissioner of array in the southern counties, then took charge of the western of three armies, covering Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight. Assignment to Suffolk's new campaign in France was aborted by the duke's death on 24 August. Arundel, married on 19 December 1545 Mary (died 1557), daughter of Sir John Arundell (c.1474-1545) ['see under 'Arundell family (per. 1435-1590)], landowner of Lanherne, Cornwall, and his second wife, Katherine, and widow of Robert Radcliffe, first earl of Sussex. They had no children. 
In July 1546 Henry, appreciative of service in France, made Arundel lord chamberlain and privy councillor. Arundel was a diligent privy councillor, attending two-thirds of the meetings to the end of Henry's reign, but was still too new to be named by the king as more than an assistant to his executors. He began to enjoy a significant political friendship with the principal secretary, Paget, and accompanied Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, and him on Henry's 1546 progress. This suggests that Hertford and Paget did not consider him too conservative, or at least not too friendly to the Howards or Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester. In an uncharacteristically meritocratic gesture of Arundel's, the year after being himself elected to the Garter, he cast a solitary vote for the commoner Paget. 
Arundel was also active as lord chamberlain, producing a book of regulations and attempting to rescue the somewhat moribund office from its eclipse after subordination to the lord great master of the household. Henry died on 28 January 1547 and under Edward VI Arundel's duties soon tended to be usurped by Sir Michael Stanhope, Hertford's brother-in-law and supporter. He did, however, act as high constable at the coronation on 20 February 1547, as he did again in 1553 and 1558. 
Arundel's reservations about the administration of Hertford, now duke of Somerset and lord protector, initially remained covert. He profited from the fall of Thomas Seymour, Baron Seymour of Sudeley, by acquiring in 1549 his great mansion between the Strand and the Thames, henceforward renamed Arundel House, for a mere $41. As enclosure disturbances spread into Sussex, Arundel was able to restore 'a quavering quiet', thinking it 'not convenient to reforme with the sworde', by providing 'aboundance of victuall' and summary adjudications at his seat, Arundel Castle (Pocock, 14; Nichols, 'Life', 14). This was a notably more impressive performance than that of landowners in East Anglia and the south-west who could not contain the rebellions by exercising traditional methods of good lordship. Whether Arundel's social conservatism later inspired his eccentric opposition to the 1563 bill against vagabondage is uncertain. 
By September 1549 Arundel and Thomas Wriothesley, first earl of Southampton, 'men of their owne nature circumspect and slow, but at the time discountenanced and discontent', joined John Dudley, earl of Warwick, in trying to interest Princess Mary in Somerset's dismissal and then in achieving it without her on 13 October (J. Hayward, 'The Life and Raigne of King Edward the Sixth', ed. B. L. Beer, 1993, 115). Arundel was one of the six peers appointed to attend Edward, and also one of the group who gained over $6000 each through manipulation of the coinage. Warwick was also said to have proposed giving Somerset's post of lord great chamberlain to Arundel, allowing Paget to become lord chamberlain. 
It was long assumed that Warwick always intended to dispose of the religious conservatives who had helped him against Somerset, but one account suggests that Southampton precipitated the breach by confiding to Arundel and William Paulet, Baron St John, with whom he had been sent to examine Somerset, a wish to dispose of Warwick, with which Arundel apparently concurred. He may have considered St John a conservative too, but he told Warwick, who moved against Southampton and Arundel in mid-December. 
Arundel lost his chamberlainship and membership of the privy council, as well as undergoing brief house arrest on 14 January 1550 on the basis of charges recorded by the young king as 'plucking down of bolts and locks at Westminster, giving of my stuff away, etc.' ('Chronicle', ed. Jordan, 19). The fine of $12,000 was heavy, and another account suggested the possibility of a more sinister element in the charges, mentioning with the vulnerability of the 'doores of the kynges hyghnes pryvy chamber' 'the subvercyon of relygyon' ('Letters of Richard Scudamore', 107-8). Whether or not he had paid $3200 Arundel gave recognizances for $8800 which were cancelled a year later. His pardon depended on retirement to Sussex, supposedly to check new disorders. 
After reported plots in 1550 and 1551 by Somerset to recover power, Warwick, newly created duke of Northumberland, finally arrested him on 16 October 1551 on a charge of treason. Arundel, having been summoned back to the privy council in August 1551 only to concur in an ultimatum to Mary that she practise protestantism, was belatedly added to the official version of Somerset's planned revenge and sent to the Tower of London on 8 November. The imperial ambassador, Francois van der Delft, reported that Arundel's arrest caused 'discontent... for the earl is very popular with all men and has the reputation of such integrity as would prevent him from taking part in any plot or treason' and ascribed it to the earl's alleged retort that Dudleys had been more often traitors than Fitzalans ('CSP Spain', '1550-52', 392). Arundel admitted 'talk and communication' with Somerset about arresting Warwick; they had 'agreed that religion should stand as it now doth' (Tytler, 2.43, 39). He was fortunate to escape with a year in the Tower and another fine: $4000 in December 1552, payable in annual instalments of $666 13's'. 4died, reduced in May 1553 to $455 per annum and remitted in early July. 
Northumberland was trying to buy support before Edward died but had left it much too late. Arundel reluctantly witnessed the letters patent naming Lady Jane Grey as heir on 21 June. He actually did homage to Jane on 9 July. When Northumberland set out to bring Mary to heel Arundel, unlike the London populace, allegedly wished him God speed and expressed hypocritical readiness 'to spende his bloode, even at his foote' (Nichols, 'Chronicle', 7). However, he hinted to his fellow privy councillors the undesirability of their location among Northumberland's henchmen in the Tower. Finally, on 19 July they signed an exhortation of loyalty to Jane, then left the Tower supposedly to meet ambassadors and proclaimed Mary instead. Arundel was willing to take the lead with William Herbert, first earl of Pembroke. His supposed speech (no doubt elaborated) to his fellows extolled legitimacy and accused Northumberland of 'practisinge my death by many wicked devises' (Nichols, 'Life', 119). 
Arundel and Paget were chosen to ride to Mary and make the privy council's peace. With another defector, William Grey, thirteenth Baron Grey of Wilton, and Mary's trusted friend Henry Jerningham, Arundel went to take custody of Northumberland at Cambridge. According to Robert Wingfield: 'At the sight of that Hooved Horse [Arundel], whom he had left in strict custody when he left London, the Bear [Northumberland] was afraid (as the result of a certain prophecy) that he would receive no light kick from his hoof, and his spirit was entirely broken. (MacCulloch, 267)' The heraldic reference inverts a story whereby Northumberland sneered at Arundel's white horse blazon. It was recycled in 'Leicester's Commonwealth' (1584) as spoken by the duke's son, Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. However, it seems more relevant to Northumberland's liking for fining Arundel: 'The white palfrey when he standeth in the stable and is well provendered is proud and fierce... but when he is once out of his hot stable and deprived a little of his ease and fat feed every boy may ride and master him at his pleasure, so is it (quoth he) with my lord of Arundel. (D. C. Peck, ed., 'Leicester's Commonwealth: the Copy of a Letter Written by a Master of Art of Cambridge (1584) and Related Documents', Athens, Ohio, 1985, 174-5)' Northumberland's error was fatal, and his suggestions the night before his execution on 22 August that Arundel intercede for his life were in vain. Arundel even assisted Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk, in Northumberland's trial on 18 August and was later lord steward for that of Suffolk, his sister's errant fiance on 17 February 1554. 
The exchange of Queen Mary for Queen Jane brought Arundel nearer the centre of power. The post of lord great master of the household -- part of Northumberland's empire -- was abolished and Arundel became lord steward and titular president of the council in September 1553; the reversion supposedly arose from his own conservatism, 'this other name being brought in of late tyme, and taken out of France' (Nichols, 'Life', 121). He dubbed knights on Mary's behalf at her coronation on 1 October, where his son (one of those knighted) served as butler while he was high constable. Arundel received a licence, like Gardiner, for two hundred retainers (Paget and the other earls, only for one hundred). 
Because Arundel was favoured by Mary peers used him as their proxy in the House of Lords more than anybody else: for example in 1554 he was proxy six times. He served on key committees for (abortive) treason legislation and for the repeal of Reformation statutes. He was commissioned to restore Cuthbert Tunstall and Edmund Bonner to the bishoprics of Durham and London and was appointed to the Lords committee of 1554 to examine the ramifications of reversing the Norfolk attainder: a convenient appointment considering the engagement of his daughter Mary Fitzalan to the heir, Thomas Howard, later fourth duke of Norfolk (1538-1572). An act of 1555 made Gardiner, Arundel, and Thomas Thirlby, bishop of Ely, Norfolk's trustees. By 1552 Arundel's other daughter, Jane Fitzalan, had married the Catholic peer John Lumley, Baron Lumley (c.1533-1609). 
Like Paget, Arundel was sceptical of Gardiner's proposals to reverse the Reformation quickly. By May 1554 Paget, Arundel, and Pembroke, according to Charles V's ambassador, Simon Renard, were 'heretic peers' whom Gardiner wanted arrested ('CSP Spain', '1554', 251). When Arundel complained loudly of Sussex grants to Sir John Gage, 'though he had obtained the queen's leave, several posts were sent after him to see what he was up to in London' (ibid., 290). Also, when Sir Thomas Wyatt the younger rebelled, Arundel, according to Antoine de Noailles, the French ambassador, 'faict encor le malade' (Bernard, 80). The imputation of malingering is doubtful, and Arundel's biographer claimed that he raised sixty horse and 800 foot at his own expense. He had tied his fortune to Mary's Spanish marriage project, and allegedly he even hoped to be made lord treasurer. Arundel opposed Gardiner's wish to charge Elizabeth over the rising. Sent to interrogate her he ultimately apologized for troubling her. Renard feared Arundel's aspirations to marry his son to Elizabeth, but Maltravers was soon bestowed elsewhere, marrying Ann (died 1581), third daughter and coheir of Sir John Wentworth of Gosfield in Essex, and widow of Sir Hugh Rich, son of Richard, first Baron Rich (licence obtained on 12 April 1555). 
Arundel was one of the six privy councillors to whom Mary first announced the Spanish marriage; he was one of the commissioners for the marriage contract and later gave away the bride, and he was one of the eight suggested by Philip of Spain to constitute a more efficient inner council. Arundel invested Philip with the Garter upon his arrival in July 1554 and organized his English household, of which he was also steward and to which his heir, Maltravers, was appointed. Mary's consort made an especial effort at intimacy with the Fitzalans. His list of jewels at the queen's death included a necklace given to him by the countess 'as a valentine' and a 'book of the Garter' translated into Latin by Maltravers ('CSP Spain', '1554-8', 441-2). Philip was notably attentive when in April 1555 Maltravers married. 'The copye of a letter sent by John Bradforth to the right honorable lordes the erles of Arundel, Darbie, Shrewsbury, and Penbroke' (1556) named four earls thought to favour crowning Philip; they were also the four with $500 Spanish pensions, rather than $250. 
Arundel's attendance at sessions of the 1555 parliament slumped below 50 per cent and he received only one proxy. Though he was part of the general absenteeism leading to the loss of Mary's cherished bill assuring Philip the regency, it is uncertain whether this was deliberate. His patronage in the House of Commons -- primarily Arundel, Chichester, and East Grinstead (later Guildford) -- diminished. That summer he joined Gardiner and Paget in the abortive Marcq peace conference. Subsequently Arundel and Pembroke were widely reported to have promised Philip to make England declare war on France. However, neither intimacy with Philip nor the two earls' role in foiling Northumberland could countervail Gardiner's influence with Mary. Arundel's biographer made the unconfirmed claim that his disgruntlement went so far that he resigned as lord steward before Mary's death because of the 'sinister workinge of some meane persons of her counsaile' -- perhaps Gage again, lord chamberlain as well as a local rival in Sussex (Nichols, 'Life', 123). He opposed censure of Thomas Wentworth, second Baron Wentworth, deputy of Calais, for alleged protection of heretics. 
Arundel was not a favoured recipient of royal grants under Mary, with the equivocal exception of Nonsuch Palace, Surrey, given in 1556, supposedly at his own request to save it from demolition, by exchange for peripheral Fitzalan lands in Norfolk and $486. Having constituted a drain on Henry VIII's purse and still unfinished, it now drained Arundel's own finances to complete it 'in as ample and perfit sorte as by the first intente and meaninge of the said kinge his olde maister the same should have beene performed' (Nichols, 'Life', 122-3). 
Once war with France broke out Mary appointed Arundel lieutenant-general for the defence of England (26 July 1557). His effectiveness was reduced by family tragedies. Maltravers, his heir, had died at Brussels on 30 June 1556 while taking a message for Philip to his cousin Maximilian. It was then reported of Arundel that 'although he is of vigorous age his wife nevertheless, being infirm, cannot give him hope of having other children' ('CSP Venice', '1555-6', 559). His daughter, the duchess of Norfolk, died on 25 August 1557, two months after giving birth to Philip Howard, later thirteenth earl of Arundel (1557-1595). The countess of Arundel died on 20 or 21 October at Arundel House and was buried on 28 October at St Clement Danes but afterwards her body was removed to Arundel. The combined effect incapacitated Arundel: the Lumleys had to move into Nonsuch, where in fact they remained for the rest of his life, taking over increasing amounts of business. 
Arundel was, despite lack of diplomatic success at Marcq, appointed by Mary as a commissioner for peace negotiations in October 1558, although Philip had suggested Paulet, now first marquess of Winchester, and Edward Fiennes de Clinton, ninth Baron Clinton. Arundel had limited capabilities for formal diplomatic negotiation, though he supposedly 'understood Latin better than he spoke it' ('CSP Spain', '1553', 327). He mainly served to confer with Philip, then to delay matters by immobilization with a 'rheum' and his own departure to England upon Mary's death on 17 November. The task was unpromising at best. Both Arundel and Thirlby professed to fear the personal consequences of agreeing to surrender Calais. Face was saved in the final treaty by a French promise to return it in eight years (or at the Greek calends). 
Upon Elizabeth's accession Gomez Suarez de Figueroa, fifth count of Feria, reported that the queen 'joked with me about what had been said of her marriage to the earl of Arundel. She does not get on with him' (Rodriguez-Salgado and Adams, 331); he later added that the earl was 'a flighty man of small ability' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 19). The rumour that Elizabeth and Robert Dudley were to be poisoned at a banquet given by Arundel was a further joke on the part of Dudley and the queen (ibid., 95-6). The Austrians also dismissed him as a contender: according to Baron Breuner, 'he and he alone entertains this hope, for he is somewhat advanced in years and also rather silly and loutish, is not well-favoured, nor has a handsome figure' (von Klarwill, 113). He was said to have spent $600 on jewels to influence Elizabeth's female attendants. His extravagance at her visit to Nonsuch in August 1559 was also noted, though he later pragmatically charged much of it to the steward's department. 
There was consensus on Arundel's resentment at the effective order of precedence at Elizabeth's court, especially that of Dudley. One outlet was taking an interest in the investigation of the death of Dudley's wife, Amy Dudley 'nee' Robsart, in autumn 1560. At the Garter meetings of 1561 and 1562 Arundel staunchly opposed proposals to recommend the queen to marry Dudley. Finally, in November 1564, 'being miscontented with sondry thynges, as he sayd, of interruptions in his office, he surrendered his [steward's] staff, with sundry speeches of offence, to the queen's majesty' -- speeches offensive enough to bring on a month's house arrest (Wright, 1.180). Perhaps among the interruptions was being called 'an impudent, discourteous knave' in 1559 by Sir William Pickering, a supposed rival for Elizabeth, when he claimed Pickering lacked the rank to enter the queen's private apartments: 'Pickering tells it in public and refrains from challenging him as he holds him of small account, but it is only right that he should refrain as the other is very weak' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 109). Later it was reported that Arundel, if Pickering became consort, planned to sell his land and go abroad. 
Catholics suggested that Arundel's vain hope of marriage to Elizabeth lay behind his absence from the House of Lords in 1559, pleading illness, when he was first needed to vote against the 'Supremacy Bill' on 18 March, thus also squandering the proxy of Thomas Percy, eighth earl of Northumberland. On 8 March Arundel had given his proxy to Lumley: it was the latter who assented initially to the supremacy. Arundel, however, returned on 17 April, being added to the remodelled committee for the revised bill, to which he assented -- nor did he record dissent to the 'Uniformity Bill'. He was one of the six privy councillors in 1562 agreeing that England should not participate in the Council of Trent. 
Increasing detachment from the court encouraged thought about the succession. Arundel allegedly was interested in conveying Katherine Grey, second daughter of Henry Grey, duke of Suffolk, into Spanish hands, and then, in the unexpected company of Sir William Cecil, conspired to marry her to Edward Seymour, first earl of Hertford. He himself was said to want to marry Hertford's sister, Jane Seymour. For half a decade Arundel, like Norfolk, was agreed to prefer a protestant Grey to a Catholic Mary, queen of Scots. When Elizabeth fell ill with smallpox in 1563 the Howard family were reported to be discussing at Arundel House their preference for the Grey claim over that of Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon. The queen wanted Dudley appointed regent. The Spanish ambassador, Alvaro de la Quadra, bishop of Aquila, casting Arundel rather than Norfolk as the faction leader, heard that he later reacted to Elizabeth's fury by saying 'that if she wanted to govern the country by passion... the nobles would not allow her to do so' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 273). 
There were few signs left of the militant Arundel of Henry's reign. He consistently opposed Elizabethan military adventures, those directed against France as well as those against Spain, to which he was supposed to be more sympathetic. He was the only privy councillor on Christmas eve 1559, of six initial doubters, to hold out against intervention in Scotland. When a crackdown on Catholics was proposed he and Clinton 'not only came to rough words, but fell to fisticuffs and grabbing each other's beards' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 126). 
In May 1565 Arundel was absent from privy council meetings on how to dissuade Mary from marrying Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley; he and Robert Dudley, now earl of Leicester, were both mentioned as more palatable options during Sir Nicholas Throckmorton's embassy to the Scottish queen. Not now ambitious for a throne Arundel disliked aid to the subsequent Scottish rebellion known as the chaseabout raid. By 1566 Arundel had mellowed towards Leicester enough to attempt a degree of reconciliation between the latter and Norfolk. 
Arundel was now uncomfortable enough in Elizabeth's England to withdraw abroad in 1566-7, ostensibly to treat his gout in Padua but also passing through the Spanish Netherlands and the Rhineland, generating ill feeling as he went. He was 'not able to abide the smell of the ship that was made ready' to take him down the Rhine ('Pepys MSS', 82). He annoyed William of Orange, 'though he could reasonably speake French', by keeping to English: 'I love to speake in that language in which I can best utter my mind and not mistake' (Nichols, 'Life', 492). One factor in the ignominious end of Dr John Man's embassy in Spain in 1568 was the ambassador's opposition to Feria's 'evill dealing with the earle of Arundell' (Wright, 1.248), though the earl despised Man's 'low position' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 525). The quarrel involved Arundel allegedly slighting Feria's (English Catholic) brother-in-law and Feria 'maintaining' against him one Burlace. 
After returning to England, Arundel received the sop of reappointment to the joint lord lieutenancy of Sussex and Surrey. Upon Mary's flight to England on 16 May 1568 he reminded Elizabeth that the Scottish queen's ejection by her subjects was 'a new doctrine... not good to be taught in England' ('CSP Scot.', '1563-9', 595). He sat on the privy council subcommittee considering the charges against Mary and then with Norfolk on the inconclusive Westminster commission. 
In the diplomatic crisis with Spain in 1569 started by seizure of the treasure ships destined for Fernando Alvarez de Toledo, duke of Alba, 'certain principal councillors' immediately met at Nonsuch and condemned Cecil for adventurism (Teulet, 1.115). Arundel with his two sons-in-law, Norfolk and Lumley, conveyed an offer via Roberto di Ridolfi, one of their moneylenders who also fancied himself as a grand political intriguer, to overthrow Cecil as a means towards better relations. The Spanish ambassador, Guerau de Spes, remarked of Norfolk and Arundel equally, 'the fact that they are Englishmen, and not entirely Catholic, makes one always suspicious of them' ('CSP Spain', '1568-79', 164). 
In September, when Elizabeth rejected Norfolk's plan to marry Mary, Arundel sent Hugh Owen with a message suggesting seizure of the Tower. Instead Norfolk retreated indecisively to Kenninghall, leaving Northumberland and Charles Neville, sixth earl of Westmorland, to rebel on their own in November. The rebel leaders claimed that they had Norfolk's and Arundel's concurrence. Arundel was removed from office as lord lieutenant and confined at Eton College, then at Nonsuch. John Leslie, bishop of Ross, later claimed that Norfolk said 'he would depart into his cuntrey, and so he had resolved be th'advyse of th'irles of Arundell and Pembroch, who would do the lyke' (Murdin, 44). 
Arundel described himself as 'a trewe and syke prysoner' (Murdin, 569); 'For lacke of disgestion he grewe to his old diseases; and for lacke of opportunitie to his owne causes he grewe to greate hindrance', such as foreclosure on estates pledged for loans (Nichols, 'Life', 212). However, he returned to the privy council in March 1570 as an advocate of reconciliation with Mary, of whose proposed marriage to Norfolk he denied being 'the author' (Teulet, 3.104). Leicester came to his support. Arundel accepted sponsorship from Leicester who also, being now chancellor of Oxford, probably got from Merton College a long lease for him of Chessington Park, Surrey, adjoining Nonsuch. 
Meanwhile Leslie optimistically asserted the readiness of Arundel and others to oppose anti-Catholic bills in the Lords, while Ridolfi still advertised around Europe the earl's alleged readiness to be part of a Catholic rising 15,000 strong in Sussex, Surrey, and Hampshire, and Owen offered Arundel Castle to prospective rescuers of Mary as a safe route on their escape to France (a suggestion originally made in 1569). Arundel was, however, little involved in the Ridolfi plot of 1571, in which Lumley was more fully engaged. Mary, probably with reason, doubted his commitment to the escape route via Sussex: 'if the Ld. Arundell or Penbroke wold appoynt a knight to convey her she wold adventure; otherwise she durst nott' (BL, Harley MS 290, fol. 36'v'). Although Arundel was again placed under house arrest after 26 September 1571 as a result of the plot, his limited involvement (as well as age and ill health) kept him out of the Tower and led to his release at the end of 1572. 
In 1573 Arundel returned to the privy council. In 1574 the privy council bolstered his decayed local standing by forcing Sir Thomas Palmer of Angmering, recently sheriff of Sussex, who had slandered Arundel after quarrelling with his servant Thomas Stoughton, to apologize after putting him in prison for a brief spell. Generally the combination of age, political disgrace, and financial embarrassment reduced Arundel to a cipher. The parliamentary patronage of Guildford, for example, had now irrevocably passed to Stoughton, who acted independently, and the Mores of Loseley. However, Arundel did strike a blow for local Catholicism. After a petition from Sir Thomas Palmer of Parham (a frequent MP in Arundel's seats) and other gentlemen in 1577 against episcopal harassment he informed the privy council of Richard Curtis, bishop of Chichester's aggressive advancement of protestantism in his diocese. The bishop was severely admonished for his overzealous approach. 
Arundel's attendance of the privy council finally dropped to a mere two occasions in 1579, he being 'sore troubled with the goute' (Nichols, 'Life', 214). If, as the Spanish ambassador, Bernardino de Mendoza, claimed, the privy council sent him and the lord chancellor, Sir Thomas Bromley, to Elizabeth that October to advise against the Anjou match, he had not been active in preliminary discussions. He made his will on 30 December 1579, died at Arundel House on 24 February 1580, and was buried in the collegiate chapel at Arundel on 22 March. Allegedly he was 'reconciled some time before his death to the Catholicke Church... by the persuasion and procurement of the Lord Lumley, his son-in-law' (Duke of Norfolk, 180). 
There is a discontinuity between the 'cunning' deputy of Calais, the decisive political player in Mary's accession, and the much mocked suitor of Elizabeth. Numerous biographies of Elizabeth rely on abstracting Breuner's 'lout' remark to describe Arundel: as his travels hinted, he rarely got on with foreigners. The idea that he was potentially significant, if isolated, in 1559 has been lost since J. A. Froude's overblown rhetoric: 'he moved in a cloud, suspected of aims which he would not avow, without a conviction, without a purpose, feared by all men and trusted by none' (J. A. Froude, 'Reign of Elizabeth', 1911, 1.31). 
Arundel supposedly compromised one of the great English aristocratic fortunes through 'sheer improvidence', but his debts were hardly on the scale of the earls of Leicester, Essex, Huntingdon, or Oxford (Stone, 'Crisis', 542). After his son's death in 1556 he lost interest in his affairs and apparently did not like his grandson sufficiently to take trouble over his inheritance. Even Philip Howard's hagiography emphasizes that evil influences at court made him 'neglect his duty in a maner wholy to the earl his grandfather', especially in his attitude to his aunt Jane Lumley and to his own wife (Duke of Norfolk, 15). Arundel's will was proved on 27 February 1580 and stressed Lumley's 'great traveile and paines taken for me and aboute my busines and affaires'. His old client Bromley was to be invoked in case of 'variance' between heir and executor (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/62, sig. 1). 
Arundel willed Lumley Nonsuch's lavish contents. He also made a succession of alienations of land during Elizabeth's reign. The most dramatic measure was the assumption in 1564 of liability for $12,350 owed by the state of Florence to the English crown, to guarantee which Arundel pledged $800 worth of lands ($620 would have been more usual) to several privy councillors to hold for Lumley's use. Both Arundel and Lumley had also provided bonds for Norfolk's borrowing, notably for the acquisition of the wardship of George Dacre, fifth Baron Dacre of Gilsland, in 1567 (after whose death two years later Arundel conveniently sat on the commission which decided the inheritance case in Norfolk's favour), transactions that had provided a fatal introduction to Ridolfi. Arundel did get $8900 from Norfolk in return for conveying lands to Philip Howard during his lifetime. 
In 1570 Lumley received a life interest in the whole honour of Arundel, which he conveyed to the earl's heir, Philip Howard, upon his death. There had been permanent alienations, especially in the west away from the main lands. Lumley stated that on Arundel's death the earl had lands worth $1900 per annum (about half his inheritance), of which only $400 per annum came to him rather than to mortgage holders, and owed $24,000 ($13,000 to the crown). In 1585 Lumley still owed $11,400 to the crown, but by advancing cash to Huntingdon he got the latter to assume the liability. 
It cannot be said, however, that Arundel was economical, even as peers went. He added a renaissance collecting mania to old-fashioned conspicuous consumption. It was symptomatic that when most great peers, even Norfolk, gave Elizabeth a new year gift of $20, Arundel had to give $30. His household was probably at least as large as those of the wealthiest of his peers, if he had 106 servants able to serve in the army of 1544. The myths that Arundel introduced to England in 1566 the coach and silk stockings testify at least to reputed susceptibility to foreign extravagances. 
The importance of Arundel's intellectual interests have been generally minimized. However, they were liberal enough for his daughters to acquire notable learning. Supposedly, 'he was not unlearned; he was quicke and redy in conceivinge, and so much naturally given unto breefenes in utteringe of his mynde, that perhaps to the unskilful he mighte seame somewhat harde' (Nichols, 'Life', 212). He collected over a third of Lumley's eventual 3000-volume library, and possibly a similar proportion of his 230 pictures. He also employed at Nonsuch 127 musicians, besides a choir, and was a significant patron of Thomas Tallis. Gregory Martin dedicated to Arundel a manuscript on Greek before withdrawing, via Norfolk's household, to Douai. Humphrey Llwyd advised him on his library and was seated in parliament by him for East Grinstead in 1559. There were more than reasons of rank for the University of Oxford to make him its high steward in 1555 and then chancellor on 6 February 1559, presumably in a late gesture of conservatism; he resigned on 12 June. 
Arundel's biographer cast him as a fiscal conservative -- 'he could never incline to inriche himselfe by the crowne, nor by extraordinarie fetches and compasses to the hindrance of fre trades' -- ignoring his minting profits after Somerset's fall and his small chance of an Elizabethan monopoly grant (Nichols, 'Life', 213). He was adventurous enough to be a founder member of the Muscovy Company. 
The decay of Arundel's political fortunes under Elizabeth owed much to valetudinarianism but more to his Howard marriage alliance. An inextricable tie with a losing faction, however ostensibly distinguished, brought to an end the more acrobatic, and more successful, part of his political career, which had little to do with the illusion of a decidedly Catholic stance created in 1569-71. No such tendency appeared even in the succession discussions of 1563, let alone in Edward's reign. The arrogance and extravagance imputed to him may be convincing, but the stupidity so often added is probably overstated. To call him 'a shrewd man of the world with a keen eye for the main chance' (Gooch, 11) might understate his luck; but some degree of skill was probably also required to survive repeated imprisonments and to avoid execution, which many of his associates failed to manage. 


@@@@@


doc= 9531


Fitzalan, John (II) (1223-1267), baron, was the son of John (I) Fitzalan (died 1240) and his first wife, Isabel, the sister and coheir of Hugh d'Aubigny, earl of Arundel, who died in 1243 with no direct male heirs. John (II) Fitzalan married Maud (or Matilda), the daughter of Theobald le Botiller and his second wife, Rohese de Verdon. After his father's death in 1240 the Shropshire lordships of Oswestry and Clun were in the custody of John (III) Lestrange, sheriff of Shropshire and member of a family long friendly with the Fitzalans, until John (II) Fitzalan came of age in 1244. After the death of Hugh d'Aubigny in 1243 a quarter of Hugh's possessions, including the castle and manor of Arundel, were awarded to Fitzalan in the right of his mother. After he offered a relief of $1000 in May 1244 he took possession of Arundel and the family lands in Shropshire, including the castles at Clun, Oswestry, and Shrawardine. 
The Fitzalans had been important marcher barons since the mid-twelfth century and John (II) Fitzalan was a significant figure in both national politics and those of the Welsh marches. Henry III granted him permission in July 1253 to pledge his lands for 500 marks to cover costs of accompanying the king in Gascony. In 1255 and 1256 Fulk (IV) Fitzwarine, lord of Whittington (just north of Oswestry), complained of attacks by Fitzalan's men. In August 1258 his men from Clun attacked Bishops Castle (Lydbury North), a large Shropshire manor belonging to the bishops of Hereford. His military power was so important that in August 1257 he was appointed captain for the custody of the march north of Montgomery, and in March 1258 was ordered to lead his men to Chester to participate in an expedition against Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. In 1259 he was one of eight royal negotiators sent to Montgomery Ford to settle breaches of the truce with Llywelyn. The latter complained in 1262 about raids on Bromfield by Fitzalan, Roger (III) de Mortimer, and John Lestrange. 
The marcher barons were a major focus of opposition to Henry III and Fitzalan adhered to this party from late 1258. By June 1263 he and his son John (III) were both active supporters of Simon de Montfort and in that month a group including Fitzalan, Roger Clifford, Humphrey (V) de Bohun, and Hamo L'Estrange attacked and captured the Poitevin royalist bishop of Hereford, Peter d'Aigueblanche. On 12 July Fitzalan seized Bishops Castle, which the family refused to surrender for over six years. By late autumn the Lord Edward had won Fitzalan over to the royal side; on 24 December he was appointed as one of five keepers of the peace for Shropshire and Staffordshire, figures whose task it was to wrest administrative control of these counties from the baronially controlled sheriff. In January 1264 he was the eighth baron who swore to adhere to the agreement under which the king of France would arbitrate between Henry III and his barons. After being besieged with Earl Warenne in Rochester Castle, Fitzalan fought in the royal army and was captured at the battle of Lewes on 14 May. In April 1265 Montfort's government suspected his loyalty and ordered him to surrender either his son or Arundel Castle. After Montfort's defeat Fitzalan was appointed on 18 April 1266 as keeper and defender of Sussex to help the sheriff arrest disturbers of the peace. In January 1267 he was ordered to investigate and quell treasonous plots in Sussex. He died in November 1267, having ordered his body to be buried in Haughmond Abbey, Shropshire; his second wife outlived him. He was succeeded by his son John (III) Fitzalan (1245-1272/3), who married Isabel de Mortimer and was succeeded in turn by his son Richard (I) Fitzalan. 
Although Rishanger called John (II) Fitzalan earl of Arundel in 1264 and some modern scholars have occasionally followed this style, he did not apparently use this title. In 1258 he was called lord of Arundel and in 1266 John Fitzalan de Arundel. 


@@@@@


doc= 9532


Fitzalan, John (VI), seventh earl of Arundel (1408-1435), soldier, was born on 14 February 1408 at Lytchett Matravers, Dorset. He was the son of John (V) Fitzalan, Baron Maltravers (died 21 April 1421) and Eleanor (died 1455), daughter of Sir John Berkeley of Beverstone, Gloucestershire, who afterwards married Sir Richard Ponyngs (died 'c'.1430) and Walter, Baron Hungerford (died 1449). John (V) held the Maltravers barony by inheritance through his grandmother Eleanor (died 1405), granddaughter and heir of John, Lord Maltravers (died 1364), but his claim, after the death of Earl Thomas (died 1415), to the earldom of Arundel as great-nephew and heir male of Earl Richard, who was executed in 1397, was contested by the heirs general, the Mowbray earls of Norfolk, into which Thomas's sister Elizabeth had married, and the families of the late earl's other two sisters. At John (V)'s death in 1421, although the heirs general acquired a considerable portion of the estate, the issue was still unsettled, and remained so during John (VI)'s minority. Not until 1433 did he have his title confirmed by parliament. He was contracted as a minor to Constance, daughter of John Cornewall, Baron Fanhope (who had held the custody of some of John (V)'s lands during his minority), and Elizabeth, daughter of John of Gaunt. She died before 1429, by which date he had married his second wife, Maud (died 1436), daughter of Robert Lovell and Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of Sir Guy Bryan, and widow of Sir Richard Stafford (died 'c'.1427). 
Described as Lord Maltravers, Fitzalan was knighted at Leicester at Whitsun 1426 together with the infant Henry VI and other young peers, and was summoned to parliament by this title on attaining his majority (12 July 1429). He was, however, already calling himself earl of Arundel and his indenture for service in the king's expedition to France in 1430 was made in this name. He disembarked with Henry VI at Calais on 23 April and in June served at the siege of Compiegne under John, duke of Bedford. Co-operating with a Burgundian force, he compelled Barbazon to raise the siege of Anglure. In the summer of 1431 he defended the Beauvaisis and took part in the capture of Potron de Saintrailles. He was present at the coronation of Henry VI in Paris on 17 December 1431 and was applauded for his prowess in the jousting which followed. 
Arundel had already marked himself out as a worthy soldier. The next four years were devoted to military service in defence of Henry's French interests. On 18 November 1431 he was appointed to the key position of lieutenant in Bedford's garrisons at Rouen, an appointment he still held in March 1433. From late November 1431 to Michaelmas 1434 he was also captain of Vernon and, from at least January 1432 to his death, captain of Verneuil. His skills were soon put to the test when in February 1432 he was surprised in his bed at Rouen Castle by an anti-English plot led by Ricarville. The latter seized the castle but was forced to surrender twelve days later. On 14 January 1432 Arundel had been appointed to the first of a series of regional commands in northern France, and was partially successful in attempting to recover fortresses in the Ile-de-France, although he could not take Lagny-sur-Marne, despite preventing the inhabitants from reaching their outer bulwark by blowing up the bridge with a bombard. In December 1432 he defended St Lo from the turncoat Ralph Tesson. Although appointed to a new regional command in Upper Normandy on 11 December 1432 he was diverted to the siege of Sees in March 1433 and in July took up a new appointment as lieutenant-general in Lower Normandy. He recovered St Celerin, Sille-le-Guillaume, and Beaumont-le-Vicomte by early 1434, although in December 1433 Bedford had, from England, changed his command again to Upper Normandy, appointing him also captain of Pont-de-l'Arche. 
On 14 May 1434 Arundel indented to furnish troops for an expeditionary army from England; it is possible that he had returned to England briefly at this stage. By the end of May John, Lord Talbot (died 1453) had replaced him as lieutenant in Upper Normandy and he had been diverted to a new command between the Seine and Loire, receiving on 8 September 1434 a grant of the duchy of Touraine, anticipating perhaps that he should campaign in this French-held area. He was appointed captain of St Lo on 20 October 1434, and held the office until his death. He was called upon to cope not only with the excesses of English pillagers in Lower Normandy but also with the full-scale revolt which had erupted in the Bessin by the end of the year and which became linked with an attempt by the duke of Alencon against Avranches. He successfully pre-empted this French advance and the revolt petered out. He attended the council at Rouen in April 1435 and in the following month was at Mantes when he was ordered to advance to Gournay. Hearing that the French had refortified the nearby fortress of Gerberoy, he hastened to attack it. The French had gathered a large force there and most of the English fell back in panic to Gournay but Arundel attempted to stand his ground. Many around him were killed, and he himself was wounded in the foot by a shot from a culverin and was taken as a prisoner to Beauvais. Basin claimed that he was distraught at being defeated by what he considered feeble opposition and that, victim of his own pride, he refused the medication that might have helped his wound. His leg was amputated and he died on 12 June 1435. Waurin claims that he was buried in the Eglise des Cordeliers at Beauvais but the will of Fulk Eyton (died 1454), a Shropshire esquire who had served in the wars, suggests that the latter ransomed his remains from the French and sold them to the earl's executors so that the earl might be buried, according to the wishes of his own will, in the chapel of the church in Arundel. When the vault beneath the tomb which bears his two effigies, in full armour and as a cadaver, was opened in the mid-nineteenth century, a skeleton about six feet tall was discovered, with one leg missing. Humphrey, born on 30 January 1429, Arundel's son with his second wife, Maud (who died on 19 May 1436), succeeded him in the earldom but died while still a minor on 24 April 1438. The earldom thus passed to Arundel's younger brother William (1417-1487), who received livery of his lands in November 1438 when of full age. 
Arundel's death was a considerable blow to the English and an equally great boost to the French, testimony to his importance as a military leader. Several French chronicles stress his unpopularity among the local population, not surprising perhaps when he had been so closely involved in suppressing rebellion. 


@@@@@


doc= 9533


Fitzalan, Richard (I), first earl of Arundel (1267-1302), magnate and soldier, was the son of John (III) Fitzalan (died 1272/3), lord of Arundel, and his wife, Isabel, daughter of Roger (III) de Mortimer of Wigmore, and was therefore the grandson of John (II) Fitzalan. He was born in 1267, probably on 3 February. His father died when he was five years old, and his estates were wasted by his grandmother Maud, and her second husband, Richard d'Amundeville. He was himself, however, under the wardship of his grandfather Mortimer, although several custodians, among whom was his mother (1280), successively held his castle at Arundel. Before 1285 Fitzalan married Alasia or Alice, the daughter of Thomas, marquess of Saluzzo, an alliance which is thought to point to a lengthened sojourn in Italy. 
In 1287 Fitzalan received his first writ of summons against the rebel Rhys ap Maredudd, and was enjoined to reside on his Shropshire estates until the revolt was put down. He is there described as Richard Fitzalan, but in January 1292 he is styled earl of Arundel for the first time, and it was as earl of Arundel that he was regularly styled thereafter. In 1292 his zeal to join the king's forces was the excuse for a humiliating submission to Gilbert de St Leofard, bishop of Chichester, after a quarrel about his right of hunting in Houghton Forest. In 1294 he was appointed to command the forces sent to relieve Bere Castle, in Meirionydd, which was threatened by the Welsh insurgent Madog. In 1295 he was active in leading the baronial opposition to Edward I's demands for paid military service in Gascony. However, in 1297 having laid aside his opposition, he agreed to serve in the duchy. In 1298, 1299, and 1300 he held command in Scotland, and in the latter year appeared, a 'beau chevalier et bien ame' and 'richement arme', at the siege of Caerlaverock (Nicolas, 50). His last attendance in parliament was in 1301 at Lincoln, where he was one of the signatories of the famous letter to the pope backing Edward I's claim to Scotland. His last military summons was to Carlisle for 24 June 1301. He died on 9 March 1302 and was buried in Haughmond Abbey, Shropshire. With his wife Fitzalan had two sons, of whom the elder, Edmund Fitzalan, succeeded him, while the younger, John, was still alive in 1375. Of their two daughters, one, Maud, married Philip, Lord Burnell, and the other, Margaret, married William Botiler of Wem. 


@@@@@


doc= 9534


Fitzalan, Richard (II), third earl of Arundel and eighth earl of Surrey (c.1313-1376), soldier, diplomat, and royal councillor, known as 'Copped Hat', was the son of Edmund Fitzalan, second earl of Arundel (1285-1326), and Alice, sister of John de Warenne, seventh earl of Surrey. On 9 February 1321, in the chapel of the king's manor at Havering atte Bower, he married Isabella, daughter of Earl Edmund's political ally Hugh Despenser the younger; they were later said to have been aged seven and eight respectively. When his father was summarily executed, and subsequently condemned as a traitor, during the revolution which overthrew Edward II and the Despensers in 1326-7, Fitzalan was disinherited and he eventually fled the country. Following the execution of Roger (V) Mortimer in October 1330 he returned to England and petitioned Edward III for his father's titles and lands, many of which (including the earldom and castle of Arundel) were restored to him in the parliament of 1331, and others during the next few years. He was, however, forbidden in 1331 to wage a private war of revenge for his father's death against John Charlton of Powys, and not until 1343, when Charlton promised to found a chantry in memory of Earl Edmund at Haughmond Abbey, was their dispute resolved. He and the king were almost exact contemporaries, and from this time onwards he remained a loyal and trusted royal servant until his death. 
Arundel served Edward III chiefly in four capacities: as war captain, diplomat, counsellor, and moneylender. As a war captain he took part in the campaigns to Scotland of 1333, 1335, 1336, 1338 (when he and the earl of Salisbury, as joint commanders, failed to take Dunbar), and 1342 (when he and the earl of Huntingdon were appointed wardens of the Scottish march), and in those to the continent of 1340 (he was at the naval battle off Sluys), 1345, 1346-7 (when he commanded the 2nd division of the English army at Crecy, and was subsequently with the king at the siege of Calais), and 1359-60; he was also with the king at the naval battle off Winchelsea in 1350, and promised in 1355 to go to the aid of the Black Prince should it prove necessary, which in the event it did not. 
Arundel's diplomatic service began in earnest in July 1343, when he was sent on an embassy to Avignon; in March 1344 he and the earl of Derby were appointed as lieutenants of Aquitaine with power to reform the administration there, and simultaneously as plenipotentiaries to the kings of Castile, Portugal, and Aragon; following this latter embassy Earl Richard and Eleanor Beaumont, soon to become his second wife, also undertook a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. In 1350 he was again sent to Avignon, and in 1353, when a major effort was being made to end the war, he twice went to Calais as one of the chief English negotiators with the French. In the winter of 1354-5 he accompanied the duke of Lancaster to Avignon once more. He was also commissioned, in 1351, 1354, and 1357, to negotiate with the Scots for the ransom and release of their king, David II. He was constantly involved in the protracted negotiations of 1358-60, being appointed as the king's plenipotentiary to Wenzel, duke of Luxembourg, in May 1358, travelling to Calais again in August 1359 to negotiate the release of the French king, and attending the formal ratification of the treaty of Bretigny at Calais in November 1360. In 1362 he was one of the commissioners to try to effect a settlement of the Breton civil war, and in 1365 he was one of the English negotiators of the treaty with the Scots. 
When not abroad on the king's business, Arundel held a succession of great offices and commissions in England: justice of north Wales during pleasure from 1334, and for life from 1337; councillor to the seven-year-old Black Prince; keeper of the realm in the king's absence, from 1338 to 1340; commissioner to investigate the financial affairs of William de la Pole in July 1340, and, in December of the same year, to examine the misdeeds of the king's ministers following Edward's sudden return from abroad; and admiral of the north and west in 1340, and again from 1345 to 1347. In July 1355 he was appointed one of the guardians of England during the king's absence in France. There are numerous references to his membership of the royal council from the late 1330s onwards: in 1344 he was granted permission to lodge at St Mary's Priory, Southwark, because he 'will have to come to London very frequently to treat of various matters for the king' ('CPR', '1343-5', 189) and, taking Edward III's reign as a whole, he witnessed more royal charters than any other lay magnate in the kingdom. Yet Earl Richard was not a man to buckle under pressure from the king: witness his behaviour in the parliament of April 1341, when he and the earl of Surrey famously courted Edward's wrath by speaking up on behalf of John Stratford, the embattled archbishop of Canterbury. He was also described in 1347 as a member of the Black Prince's council, and in 1359 was appointed as one of the prince's general attorneys. He acted as feoffee for both Henry, duke of Lancaster, and John of Gaunt, and as attorney for Wilhelm, duke of Bavaria, in 1361. 
For his services to both the king and his fellow peers Arundel was well rewarded. The first and most significant favour which he received from Edward III was his restoration in 1330-31, but this was soon followed by others: in 1336 he surrendered to the king his hereditary claim to the stewardship of Scotland, which was derived from his descent from Alan fitz Flaald, steward of Scotland in the early twelfth century, receiving 1000 marks from the issues of north Wales in return; in 1338 he was granted the franchise of return of writs and the sheriff's tourn in the hundreds which he held in Sussex, and in 1340 this was augmented to include the sheriff's aid. In 1345 he was granted the shrievalty of Shropshire for life, and in 1346 his right to inherit a substantial part of the estate of the childless John de Warenne, earl of Surrey, was, despite strong competition, confirmed by the king. Following Warenne's death in the following year he leased these lands from Warenne's widow (his own aunt), Joan de Bar, for $900 per annum, eventually succeeding to the title of earl of Surrey after her death in 1361. In 1365 the Black Prince granted him 'and his heirs for ever' $400 in rent from his lands in Chester. As a consequence Arundel grew extraordinarily wealthy, as evidenced by his activities as a moneylender: between 1338 and 1374 he lent a total of some $70,000 to the crown, usually in the form of short-term credit to finance military campaigns; before 1360 no individual loan totalled more than $3000, but following the renewal of the war in 1369 he lent greater sums, the largest being $20,000 in the summer of 1370. He also made sizeable loans to his fellow magnates such as the Black Prince and John of Gaunt, and to lesser individuals or syndicates, mainly in Sussex and Shropshire, where his major landholdings were situated. Documents from his private archives suggest that by the later years of his life his disposable wealth amounted to over $70,000; at his death in January 1376 he left over $60,000 in cash alone, half of which was in 'the high tower of Arundel Castle' (BL, Harley MS 4840, fol. 393). The main sources of Arundel's wealth were probably threefold: his large estates in Sussex and Shropshire, efficiently and enterprisingly managed, especially for wool production; capital investment on a large scale with merchants such as the Bardi and the Londoner John Philipot; and the profits of influence and credit -- unquantifiable as these are, for interest as such does not usually appear to have been paid on his loans. 
But if interest was not paid, Arundel reaped the reward for his loans in the form of political support from the crown. Between 1363 and 1367, when he was involved in a bitter dispute with William Lynne, bishop of Chichester, Edward III backed him to the hilt, seizing the bishop's temporalities and forcing Lynne first to flee to Avignon to seek help, and eventually to make a humiliating submission. Edward also supported him in the tricky matter of his divorce from his first wife and marriage to his second, Eleanor (died 1372), the daughter of Henry, earl of Lancaster, and widow of John, Lord Beaumont. Arundel's marriage to Isabella had been contracted largely to cement the political alliance between Despenser and Richard's father, Earl Edmund. By 1344, however, the attractions of an alliance with the Despenser family had become less obvious, and, notwithstanding that a son (Edmund, now aged seventeen) and two daughters had been born of the marriage, Arundel petitioned the pope for an annulment on the grounds that the couple had never consented to the marriage but had been 'forced by blows to cohabit'. Despite the implausibility of this argument and the consequences for the children, Edward III supported the petition, the pope complied, and in March 1345 the marriage which Arundel had already contracted with Eleanor, in the presence of the king and queen at Ditton on 5 February, was declared valid. Isabella was given five manors in Essex, while Edmund was bastardized and, despite his persistent protests, disinherited, dying in obscurity. 
Arundel's children with his new wife prospered mightily, however. His eldest son, Richard (III) Fitzalan, the next earl, married Elizabeth, daughter of William de Bohun, earl of Northampton, in 1359; his second son, John Arundel, married Eleanor, daughter of Sir John Maltravers, and went on to become marshal of England; his third son, Thomas Arundel, became bishop of Ely in 1373, despite being only twenty at the time, and eventually archbishop of Canterbury. Of their four daughters, Joan married Humphrey (IX) de Bohun, heir to the earldoms of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, in 1359, and Alice married Thomas Holland, earl of Kent, in 1365, while Mary and Eleanor predeceased their father. By this time, having acquired the Warenne lands in Surrey and Sussex, and purchased some twenty manors in Sussex alone, Reigate, Lewes, and Arundel had become the favoured residences of the earl and countess, rather than the castles on the Welsh marches such as Shrawardine, Clun, and Holt, which had been the chief seats of the Fitzalans under Richard's father and grandfather. Arundel and Countess Eleanor both died at Arundel Castle, she on 11 January 1372, he on 24 January 1376, their 'high tombs of marble' being sculpted by Henry Yevele ('CClR, 1374-7', 59). By his will, dated 5 December 1375, Arundel asked that his body be buried without pomp next to Eleanor's in the chapter house of Lewes Priory, founded a perpetual chantry in the chapel of St George's within Arundel Castle, and left bequests in cash amounting to 16,600 marks to his family and 6800 marks to various religious houses -- fitting testimony to that remarkable wealth for which he was chiefly renowned during his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 9535


Fitzalan, Richard (III), fourth earl of Arundel and ninth earl of Surrey (1346-1397), magnate, was the eldest son of Richard (II) Fitzalan, third earl of Arundel and eighth earl of Surrey (c.1313-1376), and his second wife, Eleanor (died 1372), daughter of Henry, earl of Lancaster, and widow of John, Lord Beaumont. He was married first in 1359 to Elizabeth, daughter of William de Bohun, earl of Northampton, and second, on 15 August 1390, to Philippa, daughter of Edmund (III) Mortimer, earl of March, and widow of John Hastings, earl of Pembroke. She was aged fourteen and Arundel about forty-four. On the death of his father on 24 January 1376 he inherited his lands, titles, and most of his enormous wealth, though not without opposition from his half-brother Edmund, the son of Earl Richard (II)'s first wife, Isabella Despenser, who raided his lands in Essex in an attempt to assert his own claims to them. Edmund's challenge was ineffectual, however, and Arundel remained one of the wealthiest men in England until his death, although unlike his father he generally declined to lend his money to the crown, the only loan of comparable size to his father's being that of 5000 marks which he and his brother John Arundel advanced to Edward III in March 1377. This was probably one among many sources of friction between him and the new king, Richard II. 
Arundel was appointed to the 'continual council' set up in the Good Parliament of 1376 to advise the aged Edward III, and he served as butler at Richard II's coronation, where he was one of several earls who carried the young king on his shoulders. Shortly after the coronation he was made admiral of the western fleet, and was also appointed to the minority councils of July 1377 and November 1378, and to the (ineffective) commissions set up to reform the royal household in the 1380 and 1381 parliaments. He was with the king in London during the great revolt of 1381, and was given custody of the great seal for two days following the murder of Archbishop Sudbury, the chancellor, on 14 June. In the next parliament, that of November 1381, he and Michael de la Pole were appointed to remain in the royal household 'to counsel and govern the king's person' ('RotP', 3.104). During these years he took an active, though not always distinguished, part in the war: he was repulsed from Harfleur in 1378, and held to blame by some for the English failure to take St Malo in the same year. He was subsequently rejected by the bishop of Norwich as the king's representative on the Flemish crusade of 1383. 
Within another year there occurred Arundel's first open breach with the king, when he launched a fierce attack on the royal government in the Salisbury parliament of 1384 and was told by Richard II to 'go to the devil!' ('Westminster Chronicle', 68). Although he joined the royal campaign to Scotland in 1385, he was to spend the remaining years of his life in open or covert opposition to Richard II, his personal relations with whom were never good. His chief grievances against the government in the 1380s seem to have been first, his objection to the king's favouritism towards men such as Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford, and Michael de la Pole, earl of Suffolk; second, his desire to prosecute a more active war policy against France than that preferred by the king and his advisers; and third, his belief that serious incompetence and corruption characterized the crown's financial administration. His misgivings were shared by many of the parliamentary Commons, with whom he was frequently appointed to confer during the stormy sessions of the 1380s. In the Wonderful Parliament of October 1386, in which these criticisms came to a head, he, his brother Thomas, bishop of Ely, and their political ally, the duke of Gloucester, were all appointed to the commission of government set up to reform the royal household and administration, which held power during the following twelve months. Arundel was also reappointed as admiral. Despite the king's lack of co-operation, a financial reform programme was put into effect and a more aggressive policy adopted towards France, the highlight of which was Arundel's capture off Margate, on 24 March 1387, of the Franco-Flemish wine fleet on its way from La Rochelle to Sluys; the Westminster chronicle records that 8000 tuns of wine were captured and subsequently sold in England for 4died a gallon, thus ensuring the earl's popularity. 
The commission was due to relinquish power in November 1387. However, when Gloucester, Arundel, and their ally, the earl of Warwick, heard of Richard II's 'questions to the judges' of August 1387, which threatened the lives of those who had opposed the king's wishes in the parliament of 1386, they refused to come to Westminster. According to the monk of Evesham, the subsequent crisis was precipitated by Richard II's attempt to have Arundel arrested at his castle of Reigate, whereupon Gloucester, Arundel, and Warwick appealed of treason five of the king's principal favourites (de Vere, de la Pole, Alexander Neville, archbishop of York, Robert Tresilian, the king's chief justice, and Nicholas Brembre, mayor of London) ['see 'Lords appellant]. It is from this action that they and the earls of Derby and Nottingham, who later associated themselves with the appeal, are known to history as the appellants. On 13 November 1387 Gloucester, Arundel, and Warwick assembled their retinues at Haringay Park, Hornsey, Middlesex, and on 17 November, accompanied by 300 followers, presented their appeals to the king in person at Westminster. Richard II declared that the appeals would be heard in the next parliament, but in the meantime prepared for war, dispatching de Vere to Chester to raise an army. However, de Vere's army was defeated by the combined forces of the appellants at Radcot Bridge, near Witney, on 20 December, following which the five lords returned to London, arrested some fifty of the king's supporters, purged the royal household, and probably deposed the king for two or three days. Their control of the government was now assured, and when parliament opened on 3 February 1388 they secured the conviction and execution of eight of the king's supporters (including Sir Simon Burley, Tresilian, and Brembre, although de Vere, de la Pole, and Neville had fled abroad), the exile of all the royal justices to Ireland, and the dismissal of a further forty or so of the king's supporters from court. Then, having voted themselves $20,000 for their expenses in saving the realm and secured an indemnity for themselves and their followers, they brought the Merciless Parliament to a close on 4 June. Meanwhile Arundel, now captain of Brest as well as admiral, crossed to Brittany in May, but failed to achieve anything of note. The appellants remained in control for another year, but on 3 May 1389 the king resumed power, replacing Earl Richard as admiral and captain of Brest on 18 May. 
During the next few years, while some of his former colleagues made their peace with the king, Arundel remained unreconciled, particularly on the question of the French war; and when a rising -- directed apparently against Richard II's and John of Gaunt's negotiations for peace with France -- broke out in Cheshire in the spring of 1393, he was accused by Gaunt of taking no action against it, despite the fact that he was at the time residing at his nearby castle of Holt. In the parliament of January 1394 he launched a characteristically rash verbal assault against the king and Gaunt, complaining among other things that Richard II and his uncle were too intimate, that the king and members of his retinue should not wear Gaunt's livery collar, that Gaunt was so overbearing in meetings of the royal council that other lords dared not speak their minds, and that Richard II should not have granted Gaunt either the duchy of Aquitaine or such a large sum of money for his Spanish campaign of 1386. He received no support from his fellow lords, however, and was compelled to make a humiliating apology to Gaunt in full parliament. On 30 April 1394 he took the precaution of securing a comprehensive pardon from the king, but on 3 August they clashed again when the earl arrived late for Queen Anne's funeral at Westminster Abbey, then promptly asked leave to depart. So incensed was the king that he seized a baton from an attendant and struck Arundel on the head with it so forcefully that he 'fell to the ground, with blood streaming out all over the floorstones' (Riley, 168), and the funeral service had to be delayed until the church had been cleansed. As a result Arundel was imprisoned in the Tower of London for a week, and only released on bail of $40,000. Nor did his relations with the king improve thereafter. He continued to raise objections to the terms of both the peace negotiations with France, and the conditions attached to the twenty-eight-year Anglo-French truce of 1396. It was probably because of this that he and Gloucester refused to attend a meeting of the council in February 1397. 
Five months later the king decided to strike against those who had previously humiliated him. On 10 and 11 July, without warning, he arrested Gloucester, Arundel, and Warwick. Arundel was apparently persuaded by his brother Thomas Arundel, archbishop of Canterbury, to give himself up to the king under assurances of safe conduct, but having done so was promptly dispatched to Carisbrooke Castle. On 5 August, at Nottingham Castle, an appeal of treason was presented against all three of them, accusing them of raising rebellion against the king in 1387, usurping the royal authority with their commission of 1386, and putting to death various supporters of the king without good cause in 1388. Arundel was brought into parliament on 21 September to face his accusers. He conducted himself with a degree of courage and defiance which clearly made a strong impression on the chroniclers of the time, for several of them include vivid descriptions of his trial. Claiming the benefit of his pardons of 1388 and 1394, he was told by the speaker, Sir John Bussy, that these had been revoked 'by the king, the lords, and us, the faithful commons'. 'Where are those faithful commons?' retorted Arundel. 'I know all about you and your crew, and how you have got here -- not to act faithfully, but to shed my blood'. When his former fellow appellant, the earl of Derby, rose to accuse him of plotting to seize the king in 1387, he replied, 'You, Henry earl of Derby, you lie in your teeth. I never said anything to you or to anyone else about my lord king, except what was to his honour and welfare' (Given-Wilson, 'Chronicles', 59). He was nevertheless convicted of treason and sentenced to be drawn, hanged, beheaded, and quartered. Because of Arundel's noble birth Richard II commuted the sentence to beheading only, and he was immediately led away -- 'no more shrinking or changing colour than if he were going to a banquet', says Walsingham -- to Tower Hill, followed all the way by a great throng who, according to the monk of Evesham, 'mourned him as much as they dared'. His desire to be led along Cheapside may have been born of the hope that he might be rescued by the throng, but this was not to be. Walsingham reports that immediately following his execution, his headless body rose to its feet for as long as it took to recite the Lord's prayer, and that so persistent were the rumours of miracles at his grave -- in the church of the Augustinian friars in Bread Street -- that the king had his body exhumed and reburied at an unmarked spot. 
Arundel's conviction for treason meant that all his estates, entailed or otherwise, as well as his vast personal wealth (which probably amounted to at least $50,000), were forfeited to the king, and his heir disinherited. Following the deposition of Richard II in 1399, however, the judgment against him was reversed and his son and heir, Thomas Fitzalan, restored to his lands and titles. Arundel had at least eight children with his first wife: his first son Richard was alive in 1393 but predeceased him, his second, Thomas Fitzalan, became his heir, while William ('b'. after 1381) entered the church; his daughters were Elizabeth, who married first Sir William Montagu and second, in July 1384, Arundel's fellow appellant Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham; Eleanor, who married Robert, eldest son of William de la Pole, earl of Suffolk (they both died before 1376); Alice, who married John Charlton of Powys, and is said in a later pedigree to have been seduced by Henry Beaufort, bishop of Winchester; Joan, who married William Beauchamp, Lord Bergavenny; and Margaret, otherwise unknown. Countess Elizabeth died on 3 April 1385 and was buried in Lewes Priory. There were no children of Arundel's second marriage. In his will, dated 4 March 1393, he made generous bequests to the hospital of the Holy Trinity which he had founded for twenty paupers at Arundel, and the college of the Holy Trinity, for a master and twelve secular canons, which he also founded at Arundel, the statutes for which were approved in 1387. Despite his irascible and violent nature, and his tempestuous and often ill-judged political career, he was apparently a man of considerable personal piety. That he was a leading figure in the politics of Richard II's reign there can be no doubt, and although his own political career ended in disaster, the opposition to Richard's policies for which he stood, as well as his own reputation, were to be vindicated in the revolution of 1399 when the king was deposed. 


@@@@@


doc= 9536


Fitzalan, Thomas, fifth earl of Arundel and tenth earl of Surrey (1381-1415), soldier and administrator, was the second son and heir of Richard (III) Fitzalan, fourth earl of Arundel and ninth earl of Surrey, and Elizabeth de Bohun (died 1385). On the execution and forfeiture of his father in 1397, the honour of Arundel was granted to John Holland, duke of Exeter, to whose custody the sixteen-year-old Thomas was committed. Treated as a servant and humiliated, he escaped to his uncle Archbishop Thomas Arundel (d. 1414) in exile, both eventually joining the future Henry IV in Paris. They landed with him at Ravenspur, Yorkshire, on 24 June 1399 and accompanied his march to Bristol and Chester. Fitzalan was knighted on 11 October 1399 and, though under age, with the judgment on his father reversed, received livery of his inheritance in 1400. He assisted in repressing the rising of the earls at Epiphany 1400 and a French source ('Chronicque de la traison et mort de Richart Deux roy Dengleterre') credits him with instigating the execution of his former captor, John Holland, at Pleshey. He later joined the royal expedition to Scotland and was elected a knight of the Garter. 
In the fourteenth century the Fitzalans were second in wealth and influence among the marcher lords only to the Mortimer earls of March. The harsh exploitation of their lordships of Oswestry, Clun, Chirkland, and Bromfield and Yale produced an income of some $2000 per annum and to this were added the Warenne lands in Sussex and elsewhere, giving a total income of over $4000 per annum. Arundel's grandfather, Richard, had a treasure of not less than $72,245 in 1376. On Richard (III) Fitzalan's forfeiture in 1397 all this moveable wealth was confiscated and dispersed while, in the revolt of Owain Glyn Dwr in 1400-01, Arundel's lands were ravaged and many of his tenants, alienated by harsh landlordship, joined the rebels. For the next six years Arundel was fighting to reassert his own and the king's authority in north Wales. In July 1402 he was appointed king's lieutenant in the north, but the royal campaign of that year was a disaster, and following the battle of Shrewsbury on 21 July 1403, he was retained to guard the Welsh marches, having his headquarters at Oswestry. These years of arduous service on the Welsh march had brought him into close association with Prince Henry, the earl of Warwick, and other lords including Sir Thomas Beaufort. Called from Wales in June 1405 to suppress the Yorkshire rising of Mowbray, Bardolf, and Archbishop Scrope, he and Thomas Beaufort were hastily invested with authority as constable and marshal to pass judgment of execution on the archbishop as a traitor at Pontefract. The shocked protest of his uncle, Archbishop Arundel, marked the beginning of a deepening rift between them. The earl's marriage in November 1405 to Beatrice, the illegitimate daughter of Joao I of Portugal, was made on the urging of Henry IV who defrayed the cost, as a means of strengthening the alliance with Portugal where his sister was queen. 
Over the next four years Arundel increasingly attached himself to Prince Henry, becoming his principal retainer in 1407, and distanced himself from the court where his uncle's influence prevailed. In Sussex he was confronted with the growing influence of Sir John Pelham, treasurer of England and a counsellor of Henry IV, who held the custody of the Mowbray castle of Bramber and the duchy of Lancaster castle at Pevensey, while further disputes with his uncle occurred over lands in Kent and Sussex. In May and again in November 1409 the council ordered him and other marcher lords to return to Wales, but when Prince Henry secured power in 1410 Arundel joined the council alongside Thomas Beaufort as chancellor. He now became closely involved in the implementation of the pro-Burgundian policy of the prince's party as civil war erupted in France. In response to advances by Duke John the Fearless he was appointed on 11 September 1411 to negotiate with him for military aid and a possible marriage for Prince Henry. With Duke John facing Armagnac pressure in Vermandois and Paris, Arundel led a force of his own and the prince's retainers to Arras in October, moving thence with the Burgundian army to Paris where they attacked the Armagnacs at St Cloud on 9 November and removed the threat to Paris. Well rewarded by the duke of Burgundy, they returned in January 1412. 
With the dismissal of the prince's council in December 1410 Arundel had no further political or military role until Henry's accession as king. Then he was appointed constable of Dover and warden of the Cinque Ports and treasurer of England. For the latter he had no evident qualifications and he was the only member of an ancient comital family to hold the post. But he lent almost $3000 to the crown and was an active member of the council, involved in the reform of royal finance and the preparations for relaunching the war up to 1415. Evidently he stood high in favour and influence with Henry V, yet this did not inhibit the king from a firm demonstration of royal authority at the centre of Arundel's lands in Shropshire. In the aftermath of Glyn Dwr's revolt Arundel's retainers, John Wele, captain of Oswestry, and Richard Lacon, captain of Clun, had restored the earl's authority with systematic harshness. Arundel's absence in England encouraged them to practise extortion and intimidation on their own account, thereby provoking resistance from the followers of Arundel's rival, John, Lord Talbot. Already in November 1413 Henry V had bound both lords by recognizances to keep the peace, and in the summer of 1414 he conducted a tour of the west midlands to suppress disorders. On 15 June Arundel's officers -- Lacon, Wele, and others -- were indicted at Shrewsbury for offences over the preceding years and Arundel was made to stand surety for them. Although they were eventually pardoned and Lord Talbot was dispatched to Ireland, Henry had shown himself determined to discipline magnate feuding. The settlement of disorder in Shropshire, as elsewhere, was facilitated by recruitment of troublemakers for the expedition to France. The earl himself led a retinue of 100 men-at-arms and 300 archers to the siege of Harfleur but was one of those who succumbed to dysentery there. His company went forward to Agincourt, but Arundel returned to England on 28 September. He had already drawn up a will before embarking, enfeoffing trustees in many of his lands, and granting all his moveable effects to his widow; on 10 October he dictated his testament at Arundel, where three days later he died on his birthday. In it he not only made provision for masses and pilgrimages for his soul and the construction of his tomb, but for payment of the wages of his servants and military retainers at Harfleur. He made a legacy to his bastard son but left no legitimate children and his heirs were his three sisters: Elizabeth, duchess of Norfolk, Joan, Lady Bergavenny, and Margaret, wife of Sir Rowland Lenthal. The castle and honour of Arundel descended to his cousin and heir male John (V) Fitzalan, Baron Maltravers (died 1421), who was however prevented by John (V) Mowbray, duke of Norfolk, his brother-in-law, from inheriting the title. Thomas Fitzalan was buried in the collegiate church at Arundel where his tomb and effigy, with those of his wife, remain. 


@@@@@


doc= 9537


William fitz Alan (c.1105-1160), baron, was the son of Alan son of Flaald (died 'c'.1114), hereditary steward of the bishops of Dol in eastern Brittany, and Avelina, daughter of Ernulf de Hesdin in Ponthieu, a Domesday tenant-in-chief in ten counties. Alan and Avelina had three sons: Jordan, who inherited the patrimony in Brittany; William, who inherited his father's rich acquisitions (which included 'the fee of the sheriff' of Shropshire) and was the direct ancestor of the Fitzalan earls of Arundel; and Walter (died 1177), who took service with David I of Scotland about 1136 and became his steward, and was the direct ancestor of the Stewart kings of Scotland. William fitz Alan married 'c'.1130 Christina, 'neptis' (a niece or close relative) of Robert, earl of Gloucester. Their son Alan died in his father's lifetime; their daughter Christiana was married in 1170 to Hugh Pantulf of Wem. William married second 'c'.1153 Isabella de Say, daughter and heir of Elias de Say, lord of Clun. Their son William Fitzalan, who was to be the heir to his father's lands, came of age in 1175. 
The group of Breton families who had served Henry I before his accession were notably loyal to his memory. Soon after gaining the shrievalty of Shropshire on the death of Pain fitz John in 1137 William fitz Alan was one of a group of magnates who renounced their loyalty to King Stephen in 1138, concurrently with Robert, earl of Gloucester, the leader of what then became the Angevin faction in the civil war. Shrewsbury Castle was held against King Stephen in August 1138, but it fell after a short siege, and Stephen, conscious of criticisms of his leniency after earlier sieges, hanged many of the garrison, probably including William's uncle, the younger Ernulf de Hesdin. William himself escaped the siege, with his wife and children, and attached himself to the Empress Matilda after her arrival in the following year. He was with her at Winchester from March to April 1141, when she was recognized as 'lady of the English', and in the following July and August was with her first at Oxford (when his brother Walter was present with David, king of Scots) and then at Winchester. Writs from the empress show that she viewed him as having some authority in Shropshire in the 1140s; but that authority cannot have been great, and was to diminish. Oswestry, the centre of his barony, was lost to the Welsh by 1149, captured by Madog ap Maredudd of Powys, and Bridgnorth was in the hands of the Mortimers. The small barony of Keevil in Wiltshire, inherited by Avelina, provided a safe haven, for it was close to Devizes where the empress was based after 1142. William was also at Chester, probably in the late 1140s, where he witnessed charters of Earl Ranulf (II). 
William fitz Alan survived to benefit from the Angevin succession. He immediately attached himself to Duke Henry on his arrival in 1153, and was with him at Leicester in June 1153 and at Dunstable in January 1154. When Henry (now Henry II) marched against Hugh de Mortimer in July 1155, and recaptured the castles at Shrewsbury and Bridgnorth, William fitz Alan was the chief beneficiary. At Bridgnorth 'the king restored his lands' ('Cart. Haughmond', 1371), and William took the homages of his men: a public statement of his power but a recognition also that in the anarchy his lordship had been destroyed. Oswestry was recaptured at about the same time. William fitz Alan accounted as sheriff of Shropshire from July 1155 until his death, which occurred about Easter 1160. What appears to be a deathbed grant shows him at Shrewsbury surrounded by the abbots of Haughmond, Lilleshall, and Buildwas, and the prior of Wenlock, all houses that he had supported with gifts. Haughmond Abbey was the foundation of William fitz Alan, and became the family monastery and mausoleum. He, however, was buried at Shrewsbury Abbey, within the town that was for so many years the focus of his ambition. 


@@@@@


doc= 9538


William fitz Aldelin (d. before 1198), administrator, was of modest origins, being perhaps a younger son of Aldelin of Oldfield (near Ripon, Yorkshire). In the past he has been confused with William de Burgh, the brother of the thirteenth-century justiciar Hubert de Burgh, but this identification has long been discredited. William fitz Aldelin is first recorded some time before 1143, as a witness to a charter of Ilbert de Lacy, relating to Potterton in the West Riding. He is mentioned as a royal official on pipe rolls between 1159/60 (when he had charge of the king's son, Henry) and 1164/5. In September 1165, styled 'marescallus', he acted as a royal justice at Westminster. In 1166 lands in Hampshire which he held of the king by service as his marshal are listed as having been granted to him with his marriage (before 1162) to Juliana (died 1186x9?), daughter of Robert Dorsnell, also called Doisnell; he is also recorded holding one knight's fee of Henry de Lacy, at Thorpe Audlin, Yorkshire. In October 1170 he was one of two royal representatives consulted by Becket's agents before their appearance before the young King Henry, son of Henry II, at Westminster and in December 1170 was named as one of the young king's three 'tutores'. In July 1171 he witnessed a charter of Henry II in favour of Newstead Priory, Lincolnshire, at Bur-le-Roy in Normandy. 
On 7 October 1171 William witnessed a charter of Henry's at Pembroke and crossed to Ireland in advance of the king, whom he met at Waterford on 18 October 1171. He witnessed Henry's grant of Dublin city to the men of Bristol, and also that of Meath to Hugh de Lacy at Wexford, in April 1172; the latter document contains the first reference to William as 'dapifer' (steward), a new title corroborated by his being described in separate entries on the 1172/3 pipe roll as 'marescallus' and 'dapifer'. According to Gerald of Wales, he was sent by Henry, along with Hugh de Lacy, to negotiate with Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, king of Connacht and claimant to the high-kingship, whose submission he received at the River Shannon. It is possible that there was indeed a meeting, but Gerald's account of Ua Conchobair's submission is certainly inaccurate. Gerald also relates that before Henry II left Ireland he assigned custody of Wexford (which he had retained as royal demesne) to William fitz Aldelin, but this is not substantiated by the better-informed court chronicler, Roger of Howden, who names Robert fitz Bernard in that role. In 1172/3 William was pardoned a scutage payment due from two fees of new feoffment in the Curcy honour, which was in the king's hand and had been entrusted by the king to William, and in 1176 he was remitted 2 marks owed towards the aid to marry the king's daughter, due apparently from the same two fees in the Curcy honour. 
About March 1173, when Henry II summoned Richard fitz Gilbert, lord of Striguil, known as Strongbow, and Hugh de Lacy to serve in Normandy, William fitz Aldelin was appointed as Henry's procurator in Ireland. With the style 'steward of the king of England' (Gilbert, 1.138), he conducted an inquisition into lands held by St Mary's Abbey, Dublin, before the confirmation charter issued by Henry II at Falaise in late 1174, which William witnessed. Gerald of Wales asserts that at some time between 1173 and 1175 the papal letter of Pope Adrian IV known as 'Laudabiliter', together with a privilege of Pope Alexander III, were proclaimed publicly at an episcopal synod at Waterford attended by William fitz Aldelin and Nicholas, prior of Wallingford. Assuming that Gerald's account may be relied upon, the occasion may have been the installation of Augustinus O Selbaig as bishop of Waterford; the election was confirmed by Henry II at Windsor in 1175. Styled 'senescallus', William witnessed the treaty of Falaise between Henry II and the king of Scots in October 1174, and during 1175 and 1176 was regularly in attendance at court as steward and also acted as a justice hearing pleas in the 'curia regis' in 1175/6. 
Following the death of Strongbow on 20 April 1176, William fitz Aldelin was sent to Ireland to take custody of Strongbow's lands and castles. Early in 1177 he issued a charter in favour of St Thomas's Abbey, Dublin, on behalf of Henry II, in the presence of the papal legate, Cardinal Vivian, and of the archbishop of Dublin, Lorcan Ua Tuathail. In February of that year John de Curcy is said to have left the Anglo-Norman garrison of Dublin without permission from William, who was his superior, before undertaking the conquest of Ulster. Gerald of Wales presents a very negative view of William, depicting him as impeding the ambitions of the chronicler's kinsmen in Ireland, but arguably this was a measure of his success as a royal agent in Ireland. Specifically, Gerald accuses him of taking the castle of Wicklow from the sons of Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1176), though he was ultimately compelled to give them Ferns in exchange; of depriving Raymond Fitzgerald le Gros (died 1189x92) of lands which he held in the Vale of Dublin and adjacent to Wexford; and of depriving Robert fitz Stephen of a cantred in Ui Faelain. William's nephew, Walter Alemannus, who was 'custos' of Wexford under him, was supposedly suborned by Muirchertach Mac Murchada, ruler of Ui Chennselaig, to effect the destruction of Ferns at the expense of the sons of Maurice Fitzgerald. Although Gerald of Wales avers that William was recalled to England in May 1177 because of incompetence, it may have been tensions between him and the adventurer-settlers, as described by Gerald, which occasioned Henry's major council on Ireland held at Oxford in May 1177, at which William fitz Aldelin was present. On the evidence of Roger of Howden, he was then reappointed as the king's principal agent in Ireland, and also custodian of Strongbow's lands, including the town of Wexford. 
Gerald of Wales cryptically asserts that under William fitz Aldelin 'Ireland and Wales together lamented their total destruction and ruin' (Giraldus Cambrensis, 239). William's association with Wales is obscure, but it may be that, when he assumed custody of Leinster in 1176, he also became responsible for the lordship of Striguil, and perhaps even Pembroke. His presence in England is unattested from 1177 until December 1181 when, still styled steward, he witnessed a charter of Henry II in favour of the monastery of Godstow. Roger of Howden records that a deputation from Ireland was received by Henry II at Windsor early in 1179, which complained of unjust and violent treatment at the hands of Henry's agents and that, as a result, William fitz Aldelin and Hugh de Lacy were removed from office; possibly representations were made by Lorcan Ua Tuathail, archbishop of Dublin, and Cadla O Dubhtaig, archbishop of Tuam, who visited the court about that time, seeking permission to attend the Third Lateran Council. William may have been recalled permanently from Ireland by 1179, but it is not until autumn 1181 that he is found witnessing royal charters in England as steward, and between 1182/3 and 1188/9 the pipe rolls record him as holding escheated lands in Hampshire at the pleasure of the king. 
On 17 March 1187 William fitz Aldelin and his wife, Juliana, granted Little Maplestead, Essex, to the hospitallers, he styling himself the king's steward, and Juliana issued a separate charter. The latter was witnessed by one Ralph, calling himself 'the son of William my lord' (which suggests that William had had at least one child with another woman), as well as by William's brother, also named Ralph (Gervers, 59-61). Some time before 1189 William and his wife gave Compton church, Hampshire, to Merton Priory. Between 1188 and 1197 he was sheriff of Cumberland, and he also acted intermittently as an itinerant justice in Cumberland and Yorkshire. At some point between 1181 and 1189 he witnessed a charter of Henry II at Anjou; and on 1 December 1189 he witnessed a charter of Richard I in favour of Canterbury. Between 1189 and 1194 he attested charters of Queen Eleanor, widow of Henry II. A charter of about 1190 refers to 10 marks given to him by his tenant, Durand son of Drew, 'for my journey to Jerusalem', indicating that he was preparing to go on crusade (Farrer, 'Early Yorkshire Charters', 3.299). Following Juliana's death William married Eustachia de Curtenai, named as his wife in two charters which he issued in favour of St Bees in Cumberland. He was dead by 1198, when land in Teversham, Cambridgeshire, which he had held as the king's marshal, was recorded as having escheated to the crown. In 1199 William de Werbirton and Ingram de Munceaux made fine as her heirs to have the inheritance of Juliana, wife of William fitz Aldelin. 


@@@@@


doc= 9539


Fitzball, Edward (1793-1873), playwright and writer, was born at Burwell in Cambridgeshire and baptized there on 20 March 1793, the second son of Nathan Ball (died 1803), a prosperous gentleman farmer with 500 acres of freehold land in Burwell, and grandson of Dr Robert Ball of Mildenhall in Suffolk. His mother, Mary (died 1830), whose maiden name was Fitz, had previously been married to the Revd Brandish Marker of Bury St Edmunds, who died a year after his marriage and left a considerable fortune to his young widow. Edward Ball was educated at the Albertus Parr Academy in Newmarket. At the age of twelve, with his elder brother in the navy, he was forced to assist in the management of the indebted family estate, which had been much reduced by his father's propensity for gambling at the Newmarket races. 
At the same age, the already theatrically smitten boy submitted his first play to the manager of the Bury St Edmunds Theatre, and returned to the farm in despair when it was rejected. In 1809, at the age of sixteen, Ball was articled to a printer in Norwich, coming out of his articles in 1812. After starting an abortive poetry magazine and marrying his wife Adelaide Alexandria Dupius (died 1850) in Norwich on 15 August 1815, Ball was encouraged, particularly by the novelist Amelia Opie, to try his dramatic fortunes in London. Two tragedies, 'Edwin' (1817) and 'Bertha' (1819), and one melodrama, 'The Ruffian Boy' (1819), had already been produced in Norwich. On his arrival in the metropolis Ball prudently secured employment as a printer. He then lived in Upper Stamford Street, off the Waterloo Road. 
In 1821 Edward Ball changed his surname to Fitzball, conjoining his last name with his mother's maiden name, in order, he maintained, to avoid confusion with another songwriter named Ball. By that time he had a young daughter, Louisa, apparently his only child. Following the production at the Surrey Theatre of a melodrama, 'Edda' (1820), and a pantomime, 'Alonzo and Imogine' (1821), Fitzball had his first big hits at the Surrey with 'The Fortunes of Nigel' (1822), an adaptation of Scott's novel, and 'The Innkeeper of Abbeville' (1822), a domestic crime melodrama (first performed in Norwich), a subject in which Fitzball came to specialize with great success. The Scott adaptation was only one of a large number of theatrical versions of his novels, which for some years were enormously popular on the stage. Fitzball wrote further adaptations of Scott, including 'Peveril of the Peak' (Surrey, 1823) and 'Waverley' (Adelphi, 1824). After 'The Fortunes of Nigel' and 'The Innkeeper of Abbeville' came another successful melodrama, 'Joan of Arc' (1822), which ran for 120 nights at Sadler's Wells and then transferred to the Olympic. 
In the 1820s Fitzball also wrote in another dominant contemporary form of melodrama, the nautical. In this too he achieved immediate success with, at the Surrey, 'The Floating Beacon' (1824) and 'The Inchcape Bell' (1828) -- which combined Gothic with nautical material -- and, at the Adelphi, two adaptations of Fenimore Cooper novels, 'The Pilot' (1825) and 'The Red Rover' (1829). 'The Pilot', with the popular former sailor actor T. P. Cooke, was especially successful. Another Adelphi success was 'The Flying Dutchman' (1827), with Cooke as the mysterious Vanderdecken, one of the many dumb parts then common on the stage that relied entirely on mime for their acting effectiveness. Another spectacular hit was a crime melodrama, 'Jonathan Bradford, or, The Murder at the Roadside Inn' (1833), the most innovative scene of which, and one that Fitzball insisted on retaining despite the objections of actors, production staff, and management, showed a cross-section of four rooms at the inn with overlapping action proceeding in each. Fitzball claimed that 'Jonathan Bradford' ran for 264 consecutive nights and was seen by 400,000 people. Even before this play he was one of London's most prolific, popular, and successful melodramatists, and his work was greatly in demand. 
Fitzball continued to write busily, not only melodramas but also songs, burlettas, and opera librettos, including the English versions of Donizetti's 'La favorita' and 'La figlia del reggimento' (both Drury Lane, 1843), Wallace's 'Maritana' (Drury Lane, 1845), and all the early operas of Balfe. He became a play-reader for both Drury Lane and Covent Garden, and had plays produced at both theatres. With the exception of one or two works, such as 'Azael' (Drury Lane, 1851), a spectacle melodrama with an Egyptian setting, his later dramatic efforts did not achieve the success of the plays of the 1820s and 1830s. Taste was changing, and Fitzball's day as the popular purveyor of theatrical sensation was passing. A tragedy with a lavish Egyptian setting, 'Nitocris', was a disastrous failure at Drury Lane in 1855. Among his last pieces were an equestrian melodrama for the circus ring, 'Robin Hood' (Astley's, 1860), and an operatic version of 'She Stoops to Conquer' (Covent Garden, 1864), with music by Macfarren. 
In a century where dramatists typically and hurriedly wrote large numbers of plays at low rates of remuneration in order to make a living, Fitzball was among the most prolific, with a recorded output for at least 25 theatres of at least 170 melodramas, opera librettos, burlettas, tragedies, comedies, and farces, although his work in the last three categories was relatively scant: Fitzball was essentially neither a tragic nor a comic writer. His forte was the melodrama of the sea, of macabre crime, and the supernatural, such as 'The Floating Beacon', 'Jonathan Bradford', and 'The Flying Dutchman'. For this last play Fitzball credited himself with the invention of a magic lantern projection from backstage onto gauze of the ghostly vessel, which grew larger, approaching the land, as the lantern retreated on its tracks further upstage. This saved the theatre the materials and labour involved in building a very large model of a ship on stage, the usual practice. If the claim is correct, this would have been the first use of back projection on the English stage. 
Several of Fitzball's melodramas were set in exotic locations, like 'The Earthquake, or, The Spectre of the Nile' (Adelphi, 1828) and 'Thalaba the Destroyer' (Covent Garden, 1836), a version of Southey's poem. Although he spent many profitable years writing for Drury Lane and Covent Garden, his best work was done for the minor theatres, particularly the Surrey and the Adelphi. All his life he wrote verse and songs, one of his best and most popular being 'My Pretty Jane', with music by Bishop. Fitzball's autobiography, 'Thirty-Five Years of a Dramatic Author's Life' (1859), is one of the most readable and informative of Victorian theatrical autobiographies, although lacking a sense of chronology. It is as colourful, lively, and vigorous as the best of his own dramatic writing. 
Edward Fitzball died on 27 October 1873, at 141 Whittaker Terrace, Maidstone Road, Chatham, where he had retired ten years before. He was buried at Chatham. 


@@@@@


doc= 9540


Fitzcharles, Charles, earl of Plymouth (c.1657-1680), courtier and army officer, was born, probably in Bruges, in 1657, the illegitimate son of Charles II (1630-1685), and Catherine Pegge (died 1678). His mother's liaison with the exiled king had come to an end by 1658, and he was brought up by her in the Spanish Netherlands with the financial support of his maternal grandfather, Thomas Pegge of Yeldersley, a Derbyshire squire and partisan of the royalist cause. After receiving a rudimentary education in Flanders -- which subsequently earned him the scathing epithet of Don Carlos from the English court -- Fitzcharles arrived in London in 1672 and gained for himself a reputation as a quick-witted and personable youth. Acknowledged by the king as his natural son, his endeavours -- for a time -- thoroughly captivated Charles II, and he was briefly even considered to be a serious political rival to the duke of Monmouth in any future struggle for the succession to the throne. On 8 October 1672 Michael Boyle, archbishop of Dublin, reported a rumour that Fitzcharles was to be given a commission as the colonel of the Queen's regiment of foot and an allowance of $10,000 per annum. 
Although this came to nothing, Fitzcharles was ennobled as Baron Dartmouth, Viscount Totnes, and earl of Plymouth on 28 July 1675. Granted a royal warrant for his coat of arms on 20 October 1675, he was also allocated a pension of $2000 a year from the excise -- a sum which was later increased to $4000 per annum. With his finances thus secured, he moved into a suite of fashionable apartments at the Cockpit in the palace of Whitehall, placing himself at the very heart of the court and the governmental machine. Unfortunately, the effect of this sudden paternal indulgence -- after early neglect -- was seriously damaging to both his character and behaviour. He accrued debts at an alarming rate, failed to pay his servants on time, and hung his rooms with the finest and most expensive damask. It was alleged that he languished in bed every day until well after noon, and his mother sadly lamented that 'much ill company [had] made him loose' ('Sixth Report', HMC, 388; 'Leeds MSS', 18). A plan to settle his debts in return for his promise to enrol at Cambridge University and to finally dismiss his Roman Catholic servants, whom he had brought over from France and Flanders, was set forth but never seriously pursued. 
However, Plymouth was soon preparing for his entry into high politics, and gained a valuable ally in the form of the lord treasurer, Thomas Osborne, earl of Danby (1632-1712), who accepted his friendship as a valuable commodity 'not easily to be removed' (Browning, 2.527). In the summer of 1677 Plymouth took service with the Dutch army and acted as a useful conduit for the exchange of intelligence between Charles II, Danby, and William III, prince of Orange. On his return to England, via Paris, he emphasized his credentials as a protestant career soldier who had chosen to serve the Dutch state when the duke of Monmouth had not. He was married 'very privately' to Danby's third daughter, Lady Bridget Osborne (1661-1718), at the parish church at Wimbledon, Surrey, on 19 September 1678. Having, at last, taken his seat in the House of Lords on 8 May 1679, he cheerfully assented to the trial and condemnation of the Roman Catholic peers and gave qualified support to his by now beleaguered father-in-law. Danby's fall did, however, dramatically affect his position at court and coincided with renewed Moorish assaults upon the English colony of Tangier. 
With interest in the stricken city rising to unprecedented levels at Whitehall and Westminster, Plymouth now took the lead in recruiting gentleman volunteers for a relief expedition, and was commissioned on 13 July 1680 as the colonel of a new regiment, the 4th foot, which was being raised especially for service in the defence of Tangier. Anxious not to miss the fighting, he had however already left for the colony, together with his gentleman recruits and a scratch force drawn from the existing military establishment. His arrival in Tangier on 2 July 1680 served to bolster the morale of the 'Old Souldiers' among the garrison, and to compel the few remaining merchants and 'burghers' to assist in the city's defence (Ross, 4). Having won glowing reports for his energy and zeal in drilling the troops, he was entrusted with leading one of the columns that assaulted the Moorish positions outside the city walls on 20 September 1680. Achieving complete surprise, the British soldiers quickly reoccupied the entrenchments and outlying forts that had been abandoned to the enemy years before, and Plymouth 'did not let any action pass either on Foot, or Horseback, in which [he] had not a share' ('Particular Relation', 4). By nightfall the Moors had been thrown back repeatedly and Plymouth's soldiers were put to work building a stockade on the site of the Pole Fort, which effectively served to anchor the centre of the British position. Unfortunately, the ruined fort resembled 'a Pond without Thatch or Cover save the Clouds and Sky', and a sustained downpour dampened spirits and washed out the trenches (Ross, 11). Chilled to the bone but thirsty after the day's hard fighting, Plymouth now drank from contaminated water and fell ill with dysentery. After being carried back to the city, his condition worsened and he died of the 'Bloody flux' on 17 October 1680. 
Plymouth's servants brought his body back to England in November 1680, but his estates were in such disorder and so burdened by debt that they were not permitted to land at Deal until the Treasury promised to pay the captain of the 'Foresight' the sums owed for their passage home. In the meantime, Plymouth's corpse was escorted to London by his friend Charles, Lord Mordaunt, and was honourably interred on 18 January 1681 in Henry VII's chapel, Westminster Abbey, in the vault vacated by the removal of the bodies of the Cromwell family. 
In the absence of an heir Plymouth's title became extinct, while his estate was placed at the disposal of his numerous creditors in December 1686. His widow subsequently began a relationship with her chaplain, Philip Bisse (1666-1721), who later became bishop of Hereford. The couple were married in secret in August 1704, and publicly acknowledged their union two years later. Plymouth had a younger sister, Catherine ('b'. 1658), who is often claimed to have taken orders at Dunkirk and lived to an extraordinary age. However, on the balance of probability it would appear that she died as an infant, and that her identity was confused with that of her half-sister, Justinia. This child was born to Catherine Pegge and Sir Edward Green, bt, shortly after their marriage in 1667, and was recorded as being among the English ladies at the convent at Pontoise. She died there in 1717. 
A mezzotint by J. Savage shows Plymouth, shortly before his death, as a plump-faced young man, with the eyes and nose that he had unmistakably inherited from his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 9541


FitzClarence, Lord Adolphus (1802-1856), naval officer, was born at Bushy Park, Middlesex, on 18 February 1802, the seventh child and fourth son in the illegitimate family of five sons and five daughters of William, duke of Clarence, later William IV (1765-1837), and the comic actress Dorothy Jordan (1761-1816). He attended a boarding-school in Sunbury before being sent to sea in 1813 at the age of eleven on the 'Impregnable'. He served as a midshipman on the 'Newcastle' on the North American station, and subsequently in the Mediterranean. He received his commission in 1821 and served on the 'Euryalus'; in May 1823 he was made commander, and served on the 'Brisk' and the 'Redwing' on the North Sea station. In December 1826 he was made captain, and commanded the 'Ariadne' (1826), the 'Challenger' (1827), and the 'Pallas' (1828). On William IV's accession in 1830 he took command of the royal yacht, which position he retained under both his father and Queen Victoria, until he was promoted to flag rank in September 1853. 
FitzClarence was devoted to his mother, who inspired his great love of the theatre: he was involved in founding the Garrick Club. As an illegitimate son of the eventual king, FitzClarence was in a difficult social situation, although few took their objections to the 'batards' to the extent of the duchess of Kent, who left the room whenever any of the FitzClarences entered. With his brothers, he badgered the king to give them titles, official positions, and funds. In May 1831 he was granted the title and precedence of a younger son of a marquess, and in the following year he became GCH. In addition to the command of the royal yacht, he was appointed groom of the robes (1830-33) and lord of the bedchamber (1833-7). On Victoria's accession Lord Adolphus was pleasantly surprised to find himself retained as commander of the royal yacht and his allowance continued; Victoria reported that he 'burst into tears, and said it was unexpected, for they did not dare to hope for anything' (Esher, 1.261). In 1848 he became additionally naval aide-de-camp to the queen, an office he retained until his death, unmarried, on 17 May 1856 at Newburgh Priory, near Easingwold, Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 9542


FitzClarence, George Augustus Frederick, first earl of Munster (1794-1842), army officer, was born in Somerset Street, London, on the morning of 29 January 1794, the eldest of the ten children born to the actress Dorothy Jordan (1761-1816) and the duke of Clarence, later King William IV. He spent many of his early months in the theatre, where his mother continued to perform. Destined by his father for the army, he was educated at a private school at Sunbury before going to the Royal Military College at Great Marlow. He was appointed cornet in the prince of Wales's regiment, the 10th hussars, on 5 February 1807, at the age of thirteen. The following year he sailed for the Peninsular War; the duke of Clarence wrote of his 'real uneasiness' at sending one of his 'extream youth' to war, adding 'The distress of Mrs Jordan is not to be described: however... she sees the propriety of his going' ('Correspondence of George, Prince of Wales', 6.514). In Spain he served as aide-de-camp to General Slade at the battle of Corunna, and early distinguished himself, winning the approval of his uncle, the prince of Wales. Back in Portugal in April 1809, he was galloper to Brigadier Sir Charles Stewart (later second marquess of Londonderry), then Wellington's adjutant-general. Wounded in the leg at Talavera in July, he returned to Portugal the following April and saw out the rest of the campaign, having been promoted to a troop. (In 1831 he published a vivid 'Account of the British Campaign in Spain and Portugal in 1809'.) 
FitzClarence was in England at the time of his parents' separation; like all the children of the union, he was placed in the difficult position of sympathizing entirely with his abandoned mother, while owing his profession and livelihood to his father's family, especially the prince regent. Ambitious, and all too conscious of his anomalous position as an illegitimate son, he tended to rail against the limited promotion prospects for men without money in his regiment, drawing from his father the anxious reminder that 'The Prince [Regent] will take care of you if you are attentive' (Tomalin, 281). He went abroad in 1813, serving through the campaigns of 1813-14 in Spain and the south of France, first as deputy assistant adjutant-general, and then with his regiment. He distinguished himself at Pamplona in 1813 and was again wounded while leading a squadron at Toulouse in 1814. When the regiment returned to England, FitzClarence (and his brother Henry) were among the twenty-four officers who signed an accusation of incompetence and neglect of duty against their commanding officer, Colonel Quentin. At the subsequent court martial, presided over by another uncle, the duke of York, Quentin was reprimanded, but the wrath of the court was brought against his accusers. FitzClarence was accused of being a ringleader, and all of the officers were stripped of their swords and dismissed from the regiment. 
FitzClarence and his brother were sent in disgrace to join the 24th light dragoons in India, where the governor-general, Lord Moira, was urged to treat them 'with the strictest discipline, not to say severity' (Tomalin, 284). FitzClarence was Moira's aide-de-camp and as such served in the campaigns of 1816-17 against the Marathas, and found great favour with his chief, who reported back to England that 'He is perfectly attentive to his duty, strictly correct in his manner, & much liked by all the officers in my family' (Moira to Colonel McMahon, 'Letters of George IV', 2.170). Henry FitzClarence died in India in September 1817, some months after receiving news of his mother's death, and in December George was sent back to England bearing the dispatches of the peace treaty signed with Maharaja Sindhia, via the overland route. He subsequently published an account of his travels, 'Journal of a route across India and through Egypt to England, in the latter end of 1817 and the beginning of 1818', which marked the beginning of a series of scholarly interests. FitzClarence was to become a fellow of the Royal Society, and of the Royal Geographical, Antiquarian, Astronomical, and Geological societies of London, and a founder member of the Royal Asiatic Society (of which he was chosen president a year before his death). He was a member of the society's committee preparing plans for publishing translations of oriental works, and was subsequently deputy chairman and vice-president of the Oriental Translation Fund. He was also to be president of the Society for the Publication of Oriental Texts. His own researches lead to the publication of a paper on the employment of Muslim mercenaries in Christian armies in the 'Journal Asiatique', 56 (February 1827), and with the aid of his secretary and amanuensis, Dr Aloys Sprenger (later principal of Delhi College) he collected a vast amount of material for a projected 'history of the art of war among eastern nations'. 
FitzClarence remained in the army on his return to England. He became a brevet lieutenant-colonel in 1819, and subsequently obtained a troop in the 14th light dragoons, commanded the 6th carabiniers for a short time as regimental major in Ireland, and served as captain and lieutenant-colonel of the Coldstream Guards from July 1825 to December 1828, afterwards retiring as lieutenant-colonel on half-pay unattached. 
Married on 18 October 1819 to Mary Wyndham (died 1842), the illegitimate daughter of the third earl of Egremont, with whom he had four sons and three daughters (the eldest of whom was prudently named Adelaide after his stepmother), FitzClarence was unhappy in his domestic life, and he retained a strong sense of grievance arising from the circumstances of his birth. This unhappiness was strengthened when in 1830 the duke of Clarence became king, for now the indignities of being the recognized, but illegitimate, eldest son of the monarch weighed heavily on him. Feeling the injustice of his situation led him (along with his brothers) to press his father for honours, recognition, and hard cash. Hoping to be raised to a dukedom (in the manner of Charles II's illegitimate family), he threatened suicide when William IV prevaricated; finally, in June 1831 he was created earl of Munster, but was not content. Determined to be recognized as the king's son, he demanded 'Let me carry your crown at the Coronation... Who is more fit than your own 'flesh and blood'?' (Ziegler, 158). The king was furious, and their relationship was henceforth plagued with violent quarrels. He was appointed governor of Windsor Castle and constable of the Round Tower, and sworn of the privy council, and was accused of attempting to influence the king against the 'Reform Bill'. At William IV's death, they were still unreconciled, despite various attempts by the king to heal the breach between them. 
Victoria's accession to the throne that would, had his parents been married, have been his own, served only to exacerbate Munster's misery. Victoria's mother, the duchess of Kent, had used the presence of the FitzClarences at William IV's court as an excuse for keeping her daughter away from the king; Victoria herself was more forgiving, and Munster retained his appointments. This was insufficiently consoling to the unhappy man, and, on the night of Sunday 20 March 1842, Munster shot himself in his library in Belgrave Square, London, having first written to the queen. He was buried in the parish church at Hampton. 
Lord Melbourne wrote to the queen that Munster 'was always... an unhappy and discontented man, and there is something in that unfortunate condition of illegitimacy which seems to distort the mind and feelings and render them incapable of justice or contentment' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 1st ser., 2.486). The early nineteenth century was an inhospitable place for illegitimate royal offshoots: the over-reaction to the Quentin affair clearly showed some residual fears that the illegitimate son might foment wider discontent, but Munster was no Monmouth. Publicly derided for that condition over which he had no control, Munster shared Edmund's resentment in 'King Lear': '
Why brand they us 

With base? with baseness? bastardy? 

' -- and his heartfelt cry, 'Now, gods, stand up for bastards'; the gods did not listen. 


@@@@@


doc= 9543


Brian fitz Count (c.1090-c.1149), magnate, was the son of Alan (IV) Fergant, duke of Brittany. 
Brian was most likely illegitimate, for his mother's name is not recorded, and he is not known to have held any land by inheritance. He became a great landowner under Henry I, and one of his most intimate counsellors. In the early 1140s, when embroiled in the civil war of Stephen's reign, he would look back to 'the good and golden days' of Henry I, describing himself as a man 'whom good king Henry brought up and to whom he gave arms and an honour' (Davis, 303). The honour was that of Wallingford, which he had acquired by his marriage before 1119 to Matilda, lady of Wallingford, who was the heir of Miles Crispin. Matilda's parentage is a matter of continuing scholarly discussion. The earliest contribution to this was made by a local jury in 1183, who stated that Matilda was daughter of Robert (I) d'Oilly (died 'c'.1093) and wife of Miles Crispin (died 1107). This would make Matilda a mature lady at the time of her second marriage, and an elderly one when she died; and some later historians suggest Matilda was the daughter of Miles Crispin; but the jurors, some of whom would have known Matilda, may be thought the best witnesses. In addition to Wallingford, also by 1119, Brian had control of the lordship of Abergavenny and Upper Gwent. In the pipe roll of 1129/30 he is shown as having exemptions from geld on 720 hides of land, in eleven counties, and owning a town house in Southwark. He himself rendered account for the borough of Wallingford, and for the office and part of the land of Nigel d'Oilly. The office may have been the constableship previously in the d'Oilly family, for Brian fitz Count attested as constable shortly thereafter. 
Brian fitz Count is first recorded at Westbourne in Sussex probably in 1114, when he was a member of the royal household about to cross over to Normandy. It was, however, only after 1125 that he was regularly at court, in the last decade of Henry I's life witnessing over forty of his charters, the majority of them in Normandy. It was a decade dominated politically by Henry's attempt to provide for the succession. Brian was at Woodstock and at Rockingham in the autumn of 1126 immediately after the Empress Matilda (died 1167) returned from Germany; and in the same year Waleran, count of Meulan, was transferred to his custody at Wallingford. He may be presumed to have been at Windsor on 1 January 1127 when the empress was designated as Henry's 'lawful successor' (Malmesbury, 3); and he and Robert, earl of Gloucester (died 1147), then accompanied the empress to Rouen in May 1127 for her betrothal to Geoffrey, count of Anjou. The same two trusted counsellors were responsible for a special audit of the treasury during the financial year 1128/9. In the years 1129 and 1130 Brian was with the king in England and in Normandy. In February 1131 he occurs at Rouen as constable, while in the summer of that year he was at Arques, and a charter addressed to him and the vicomte of Arques suggests that he may then have had control of that castle. In September 1131 he was present at an important meeting of the royal court at Northampton, at which oaths in support of the empress's succession were again sworn. He crossed with the king to Normandy in the summer of 1133, and attested several charters at Rouen in 1134. He saw at first hand the conflict that then developed, in consequence of the demand made by the empress and her husband that the king transfer castles as security for the succession, which he refused them. In the late summer of 1135 Henry was at Argentan, and strengthened its defences; an attestation of Brian there may date from this time. 
This conflict provides a part of the context which allowed Stephen of Blois, count of Mortain and Boulogne, to claim the English crown after Henry's death on 1 December 1135. Brian fitz Count cannot have welcomed this development, but initially he went along with it. He was at Stephen's Easter court in late March 1136, and early in April at Oxford when the charter of liberties was issued, by which time Robert, earl of Gloucester, had also come to terms with the king. It may have been at Wallingford that Robert joined the royal court as it travelled along the Thames valley. Both Brian and Robert, as marcher lords, were confronted by the threat posed by the Welsh resurgence after Henry's death. Brian accompanied Richard de Clare when he rode through Abergavenny to Cardigan, but (according to Gerald of Wales) Richard ignored his advice and sent him back, riding alone into an ambush in which he was killed on 15 April 1136. Brian also attested for Stephen at Hereford, in two charters probably dating from May 1138. At this time many of the marcher lords rebelled against Stephen, following the lead of Robert of Gloucester, but Brian is not mentioned among them. 
It was only when the empress landed in the autumn of 1139 that Brian fitz Count declared for her. He was then at Wallingford. Robert of Gloucester left the empress outside Arundel and set out for Bristol; and Brian is described by William of Malmesbury as meeting him half way, which might have been at Marlborough. Stephen turned immediately to attack Wallingford, but this 'impregnable castle' ('Gesta Stephani', 91) held out until it was relieved by Miles of Gloucester. Brian is next noted in March 1141, after Stephen had been captured at the battle of Lincoln, as one of those who swore in support of the promises made by the empress to Henry de Blois, bishop of Winchester (died 1171), the papal legate, after which she was received as 'domina Anglorum' ('lady of England'; Malmesbury, 'Historia novella', 47). He would retain a very clear memory of this event. The empress's charters, supported by the chronicles, show that for the remainder of a particularly eventful year Brian was continually at her side. In June he was with her at St Albans, when she came to terms with the Londoners; then at Westminster, where she issued the first of her charters to Geoffrey de Mandeville; and then in July, after the Londoners had driven her out, at Oxford, where Miles of Gloucester (died 1143) was made earl of Hereford. Brian followed the empress to Winchester early in September, but she was driven out from here also. In the retreat from Winchester, Robert, earl of Gloucester, was captured, but the empress escaped to Devizes accompanied by Brian, by which -- says the 'Gesta Stephani' -- they 'gained... a title to boundless fame, since as their affection for each other had before been unbroken, so even in adversity... they were in no wise divided' (p. 135). A charter of Miles, earl of Hereford, precisely dated to the last week of September, suggests that Brian and the empress next moved to Gloucester. The empress then sought to establish a base at Oxford, and Brian was with her there at times in 1142, but she was besieged by Stephen's forces in the castle, and at the end of December in that year she made her escape to Wallingford; thereafter, until she withdrew from England in 1148, she was based at Devizes. 
The retreat of the Angevin party, back to its original bases in the west country, left the castle of Wallingford exposed, and Brian was tied down to its defence. He resigned his marcher lordships. Having no son of his own, he in effect adopted Walter, the second son of Miles of Gloucester, giving him Grosmont possibly even before 1139 (for the grant was confirmed by Stephen). To Miles himself he resigned Abergavenny, to hold of him in return for the service of three knights. It became difficult even to provision Wallingford garrison. Seeking to defend the detention of goods bound for the fair at Winchester, probably in September 1142, Brian said that he had lost control of the lands which Henry I had given him. 'As a result I am in the greatest distress and am not harvesting one acre of corn from the land which he gave me' (Davis, 302). 
Brian was writing in response to a curt letter from Henry, bishop of Winchester, reproaching him for supporting the empress, and threatening that he would shortly be numbered 'amongst the unfaithful men of England' (Davis, 301). Brian sent the bishop a lengthy and passionate defence of his integrity. It was not lack of faith but simple necessity that now led him and his men to self-help: 'neither I nor my men are doing this for money or fief or land, but because of your command the lawfulness of myself and my men'. The command had been given at Winchester in April 1141: 'you yourself who are a prelate of holy church have ordered me to adhere to the daughter of king Henry your uncle, and to help her to acquire that which is hers by right but which has been taken from her by force. (Davis, 301)' He called as witnesses no fewer than fifty-three prelates and magnates who had been there, whom he seems to have been able to list from memory. Henry of Winchester, who had heard much in this vein, had told Brian not to look back: 'remember the wife of Lot' (ibid., 301). In response, Brian brushed Lot's wife aside, and looked back to the first crusade. A further list of great men followed, starting with the bishop's father, 'who obeyed the pope's command and left so much behind, who by assault and force of arms conquered Jerusalem like good knights, and established there a good and lawful king by the name of Godfrey'. Stephen most certainly was not 'a good and lawful king' (ibid., 301). The demonstration of why this was so was provided by Gilbert Foliot, then abbot of Gloucester, in response to a letter from Brian. This letter (of 'c'.1143) does not survive, but it must have been long -- 'librum edidisti' ('you have written a book'; 'Letters and Charters', 61, no. 26) -- and the courtesies of correspondence led the abbot to pick up some of its themes in his preamble. Here was the reference to the good and golden days of Henry I, now turned to base metal. Here had been a fuller biography, for that king had 'brought you up from boyhood, educated you, knighted you, enriched you' (ibid.). It was quite understandable, granted what had come after, that those days lived vividly in Brian's memory. Now he was sustaining the empress's cause, 'not just with arms but with the grace and truth of eloquence' (ibid.). The abbot then turned to business. Brian had proposed that everything that had belonged to King Henry was by right ('iure') owed to his legitimate daughter. Gilbert was prepared to show that this was so by divine, natural, and human law; and this he did at some length. In these few letters, survivals from an active pamphlet warfare, can be seen fully articulated the case for the Angevin succession, a decade before it would be realized. In an age when the biographies even of prominent laymen are difficult to construct, the fragments of autobiography which come from Brian fitz Count have a particular value. 
After 1142 references to Brian fitz Count are sparse and most often at second hand. When William Martel, one of Stephen's leading lieutenants, was captured at the battle of Wilton in 1143, he was sent as prisoner to Wallingford, where according to Matthew Paris he was placed in 'cloere' 'Brien' (Brian's dungeon), specially constructed for him (Paris, 2.174). In 1146 Stephen was joined by Ranulf (II), earl of Chester (died 1153), in a further direct assault on Wallingford; but this too failed. Relations between the garrison of Wallingford and the men of the bishop of Winchester continued on a war footing: one of Brian's knights captured the bishop's castle at Meredon (in Hursley, Hampshire), but it was recaptured with the king's help. 
Brian 'the son of the count' never became an earl. It is noteworthy that in his letter to Henry of Winchester he gives the title earl to only one of the many creations after 1135, either of Stephen or the empress, which suggests a patrician disdain for new titles. There are signs, however, that in the Angevin camp a distinctive honorific was created for him, since William of Malmesbury describes him as 'marchio de Walingeford', which could equally well be translated 'marcher' or 'marquess'; it was given as a title to later lords of Wallingford. A further sign of the esteem in which he was held was the grant ('c'.1144) by the empress to Reading Abbey of the royal demesne manor of Blewbury in Berkshire, 'for the love and loyal service of Brian fitz Count, which he has rendered me' ('Reg. RAN', 3, no. 703); and her son Henry, in 1147 or 1149, confirmed the grant and associated himself with the sentiments. A letter of David, king of Scots, addressing Brian alongside the abbot and convent of Reading, shows that he was viewed as closely associated with the house which Henry I had founded and in which he was buried. Matilda of Wallingford, Brian's wife, maintained a close relationship with the abbey of Bec, granting it the two manors of Ogbourne in Wiltshire which became the centre of their estate in England. The last of her confirmations was issued at Bec in 1150 or 1151; and since Brian was neither present nor mentioned in it, he may be presumed to have died. The gap in the evidence concerning his last days was filled by later tradition. The Abergavenny chronicle stated that he had gone on crusade, but this is unlikely. The memory of the shire was that both he and his wife entered religion, and this is more probable. The quiet end became the man. Brian fitz Count was born illegitimate, and died childless. The distractions and the commitments of family are missing in his career, and this as much as temperament must account for what is distinctive in it. In his day he was a great man, but in his heart he remained always the household knight of Henry I. The love ('amor') of which he wrote so frequently, and that he lavished on Henry's daughter, was neither carnal nor platonic but rather the very essence of chivalric loyalty and integrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 9544


Fitzgeffry, Charles (c.1575-1638), Church of England clergyman and poet, was born in Fowey, Cornwall, the son of Alexander Fitzgeffry, a clergyman formerly of Bedfordshire. Fitzgeffry matriculated at Broadgates Hall, Oxford, in 1590 and was awarded a BA in January 1597 and an MA in July 1600. While at Oxford he published his poem, 'Sir Francis Drake, his Honorable Lifes Commendation and his Tragical Deathes Lamentation' (1596), which he dedicated to Queen Elizabeth and to which commendatory verses were prefixed by, among others, his Broadgates friends, Thomas Mychelbourne and Richard and Francis Rous. The poem was favourably reviewed by Francis Meres in 'Palladis tamia: Wits Treasury' (1598), with reference to 'yong Charles Fitz-Jeffrey, that high touring Falcon'; and there are several quotations from the poem in 'England's Parnassus' (1600). In 1601 Fitzgeffry published a volume of Latin epigrams and epitaphs, 'Caroli Fitzgeofridi affaniae, sive, Epigrammatum libri tres, ejusdem cenotaphia', which includes epigrams addressed to Michael Drayton, Samuel Daniel, Sir John Harrington, William Percy, and Thomas Campion, and epitaphs on Edmund Spenser, Richard Tarlton, and Thomas Nashe. An epigram 'To my Deare Freind Mr Charles Fitz-Jeffrey' appears among the poems 'To Worthy Persons', appended to John Davies of Hereford's 'Scourge of Folly' ([1610-11]). By this time Fitzgeffry was ordained. In 1603, through friendship with the Rous brothers, he had been presented to the living of St Dominick, near Saltash, Cornwall, by their father, Sir Anthony Rous, a prominent Cornish puritan. 
Born and (apparently) brought up in Fowey, Fitzgeffry maintained his connections with the town. Probably in 1625 Bevill Grenvile of Stow represented to 'the wife of the Chancellor of the Diocese' the grievances of the inhabitants of Fowey against their 'very worthless Vicar' and the town's wish 'to have a lecturer at their own charge... The man they have chosen is Mr F[itz]G[effry]' (Granville, 196). There is no record of Fitzgeffry's appointment, but his subsequent correspondence and his close association with the Rashleighs of Menabilly, the leading family in Fowey, suggests that he did become Fowey's lecturer. On 17 February 1629 Fitzgeffry dedicated to Mrs Anne Rashleigh a sermon entitled 'A Preparative to Repentance', preached before the House of Commons at the general fast on Ash Wednesday (Cornwall RO, R(S) 1/460). Further, it was Fitzgeffry (rather than the vicar of Fowey, Edward Basill) who preached Anne Rashleigh's funeral sermon in 1631. Besides commending her wifely behaviour, private devotions, hospitality, and charity, Fitzgeffry praised Mrs Rashleigh for 'constantly repairing to the Temple... not only on the Lord's day, but on the Lecture day, and by her attention and devotion in the Temple' (Cornwall RO, R(S) 1/462). On 24 March 1634 Fitzgeffry wrote to Lord Robartes (whose sister had married Fitzgeffry's patron, William Rous) about a thunderstorm which had caused considerable damage in Fowey. Fitzgeffry, who had been residing in the town at the time, described how he 'lay waking... my chamber window being right opposite to that Pinnacle of the Church which suffered'. Interpreting the storm in providential terms as 'that warning-piece from heaven', he had expected the wicked to be punished by it and was puzzled that the only injury was to Mrs Rashleigh's maid servant, 'whom for this seven years I have known to be of sober, modest, religious conversation'. Fitzgeffry also complained to Robartes of a shortage of time due to 'my manifold employments', reinforcing the impression that he was lecturer of Fowey as well as rector of St Dominick (Cornwall RO, FS/3/1032). 
Fitzgeffry's sermon at the Cornish quarter sessions of 1630 was published the following year, with reference to 'Theese two yeeres of dearth'. Condemning those who hoarded corn with the intention of selling it at a higher price, Fitzgeffry proclaimed, 'let Ministers (as his Majesty commandeth) joyne forces with the Magistrates against this Monster, Avarice'. Going on to encourage JPs to demonstrate the important puritan virtues of charity and hospitality to the poor, Fitzgeffry tacitly supported the government's 'Book of Orders' of January 1631, which may explain Cornish puritan zeal for the book (C. Fitzgeffry, 'Curse of the Corne-Horders', 1631). In 1636, when the problem of Turkish piracy on the south coasts of Cornwall and Devon intensified, Fitzgeffry published a sermon urging charity towards those taken captive by the Turks and care for their dependants, both in prayer and generous giving. He dedicated the sermon, which was originally preached in Plymouth, to the mayor and brethren of the town and praised the people of Plymouth for their monthly collections for the cause (C. Fitzgeffry, 'Compassion towards Captives', 1637). 
In addition to his sermons, Fitzgeffry published numerous poems and epigrams. He prefixed commendatory verses to Storer's 'Life and Death of Thomas, Earl Cromwell' (1599), Davies of Hereford's 'Microcosmus' (1603), Sylvester's 'Bartas, his Devine Weekes and Workes' (1605), and William Vaughan's 'Golden Grove' (1608). In his devotional poem 'The blessed birth-day celebrated in some pious meditations on the angels anthem', published in 1634 and reprinted 1636 and 1651, Fitzgeffry reflected on Christ's nativity. He had resigned as rector of St Dominick by 3 March 1636 when John Fitzgeffry, presumably his son, was presented to the living. Charles Fitzgeffry died less than two years later, on 24 February 1638, and was buried under the communion table in St Dominick parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 9545


Fitzgeffrey, Henry (d. 1639/40), satirist, was the second son of Sir George Fitzgeffrey, knight, of Creaken in Barford, Bedfordshire. He was a king's scholar at Westminster School, and went on from there to Cambridge, matriculating as a pensioner at Trinity College in 1612. On 5 October 1614 he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn. In October 1616 his elder brother, George Fitzgeffrey, died. George's will indicates that he was heavily in debt, that Henry had entered into numerous bands and sureties on his behalf, and that their father was still alive at this time. 
Fitzgeffrey is known for one publication, which first appeared as 'Satyres and Satyricall Epigrams' (entered on the Stationers' register on 9 October 1617), before being prefixed with a selection of unrelated elegies by Francis Beaumont, Michael Drayton, and other writers, and reissued in 1618 and 1620 as 'Certain Elegies, done by Sundry Excellent Wits, with Satires and Epigrames'. Fitzgeffrey identifies himself on the title-page of the first edition as a student at Lincoln's Inn. A number of other Lincoln's Inn students are either recipients or contributors of epigrams: among them 'his Lou: Chamber-Fellow and nearest friend Nat. Gurlin of Lincolns-Inn' (admitted 1613), 'his True friend Thomas Fletcher' (admitted 1615), and the satirist John Stephens (admitted 1611). Also in Fitzgeffrey's poetic circle were Will Goddard and George Wither. Fitzgeffrey's satires describe London life and theatrical circles, with several references to debt that invite biographical application: '

'Duke's not in debt': yee do him wrong to say it: 

The 'Debt' is -- God knowes whose. His that will pay it. 
('Epigram 13')' Most interesting to modern readers, perhaps, is his pen portrait of John Webster, 'Websterio', that he claims is based on personal acquaintance. He portrays 'the Play-wright, Cart-wright' struggling for inspiration in a tavern: '
See how he drawes his mouth awry of late. 

How he scrubs: wrings his wrests: scratches his Pate 
('Notes from Black-Fryers', 266-7)' Fitzgeffrey's problems with debt continued, as he and another student, Oliver Goode, were complained against by Mary Wythines in January 1618 for non-payment of money owed. The benchers of Lincoln's Inn suspended the two students until the money was repaid. In June 1618 the benchers ordered that Fitzgeffrey's 'chamber be disposed of for the payment of his dueties to the house' ('Black Books', 199, 200, 206). None the less, he was called to the bar on 14 June 1621. Nothing further is known of Fitzgeffrey's later career, and by the time of the 1634 visitation of Bedfordshire, the manor of Creaken in Barford no longer belonged to the Fitzgeffrey family. His will, made and proved in 1639-40, names three brothers and a sister (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/182/41). 


@@@@@


doc= 9546


Fitzgerald, Lord Edward (1763-1798), Irish nationalist and army officer, was born on 15 October 1763 in London, the twelfth of nineteen children of James Fitzgerald, first duke of Leinster (1722-1773), and his wife, Emily Mary (1731-1814) ['see 'Fitzgerald, Emilia Mary, duchess of Leinster], daughter of Charles Lennox, second duke of Richmond, and his wife, Sarah. Lord Edward arrived in Ireland as an infant the year after his birth and by 1768 was being educated at the Rousseau-inspired family school at Frascati in Blackrock under William Ogilvie. On the death of the first duke of Leinster in 1773, Emily Fitzgerald and Ogilvie, who was her long-time lover, went to France with most of the children. They settled first in Marseilles and in 1776 moved to the duke of Richmond's chateau at Aubigny. Lord Edward's military career commenced in 1776 when he briefly attended a military academy in Paris. Two years later a lieutenant's command in the 96th foot was bought on his behalf. However he was not permitted to leave home until 1779 when he joined the Sussex militia in southern England. The following year he decided that the unit, commanded by his uncle the duke of Richmond, would not advance his military career, and he entered the 96th foot then stationed in Youghal, co. Cork. By February 1781 he had changed to a regiment preparing to sail for America, where he gained active military experience for the first time. However, only a few months after arriving at Charles Town Lord Edward was seriously injured in an engagement at Eutaw Springs, and probably owed his life to the intervention of a local former slave called Tony Small, who carried him from the battlefield. He recovered from his injuries and in 1782 purchased a majority in the 90th infantry regiment, but the unit was ordered home. Fitzgerald was accompanied by Tony Small, who became a loyal servant. 
On his return from America Fitzgerald was elected MP for the borough of Athy in co. Kildare on the Leinster interest, now controlled by his brother, the second duke. In political circles he strongly aligned himself with his first cousin Charles James Fox and the Irish patriot grouping. During the mid-1780s he appears to have been uncertain about his future, and travelled frequently between Ireland and England, as well as continental Europe in 1787. Moreover, he realized the difficulty of his position as a minor aristocratic figure and was disappointed romantically. In 1788, probably in a bid to improve his military and social prospects, he changed regiment again and sailed for British North America. While camped at Halifax and New Brunswick he was impressed by the self-sufficiency of the settler society, noting in a letter to his mother: 'The equality of everybody and of their manner of life I like very much. There are no gentlemen; everybody is on a footing, provided he works, and wants nothing; every man is exactly what he can make himself, or 'has' made himself by industry. (Moore, 62)' Even more revealing for a man imbued with Rousseau's notion of the noble savage was Fitzgerald's interaction with Native Americans. While on a trek south towards New Orleans in 1789 he was formally accepted as a chieftain of the Seneca, one of the Iroquois nations. 
By the following year Fitzgerald was back in London and during the subsequent decade became more actively engaged with the growing radicalism of the period. Further promotion within the army was unfeasible after Fitzgerald was elected MP for co. Kildare in 1790 and he decided to remain in the opposition ranks. His own growing political awareness was given political articulation and indeed accentuated by his interaction with the small circle of radicals in England centred on Thomas Paine. Through the same group he met and began an affair with the musician Elizabeth Linley (1754-1792), wife of the playwright Richard Brinsley Sheridan. She died of consumption on 28 June 1792 shortly after giving birth to Fitzgerald's daughter, Mary, who died in infancy in the care of Sheridan. The growing hostility to the increasingly small number of pro-French radicals in England resulted in Paine's flight to the birthplace of the revolution. Fitzgerald visited France in October 1792 and was highly impressed by the revolution. Moreover, he became closely attached to Paine, with whom he lodged in Paris. In November 1792, at White's Hotel, he renounced his noble title in public and increasingly adopted the outward trappings of revolutionary fashions. His inflammatory Francophile stance resulted in his being cashiered from the army, which left him without a profession. On leaving France Fitzgerald cemented his revolutionary enthusiasm by marrying on 27 December 1792 Pamela (1776?-1831) ['see 'Fitzgerald, Pamela], daughter of the educationist Madame de Genlis and reputedly the duc d'Orleans, who had renamed himself Philippe Egalite and was regarded as an aristocratic pariah outside France. Pamela's origins continue to confuse historians, but the effect of Fitzgerald's marriage was unmistakable, and signalled his radical ardour. The couple subsequently had three children, Edward Fox, Pamela, and Lucy Louisa. 
On the Fitzgeralds' return to Ireland in January 1793 they became a focal point of radical chic, though seasoned reformers viewed Fitzgerald with some misapprehension. Nicholas Murphy, a sympathizer, in whose house Fitzgerald lodged before his final capture, described him at this time as follows: 'He was, I believe, about 5 feet, 7 inches in height, and had a very interesting countenance, beautiful arched eyebrows, fine grey eyes, handsome nose, and high forehead, thick, dark coloured hair, brown or inclining to black' (Moore, 434). In parliament Fitzgerald carved out a reputation as an extremist. Most famously, at a debate which banned an assembly of the politically driven Dublin Volunteers, he exclaimed: 'Sir I give my most hearty disapprobation to this address, for I do think the Lord Lieutenant and the majority of this house are the worst subjects the king has' (ibid., 163-4). The statement drew the wrath of the members and he was forced to make two apologies before finally being readmitted to the house. Increasing disillusionment with the effectiveness of parliamentary opposition helped drive him towards the active revolutionary option as the only solution to Irish inequality. In 1794 he and Pamela moved to a house in Kildare town, near his estate at Kilrush. From this base he gradually developed a warm rapport with the lower orders in which he was to place his political aspirations. However, from 1794 it is more difficult to ascertain what Fitzgerald was doing; those letters which survive are markedly apolitical in tone. In Kildare, lower order Defender disturbances re-emerged during 1796, signalling a rapprochement with the expanding United Irishmen. The stature of the Geraldine family in Kildare placed Fitzgerald in an ideal position in which to organize the underground movement in the county. James Alexander's sister commented that in 1796 'his lordship resided in Kildare, danced among the rustics at bonfires and in short conducted himself with such condescension, freedom and affability that... he stole away the hearts of the people' (Alexander, 22). By the following year a strong county-wide United Irish organization had emerged centred on Fitzgerald, who surrounded himself by local radicals such as the apothecary George Cummins. 
In the summer of 1796 Fitzgerald travelled to Hamburg with his equally well-connected companion, Arthur O'Connor, with the intention of seeking French assistance for an Irish rising. By now Fitzgerald's Orleanist connections worked against him; therefore O'Connor alone negotiated with Hoche. It was probably on his return to Ireland in late 1796 that Fitzgerald formally joined the republican and separatist Society of United Irishmen. His home at Kildare town continued to act as a centre of radical activity, as recorded in the diary of Fitzgerald's radical younger sister Lucy. He travelled to Belfast with O'Connor during early 1797, now more closely under the scrutiny of the Dublin administration. By mid-1797 the parliamentary opposition had relinquished all hope of effecting change in Ireland or England, and Fitzgerald announced to the electors of co. Kildare that he would not stand for re-election. Most of his time was occupied developing the growing United Irish organization, particularly since he was the group's most important experienced militarist. A crucial mistake was made, however, during 1797 when he invited Thomas Reynolds, a Catholic merchant, to replace him as colonel of the United Irish forces in Kilkea and Moone barony in south Kildare. This decision appears to mark a general retreat by Fitzgerald from his Kildare base towards Dublin, but, in fact, Reynolds was a lukewarm radical who quickly furnished the government with information on United Irish meetings, resulting in the capture of almost the entire Leinster directory on 12 March 1798. Fitzgerald evaded capture but was henceforth forced to remain in hiding, largely in Dublin, though he continued to meet Reynolds. 
The arrests in Dublin contributed to the decision to proceed with an indigenous rising. Fitzgerald was suddenly placed at the heart of this endeavour and took steps for what he hoped would be a swift 'coup d'etat' centred on Dublin, supported by the surrounding counties. His high profile and aristocratic background placed the government in a difficult position, and discreet offers were made to encourage him to leave the country. However, he remained in hiding in Dublin, moving from house to house and meeting United Irish leaders. On 11 May the government belatedly offered a reward of $1000 for his capture. One week later Fitzgerald narrowly avoided arrest and was subsequently lodged at the house of a feather merchant called Nicholas Murphy. However, the following day, 19 May, the authorities finally caught up with Fitzgerald as he lay on an upstairs bed. In the ensuing struggle Fitzgerald mortally wounded Captain Ryan before being shot in the shoulder by Major Sirr. The identity of Lord Edward's betrayer remained a complete mystery until the second half of the nineteenth century, when W. J. Fitzpatrick demonstrated that the United Irish sympathizer and barrister Francis Magan had relayed the information concerning Fitzgerald's whereabouts to Dublin Castle through the notorious spymaster Francis Higgins. Fitzgerald was imprisoned in Newgate gaol, Dublin, and his wounds were initially considered not to be serious. Samuel Neilson and others made a futile attempt to rescue him in the hours before the rebellion he had planned broke out on 24 May 1798, indicating the aristocrat's perceived centrality as a figurehead and leader. Fitzgerald's wounds gradually became infected but no decision was taken to attempt to remove the bullets which had lodged in his shoulder. His brother Lord Henry and his aunt Lady Louisa Conolly were permitted to see him in early June. Gradually his body was wracked by septicaemia and as a result he died in his cell on 4 June 1798. As rebellion raged in the country, and with security extremely tight in Dublin, Fitzgerald was quietly buried in the crypt of St Werburgh's Church, Dublin. Despite the protests of the duke of Leinster, the government passed an act of attainder against Lord Edward, depriving his immediate family of his testament, though William Ogilvie was permitted to purchase his Kilrush estate. 
Lord Edward Fitzgerald's heroic reputation was established by Thomas Moore's biography, published in 1831. Moore presented him as a romantic nationalist rather than a committed revolutionary republican. Fitzgerald's lack of political publications, the fact that much of his correspondence was not available, and his dramatic and tragic history allowed this interpretation to remain central and the profusion of twentieth-century biographies concentrated on the romantic Fitzgerald. The reality was that Fitzgerald was at the heart of the revolutionary plans of the United Irishmen by May 1798, as their key militarist and one of the few figureheads who remained at large and committed to an Irish rising. His arrest and death did not cause the failure of the Irish insurrection in 1798 but his leadership of the attempt might have produced a very different series of events. 


@@@@@


doc= 9547


Fitzgerald, Edward (c.1770-c.1807), Irish nationalist, the son of John Fitzgerald, a landowner who was engaged in the malt trade, was born at Newpark, co. Wexford, into a propertied Roman Catholic family. His mother's maiden name was Hay. Although reputed to have been educated at Trinity College, Dublin, and called to the bar, the records of both institutions do not support these traditions. More certain is that he took up residence in Newpark upon inheriting the family estate and malting business. Although a member of the loyalist Shelmalier yeomanry, he secretly enrolled in the revolutionary United Irishmen and was, very probably, the adjutant-general elect for Wexford. He was arrested after being implicated by a colleague on 26 May 1798 and was committed to the county gaol just as the rebels were taking to the field. He was bailed on the 29th to open negotiations with the rebels at Enniscorthy under Father John Murphy but such was the acclaim which greeted his arrival that he was instated as a senior insurgent commander. 
On 30 May Fitzgerald was the first rebel leader to ascertain that the county town had been evacuated by its garrison and, having interested himself to preserve the lives and properties of pro-government families, visited Newpark. Upon his return to the town the next day he was passed over for chief command of county insurgents in favour of Beauchamp Bagenal Harvey, a compromise candidate, but he none the less assumed nominal leadership of the 15,000 strong north Wexford rebel army. At the pivotal battle of Arklow, co. Wicklow, on 9 June, Fitzgerald led the rebel Shelmalier gunmen during their attack on the fishery. When this assault was called off owing to lack of ammunition Fitzgerald and other important officers led their men into the Wicklow Mountains before rallying at Vinegar Hill on the 21st for what transpired to be a major defeat. 
The total destruction of Newpark on 21-2 June cost Fitzgerald about $5000 and this loss, in conjunction with army atrocities, evidently rendered him increasingly militant. Rebel forces under Fitzgerald and his Wicklow cousin Garret Byrne won a pyrrhic victory at Hacketstown on the 25th and five days later defeated a strong cavalry patrol at Ballyellis. Rebuffs at Carnew, Ballyrahan, and White Heaps between 30 June and 5 July sapped insurgent strength to the extent that only guerrilla-style tactics were prudent subsequently. A desperate foray from Wicklow into Kildare and co. Meath on 8 July was opposed by Fitzgerald, who reluctantly abided by the majority decision. When 4000 rebels were repulsed by the small garrison of Clonard (co. Meath) on the 11th, Fitzgerald decided to leave their ranks and accept the terms of surrender on offer from government. 
By 21 July 1798 Fitzgerald and over a dozen leading insurgents were detained as state prisoners until they could be permanently exiled. Fitzgerald, Byrne, and William Aylmer, however, were privately assured that they could reside in England and return home in a few years. This controversial deal fell through in March 1799 when the Fitzgerald group was arrested in Bath on suspicion of treason; they were deported to Hamburg soon afterwards. Fitzgerald suffered greatly from consumption when living with Byrne in humble lodgings in Altona, Hamburg, where he died in or about 1807. 


@@@@@


doc= 9548


FitzGerald, Edward (1809-1883), writer and translator, was born on 31 March 1809 at the White House (later known as Bredfield House), between Bredfield village and the town of Woodbridge in Suffolk, the seventh of eight children and the youngest of three sons of John Purcell (1775-1852), country gentleman and MP, and his wife, Mary Frances (1779-1855), the daughter of the wealthy Irish landowner John FitzGerald and his wife, Mary. His parents were first cousins and both came from wealthy Irish families. On his mother's side he was descended from the earls of Kildare. In 1818 his mother inherited her father's fortune and the family changed its name to FitzGerald; Edward disliked his new name, saying in later life that he found it 'distasteful' (Martin, 23). 
FitzGerald's father, usually described as ineffectual and impractical, trained as a lawyer but never practised. In his later years, he made an unfortunate investment in a mine near Manchester which resulted in his bankruptcy. This did not affect his wife's fortune, however, and thus did not cause much more than inconvenience for Edward, who all his life had enough money not to have to work for a living. 
FitzGerald's mother is often described as a beauty, but FitzGerald himself said she looked like the duke of Wellington (Martin, 29). Commentators usually describe her as imperious and lacking in affection for her family. FitzGerald once said of her: 'My Mother used to come up sometimes [to the nursery], and we Children were not much comforted' (Terhune, 7). She and her husband increasingly lived apart, and for many years it was FitzGerald's duty to escort her to the opera and the theatre and to attend her at formal dinners. 
FitzGerald was educated first at a private school in Woodbridge. When the family moved to France for two years (1816-18) he was taught French, fencing, and dancing by private tutors, and was said to be 'a beautiful dancer' (Terhune, 10). In France the family lived first at St Germain-en-Laye and then in Paris in a house in the rue d'Angouleme that had reportedly been occupied by Robespierre. On the family's return from France, FitzGerald was sent to King Edward VI Grammar School in Bury St Edmunds, which was notable at the time for its emphasis on English literature and composition. In 1826 he proceeded to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he showed little interest in mathematics and the rest of the required curriculum, instead devoting himself to studying literature. He befriended William Makepeace Thackeray and also several members of the Cambridge Apostles, but never became a member himself. He did join the musical society Camus at Cambridge, and throughout his life he enjoyed playing the piano and the organ as well as singing; he also composed music and arranged works by others. 
Although he took only an ordinary degree and did not distinguish himself academically, finishing 106th in his class, FitzGerald enjoyed the intellectual camaraderie of undergraduate life so much that for several years after he graduated he returned each year to Cambridge to spend up to a term in his old lodgings at 19 King's Parade. Indeed, for much of his life, despite his wealth FitzGerald tended to live in rented lodgings, usually being content with two rooms: one to sleep in and one -- containing a disorganized mass of books, papers, and paintings -- which served as a study. 
Between 1830, when he graduated from Cambridge, and 1837 FitzGerald lived the life of a 'genteel gipsy' (Terhune, 38) with no real fixed address. He lived some of the time in lodgings in London so he could attend his mother, and spent the rest of his time in Cambridge, at his sister's house at Geldestone Hall in Norfolk, at the homes of friends, and at his family's new residence, Wherstead Lodge, near Ipswich, which they had moved into in 1825. 
In 1831 FitzGerald anonymously published a poem, 'The Meadows in Spring'; it appeared in two separate publications, 'The Athenaeum' and William Hone's 'Year Book', and was praised by Charles Lamb. However, despite this promising start, FitzGerald wrote only a few more original poems throughout the rest of his life, saying: 'I know that I could write volume after volume as well as others of the mob of gentlemen who write with ease: but I think unless a man can do better, he had best not do at all; I have not the strong inward call... (Jewett, 38)' In 1837, two years after the family moved from Wherstead Lodge to Boulge Hall, near Bredfield village, FitzGerald moved into the nearby Boulge Cottage, where he stayed for the next sixteen years; he still, however, spent much of his time wandering around England visiting friends and relatives. In 1842 FitzGerald visited one of his family's estates, Naseby Wooleys, in Northamptonshire, site of the battle of Naseby, in part to do research for a new friend, Thomas Carlyle, who was investigating the battle for his book on Oliver Cromwell. FitzGerald corrected an error Carlyle had made about the location of the battle and had some soldiers' graves dug up on the battlefield; he sent Carlyle some teeth and a bone. 
In 1849, on the death of his friend the 'Quaker poet' Bernard Barton, FitzGerald prepared an edition of Barton's works along with a prefatory memoir. In 1851 he published an original prose composition, 'Euphranor', a philosophical dialogue about education in which he argued for a balance between academic and athletic pursuits, and in 1852 he published 'Polonius', a collection of aphorisms taken from the works of other authors. 
Inspired by his friend Edward Cowell, a self-taught linguist, FitzGerald began studying Spanish about 1850, and by 1853 he was proficient enough to publish a translation of six dramas by Calderon. Usually insisting on anonymity, FitzGerald allowed his name to appear on the title-page to distinguish his translation from another appearing at the same time; this was the only time he allowed his name to appear on any of his publications. FitzGerald's book came in for criticism for its very free translation, something FitzGerald himself openly admitted. His policy in this and later translations was not to aim for a literal rendering but to create an English equivalent in the spirit of the original. 'I suppose very few People have ever taken such pains in Translation as I have', he wrote, 'though certainly not to be literal. But at all Cost, a Thing must 'live': with a transfusion of one's own worse Life if one can't retain the Original's better. Better a live Sparrow than a stuffed Eagle' (Martin, 204). 
In 1852 Cowell introduced FitzGerald to Persian, and by 1854 FitzGerald was at work on a translation of Jami's allegorical Persian poem 'Salaman and Absal', which he arranged to have printed at his own expense in 1856. Also in 1856 Cowell introduced FitzGerald to a collection of quatrains (or 'rubaiyat') attributed to the eleventh-century Persian poet 'Umar Khayyam. FitzGerald found himself attracted to them, declaring himself to be 'akin' to Omar; he even used the signature Edward FitzOmar at least once (Jewett, 79, 92). 
Wright has suggested that FitzGerald was drawn to Omar because of the agnosticism in his verses (Wright, 2.15). Though a member of the Church of England, FitzGerald often expressed doubts about religion, and in his later years rarely attended church. It has also been suggested that FitzGerald was attracted by the hedonism and the melancholy in the original (Benson, 114-15; Jewett 158). FitzGerald himself said the verses expressed an 'Epicurean Pathos', adding that they embodied an attitude that could be summed up by the statement, 'Drink -- for the Moon will often come round to look for us in this Garden and find us not' (Terhune, 204). 
Early in 1858 FitzGerald sent thirty-five of the 'less wicked' verses he had translated from Omar to 'Fraser's Magazine' (Terhune, 205). 'Fraser's' would not publish them, however, so in 1859, after adding forty more verses, FitzGerald issued the collection of seventy-five as a book published anonymously at his own expense. This first edition of 'The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam' did not sell well at first, but in 1861 Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Algernon Swinburne discovered it and helped to make it better known. This led to the publication of a second edition (1868), which especially won favour in the United States, where it was reviewed in glowing terms by Charles Eliot Norton. Soon there was, as FitzGerald put it, 'a little 'Craze'' over the 'Rubaiyat' in America (ibid., 209). By the 1870s rumours about the 'Rubaiyat''s authorship were confirmed, and FitzGerald was upset when his publisher Bernard Quaritch made his identity known in an advertisement in 1875. 
FitzGerald produced four editions of the 'Rubaiyat' altogether, continuing to add and subtract stanzas and to refine his language (the only two fragments extant of any 'Rubaiyat' manuscript are in the Rosenbach Museum and Library, Philadelphia). The last edition in his lifetime, in 1879, contained 101 stanzas and most of the work's best-known lines, such as: '
The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ, 

Moves on 

' and '
A Book of Verses underneath the Bough, 

A Jug of Wine, a Loaf of Bread -- and Thou. 

' There has been much discussion of how much of the 'Rubaiyat' is FitzGerald and how much Omar. One study demonstrated that about half of the stanzas paraphrase specific stanzas in the Persian manuscripts, another 45 per cent are, as FitzGerald put it, two or more stanzas 'mashed up' into one (Terhune, 229), and the rest are more generally inspired by Omar's poetry, other Persian poetry, and FitzGerald's own ideas. FitzGerald did not use all the stanzas available to him, and he imposed order on the ones he did use, creating a narrative pattern that moves from morning to night, a pattern not seen in the original. The result is generally seen as being in some ways an original English poem, one that is much better known than Omar's poem is in Persian. 
On 4 November 1856, when he was just beginning to study 'Umar Khayyam's poetry, the 47-year-old FitzGerald married Lucy Barton (1808?-1898), writer and governess, and daughter of his old friend Bernard Barton. The marriage seems to have come about as a result of Bernard Barton's deathbed request that FitzGerald look after Lucy. However, she and FitzGerald, though about the same age, were incompatible in character: FitzGerald lived an unconventional, somewhat isolated life in rural Suffolk, while his wife wished for the conventional high society life which FitzGerald had known and rejected in his youth. They were 'very differently complexioned and educated', he said (Terhune, 196), and too set in their different ways. The tone was set at the wedding, for which FitzGerald refused to dress up, and at which almost his only words were an expression of disgust when offered some blancmange. 'Ugh!' he said, 'congealed bridesmaid' (Martin, 193). The marriage was a complete disaster and lasted less than a year, ending in separation. 
FitzGerald's biographers agree that he felt no physical or emotional attraction for Lucy. Terhune says that FitzGerald's true love was Elizabeth Charlesworth, a woman he had known in his twenties and who later married his friend Cowell (Terhune, 138-40). There is one story that when Cowell told him he was marrying Elizabeth, FitzGerald replied, 'The deuce you are! Why, you have taken my Lady!' (ibid., 138). He also said Elizabeth 'would have been my Poetry if I had had wit enough' (ibid., 140). It has also been suggested that FitzGerald was in love at various times with two other young women: Mary Lynn of Aldeburgh, whom he knew in his teens, and Caroline Crabbe, the granddaughter of the poet George Crabbe and daughter of FitzGerald's friend George Crabbe, the vicar of Bredfield. 
On the other hand, Havelock Ellis, in his book 'Sexual Inversion', said FitzGerald was one in whom 'it is easy to trace an element of homosexuality' (Ellis, 50), and his later biographer Martin strongly suggests that FitzGerald's passions were directed primarily towards young men, notably William K. Browne, Joseph ('Posh') Fletcher, and to a lesser extent Cowell. FitzGerald sometimes embarrassed his friends with his enthusiastic praise for Browne. After Browne's death in a riding accident in 1859, FitzGerald frequented the fishing village of Lowestoft in Suffolk and, as he put it, 'used to wander about the shore at night looking for some fellow to accost me who might give some promise of filling up a very vacant place in my heart' (Martin, 216). Eventually, he befriended Fletcher, a sailor half his age, and provided him with financial backing in a herring fishery business. 
FitzGerald spent a good deal of time in his later years among the sailors of Suffolk, seeing them as 'the old English Stuff', much superior to the 'decayed Race' found in London (Terhune, 241). He admired their way of speaking so much that he wrote articles about their dialect. He also hired them to take him out on his boat, the 'Scandal', one of his favourite activities: he would lie on deck reading Dante or Homer while the sailors worked. At least one time he was so immersed in his reading that he failed to notice the boom shifting and was swept overboard. 
FitzGerald was a tall man, stooped a bit in later life and balding, though with a fringe of long grey hair; he typically walked about wearing a plaid shawl and an old tall hat, and was described as having a melancholy expression. His eyesight began deteriorating fairly early in his life, and he often hired boys to read to him; one such incident of being read to during a time of drought, as described by A. C. Benson (Benson, 142), gave T. S. Eliot the inspiration for the opening of his poem 'Gerontion', about the '
old man in a dry month, 

Being read to by a boy, waiting for rain. 

' For most of his life he kept to a vegetarian diet, subsisting mostly on bread and fruit, and he was seen by his Suffolk neighbours as rather eccentric. 
FitzGerald was also something of a curmudgeon, complaining about social and literary decline, and full of what his friends called 'crotchets' (Terhune, 118). He could be quite caustic about the literary works of his friends and of others, for instance saying that Alfred Tennyson, who had been his friend since the 1830s and dedicated 'Tiresias' to him, should have 'left King Arthur alone... instead of turning him into Prince Albert' in 'Idylls of the King' (Martin, 257). He also said Tennyson's 'In Memoriam' seemed to have been written by a 'Poetical Machine' (Terhune, 126), and he fell asleep when Tennyson read him 'The Princess'. 
FitzGerald's most notorious literary comment was directed at a writer he did not know personally: Elizabeth Barrett Browning. When she died, he wrote in a letter: 'Mrs. Browning's Death is rather a relief to me, I must say: no more Aurora Leighs, thank God!' (Terhune, 255). When Robert Browning read this in FitzGerald's posthumously published correspondence, he wrote an angry poem in response. 
After years of living in rented lodgings in and around Woodbridge in Suffolk, FitzGerald finally moved in his last decade into his own house, Little Grange, in Woodbridge. In his later years FitzGerald translated Aeschylus's 'Agamemnon', issued privately and then published anonymously in 1876. A few years before his death he completed translations of Sophocles's 'Oedipus tyrannus' and 'Oedipus Coloneus', as well as translating two more dramas by Calderon. But none of these translations matched his achievement in the 'Rubaiyat'. His work on Calderon did, however, earn him a medal from the Spanish Royal Academy in 1881. In 1882 he published 'Readings in Crabbe', an abridged version of the 'Tales of the Hall'. 
FitzGerald never entirely gave up his 'genteel gipsy' wanderings, and it is perhaps fitting that he died away from home, while visiting his friends the Crabbes in Merton, in Norfolk. He died in his sleep on 14 June 1883, of heart disease, having previously been suffering from bronchitis. He was buried in Boulge churchyard on 19 June 1883, and left the bulk of his money to his nieces and nephews. 
FitzGerald produced only a small body of literary work, leading some commentators to say he did not fulfil his potential, out of indolence, lack of confidence, or lack of direction; Benson called him 'a practised craftsman without a subject', at least until he discovered 'Umar Khayyam (Benson, 96). FitzGerald himself said: 'I have been all my life apprentice to this heavy business of idleness' (Terhune, 94). FitzGerald also called himself 'one of the 'most translatingest' men alive' (Martin, 275), and much of the work he did produce consisted of translations, adaptations, or editions. His collected writings were edited by W. Aldis Wright, with selections from his letters, in 1889; further collections of correspondence followed in 1895 and 1901. A four-volume collection edited by Alfred McKinley appeared in 1980. FitzGerald's correspondence has been generally praised for its stylishness and interesting observations. Martin has even called it his greatest literary achievement, though that prize is usually awarded to the 'Rubaiyat'. 
Although praised for his letters and his friendships, FitzGerald is still remembered primarily for the 'Rubaiyat', which stands out from all his other works: the Persian verses struck a chord with him, and his English adaptation of them in turn struck a chord with generations of readers. One commentator says all his other translations and editions 'seem quite unrelated to the warmth, the ecstasy and burning imagery of the Rubaiyat' (Polnay, 211). The 'Rubaiyat' became increasingly popular after FitzGerald's death, perhaps because its 'poignant sadness' and 'Oriental fabric' appealed to readers living in a time of 'outworn faith and restless dissatisfaction' (Benson, 97). One commentator has called it 'the most popular verse translation into English ever made' (Decker, xiv), and another has said that with its 'combination of deep truth and lyrical beauty' the 'Rubaiyat' seems certain to assure FitzGerald 'a prominent place among the immortals of English literature' (Jewett, 159, 157). 


@@@@@


doc= 9549


Clinton, Elizabeth Fiennes de, countess of Lincoln (1528?-1589), noblewoman, was the second daughter of Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare (1487-1534), and his second wife, Lady Elizabeth Grey. Her mother, the daughter of Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, and granddaughter of Edward IV's queen, Elizabeth Woodville, was Henry VIII's first cousin. Lady Elizabeth's early childhood was spent in her father's great household at Maynooth, which was wealthy, cultivated, and devout, the seat of Kildare ascendancy in Ireland. In October 1533 Lady Kildare returned to England, followed by her husband in February 1534, in response to a royal summons. In their absence, official threats to Kildare supremacy precipitated the rebellion of Lord Offaly ('Silken Thomas'), Lady Elizabeth's half-brother, and culminated in the destruction of the house of Kildare. The title was forfeited, the estates confiscated, and the family proscribed. The countess withdrew with her children -- except Gerald, who was in exile -- to Beaumanor, Leicestershire, the estate of her brother Lord Leonard Grey, who was himself executed in 1541. In the late 1530s Lady Elizabeth joined the household of her royal cousins, the princesses Mary and Elizabeth, and by June 1539 had entered the service of Princess Elizabeth. 
At visits of the princesses' household to Hunsdon, Hertfordshire, and Hampton Court, Henry Howard, the poet earl of Surrey, first saw Lady Elizabeth. He wrote a sonnet, 'From Tuscan cam my ladies worthi race', to 'Geraldine', praising her descent, her education with a 'kinges child', and her beauty of form and spirit: '
Bewty of kind, her vertues from above; 

Happy ys he that may obtaine her love. 
(Howard, 'Poems', 9)' Surrey's father, the third duke of Norfolk, had offered support at court to the earl of Kildare in the early 1530s, and now Surrey offered chivalrous protection to the earl's daughter in the shipwreck of her family. Another sonnet, 'The golden gift that nature did thee geve', was, in the second edition of Richard Tottell's 'Songes and Sonnettes' (1557, known as 'Tottell's Miscellany'), addressed to 'Garret'. There Surrey, or his poetic persona, wrote as 'thy frende... who seekes alway thine honour to preserve', and offered a cautionary warning: since her gifts were divinely given '
Do not deface them than wyth fansies newe, 

Nor chaunge of mindes let not thy minde infect. 
(ibid., 8)' On 12 December 1542 Lady Elizabeth married Sir Anthony Browne (c.1500-1548), master of the horse, one of the grandest and wealthiest of Henry VIII's courtiers. She used the influence that this marriage gave her to restore the fortunes of her family; writing in July 1547 for a command in Scotland for her brother Edward, and arranging the marriage of her stepdaughter Mabel to her brother Gerald. Gerald Fitzgerald returned to England, was received into favour by Edward VI, and was knighted and restored to his Irish estates in April 1552. Sir Anthony Browne died in 1548. Lady Elizabeth bore him two sons, Edward and Thomas, who both died in infancy, and never bore another child. 
In 1552 Lady Elizabeth married Edward Fiennes de Clinton, ninth Baron Clinton and Saye (1512-1585), lord high admiral. He was created earl of Lincoln in 1572. In 1569 Gerald, eleventh earl of Kildare, his brother, Edward, and three sisters, Margaret, Elizabeth, and Cecily, petitioned the queen, successfully, to be restored to their blood and lineage. Suits to the countess of Lincoln show that she was believed to have influence with Queen Elizabeth. In his will of July 1584 Clinton made his wife executor, but also attempted to guard her from attempts by his son Lord Henry Clinton to dispute the will. Three days before his father's death on 16 January 1585 Henry Clinton wrote to Lord Burghley complaining of the machinations of the countess to deprive him of his inheritance, and of her maligning him to the queen. Elizabeth, countess of Lincoln, died in March 1589 and was buried beside her second husband in St George's Chapel, Windsor, where she had already erected an elaborate monument to his memory. 
Elizabeth Fiennes de Clinton had been a figure of some political influence, with a compelling pride in her Fitzgerald blood, but her posthumous reputation was as the Fair Geraldine, the object of the earl of Surrey's Petrarchan adoration. In Thomas Nashe's 'The Unfortunate Traveller' (1594) Surrey is seen writing her love poetry in the tradition of courtly love and, travelling in Italy, challenging all comers in defence of the beauty of his Fair Geraldine. Both the journey and the challenge were fictive. Michael Drayton used Nashe's fiction in 'Englands Heroicall Epistles, Henry Howard Earle of Surrey to Geraldine' (1597), and told of Surrey's love for Geraldine. Sir Walter Scott followed Nashe's tale of Surrey's consultation of Cornelius Agrippa in Venice and his sight of Geraldine in a magic mirror in his 'Lay of the Last Minstrel' (canto 6, stanzas 16-20). 


@@@@@


doc= 9550


Fitzgerald, George, sixteenth earl of Kildare (bap. 1612, d. 1660), politician and army officer, was baptized on 23 January 1612, the third but only surviving son and heir of Thomas Fitzgerald (died 1619), second son of William Fitzgerald, thirteenth earl of Kildare, and Frances (1576-1618), daughter of Thomas Randolph, postmaster-general and chamberlain of the exchequer in England under Queen Elizabeth. His diminutive stature (as portrayed in his portrait, painted in 1632, at Carton) earned him the nickname the Fairy Earl. In 1620 he became heir to the premier earldom in Ireland on the death of his eight-year-old cousin Gerald, the fifteenth earl. George succeeded to an Irish inheritance that teetered on the brink of bankruptcy (by 1624 the earldom was allegedly hardly worth $900 per annum). A series of minorities and encroachments from local speculators had ravaged it, as had jointures and other obligations, particularly to the eleventh earl's granddaughter, Lettice, who had been created Lady Offaly and enjoyed extensive estates in King's county, which encumbered it. 
Thanks to the survival of the Kildare letter-book (1628-37) in the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland, the earl's early life is remarkably well documented. James VI and I held the young earl's wardship and awarded it to his own kinsman, the third duke of Lennox. With the duke's death in 1624 the wardship passed to his widow and in 1629 she discussed the possibility of marrying Kildare to one of the daughters of the first earl of Antrim. Elizabeth Nugent, the widow of Gerald, fourteenth earl of Kildare, a fervent Catholic and patron of the Jesuits, warmly supported this match. However, Charles I was determined to isolate Kildare from the influence of his Irish relatives and their Catholicism and instead dispatched the youth in 1629 to Christ Church, Oxford. The king also approved the proposal of Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork, to take over Kildare's wardship (in return for a payment of $6600 to the duchess of Lennox), to revive the family fortunes and to 'employ all my best endeavours, to reduce [the lineage] to its former lustre' (PRONI, D3078/3/1/5, 3). This and the subsequent marriage (15 August 1630) of Kildare to the earl's daughter Joan (1611-1656), should be seen as a component of Cork's wider social, political and territorial ambitions to enrich his own pedigree, to consolidate his influence over Fitzgerald patrimonies in Ireland, and to tap into Kildare's patronage networks at court. True to his word, Cork challenged rival claimants to the Kildare patrimony (including Lady Offaly and the dowager countess of Kildare), began to redeem the numerous mortgages on the estate, rebuilt the earl's seat at Maynooth and the neighbouring chapel (completed in 1634), and provided the castle with expensive and exquisite furnishings. 
On Lady Cork's death in 1630 her son-in-law was lauded as: '
Renown'd Kildare prime earl of this our Isle, 

Whose auncient race, and still continued stile 

Of honour, vertue, valour, 
('Musarum lachrym', [6])' but Kildare's relations with Cork became increasingly sour especially after he came of age in January 1633 (special livery to his lands was granted on 20 February). Kildare's continued affection for his Catholic kin (including the dowager countess of Kildare), and his extravagance and financial recklessness infuriated Cork who complained that Kildare led 'the most licentious, prodigal and profuse way of life that ever [a] noble man did' (Canny, 50). The earl's support for Sir Piers Crosby, who had publicly crossed swords with lord lieutenant Thomas Wentworth, his decision to travel to London without a licence, and his refusal to disclose property titles in relation to a legal suit with Lord Digby also earned him the enmity of the lord deputy and a spell in prison (between 1637 and 1638). Despite this, Kildare befriended James Shirley the dramatist during his visit to Dublin, who then dedicated to him his tragi-comedy entitled 'The Royal Master', which was performed in Dublin in 1638. 
Kildare took his seat in the House of Lords in 1640 (as he had done in 1634) and with the outbreak of the 1641 rising he became governor of co. Kildare. Despite repeated overtures from the insurgents who, according to his wife, 'sent many times to my lord to desire him to come and live amongst them, and they would put him in possession of all his lands', he remained loyal to the protestant cause (Grosart, 4.267-8). In retaliation they burned in February 1642 Kildare's 'new house at Maynooth', after pillaging his livestock and his household goods, including 'divers bookes out of the earles studye' (deposition of William Vowelle, TCD, MS 813, fols. 330'v', 331'v'). With the death of Sir Charles Coote in May Kildare took over command of his regiment and despite speculations about 'how he will proceed against his countrymen' ('The Last Joyfull Newes from Ireland', 1642, 3), he quickly became one of the 'strong pillars of the Protestant Army' ('The English and Scottish Protestants Happy Tryumph over the Rebels in Ireland', 1642, 7). In January 1646 he stood bail for the royalist agent the marquess of Glamorgan, yet the following year acted as governor of Dublin under the parliamentarian colonel Michael Jones, and in 1649 he received a weekly pension of 46's'. from the government. Imprisoned for debt in 1650 and again in 1655, Kildare petitioned the state for aid and relied for support on his brother-in-law, Lord Broghill, later earl of Orrery. With the death of his wife in 1656 (she was buried with her father in St Patrick's Cathedral) he appears to have retired to his castle at Kilkea, where he died early in 1660; he was buried alongside his ancestors at Kildare. 
Kildare and his wife had three sons: Richard, Lord Offaly, who had died as a child; Wentworth (1634-1664), who became the seventeenth earl; and Robert, grandfather of James, first duke of Leinster. Of their six daughters two died young, Catherine, 'a lady of great piety and virtue', died unmarried, and the remaining three wed local grandees (including the Clancartys) (FitzGerald, 261). In 1655 Wentworth Fitzgerald married Lady Elizabeth Holles, a daughter of John, second earl of Clare (her marriage portion was $6000) but his untimely death of a fever in 1664 and his wife's demise two years later left their young heir, John, at the mercy of other family members and his estates vulnerable to speculators. Despite the best efforts of the first earl of Cork and his sons to protect and promote the Fitzgerald lineage, an apparently congenital inability to produce an adult male who himself lived to see his son reach maturity once again threatened to undermine the survival of the ancient (and now protestant) house of Kildare. 


@@@@@


doc= 9551


Fitzgerald, George Robert (c.1746-1786), duellist, was the eldest son of George Fitzgerald (died 1782) of Turlough, co. Mayo, and Lady Mary Hervey (1725-1815), formerly maid of honour to the Princess Amelia, and sister to three successive earls of Bristol, including Frederick Augustus Hervey, fourth earl of Bristol (1730-1803), bishop of Derry. He was educated at Eton College, which he left to join the army, and it was while stationed at Galway that he fought his first duel -- a harmless exchange of shots. He received a serious head injury, however, in a subsequent encounter with a fellow officer. 
Having left the army, Fitzgerald persuaded Jane Conolly (died 1779) of Castletown to marry him, against the advice of her brother Thomas Conolly (1738-1803) in 1770. She brought him a fortune of $10,000, some of which the couple used to sustain an extravagant lifestyle in Paris. Following a difference with a creditor in France, Fitzgerald fought a bloody duel at Valenciennes in the Southern Netherlands in which he clearly displayed murderous intent, but there was no legal retribution because his second, Hamilton Rowan, allayed the suspicions of the French authorities. In London, where he styled himself as a man of fashion or macaroni, Fitzgerald became involved in three more disputes. He met with more than he bargained for in July 1773 when his intervention in an altercation between Captain Croftes and Henry Bate, the editor of the 'Morning Post', rebounded upon him and exposed him to public opprobrium. Fitzgerald was not easily shamed, but his attempt to redeem his reputation by challenging Major John Scawen a month later did him little good, while his public repudiation of allegations of misconduct during their duel by Cornet Thomas Walker in 1775 was so intemperate as to serve no useful purpose. Back in Ireland for the 1776 general election in which his father was a candidate for co. Mayo, Fitzgerald fought a duel with Cornet Swords. More famously, shortly after his permanent return to Ireland in 1779, he fought the noted 'fireater' Alexander English, of Springfield, co. Tipperary, at Stephen's Green in an encounter in which he escaped with his life only because of the intervention of 'several gentlemen' (Walsh, 26-7). 
By now separated from his wife, who died in October 1779, Fitzgerald married Sidney, the daughter and heir of Matthew Vaughan of Carrowmore, co. Mayo, in 1782. However, he was chronically short of money, and since his only source of income was his father, who had promised to pay him $1000 annually in return for a capital sum of $8000 in the early 1770s, he returned to Mayo, accompanied by a bear, to secure the money owed. His father did not have it, so George Robert had him legally ousted from the family estate, and when his father sought the payment of the allowance to which he was entitled, George Robert first manacled him to his bear, then to a dray, and later imprisoned him in a 'cave'. Such behaviour, combined with his accoutring of a set of local desperadoes as his personal volunteer corps, disturbed local gentlemen and contributed to the precipitation of a sequence of encounters with Caesar French, Hyacinth Martin, and Denis Browne, in none of which did Fitzgerald conduct himself according to the rules of duelling. Indeed, his reign of terror was halted, and then temporarily, only by the intervention of his younger brother, Charles, who prosecuted him to conviction for mistreatment of their father at Castlebar assizes in 1781. George Robert managed to frustrate the efforts of the authorities to imprison him for a time, but he was eventually incarcerated following a retrial. His time in gaol did not have any ameliorative impact on his behaviour, for he was not long out of prison when he embarked on what proved a prolonged affair with another noted duellist, 'Humanity Dick' Martin. This was finally concluded with an exchange of shots at Castlebar in July 1784 in which the absence of serious injury was attributed by some to the fact that Fitzgerald wore concealed armour. This, in fact, proved to be Fitzgerald's last duel. He continued to behave in a lawless and erratic manner until he was hanged on 12 June 1786 outside new gaol, Castlebar, for his part in the murder of Patrick Randal McDonnell. He was buried at dawn the next day in Turlough churchyard. 
In his short life Fitzgerald fought some twelve duels, which is, by a substantial margin, more than any other known Irish duellist. Indeed, it is improbable that he could have fought so many had he not contrived, as the 'Dublin Evening Post' reported on 15 June 1786, 'to have some advantage of his opponent'. That he did so was partly a reflection of the preparedness of eighteenth-century society to exempt gentlemen from normal legal prescriptions. But it was primarily a consequence of George Robert Fitzgerald's character. He was, one contemporary observed, 'easily provoked; he would quarrel upon the most trifling occasion; and having once conceived an enmity towards another was of that implacable, revengeful and sanguinary nature as to suffer nothing but the blood of the person from whom he supposed he had received an injury, to appease his wrath. ('The Life and Work of George Robert Fitzgerald', 5, 10)' Duelling, in other words, was not simply a matter of honour with Fitzgerald. It was a quasi-legal means of dealing with those who offended or inconvenienced him, which he was able to get away with so long as he did not stray too far to the wrong side of the ill-defined line that separated manslaughter from murder. 


@@@@@


doc= 9552


Fitzgerald, Gerald fitz Maurice (d. 1204), magnate, was a son of Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1176). He accompanied his father to Ireland and he and his brother Alexander were with him when the Norman garrison in Dublin was besieged in 1171 by Ruaidri O Conchobair, king of Connacht and claimant to the high-kingship. John, son of Henry II, as lord of Ireland confirmed to fitz Maurice 'c'.1185-9 the half cantred of Ui Faelain which included Ui Mael Rubae, Rathmore, Maynooth, Laraghbryan, Taghadoe, and Straffan (in Kildare), which had been granted to him by his brother William (died 'c'.1199); and also lands in Ui Glaisin in the kingdom of Cork which had devolved to him as heir of his brother Alexander, who had been enfeoffed by Robert fitz Stephen. At some time between 1194 and 1204 Philip of Worcester made to fitz Maurice grants of land in what are now counties Limerick and Tipperary. 
Gerald fitz Maurice married Eva (died 'c'.1225), daughter and heir of Robert of Bermingham, who had been granted Ui Failge (Offaly) by Richard fitz Gilbert, earl of Pembroke and lord of Striguil (known as Strongbow), and succeeded to the lordship of Offaly in right of his wife. He died before 15 January 1204, when Meiler fitz Henry, justiciar, was ordered to give wardship of his heir, custody of his castles, and lands (including the castles of Lea and Geashill in Ui Failge) to William (I) Marshal as lord of Leinster. He was to be succeeded by his son, Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1257), who had come of age by 1215. His widow, Eva, married Geoffrey fitz Robert (died 1211), lord of Kells, and Geoffrey de Marisco, justiciar. Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald was ancestor of the earls of Kildare, later dukes of Leinster. 


@@@@@


doc= 9553


Fitzgerald, Gerald fitz Maurice, third earl of Desmond (1338?-1398), justiciar of Ireland and poet, was born probably in 1338, one of the younger sons of Maurice fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, first earl of Desmond (c.1293-1356), and his second wife, Avelina, daughter of Nicholas Fitzmaurice. The eldest son, Maurice, had livery of the lands of the earldom in October 1357, but was drowned in the Irish Sea some time between 20 April and 5 June 1358; the next brother, Nicholas, was an idiot and on 3 July 1358 Gerald was appointed to the charge of his father's lands, and these were formally transferred to him, as third earl (though he is sometimes, wrongly, called fourth earl), on 20 July 1359, on condition that he would marry Eleanor, daughter of James Butler, second earl of Ormond, and also see to the food, clothing, and maintenance of Nicholas. The territory thus entrusted to him covered not only the palatinate of Kerry, but also lands in Limerick, Tipperary, Cork, and Waterford. 
Predictably Desmond found himself charged with various governmental duties: he had already been summoned to a council in Waterford in March 1359; on 30 March 1363 he was appointed one of a number of commissioners to inquire into charges of corruption and oppression against royal officials in Ireland. He was appointed justiciar on 20 February 1367, an office which he held until 20 June 1369 and which he exercised with vigour, convening parliaments and holding pleas, the latter both in parliaments and elsewhere. Thereafter Desmond was involved in resisting attempts by Brian O Briain, the native Irish ruler of Thomond from 1343 to 1375, to expand his territory, but had the misfortune to be captured by O Briain in an encounter in Limerick on 10 July 1370; he was held captive for over a year on an island off the west coast and released late in 1371. This was probably not the first such incident in his life: there is evidence that as a teenager he had been a captive, in 1355 or 1356, of the Mac Con Mara family in Thomond. Nor was this the last of O Briain's threats to Desmond's territory: another is recorded in the spring of 1372, when the earl was ordered to go into Limerick to resist him. 
Throughout his career Desmond was involved in administration, as far as can be traced in the gapped documentation surviving from the Irish chancery. Although he refused to become justiciar in January 1382, following the death of the earl of March, he was regularly summoned to parliaments and councils, was a representative in Munster of the king's lieutenant and also a justice in Kerry from January 1386, and a 'custos pacis' in Limerick and Kerry from December 1388, a commission expanded to include Cork from October 1391. During Richard II's Irish expedition of 1394-5 he was ordered to assist the earl of Nottingham in his dealings with Art Mor Mac Murchadha of Leinster, and he may have negotiated with Brian O Briain of Thomond before the latter did homage to the English king. At the same time, however, Desmond was regularly involved in disputes with others, one with members of the Burke family lasting from 1377 to 1381, when it was settled by a fortnight's arbitration. In December 1380 he and the second earl of Ormond were denounced at mass in Dublin Castle by Richard Wye, bishop of Cloyne, for their destructiveness -- possibly directed at one another, since a mediation session was held between Desmond and Ormond's successor in 1384, and another one followed in 1387. The disputes were probably over claims to the lordship of territories on the border between them. 
What distinguishes Desmond from other Anglo-Irish lords of the time is his close links with the native Irish and his involvement in Irish literature. One Irish annalist wrote of him that he 'excelled all the English and many of the Irish in knowledge of Irish language, poetry and history' (McKisack, 233). Both he and his brother Maurice were among the patrons of Gofraidh Fionn O Dalaigh, one of the most eminent Irish poets of the century. Desmond sent one of his sons, James, to be fostered by Conchobhar O Briain in 1388; and he was also a close friend of Diarmait Mac Carthaigh, lord of Muskerry in Cork. There survives in the 'Book of Fermoy', a later fifteenth-century manuscript, a copy of 'Duanaire Ghearoid Iarla', 'The poem-book of Earl Gerald', containing thirty short poems in Irish attributed to him. Each poem ends with a verse to the Virgin Mary and is couched in metres which by the standards of the time required little technical skill, suggesting that he lacked professional training, and was essentially imitating better qualified practitioners. However, these verses show a wide acquaintance with a number of native Irish tales and touch on a number of aspects of the earl's life: three poems deal with his captivity in 1370-71; others refer to Diarmait Mac Carthaigh, both in the latter's lifetime and after his death in 1381; two of them refer to the death of Gerald's wife in 1392. Desmond himself died in 1398 and was succeeded by his eldest son, John Fitzgerald (died 1400). 


@@@@@


doc= 9554


Fitzgerald, Gerald, eighth earl of Kildare (1456?-1513), magnate and administrator, was probably born in 1456, the eldest of the four sons and two daughters of Thomas Fitzgerald, seventh earl of Kildare (d. 1478), and his wife, Joan, daughter of James Fitzgerald, sixth earl of Desmond (died 1462/3). Nothing is known of his early life, although Walter Hussey, in the 'Book of Howth', recalled in the 1540s that he was 'without great knowledge or learning, but rudely brought up according to the usage of his country'. He was, however, 'a mightie man of stature, full of honour and courage', 'a warrior incomparable', 'hardlie able to rule himself when he were moved to anger', but quickly appeased (Bryan, 10). 
By December 1472 Fitzgerald was old enough to be entrusted with the command of twenty-four spearmen for the defence of the English pale; and in March 1478, on the death of his father, then acting as justiciar or temporary governor, he was elected by the Irish council to supply the vacancy. Edward IV's decision, a few months later, to prefer a minor English peer, Henry, Lord Grey of Ruthin, as deputy lieutenant provoked the young earl into a characteristic demonstration of Geraldine power of the sort which punctuated his relationship with successive kings. Kildare's supporters in the administration withheld recognition of the new governor, whose commission was deemed invalid on a technicality. Grey subsequently secured confirmation from the king and parliament in Ireland, which annulled the legislation of a parliament convened by Kildare, but Grey was reluctant to continue without the support of the lordship's leading family and retired to England. Subsequently, Edward summoned the leading lords and officials to court and dictated a settlement which saw Kildare given charge as deputy lieutenant of a more broadly based administration, with detailed instructions for the maintenance of good rule and the king's interests. By and large, the earl's government preserved the spirit, if not the letter, of this settlement until Edward's death. 
The eighth earl's career epitomized the period in Irish history known as the 'Kildare ascendancy' (1470-1534) and marked the height of the family's fortunes. Admired by Free State historians as a champion of home rule and a growing Anglo-Gaelic cultural rapprochement, Kildare was in reality not unlike English marcher lords elsewhere in his relations with successive kings. His principal recommendation to the crown was the location of his estates in the pale marches and the consequent facility with which he could organize the region's defence through the deployment of his 'manraed' (the men he could call on in wartime) and affinity. 
From the creation of the earldom in 1316 until the 1450s, the Leinster branch of the Fitzgeralds were of chiefly local importance. Their landed patrimony was modest, valued at about $430 a year 'c'.1330, chiefly from estates in the Kildare marches, with a secondary cluster of lands in Limerick. At his death, however, the eighth earl was easily the richest lord in Ireland, with a landed income of perhaps Ir$1800 ($1200 sterling) a year. About 40 per cent of this still came from estates in Kildare, where Earl Gerald completed a major military reorganization begun by his father, but the earl also built up a large rental in Meath and significant holdings in Carlow and east Ulster. 
These estates were accumulated in a variety of ways. Kildare's first wife, Alison (died 1495), daughter and coheir of another prominent Kildare landowner, Roland FitzEustace (or Eustace), first baron of Portlester, brought him the reversion of the strategic border manor of Portlester. After her death in 1495, he married in 1496 Henry VII's first cousin, Elizabeth St John, whose dowry included lands in England and Ireland worth Ir$200 a year. A further royal grant followed in 1503 when his son and heir, Lord Gerald Fitzgerald (1487-1534), married Henry's kinswoman, Elizabeth Zouche. Altogether the earl and his family received lands worth over Ir$300 a year by direct royal grant, as successive kings deliberately sought to build up the Fitzgeralds as ruling magnates. These grants were financially lucrative, but strategically more important were the extensive marchlands Kildare acquired, particularly in Carlow, Wexford, Westmeath, and south Dublin. Some of these, indeed, were nominally crown lands. In practice, Kildare acquired them as 'swordland' by expropriating Gaelic clansmen, although the Gaelic peasants who actually cultivated the land were probably often retained as the earl's tenants and 'sworn English' (who had rendered the oath of allegiance as English subjects). The earl regularized his common-law title to them either by acts of parliament or purchase or, after 1496, by virtue of a clause in his commission as deputy making him a grant of any crown lands he could recover from the Irish. 
The military muscle behind this English revival lay in the combination of public office and private resources which characterized the earl's long tenure of office. Kildare reorganized the pale's southern defences around his principal castles of Maynooth, Rathangan, Portlester, Lea, Kildare, Athy, Kilkea, Castledermot, Rathvilly, and Powerscourt, most of which were strengthened or rebuilt during this period. As deputy, Kildare gradually built up a standing force of about 300 kerne, galloglass, and horsemen. These troops were regularly quartered on his own tenants in the marches, but it was probably the eighth earl who began to create rent-free holdings for the maintenance of his horsemen and to shift the burden of his kerne and galloglass onto neighbouring Irishmen. 
Marriage alliances with prominent English and Gaelic lords also helped to strengthen the earl's affinity and to stabilize the defence of the marches. His sister Eleanor married Conn O Neill, chief of Tyrone (1483-93). Five of his six daughters from his first marriage were matched with: O Neill's son Art Og O Neill, who succeeded his father as chief; Mac Carthaigh Riabhach, chief of Carbery; Ulick Finn Burke, lord of Clanrickard; Sir Piers Butler of Polestown, earl of Ormond and earl of Ossory (who married his second daughter Margaret ['see 'Butler, Margaret]; and Christopher Fleming, thirteenth baron of Slane (died 1517). Later most of his seven sons with his second wife also made politically important marriages. Concurrently, the earl was exacting tributes or black rents from almost all the Gaelic chiefs whose lands bordered the pale's southern and western marches. From a Gaelic perspective, Kildare's dealings with the weak and divided chieftaincies bordering his lordship differed little from the relations between a Gaelic overlord and his 'uirrighthe', or vassal-chiefs. Indeed it was in the earl's interests to cultivate that impression since, despite repeated requests by the English of Ireland, in 1474, 1494, and 1506, the king proved unwilling to make available sufficient resources to complete the conquest of Ireland. Accordingly, Kildare spoke and wrote in Gaelic, as occasion demanded, and his court included a Gaelic entourage, with a judge, physician, poets, and other captains, household servants, and receivers. 
Yet suggestions that 'the Great Earl' was an 'Anglo-Irish separatist', attempting to establish himself as a quasi-high-king, fundamentally misconstrue the nature of his relationship both with the English political community of Ireland and with the English crown. Certainly, the earl exploited the crown's renewed weakness under Richard III: Geraldine influence on the Irish council was strengthened, and Kildare's brother Thomas Fitzgerald (died 1487) was intruded as chancellor against the king's wishes. But the corollary was the earl's active support for the Yorkist cause in the years that followed. This later clouded his relations with Henry Tudor. It culminated in the 1487 conspiracy, when the earl backed Lambert Simnel, who pretended to be Edward, earl of Warwick, Edward IV's nephew. Simnel was crowned King Edward VI in Christ Church, Dublin. For the invasion of England which followed, Kildare recruited 4000 Gaelic kerne commanded by his brother to reinforce the 2000 German mercenaries supplied by Margaret of Burgundy. The Yorkist army reached Stoke by Newark but was heavily defeated in a three-hour battle in which Thomas Fitzgerald was killed. Kildare held out in Ireland for a few months longer. He was eventually pardoned in 1488 in a settlement negotiated with Sir Richard Edgcumbe, Henry VII's commissioner. 
Yet Edgcumbe failed to extract anything more from the deputy and council in return for their pardons than oaths of allegiance: rather than give bonds for their future conduct, they threatened to 'become Irish every one of them' (Bryan, 134). And in 1490 Kildare evaded a summons to court with the excuse that he could not be spared from the defence of the land. Thus when, in 1491-2, he was implicated in the activities of another Yorkist pretender, Perkin Warbeck, who landed at Cork and was supported by Desmond, Kildare's cousin, the king responded more energetically. He first dispatched Sir James Ormond, illegitimate brother of his leading councillor, Thomas Butler, seventh earl of Ormond, with 200 men to hold the Butler territories as a wedge between the two Fitzgerald earls (of Kildare and of Desmond); and then, after Warbeck's departure for France, he dismissed Kildare and his closest supporters from office. 
It was four years before the earl regained the deputyship. Meanwhile, Henry's attempt to build up Ormond as a counterweight to Kildare brought about both a revival of the old Butler-Geraldine feud and increased disturbances. Kildare withdrew his co-operation in government and defence. Thus in autumn 1493 leading nobles and officials were bound over for their good conduct, Kildare in 1000 marks, and summoned to court. Eventually, Sir Edward Poynings was appointed deputy, with 653 men to hold Ireland against Warbeck, and a handful of skilled administrators to overhaul the Dublin government. Kildare actively supported Poynings, encouraging Ulster chiefs to submit, but in February 1495, after his secret communications with the chiefs were revealed, he was arrested on charges of plotting against the deputy, attainted by the Irish parliament, and shipped to England. Led by his brother James Fitzgerald, who seized Carlow Castle, Geraldines rose in rebellion, while Desmond rallied support for Warbeck in Munster. The deputy besieged Carlow during the spring and then lifted Warbeck's siege of Waterford. This broke the resistance, Ireland was quiet at last, and Poynings sailed for England. 
By 1496, therefore, Henry VII had finally wrested the initiative in Ireland, although this had cost him $23,000 since 1491. The need for a garrison and the prospect of continuing expenses, however, prompted the king to look again at the traditional expedient of government through a local noble. By then the English parliament had reversed Kildare's attainder, he had been permitted to marry the king's cousin, and a formal investigation of his contacts with Ulster chiefs cleared him of treason. Before the English council in August 1496, he swore to uphold Poynings' law, to surrender traitors or rebels to the king upon request, and to forget old quarrels with the Butlers. He was reappointed deputy on exceptionally generous terms, although Henry kept his son and heir at court as a pledge for his conduct. 
Thereafter relations between king and earl remained harmonious. Kildare's later years as deputy witnessed a period of comparative peace, prosperity, and strong government. Warbeck again landed at Cork in 1497, but attracted little support. Kildare spent much of his time on military expeditions far into Gaelic parts and made progresses through outlying shires and cities which seldom saw the king's deputy, visiting Carrickfergus in 1503, Galway in 1504, and Limerick in 1510. The series of expeditions which he now organized against O Briain of Thomond reflected the extended horizons of English rule. It precipitated in 1504 the largest engagement of the period, at Knockdoe near Galway, in which the pale levies of English bills and bows with Kildare's Gaelic allies and clients defeated the forces of O Briain and Clanricarde in a rare pitched battle. The king rewarded the earl for this victory with election to the Order of the Garter. The previous year Kildare had paid what proved his last visit to court for his son's marriage, after which Lord Gerald was permitted to return with his father and was appointed lord treasurer. 
On Henry VII's death in 1509, Kildare was elected justiciar by the council, according to custom. The young Henry VIII summoned him to court, but accepted his excuses and reappointed him as deputy. By then, the earl was in his mid-fifties. He still campaigned vigorously, but not always successfully. In 1510 he led another expedition against O Briain and broke down his bridge over the Shannon but also suffered heavy losses. He was wounded the year after while campaigning in the midlands and cancelled a visit to court. In 1512 he captured Belfast and Larne castles and hosted into Connacht. He met his end, appropriately enough, while on campaign in 1513, being shot and wounded while watering his horse near Kilkea by one of the Ui Mhordha of Laois. He retired slowly via Athy to Kildare where, after lingering a few days, he died on 3 September. His body was carried to Dublin and buried in Christ Church in the chapel he had built two years earlier on the north side of the altar. Neither chapel nor tomb survive, but a drawing of his tomb has been published. He was succeeded as earl and governor by his son, Lord Gerald. 
From their different perspectives, English and Gaelic writers were fulsome and remarkably consistent in their praise of Kildare's rule and career. The Gaelic annals of Ulster wrote that: 'in power, fame and estimation, he exceeded all the 'Gaill' [foreigners, English], conquered more territory from the 'Gaedhil', built more castles for the 'Gaill', rased more castles of the 'Gaedhil', kept better justice and law, and gave most of his own substance to the men of Ireland. ('Annals of Ulster', 3.507)' His servant, Philip Flattisbury of Johnstown, Kildare, an exchequer clerk who compiled the earl's red book, wrote that as governor he excelled all previous governors in defeating Irish enemies and reducing them to the king's peace, and also: 'he forcibly constructed and built on the borders of the Irish in different parts many towns which had long since been laid waste by the Irish and needed replenishing with colonists and other buildings, and also diverse castles and bridges and other fortresses to the great profit and defence of the English. (BL, MS 4787, fol. 252'v')' 



@@@@@


doc= 9555


Fitzgerald, Gerald, ninth earl of Kildare (1487-1534), lord deputy of Ireland, was the only son of Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare (1456?-1513), lord deputy of Ireland, and his first wife, Alison Eustace (died 1495), daughter and coheir of Roland FitzEustace or Eustace, first baron of Portlester. He had at least six sisters, including Margaret Butler, countess of Ossory and Ormond (d. 1542), and subsequently seven half-brothers, children of his father's second marriage, to Elizabeth St John, the king's cousin. 
Lord Gerald spent his formative years at court, a pledge for his father's loyalty, being brought up with princes Arthur and Henry. Although Kildare's pardon of 1493 was on condition that he send his heir to England, more probably Lord Gerald first came to court after his father's arrest in February 1495. Little is known of his sojourn there, where he received a conventional English aristocratic education, with exposure to the classics and vernacular Renaissance literature. Presumably this is where he first acquired his taste for the numerous Latin and French books which later adorned his library. The works in Gaelic, mainly saints' lives, no doubt reflect Gerald's interest in Gaelic culture following his return to Ireland. Gearoid Og (Gerald the younger), as he was known to Gaelic annalists, was later a noted patron of native learning, employing in his court rhymers, a physician, a judge, and captains of his kerne and galloglass. 
In December 1497 the king paid $2 'to a surgeon that heled my lord Kildares son' (TNA: PRO, E 101/414/16, fol. 7'v'), and in 1502 Lord Gerald played a leading role at Prince Arthur's funeral in Worcester Cathedral. Reflecting the family's enhanced status at the Tudor court, he was permitted to marry the king's kinswoman, Elizabeth (died 1517), daughter of Sir John Zouche of Codnor, Derbyshire, in July 1503. The couple's jointure included four manors in the Meath-Kildare marches, granted by his father, and the king's manor of Cawston, Norfolk. The following month Lord Gerald finally returned to Ireland with his wife and father, having spent eight years in London. He was appointed treasurer in February 1504, although Sir William Darcy continued to discharge most of the duties as his deputy; and that August he also received his first serious taste of military action at the battle of Knockdoe. Appointed by Kildare to command the reserve, Lord Gerald committed them too soon, so allowing the Irish horse to capture the English carriage and a few gentlemen, even though he fought well. After the old king's death the young Henry VIII remembered his boyhood companion with a grant during pleasure of Ardmullan Manor, Meath; and when Gerald's father likewise died, in September 1513, the young earl, having been elected justiciar by the Irish council, was quickly confirmed as deputy by the king. 
Earl Gerald's acquisition of what was among the most influential of Tudor offices had been far smoother than his father's route to power. Yet circumstances were changing, despite the ninth earl's clear dominance of Irish affairs over the next six years. Initially Henry VIII's indifference to the minutiae of administration allowed Kildare almost a free hand in ruling this remote Tudor outpost which scarcely registered in the king's plans to recover his French territories. Yet once his concerns were aroused, Henry expected more, and sooner, of ruling magnates such as Kildare, and showed himself less sympathetic than his father to the particular difficulties of ruling and defending a turbulent marcher society. Concurrently, within the English pale, the earl was increasingly a victim of his family's success: power was passing to leaders who no longer remembered the crisis of lordship which had befallen the Englishry sixty years earlier. Like their counterparts in lowland England, the prosperous gentry and rich merchants of the pale maghery began to view with a more jaundiced eye the activities of marcher lords like Kildare, notably their tolerance of border lawlessness. 
Kildare's cross-border alliances likewise attracted suspicion. In 1514 successful expeditions into Leix (Laois) and East Breifne to break the castles of O'More and O'Reilly, and then into Munster to support his client Piers Butler, marked the start of frequent expeditions into remote parts by which the earl, like his father, maintained the Kildare ascendancy. Initially too he was even more successful, destroying Leap Castle in Ely O'Carroll in 1516 which, as one annalist observed, his father had failed to do. In 1517 he even invaded Tyrone in support of his nephew Conn Bacach O'Neill, capturing Dungannon Castle. On 6 October, however, his wife died suddenly at Lucan, and was buried with great pomp near his mother in the Observant house at Kilcullen. 
The first significant challenge to Kildare's rule occurred in May 1515 when he went to court for consultations and with bills for a proposed parliament. He had to answer questions about his father's estate and his stepmother's claims on it, but Sir William Darcy, since ousted as treasurer by Lord Slane, put in articles for a council meeting at Greenwich complaining that Gaelic customs were swamping the Englishry, that the deputy was making peace and war without the council's consent, and that he had imposed coign and livery, cartage, and other unlawful levies on the king's subjects. Other tracts about the decay of Ireland and plans for its reformation, notably those by Patrick Finglas, chief justice of the king's bench in Ireland, attest to a more general unease in pale circles about the conduct of government. Yet Kildare was confirmed as deputy, and the series of royal grants which followed his return in September underlined the king's continuing confidence in the earl. Besides a licence to hold parliament (which, meeting between February and October 1516, renewed the subsidy), the earl received a grant in tail male of Ardmullan and of lands and rights in east Ulster, charters of incorporation for his boroughs of Kildare and Athy, and licence to found and endow a college at Maynooth, his principal residence. The resultant college was a lavish chantry endowment, with the castle church there also rebuilt, on a much grander scale than similar projects by other pale families, and in keeping with the furnishing of his castle there which 'was accompted, for housholde stuffe and utensiles, one of the richest Earle his houses under the Crowne of Englande' ('Holinshed's Chronicles', 300). 
These patents were very much in keeping with the earl's estate management policies. The Kildare estates had been greatly extended under the earl's father, particularly around the pale's southern and western marches, but the work of developing these borderlands fell mainly to Earl Gerald. In 1518 he began the unique rental book (now preserved in the British Library, Harley MS 3756) which gives a summary account of his landed possessions and other rights, his tributes or 'duties upon Irisshmen', annuities received, annual gifts of horse and harness, lands set to farm, an inventory of his plate, and the contents of his library. No doubt most of this reflected his father's achievements, but the ninth earl perfected the system of rent-free holdings to maintain his horsemen, and was credited with shifting most of the burden of his kerne and galloglass onto neighbouring Irishmen. The defence of key marches he entrusted to his numerous kinsmen, but Kildare's rental shows that every major Gaelic chief in a wide arc around the pale, plus a host of weaker ones and others further afield -- twenty-four altogether -- was paying tribute for the earl's protection ('slanuigheacht'). 
Kildare also extended and reorganized the military service owed by his tenants in Meath, Kildare, and Carlow, co-ordinating it through four chief castles at Portlester, Rathangan, Kildare, and Athy against the military threat from the Gaelic midlands, while their labour services were employed in strengthening the marches with castles and ditches. Not surprisingly, the earl soon acquired a reputation as 'the gretest improver of his landis in this land' ('State Papers Published under... Henry the Eighth', 11 vols., 1830-52, 2.300). Yet one region in which the ninth earl was probably the chief architect of territorial expansion was along the east Ulster coast from Greencastle to Strangford, where his annual rental eventually exceeded Ir$150. By 1534 his estates alone were worth Ir$1585 a year, notably lands in co. Kildare (Ir$709) and Meath (Ir$460), and laid the foundations of an extensive political connection reflected in his gifts of horse and harness to the lordship's leading landowners, local Kildare gentry, estate officials, Gaelic nobles, and even Tudor courtiers. On average he gave away sixty-five chief horses annually from his stud farms in Maynooth, Fercullen, Annaly, Fassaghbantry, and in Ulster (containing in 1534 an estimated 1000 horses and mares) together with thirty-three hackneys and a dozen sets of harness. These gifts must have cost at least Ir$800 a year, but with an overall income comfortably exceeding Ir$2000, Earl Gerald was among the ten wealthiest Tudor magnates, standing head and shoulders above other Irish lords. 
Kildare's next visit to court, in September 1519, was far less successful. It was rumoured that he was coming to choose a wife. By then, however, he had quarrelled with his former client Piers Butler. Butler claimed the earldom of Ormond as heir male on the seventh earl's death, and was supported by the deputy and council who granted him possession of the Irish estates in 1516. Yet the king then ordered Kildare to give his lawful assistance to the seventh earl's daughters who received livery of the English estates. Presumably Butler felt that Kildare had not done enough to support him. By 1518 more complaints about Kildare rule had surfaced, with the king for once taking a personal interest in Irish affairs. Kildare was commissioned to appoint his own deputy, his uncle Maurice Fitzgerald, during his absence; but this time he was replaced as governor by the earl of Surrey. He was detained at court, ostensibly on charges of maladministration, but the disputes in council between Kildare and Cardinal Wolsey probably also reflected a personality clash. In May 1520 Kildare was bound over not to leave the London area, although in June he accompanied the king to the Field of Cloth of Gold. In July, when suspected of using his friends to make trouble for Surrey, he gave fresh bonds to appear before Wolsey on demand. He was later imprisoned but released in November. He was once again suspected the following spring and bound over in 10,000 marks to appear in Star Chamber at Easter, not to leave London, nor to send messengers into Ireland without permission. By 1522, however, he had been exonerated. His second marriage, to the king's cousin Lady Elizabeth ['see 'Fitzgerald, Elizabeth], daughter of Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, in 1522, not only reflected Kildare's restoration to favour but also provided the earl with an influential advocate of Geraldine interests at court. Their daughter, Elizabeth Fiennes de Clinton, became the much heralded 'Fair Geraldine'. 
On new year's day 1523 Kildare and his countess reached Ireland, his return having been requested by Surrey's successor, the earl of Ormond, to restore order among his kinsmen who were uncontrollable in his absence. Yet quarrels soon recommenced between the two earls, with Kildare acting as if he were still governor, leading an army into Ulster, allegedly to defend his lands there. Despite the king's intervention and an arbitration by Irish councillors in November, the feud continued, culminating in the murder by Kildare's brother James of Robert Talbot, sheriff of Dublin, while he was riding to Kilkenny to keep Christmas with Ormond. Eventually, three influential commissioners were dispatched to Ireland in summer 1524 to compose disputes, particularly the Geraldine-Butler feud, after which Kildare was reappointed deputy. Both earls gave bonds to observe the terms of a lengthy composition between them, but the displacement of one earl by the other did little to heal the feud which recommenced after an interval. In a revealing response in August 1525, when he detected a note of suspicion and displeasure in the king's letter, Kildare replied that he was peculiarly bound to Henry, not just by allegiance, but by service in their youth, good lordship, and grants of land, and because his first wife and present wife were the king's kinswomen. 'And though there were no suche cause, yet cowd I fynde in my hart to serve Your Grace before all the princes in the world' because of Henry's nobleness, prowess, and equity; 'And besides that, I do knowe right wele, if I did the contrary, it shulde bee the distruccion of me and my sequele for ever' ('State Papers Published under... Henry the Eighth', 11 vols., 1830-52, 2.125). 
Hostings by Kildare against O'Donnell and then into Connaught in 1526 underlined his undiminished military prowess. In 1525, moreover, the earl's public crucifixion of the archdeacon of Leighlin for murdering his bishop also excited comment. With both earls inciting their Gaelic satellites to raid the lands of their rivals, the king was again forced to intervene. In August 1526 he summoned them both to court. By then his suspicions had been further aroused by Kildare's inability to arrest his kinsman James Fitzgerald, earl of Desmond, then in league with Francois I, and -- so the 1536 attainder asserted -- by Kildare's treasonable communications with him. This time, however, Kildare took steps to avoid a repetition of the lengthy detention which followed his previous summons. Allegedly, individual councillors were sworn to write in his favour; he asked his Gaelic allies to keep the peace until the king's intentions were apparent; and in the expectation that he would again be forbidden to send messages into Ireland, he arranged with his officers that if he sent home his daughter Alice Fleming, Lady Slane, this was a 'prevy token' that he 'was not at his pleasour to come home' (TNA: PRO, SP 60/1, 101.139). Gradually, matters developed into a battle of wills between king and earl. 
Kildare left his brother Sir Thomas Fitzgerald of Leixlip as vice-deputy, but Fitzgerald was soon replaced by Lord Delvin, apparently on the king's orders. There matters rested for almost eighteen months, with Kildare committed to the duke of Norfolk's custody at Newington, Middlesex, and the Irish council warning, in the face of mounting disorders, that 'there is none of this land that can or may do for defence of the same so well as [Kildare]' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/51, fols. 18-19). In May 1528 Delvin was kidnapped by O'Connor in a parley, and in July Kildare sent Alice home. She rode straight to O'Connor, who recommenced hostilities, while Fitzgerald, elected captain by the council in the emergency, subsequently permitted O'Connor 'to invade, rob and destroy' the king's subjects 'by reason of certain intelligence had with O'Connor, contrary to his allegiance' ('Ormond Deeds, 1509-1547', no. 144). Not only was Kildare again imprisoned, he came within an ace of being tried for treason. His brother, daughter, and a leading councillor were all pardoned for treason in 1529. The earl received a general pardon in 1530. When Kildare was posthumously attainted of treason in 1536 the act took effect from 8 July 1528, the date on which, allegedly, he had through his daughter stirred up war against the king's subjects. 
Thinking that Kildare 'goeth fraudelently about to colour that the king shuld thinke that his grace couthe not be served there but oonly by hym' (BL, Cotton MS Titus B. xi (11), fols. 349-50), in August 1528 Henry reappointed as deputy Piers Butler, now created earl of Ossory instead of Ormond, against the advice of Norfolk and Wolsey, but this solved nothing. Kildare's detention in England alleviated the feud with Ossory, but successive administrative initiatives merely showed that good rule could not be maintained in his absence without subventions from England. Meanwhile Kildare exploited his connections with Norfolk, the Boleyns, and the Greys to recover Henry's favour. His signature on the English nobles' appeal to the pope in 1530 also suggests a willingness to accommodate the king on this acid test of loyalty. Holbein's portrait of him, painted in spring 1530, shows a consummate Tudor courtier, looking rather younger than his forty-three years. 
With Norfolk's continued coaxing, Henry finally agreed in August 1530 to Kildare's return home with Sir William Skeffington, now promoted deputy, and 250 troops. Skeffington was charged with reconciling outstanding differences between the earls of Desmond, Kildare, and Ossory, and instructed to convene a parliament and secure a subsidy so as to reduce the king's expenses. Kildare meanwhile undertook to compel the border chiefs to make peace. Initially the experiment worked well and, campaigning jointly and separately, Skeffington and Kildare soon restored order. Yet by July 1531 Skeffington and Kildare had fallen out and the Geraldine-Butler feud had recommenced. When the Irish parliament met in September-October 1531 the subsidy bill was thrown out, and with the deputy already reduced to 100 troops to save money and Kildare mobilizing support in the Irish council and from Norfolk and the Boleyns, Skeffington's recall was only a matter of time. 
In spring 1532 Kildare was summoned to England together with Ossory's son, Lord Butler, and leading officials who deposed before the council that the earl had done good service until recently, when provoked by Skeffington's favour for Ossory. When Butler likewise asserted that Skeffington was largely responsible for resurrecting the Kildare-Ossory feud, the king concluded that the lordship could be governed more efficiently and cheaply by reappointing Kildare and balancing this by appointing Butler as treasurer. Kildare took up office in August and characteristically settled scores against Skeffington, 'where of great myscheff came' (TCD, MS 543/2), and other officials, notably Archbishop Alen and his namesake John Alen, who had been dismissed. Skeffington was humiliated publicly during a muster of his troops before their departure, and further inquiries pursued by the earl implicated his opponents in embezzlement. Thus by late 1532 the king was back where he had started, with no real alternative to a wilful deputy who had recommenced attacks on the Butlers and others who challenged his revived authority. While besieging Birr Castle on behalf of his son-in-law Ferganainm O'Carroll ['see under 'O'Carroll, Mulroney] in mid-December, however, Kildare was 'shot into the bodye with a hand gone and ney slayne, but he was neuer holl againe, the mor pittie' (TCD, MS 543/2), partially losing the use of his limbs and speech. The earl was forced thereafter to rely more on his kinsmen for military exploits and several embarrassing reverses followed, notably a raid by the O'Byrnes to release prisoners from Dublin Castle. 
By mid-1533 Thomas Cromwell was accumulating reports and complaints against Kildare, and appointments of the earl's critics to key offices in the Dublin administration suggested that he was losing the king's favour. Yet his procurement of a subsidy in June when he convened parliament suggests that the deputy still had considerable influence in the lordship, and at court he was supported by Norfolk and Wiltshire. In September 1533 he was again summoned to court, along with other officials, and the Irish council recommended the appointment of an experienced English-born governor. Kildare's response was to send his wife with excuses, alleging illness from his old gunshot wound, and he also ignored the king's command not to transfer ordnance from Dublin Castle to his own strongholds. Henry insisted on Kildare's appearance, however, but sent a commission empowering the earl to appoint a deputy during his absence. In February 1534 Kildare held a final council meeting at Drogheda, at which he deputed his heir, Thomas Fitzgerald, Lord Offaly, as his deputy, with secret instructions to take advice only from his senior officers and those councillors he felt he could trust. 
Kildare was examined in council on arrival at court, and by May 1534 'manyfold enormyties' had been proven against him; but he was evidently so ill and 'not like to live long' that the main priority was to dispatch a new governor to prevent a recurrence of the earlier disorders fomented by his kinsmen. Accordingly, Henry now sent Offaly instructions to summon a council at which the king's further pleasure would be declared; but the earl forestalled the king's plans by dispatching a messenger who delivered his son 'a littill hart of sylver and gilte, and a paire of blak dise' with instructions 'that he shulde not trust to the kinges counsaill ther. For if he did, he shulde be brought perforce into Englonde and ther sholde lose his liff, and that he shulde kepe hym out of the waye asmoche as he might' (LPL, MS 602, fols. 138'v'-139'v'). 
That Kildare intended the full-scale insurrection which his son later unleashed cannot be ruled out, but it is perhaps unlikely. He clearly intended to create difficulties for his successor along the lines of events in 1527-9, and the overwhelming support which his son received from the earl's connection at the start of the revolt also disproves suggestions of a gradual erosion of Kildare power. Perhaps he hoped that the crisis over the royal divorce and breach with Rome might yet cause the king to back down, but he must have been aware too of the sudden arrest of another ruling magnate and Norfolk client, Lord Dacre, charged like himself with treason. Following Offaly's defiance, Kildare was arrested on 29 June 1534 and sent to the Tower. Two months later he rallied briefly from his illness, prompting rumours that he might be sent home to persuade his son to submit, but with his countess in constant attendance the old earl died in the Tower on 2 September, amid fairly general expressions of regret at court. He was buried in the church of St Peter ad Vincula in the Tower, and in May 1536 was posthumously attainted of treason by the Irish parliament. His heir and five brothers were all executed at Tyburn in February 1537, but he was survived by his four daughters by his first marriage and by two sons and two daughters of his second marriage, of whom the elder son, Gerald Fitzgerald (1525-1585), was in 1554 restored as eleventh earl of Kildare. 
The religious opinions of the ninth earl of Kildare are difficult to pin down. He was reputed to have been very devout, a view supported by his evidently close ties with both regular and secular clergy in Kildare, and by the lavish scale of his endowment of Maynooth College. His own library boasted numerous religious works in Latin, English, French, and Gaelic. But Kildare's precise opinions on the Reformation and the royal supremacy over the church are far less clear. Maynooth was a conventional late medieval chantry endowment, for instance, and yet his library books suggest a strong interest in English humanism and even in the controversies of the early Reformation. 
Traditional accounts of Kildare described a partly Anglicized magnate whose inability to match the achievements of his famous father in extending the Kildare patrimony and preserving home rule reflected defects of character. Yet such accounts exhibited scant appreciation either of Kildare's status as an English subject in a centralizing Tudor state or of the new demands created by the different personality and priorities of the second Tudor king. More recent assessments of the earl, while differing in emphasis, have been more appreciative of these difficulties. The earl's strength was his ability to play the role both of an English courtier and of a Gaelic 'uir-riogh' (provincial chief), as circumstances dictated. His weakness was his wilfulness and his arrogance in believing that Henry VIII would continue to recognize a prior Kildare claim on the deputyship. Yet in these failings he was not unlike other marcher lords such as Dacre or Percy, who also lost control of provincial offices they saw as rightfully theirs. 'Valiant and well spoken, [he] was nothing inferior to his father in martiall prowesse... bringing in awe all the Irish of the land' ('Holinshed's Chronicles', 278). 


@@@@@


doc= 9556


Fitzgerald, Gerald fitz James, fourteenth earl of Desmond (c.1533-1583), nobleman, was the son of James fitz John Fitzgerald, thirteenth earl of Desmond (d. 1558), and More 
(or Maud; died 1548)
, daughter of Sir Mulroney MacShane O'Carroll, lord of Ely O'Carroll. In 1550 he married Joan (died 1565), the daughter and sole heir of James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, tenth earl of Desmond, and widow of Sir Francis Bryan and of James Butler, earl of Ossory and Ormond. Gerald succeeded his father in 1558, doing homage before Lord Deputy Sussex at Waterford on 28 November. He was graciously received by Queen Elizabeth I and confirmed in all of the hereditary Desmond lands, offices, and privileges by her on 22 June 1559. However, despite close marriage connections, he also inherited deep hostility to Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond. 
In the feud between the houses of Desmond and Ormond each was backed by rival factions in England, the earl of Leicester supporting Desmond and Sussex upholding the house of Ormond, while in Ireland Sir Henry Sidney supported Desmond and Sir William Fitzwilliam upheld Ormond. In 1560 Desmond inflamed the traditional rivalry when he quarrelled with Ormond about wine prisage in the ports of Youghal and Kinsale and about his alleged rights to lands on the River Suir, both also claimed by Butler. The two earls were summoned to submit their claims in person to the queen. Ormond, cousin to the queen and consistently loyal, complied immediately but Desmond did not appear at court until May 1562 and then only with a huge retinue. He was charged with open defiance of the law in Ireland. When he refused to make humble submission he was at once committed to the custody of the lord treasurer to teach him a lesson, as the queen wrote to Joan, his countess (who also happened to be Ormond's mother). Although released in 1564, Desmond was not permitted to return to Ireland until he had agreed to keep all measures essential to law and order, particularly the suppression of the old Gaelic laws and customs. 
By October 1564 these undertakings were soon forgotten when Desmond was again in feud with Ormond, invading his territory and killing his tenants and his cattle as well as being mixed up in the dynastic rivalries of the O'Briens, the earl of Thomond, and his rival Sir Donall O'Brien. The death of Desmond's wife on 2 January 1565 seems to have emboldened him to enforce claims to disputed lands and to recover arrears of rents and services, this time against Maurice Fitzgerald, Viscount Decies, who enlisted the willing support of the earl of Ormond to free himself of the demands of his feudal overlord. On 8 February 1565 the two rival armies met at the ford of Affane on the Blackwater in co. Waterford. Desmond was wounded in the thigh and taken prisoner by Ormond but soon released. Affane is remarkable in that it was the last private battle fought out between two noblemen in the British Isles. Both earls were once more summoned by an outraged queen to appear at court. While Desmond arrived in Liverpool seasick and wounded and in the custody of Captain Nicholas Heron, Ormond was already at court where charges and counter-charges of high treason were bandied about. 
However, both earls submitted and promised to keep the peace, entering into recognizances of $20,000 each. On 20 January 1566 Sir Henry Sidney was sworn in as lord deputy and was told of the earls' reconciliation. But their feud was deep-seated. Sidney, especially after his tour of Munster in January 1567 -- predominantly through Desmond lands in Cork, Kerry, Limerick, and Waterford -- and after an examination held in Youghal of the causes of the feud between the earls, found that the disputed lands were in the possession of Ormond 'at the time of the fray making' and saw in Desmond the chief cause of the turbulent state of the province of Munster. 'From this time forward, nor never since', he wrote to Elizabeth, 'found I any willingness in him to come to any conformity or good order', but on the contrary found him to be 'a man void of judgment to govern and will to be ruled'. This change of heart on the part of the lord deputy may have been one reason for the earl of Desmond's future rebelliousness, but he did fear a conspiracy between the government and Ormond to bring about the downfall of his house, especially as Sidney sought to abolish the dependence of the lesser Munster nobility on Desmond. The power of the over-mighty subject, as exemplified by Desmond's liberty of Kerry, and his local ambitions and stress on Gaelic rights, dues, and services there, was increasingly at odds with the new drive for centralized power seen in the introduction of provincial assemblies in Munster and Connaught in 1569. Ormond's kinship with Elizabeth, however, protected his liberty of Tipperary from similar attacks from Dublin. Following the judgment at Youghal, Sidney arrested Desmond at Kilmallock in co. Limerick and had him incarcerated in Dublin Castle, leaving Desmond's brother Sir John of Desmond, of whose loyalty Sidney felt more assured, in charge of the earl's lands. 
In August 1567 Sidney left Ireland. Robert Weston and Sir William Fitzwilliam were sworn in as lords justices in his absence; they promptly had Sir John of Desmond imprisoned with his brother Gerald, and had them both sent over to be confined in the Tower of London where they remained until midwinter 1570. With the deterioration of Sir John's health, both were then placed under house arrest and the supervision of Sir Warham St Leger at Southwark who, judging by his complaints to the privy council, had difficulty in restraining the earl from ranging abroad at will into sundry parts of London. Desmond's second wife, Eleanor Butler (died 1636x8), daughter of Edmund Butler, Lord Dunboyne, remained with him in England until his release. In 1572 he attempted to bribe Martin Frobisher to help him escape by sea, as Frobisher informed Burghley. By then Sir John Perrot had set up the provincial council of Munster, and ruled by martial law, a direct affront to Desmond's palatine jurisdiction. Perrot did not want the earl back in Ireland but conceded that Sir John of Desmond be allowed to return. Perrot marvelled at the queen's leniency to 'a man rather meet to keep Bedlam than to come to a new reformed country' -- this comment and others of his contemporary detractors encouraged later historians to surmise, but without proof, that the earl was probably insane. 
On 25 March 1573, after signing warrants for future good behaviour and a comprehensive list of articles to be observed by him, Desmond was allowed back to Ireland. But once in Dublin he was promptly rearrested and imprisoned in the castle whence he wrote to the earl of Leicester to plead for him with the queen for the restoration of his lands and castles. He escaped from Dublin Castle on 11 November, the same day as Perrot's departure. In Perrot's absence Desmond reclaimed his lands, castles, liberties, and privileges in Munster. Two attempts made in June 1574 -- one by Edward Fitzgerald, brother of the earl of Kildare, and the other by Walter Devereux, earl of Essex -- failed to get him to surrender unconditionally. Yet Desmond protested his loyalty. He was pressed by Sir William Fitzwilliam to surrender certain castles and to abolish Gaelicized dues and services, coign and livery being the most burdensome. But he refused, and was supported in that stance by his kinsmen who then, on 18 July, bound themselves on oath 'to maintain and defend this our advice against the lord deputy or any others that will covet the earl's inheritance' (Morrin, 2.109). 
Desmond was then proclaimed a traitor with a price on his head. Sir William Fitzwilliam and Ormond advanced into Munster in August 1574, captured Derrinlaur Castle near Clonmel, and put the garrison to the sword. On 2 September Desmond appeared in Cork to make a humble submission and on 10 September he put all his lands in trust for himself and his wife during their joint lives and made provision for his daughters and son James; Lord Dunboyne (his father-in-law), Lord Power, and Sir John FitzEdmund Fitzgerald of Cloyne were the trustees. These family arrangements and enfeoffments may indicate that Desmond was contemplating all-out rebellion on his own part; but that he was then in league with James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1579), his cousin, in his search for allies in France, Spain, and at the papal court, is not borne out by his relationship with Lord Deputy Sidney. On the contrary, he kept Sidney informed of fitz Maurice's continental negotiations. However, he continued to rail to Sidney against the arbitrary conduct of the new president of Munster, Sir William Drury, who was determined to use the presidency to undermine the power of both Desmond and Ormond. On 27 February 1576 Sidney wrote to the privy council: 'so long as any subject has any jurisdiction palatine... there will be no perfect reformation in Munster' (Brewer and Bullen, 2.41). His policy was clear: the Irish lords had to abandon private armies and jurisdictions and become landlords in the English sense, not Gaelic warlords. 
No one clear motive for Desmond's gradual drift to all-out rebellion can be isolated, but the invasion of James fitz Maurice's allies (17 July 1579) and the change in government personnel indicate the steps. Sidney resigned office and finally left Ireland on 12 September 1578; Drury was sworn in as lord justice but due to ill health he was replaced by Lord Justice Sir Nicholas Malby, the vigorous governor of Connaught, and by the equally militant Sir William Pelham. Desmond's brothers Sir John and James joined fitz Maurice's rebellion but the earl was reluctant. Yet he had to appear belligerent to keep authority over the followers of his rebellious brothers. Desmond, though he showed no strong religious feelings, was influenced by the preaching and rhetoric of Nicholas Sander, the papal envoy, who was at pains to make the invasion a Catholic crusade and excite a nationwide rebellion. In any case, after the killing of fitz Maurice on 18 August 1579 in co. Limerick, the earl of Desmond became the focus of attention from Catholic Europe, principally Rome and Spain, whether he liked it or not. Through the network of Jesuits, friars, and English recusants he became the potential leader of the Catholic cause, even though his brother Sir John headed the rebel army after fitz Maurice's death. 
These pressures and the ambitions of the other Fitzgeralds pushed Desmond into open support for the rebellion over the next four years. On 2 November 1579 he was proclaimed traitor and attainted. He marched on Youghal which he sacked and burned; his ally the earl of Clancar did the same at Kinsale. In March and April 1580 Sir William Pelham took the Desmond castles of Carrigafoyle, Askeaton, their ancestral home, and Ballyloughan, Desmond's remaining fortress. In June Desmond and Sander narrowly escaped capture by Pelham. By August 1580 Lord Grey of Wilton was sent as lord deputy to quell a rebellion which was rapidly spreading outside Munster. On 12-13 September 1580 a papal force of Italians and Spaniards landed at the fortress of Dun an Oir at Smerwick, but Desmond made no apparent attempt to come to their aid. On 7-9 November Grey attacked and massacred the garrison after they had surrendered. Meanwhile, of Desmond's brothers, Sir James was captured and executed at Limerick on 4 August 1580 and Sir John was killed near Castlelyons, co. Cork, by Captain Zouche in December 1581. 
Desmond appealed to Admiral Winter, then cruising off the Irish coast to intercept Spanish shipping, to transport him to England to beg his pardon personally from the queen. Captain Zouche's company of 450 men was sent to hunt down the earl. On 15 June 1581 he was surprised near Castlemaine, Kerry, but he escaped into the woods in a pass in the Galtee Mountains in Aherlow, co. Tipperary. During the winter of 1581 he was again almost captured at Kilmallock, and by January 1583, when Ormond was commanded to destroy his hereditary enemy, Desmond had still made two remarkable escapes. Sir Geoffrey Fenton, the secretary of the Dublin council, among others, dearly wanted Desmond assassinated. His support was already dwindling because a proclamation offering pardon to any Munster rebels who submitted deprived him of most of his followers. Deserted by his countess Eleanor in June 1583, and by all except for a chaplain, two horsemen, one kerne, and a boy, he went from one hiding place to another evading capture on the borders of west Cork and east Kerry. On Monday 11 November 1583 he was surrounded by five soldiers led by Owen MacDonnell O'Moriarty from the garrison at Castlemaine, near Tralee, in a cave in the Glanaginty woods and slaughtered; Daniel O'Kelly beheaded him and sent the head to England, thereby gaining his reward. 
According to tradition, Desmond's body was taken to a mountain churchyard near Castlemaine for burial. His widespread estates were forfeited by the 1582 act of attainder which marked the demise of the house of Desmond, thus closing the medieval history of Munster and paving the way for its subsequent plantation. By his second marriage Desmond had a son, James fitz Gerald Fitzgerald, known as the Queen's Earl, another son, Thomas, and four daughters, Margaret, Joan, Catherine, and Ellen. His widow was eventually pardoned and pensioned by the queen. 


@@@@@


doc= 9557


Fitzgerald, Gerald, eleventh earl of Kildare (1525-1585), magnate, was born on 28 February 1525, the eldest son of Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare (1487-1534), lord deputy of Ireland, and his second wife, Elizabeth Fitzgerald (fl. 1514-1548), noblewoman, daughter of Thomas Grey, first marquess of Dorset, and his wife, Cicely. As a younger son his immediate prospects were not promising, and they worsened when his half-brother Thomas Fitzgerald, nicknamed Silken Thomas, tenth earl of Kildare (1513-1537), led an abortive rebellion in 1534. After the rebellion the government sought to capture the leading Fitzgeralds of Kildare, including Gerald Fitzgerald, Silken Thomas's heir. Although suffering from smallpox, Fitzgerald was harboured from the government, initially by his tutor Thomas Leverous, then by his paternal aunt Eleanor, widow of Donnell MacCarthy Reagh. Both exploited the Geraldine network to hide Fitzgerald in a succession of safe houses. Fitzgerald's uncle Leonard Grey, Viscount Graney (c.1490-1541), the lord deputy, was later accused of allowing him to escape, but the reality was that once the fugitive had left the vicinity of the pale the government could do little to secure his surrender. 
Upon the execution of his brother and five uncles in 1537, the fugitive Fitzgerald became heir to the earldom of Kildare, abolished by act of attainder in 1536. Restoring his house became Fitzgerald's driving ambition. The execution of the leading Geraldines also ensured that his protectors would not surrender him. The government's concern to seize Fitzgerald increased when his guardians, faced with the loss of their factional leader, formed a coalition, essentially aimed at re-establishing the Kildare ascendancy in Ireland. That Fitzgerald supplied a focus for Gaelic dynasts and traditional enemies like Conn Bacach O'Neill ('c'.1482-1559) and Manus O'Donnell, who married Eleanor MacCarthy in June 1538, against government authority was only marginally less worrying than the Geraldine league's continental links. The pale, it was rumoured, stood ready to rise in support of Fitzgerald if continental assistance was forthcoming, but the league's ephemeral nature was revealed by its collapse after Grey's victory over the combined forces of O'Neill and O'Donnell at Bellahoe, co. Monaghan, in August 1539. The lord deputy's desolation of O'Neill's country in 1540 prompted the Ulster chieftains to evacuate Fitzgerald from Ireland. 
In May 1540 Fitzgerald secured passage to St Malo. His flight did not much reassure the government. The situation in 1540 was 'moche to be doubted' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 3.234) and could be transformed if Henry VIII's continental enemies intervened. Accordingly, Fitzgerald's arrest remained a priority until the king's death. After arriving in St Malo, Fitzgerald travelled to the French court upon invitation, doggedly pursued by English envoys. To avoid a diplomatic rupture with England he was swiftly moved on, briefly also visiting Charles V's court. Yet his significance was lost on neither monarch; both granted him pensions. Eventually Fitzgerald reached Florence and the court of Cardinal Reginald Pole (1500-1558), which remained his primary residence during his continental sojourn. Pole, a relative and fellow exile active against Henry, undertook to maintain Fitzgerald (who was doubtless seen by him as a useful asset in his intrigues) and secured him a gentleman's education. While Fitzgerald's partisan Richard Stanihurst later sought to distance him from England's continental enemies, cultivating an image of him as the quintessential Renaissance noble, Fitzgerald actually actively sought French aid to restore his house. In 1543, 1544, and 1545 it was rumoured that he would lead French expeditions to effect a Geraldine restoration and expel the English from Ireland. 
Nevertheless, throughout the 1540s Fitzgerald continually negotiated with English representatives. By 1547, increasingly frustrated at the absence of French military support, he made preliminary overtures about pardon and restoration. Henry's death in January 1547 greatly facilitated this process. Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, the lord protector, was anxious to rehabilitate Fitzgerald, to end both the threat of foreign intervention in Ireland as the Anglo-Scottish war intensified and the chronic instability in the Irish midlands -- traditionally policed by the Kildares -- fuelled by the abandonment of the conciliation policy. Somerset blamed Fitzgerald's earlier defiance on misguided advice by his guardians and persuaded Fitzgerald's mother, who was living at court, to entreat him to return. Fitzgerald, still not wholly trusting the government, secured a full pardon in March 1549 before arriving in England in July that year. 
Soon afterwards Fitzgerald met Mabel (died 1610), daughter of Sir Anthony Browne (c.1500-1548) of Cowdray Park, Sussex, and his wife, Alice. They married on 29 May 1554 in the Chapel Royal, having obtained the marriage licence the previous day. They went on to have three sons, Gerald Fitzgerald (1559-1580), Henry Fitzgerald, twelfth earl of Kildare (1562-1597), and William Fitzgerald, thirteenth earl of Kildare (died 1599), and two daughters, Mary (1556-1610) and Elizabeth (died 1617). Fitzgerald's brother-in-law was Anthony Browne, first Viscount Montagu (1528-1592). Mainly through Montagu's influence, Fitzgerald was fully restored to favour, receiving some of his lands back in 1552-3, being knighted about 1552, and culminating on 13 May 1554 with his creation as earl of Kildare and baron of Offaly. He signed the letters patent for Edward VI's alteration of the succession on 16 June 1553 but quickly ingratiated himself with Mary I by distinguishing himself during the rebellion of Sir Thomas Wyatt the younger in 1554. By May 1555 nearly all lands forfeited by the 1536 attainder were returned, and in November 1556 Kildare was sent to Ireland with the recommendation of Philip II. The annalists recorded 'great rejoicing throughout the greater part of Leath-Mhogha because of their [the earl and countess's] arrival; for it was thought that not one of the descendants of the earls of Kildare... would ever come to Ireland' ('AFM', s.a. 1553 ['sic']). 
Kildare immediately sought to restore the Geraldines' former glory and symbolically began to rebuild his family's homes. He also began the reconstruction of the Geraldine network, entertaining traditional clients shortly after his return. In 1556 he hastened into Ulster to assist his relative Shane O'Neill (c.1530-1567) against local rivals. Kildare's ultimate ambition was to recover the deputyship but his immediate goal was the restoration of the liberty of Kildare and its extension to include the border lordships. This brought him into conflict with supporters of plantation as a solution to endemic disorder on the pale borders, namely the New English community who were already threatened by the earl's restoration as their influence rested largely on their acquisition of confiscated Fitzgerald lands. Kildare's re-establishment offered the cheaper alternative of magnate management of the borders, and when Sir Anthony St Leger, the lord deputy, appointed the earl as governor of Offaly in early 1556 it appeared that a return to aristocratic delegation was imminent. 
The appointment as lord deputy of Thomas Radcliffe, Viscount Fitzwalter, in April 1556 was an equal relief to the planters as it was a disappointment to Kildare, since the new governor transformed the Leix-Offaly plantation into an entirely New English project. In October 1557 Radcliffe (now third earl of Sussex) appointed his brother Sir Henry Radcliffe as governor of Leix-Offaly, cancelling Kildare's commission. In response, Kildare accelerated his pursuit of the restoration of the liberty of Kildare, now envisaged as including Offaly and the levy of bonnacht (tribute to maintain soldiers) and other dues traditionally imposed by earls of Kildare on the marches. The early optimism of Kildare's return to Ireland was dissipated by the crown's refusal to countenance his proposals, and his bid for liberty seriously soured relations with Sussex. In June 1558 Sussex dealt a further blow by extending his brother's authority throughout the pale. This threatened to rob Kildare of his 'raison d'etre' -- for what use was an earl of Kildare without responsibility for the borders? 
In his search for a method to discredit Sussex, Kildare focused on Shane, on whose removal from power in Tyrone the lord deputy had staked his credibility. As Shane's 'disobedience' during 1558 and 1559 increased, Sussex claimed that Kildare was the real instigator of the disorder, and director of the pale gentry's increasingly vocal complaints against Sussex's excessive financial impositions. He blamed Kildare for fomenting opposition because 'the gouernment of this realm is not commyted to him, as it hath beene to others of his ancestors before' ('Calendar of Carew Manuscripts', 300-04). On Sussex's recommendation Kildare was summoned to court on suspicion of conspiring with the dissident Gerald FitzJames Fitzgerald. Opportunely for Kildare, Sir Robert Dudley emerged as Elizabeth I's favourite and saw in the earl an opportunity to discomfit Sussex, a factional opponent. Attaching Kildare to his emerging party, Dudley had the earl cleared of any suspicion of treason and, after Sussex's 1561 campaign against O'Neill disintegrated, Dudley and Kildare convinced Elizabeth to negotiate with Shane. Kildare was dispatched in triumph to secure Shane's attendance at court. Sussex remained as lord lieutenant (having been promoted in May 1560) until May 1564, but this Geraldine 'solution' fatally compromised his authority and Sir Nicholas Arnold, who acted as lord justice, replaced him. 
Arnold was extremely unpopular with the New English administration and garrison, whom he had been commissioned to investigate for corruption. Consequently, he relied heavily on Kildare for support. In return Arnold allowed Kildare the role he craved, protector of the borders. The lord justice reduced the midlands garrison and hounded Sir Henry Radcliffe into resigning his post, thus allowing Kildare considerable latitude to deal with the midlands disturbances. Arnold's support for Kildare infuriated the New English. Sir William Fitzwilliam, vice-treasurer of Ireland, claimed that Kildare was causing disorder against the garrisons as a prelude to regaining traditional Geraldine authority in Offaly and the borders. Kildare also made incursions into Annaly, Fercall, Offaly, and east Breifne, ostensibly to pursue fleeing midland rebels, but, as Fitzwilliam indicated, really to bind those lordships 'to be true and faithful to hym and his posteritie for ever'. Moreover, he claimed, Kildare, with Arnold's connivance, also overawed the pale, imposing coign and livery and retaining 'all the bastard Geraldines that be hys kinsmen' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/15/54). Arnold's support, however, meant such charges were disregarded; indeed, he imprisoned one of Kildare's most vocal critics, Oliver Sutton, for sixteen weeks for denouncing Kildare as Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare (1456?-1513), 'redivivus [restored]' (ibid.). 
Kildare's influence in the pale and its western marches expanded greatly during Arnold's administration. Similarly, when Sir Henry Sidney arrived as lord deputy in January 1566, Kildare benefited from the support of another protege of Dudley (now earl of Leicester). Sidney's expansive programme and his feud with Thomas Butler, eleventh earl of Ormond, made Kildare his main support in Leinster. When Shane sought to foment dissension in the pale borders in 1566 and 1567 Kildare prevented any outbreaks: 'As towchinge all Leinster and Methe, I dare affirme, upon my Credite, unto your Majestie, aswell for the English Pale, and the Justice thereof: It was never, in the Memorie of the oldest Man that now liveth, in greater Quiet and Obedience... And so well was the English Pale garded in myne absence, chieflie by the diligente and paynefull Service of the Erle Of Kildare, who, for the moste Parte, did continuallie reside upon the Borders, as I cannot here, that there was the Vallue of one Cowe, by Force or Stelthe, taken out of the same. (TNA: PRO, SP 63/20/66)' Sidney then turned a blind eye to Kildare's pursuit of traditional Geraldine interests and his resort to coign and livery, even as he tried to eradicate it in the Butler and Desmond lands. For his part Kildare had few qualms about abandoning Shane in order to retain Sidney's support. In the 1566 campaign against Shane 'the Earle himself [was] with desperate Followinge of A Horseman into a P[l]ace, shot throughe his Sloppe of his Hose with a Callyver, but not hurt' (Collins, 1.15-17). After Shane's fall Kildare played a major role in the reorganization of Ulster in summer 1567. Elizabeth even suggested that Sidney appoint him commissioner there during the lord deputy's absence. His star in the ascendant, Kildare made renewed efforts to reclaim yet unrestored family lands when he went with Sidney to England. With the benefaction of Sidney and Leicester, Kildare's requests were satisfied and he was appointed to the lucrative post of admiral of Ireland. 
Kildare's collaboration with Sidney continued after the lord deputy's return to Ireland. Mainly through Kildare's re-entrenched influence in the pale, Sidney's programme passed through the 1569 parliament. An act reversing the Kildare attainder and restoring his family in blood was Kildare's reward. It was testimony to Kildare's supreme confidence in his alliance with the lord deputy that he supported Sidney's parliamentary programme despite its proposed abolition of Gaelic practices such as fosterage and coign and livery, upon which Geraldine power had traditionally rested. Crucial to Kildare's acceptance of the programme was the absence of serious challengers from within his own family. During the Butler and Desmond revolts in 1569-70 Kildare again proved the mainstay of the pale defences, rallying support for the lord deputy, preventing a Butler advance on the pale, and conducting a holding operation against Turlough Luineach O'Neill. When in 1571 he received a letter from Sir William Cecil, the principal secretary, commending the propriety of his behaviour, Kildare's rehabilitation appeared complete. 
Yet there was one serious weakness in Kildare's position, the vagaries of court faction. Under a sympathetic lord deputy a favoured dynast could reap rich reward; conversely, under an unsympathetic lord deputy the situation was reversible. When his old enemy Fitzwilliam became lord deputy in December 1571 Kildare was exposed to that harsh reality. Initially little changed: Kildare continued to play a crucial role in government; Fitzwilliam's brief to reduce expenditure prevented him from dispensing with the earl's service and in 1571 he commissioned Kildare to suppress Rory Oge O'More's rebellion. The campaign started well, but by 1573 Kildare could no longer contain the rebels. By late 1574 Fitzwilliam was in severe disfavour at court, blamed by Sidney and Leicester for the disorder in Ireland. As Fitzwilliam's deputyship started to disintegrate he sought to make Kildare the scapegoat, suggesting that the earl's failure to prevent the midland disturbances was a deliberate tactic to advance his claims to govern instead of the lord deputy. He labelled Kildare 'the procurer, and mayntainer of all the storme, disordr and rebellion of the Pale since [the beginning] of my goverment' (Bodl. Oxf., Carte MS 55, fol. 30'r'). Fitzwilliam secured Elizabeth's permission to apprehend Kildare. He was arrested before the Irish privy council on 8 May 1575 and transferred immediately to England. Sir Nicholas Malby reflected the shock in Ireland: 'my lord Kildare's apprehension is found strange by manie'. Subsequently dozens of his followers were interrogated, with some sent to London for further examination. 
The basic charge against Kildare was treason: of directing the Leinster rebels against the government. Though repeatedly interrogated in the Tower of London (June to December 1575), Kildare answered the charges brilliantly. He maintained throughout that all dealings with rebels had been only 'to satisfie her majestys commission and for her seruice and for the goode of the countrye and her subiects' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/52/13). By December it was clear Kildare had no case to answer and Cecil (now Baron Burghley) persuaded Elizabeth to pardon him. The countess of Kildare had licence on 13 February 1576 to return to Ireland to look after her husband's affairs. Nevertheless, Kildare was detained in England for three years and upon his return to Ireland he discovered the midland rebels had ravaged his lands: 'the Countye of Kildare is extremely impoverished, and in especiall the Earle of Kildares Lordshippes and Landes; which, in a great Parte, are wasted' (Collins, 1.81-5). Worse still, his power and influence, so painstakingly constructed over twenty years, lay in tatters. Kildare now required a period of stability to regain the government's confidence and reassert his influence over his former pale dependants and the junior Fitzgerald lines that had asserted their independence during his absence. His detention in England was critical in the outbreak of the pale rebellion of 1579-80 because he had lost influence over its gentry just as a serious breach with the increasingly intrusive New English party emerged. 
Furthermore, Kildare failed to gauge accurately the changing religious and ideological atmosphere; and when the rebellion began, mindful of his recent imprisonment and his family's fate in the 1530s, he was paralysed. He neither joined the rebellion, for fear of defeat, nor could he participate effectively in its suppression because to do so would draw 'the hatred and ill wyll of my countrie, and pull upon [his] house and posteritie forever the blame' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/79/26, SP 63/79/26 (i), SP 63/79/26 (ii)). Nor did he appreciate that he could no longer depend on his allies at court because of the revolt's religious dimension. As his relatives, friends, and dependants joined the rebellion, Kildare's position was compromised, and it became untenable when Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, commander of his troops, defected to the rebels in August 1580. In December, on the advice of Kildare's enemies on the Irish privy council, who claimed that the earl was the centrepiece of an international Catholic conspiracy, Arthur Grey, fourteenth Baron Grey of Wilton, the lord deputy, arrested Kildare on suspicion of treason. He was imprisoned with his son-in-law Christopher Nugent, fifth Baron Delvin (1544-1602), in Dublin Castle, before being sent to England in 1582 and incarcerated in the Tower again. Kildare's failure to support his faction ensured the failure of the pale rebellion, the decimation of the Geraldine bloc, and the New English triumph. Moreover, his failure adequately to support the government allowed his enemies to turn on him to great effect. 
Kildare was cleared of treason in June 1583 and released from the Tower on giving a bond for $2000 to remain within 20 miles of London but not to come within 3 miles of the court. The following year he was permitted to return to Ireland, and sat in parliament in April 1585. He died in London on 16 November 1585, and was buried at Kildare on 13 February 1586. The dowager countess of Kildare died on 25 August 1610 and was buried at Kildare. In 1577 Kildare was described as 'a perfect horseman and valiant of courage, small of stature, and slender of person, a very courteous gentleman, a right courtier. All that belonged to a gentleman was in him, saving he was hard and angry at times. He was a great gatherer of money, and would play [gamble] much' ('Calendar of Carew Manuscripts', 5.216). 
Kildare has a well-established historiographical reputation as an ineffectual leader compared with his father and grandfather. Professor Vincent Carey, who demonstrates that the earl faced very difficult problems, has recently convincingly dismissed this simplistic assessment. In the twenty years following the Geraldine collapse the political situation in Ireland changed irrevocably. The crown had no intention of delegating power to a native magnate, preferring to appoint English-born governors. In consequence, a new element was introduced to Irish society -- the New English. However, this process created a new colonial elite whose position depended on the eclipse of the old colonial elite. In the bipolar struggle that ensued, Kildare, after his return in 1556, assumed leadership of the Old English bloc fighting a rearguard action against aggressive New English expansion. 
Neither could Kildare achieve his aims by threatening the lordship's stability, by openly unleashing the Geraldine faction in the manner of his predecessors, because he could not lay claim to the same authority. Accordingly, he modified his tactics, proving extremely flexible in adapting to the disorganized process of English expansion in Ireland. He owed his survival to adept playing of the game of faction, particularly at court, and during the 1550s and 1560s won some notable victories, destroying Sussex's administration and using Arnold as a puppet lord deputy. 
Although Kildare contained the New English between 1555 and 1575, his successes, because the result of fluctuations in court faction, were in reality transitory. As the struggle between the Old English and the New English intensified in 1579-83 the increasingly successful New English attempt to associate the Old English aristocracy with Gaelic degeneracy was to severely damage Kildare's position and destroy his cousin, Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond (c.1533-1583). Their eclipse signalled the end of the era of regional magnates, and the triumph of the New English party. Of the three great earls of Ireland, only Ormond wielded any influence after 1583 and his survival depended on his familial link to Elizabeth, which insulated him from the attacks of his English opponents. 


@@@@@


doc= 9558


Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1287), from an earlier marriage to a wife whose name has not been preserved. Gerald's wardship was granted to Thomas de Clare, who in 1269 sold it to William de Valence for 3500 marks. This Gerald, who married Geoffrey de Geneville's daughter, Joan, was captured in a war against the Irish of Offaly in 1285, and died childless in 1287. His father's sister, Juliana, the wife of John de Cogan, was his closest relative. However, shortly before his death he seems to have granted the castle of Lea and possibly other lands in Kildare and Offaly to his first cousin, John fitz Thomas Fitzgerald (d. 1316). John, who was to be created earl of Kildare in 1316, set out to reintegrate the possessions of his grandfather, Maurice Fitzgerald, the justiciar. This process involved complex and acrimonious dealings with Juliana de Cogan, Agnes de Valence, and other heiresses and widows of his kinsmen. In the 1290s it also provoked further contention with the de Burghs, led by Richard de Burgh, earl of Ulster. Possibly it was in connection with this that Agnes de Valence granted the manor of Geashill in Offaly to the earl of Ulster in 1296. Only after her death in 1309 -- which was followed by litigation over the Limerick lands which she had held in jointure for more than forty years -- did her husband's lordships pass fully into the hands of the junior branch of the family. 


@@@@@


doc= 9559


Henry Vesey Fitzgerald, Baron Fitzgerald and Vesey (1786-1860), dean of Kilmore, was born in Dublin on 19 December 1786. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, from October 1802, and was appointed dean of Emly in 1818. He married, on 7 September 1825, Elizabeth O'Grady (died 1834), daughter of Standish O'Grady and Mabella Ryver of co. Limerick. He was appointed dean of Kilmore in 1826 and succeeded to the barony on his brother's death in 1843. He died on 30 March 1860 at Danesfort, co. Cavan; the title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 9560


Fitzgerald, James fitz John, thirteenth earl of Desmond (d. 1558), nobleman, was the second but eldest surviving son of John fitz Thomas Fitzgerald (also known as Sir John of Desmond), 'de facto' twelfth earl of Desmond (died 1536), and More, daughter of Donough O'Brien of Carrigogunnell, co. Limerick, lord of Pobblebrien. Following the death of Thomas Fitzgerald, eleventh earl of Desmond, in 1534, James, together with his father, Sir John, contested the succession to the earldom with Thomas's grandson James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, de jure twelfth earl (d. 1540). As fitz Maurice's parents were cousins, having a common grandmother, their marriage was considered by a majority of the Desmonds to be invalid, making fitz Maurice illegitimate and therefore ineligible to succeed as earl. 
In these circumstances Sir John seized control of the earldom of Desmond in 1534, and when he died two years later James continued in possession. During this time the rebellion of Silken Thomas (Thomas Fitzgerald, tenth earl of Kildare) broke out. As they were then seeking Henry VIII's recognition for their claim to the earldom, they chose not to support the rebellion. Indeed, in January 1535 Henry wrote to James and his father thanking them for their service against the rebels, and asking for their continued support, although it is uncertain whether they did anything more than simply refuse to support Silken Thomas. Meanwhile, James fitz Maurice was still trying to gain possession of the earldom with the assistance of his father-in-law, Cormac Og Laidhir MacCarthy, ninth lord of Muskerry. By 1536, however, having failed to garner sufficient support in Munster, fitz Maurice had gone to England where he was to remain until 1539. 
James fitz John also had to deal with James Butler, ninth earl of Ormond (died 1546), who sought to inherit the earldom of Desmond himself as husband of Joan, the daughter and heir-general of James, tenth earl of Desmond (died 1529). Soon after Sir John's death in June 1536 Butler's father, Piers, eighth earl of Ormond, supporting Lord Leonard Grey, the lord deputy, captured James fitz John's castle at Lough Gur, co. Limerick, and in November James fitz John agreed to deliver two of his sons as hostages. However, it was not until March 1538 that he handed over one of his sons, a delay which both James and Grey blamed in part on the Butlers. In March 1539 James presented his claim to the earldom in a letter to Henry, but later that year fitz Maurice returned to Ireland with Henry's support. 
By November 1539 Grey and James Butler had captured the territories of Imokilly and Kerrycurrihy in co. Cork and placed fitz Maurice in possession of them. However, fitz Maurice was killed on 19 March 1540 by James fitz John's brother Maurice, so removing the main threat to James. Thereafter his relationship with the crown improved dramatically, James fitz John being Henry VIII's only realistic candidate for the earldom, and in January 1541 he submitted to the lord deputy, St Leger. That St Leger was deputy was propitious as he was embarked on the political reform of the lordship of Ireland through the policy of indentures subsequently referred to as surrender and regrant, by which Gaelic-Irish lords formally surrendered their lands to the crown, which in turn regranted them the lands to hold in fee of the crown. Desmond's submission fitted this concept of a new beginning in the relationship with the crown, and was followed by his attendance at the Irish parliament in June 1541 when Henry VIII was made king of Ireland, once he had renounced the privilege, which his predecessors had claimed since the beheading of Thomas, seventh earl, at Drogheda in 1468, of not attending parliaments or councils. The following June he travelled to England and did homage to Henry at court. St Leger also ended Ormond's ambitions of gaining the earldom in February 1541, arranging for a future marriage between the children of the two earls as a way of defusing Desmond-Ormond rivalry. 
Desmond's 'rapprochement' with Henry involved him acting on behalf of the crown, both within Munster and further afield. In August 1541 he was appointed to a commission charged with the dissolution of the religious houses in the counties of Limerick, Cork, Kerry, and Desmond (south Kerry), and later that year was praised for persuading O'Brien not to rebel. In the summer of 1543 he apprehended the white knight and Lord Roche, then in conflict with each other, and delivered them to Lord Deputy St Leger at Carlow, whence they were transferred to Dublin Castle. He contributed 120 kerne to Henry VIII's forces for service in France the following year. In 1546 and again in 1547 he was active against the O'Mores and the O'Connors. In return for this service the crown supported him, as in September 1542 when St Leger brought 400 troops to Cork to subdue MacCarthy More and MacCarthy Reagh, who were threatening Desmond's lands and the towns of Cork, Kinsale, and Youghal, St Leger taking indentures from them and other lords of the region for their future behaviour. Similarly, in October 1542 Henry nominated Aeneas O'Hernan (O'Heffernan), preceptor of the knights hospitallers' preceptory of St John the Baptist at Knockainy, co. Limerick, to the see of Emly, O'Hernan receiving letters patent on 6 April 1543. 
Desmond's reconciliation was such that one of Edward VI's first acts in Ireland was to appoint him to the prestigious office of lord treasurer of Ireland in March 1547, and that October Edward offered to educate James's eldest son at court. The following year he was appointed admiral of the coast between Dungarvan, co. Waterford, and Galway. St Leger was to remain as deputy until May 1548, and intermittently thereafter until finally replaced in May 1556 by Thomas Radcliffe, Lord Fitzwalter, who in 1557 was created earl of Sussex. During this time Desmond fell into occasional disfavour, being alleged in August 1548 to have sworn the lords of Munster to obey him, and later that year was possibly briefly detained by the lord justice, Sir Edward Bellingham, in Dublin Castle. Desmond recovered his position following Bellingham's recall, serving in early 1551 on a commission for the establishment of order in Munster, although at this time he came into conflict with the earl of Thomond, one of James's sons being taken as a pledge. 
Desmond enjoyed more influence under Lord Deputy Sir James Croft, being appointed to a commission for the maintenance of order within counties Cork, Kerry, and Limerick in late 1551. In December 1551 he captured his son and heir Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald (c.1533-1583), and his brother Maurice, for having staged a cattle raid, and handed them over to the lord deputy. In February 1552 Desmond was suspected of membership of a group of lords who were negotiating with the queen of Scots to get Scottish troops to invade the north of Ireland. However, he survived this accusation, and towards the end of his life was back offering advice to the crown, requesting a president for Munster in March 1557, while the following February he proposed to Queen Mary a commission to inquire into the state of Ireland as a prelude to further change. 
Desmond received numerous grants of land, including several properties upon Henry VIII's closure of the monasteries. In 1541 he received a three-year lease on St Saviour's Dominican priory at Kilmallock, co. Limerick, and in 1543 he was granted St Saviour's Dominican priory at Limerick. The same year also saw him receive a grant in tail male of lands formerly belonging to St Mary's Cistercian abbey at Dublin, this being intended as Desmond's residence while in Dublin for sessions of parliament. He was granted the manors of Adare and Croom, co. Limerick, for life in November 1546, having previously received a lease for them in 1542, these lands being forfeited by Silken Thomas. He also got a twenty-one year lease in 1550 on the monastery of the Augustinian canons at Molana, co. Waterford, along with the rectory of Mogeely which had previously belonged to the Cistercian monastery at Midleton, co. Cork. He appears to have supported the religious orthodoxy of the day, participating in Henry's dissolution of the monasteries in Munster, surviving Edward VI's more protestant reign, and witnessing the restoration of the Roman Catholic church under Queen Mary, at which time he restored some of the monasteries, including St Mary's Franciscan friary at Shandon, Cork, in October 1557. 
Desmond was married four times; his first wife was Joan, daughter of Maurice, Viscount Roche, with whom he had a son, Sir Thomas (also known as Thomas Roe or Red Thomas). However, Joan was the granddaughter of Desmond's brother Maurice Dubh, and consequently he abandoned her and disinherited Sir Thomas. His second wife was More (died 1548), daughter of Sir Mulroney O'Carroll, lord of Ely O'Carroll, whom he married before 1533, with whom he had two sons, Gerald, his heir, and Sir John, and possibly a third, Maurice, and four daughters, Joan, Margaret, Ellis, and Honora, and possibly a fifth. Desmond's third wife was Katherine, daughter of Piers Butler, eighth earl of Ormond, and widow of Richard, Lord Power, whom he married before February 1550; they had no children, Katherine dying at Askeaton, co. Limerick, on 17 March 1553. In 1553 he married his last wife, Ellen or Eveleen, daughter of Donald MacCarthy More, with whom he had a son, Sir James Sussex, and a daughter, Elinor. Ellen married, second, Conor O'Brien, third earl of Thomond (died 1581), and died in 1560, being buried in Muckross Abbey, Kerry. 
Although highly successful, Desmond's political recovery was a very personal one, dependent in large part on his relationship of mutual benefit with St Leger. As a result, following his death, which occurred before 31 October 1558, and his burial at the Franciscan friary at Askeaton, his son Gerald inherited an earldom with many unresolved problems which he would struggle to deal with. 


@@@@@


doc= 9561


Fitzgerald, James fitz Maurice, 'de jure' twelfth earl of Desmond (d. 1540), nobleman, was the son of Maurice fitz Thomas Fitzgerald (died 1529), only son and heir apparent of Thomas Fitzgerald, eleventh earl of Desmond (died 1534); his mother was Joan, daughter of John fitz Maurice FitzGibbon, the white knight. His grandfather Thomas had succeeded as earl, aged about seventy-five, against a background of internecine warfare among the Desmonds, and spent the greater part of his remaining years in an attempt to ensure James's succession. In May 1532 Thomas informed Henry VIII that he could not send James to England, as he had promised in his submission, as he feared for his safety, believing that it was best for James to remain in Munster. When Thomas died in 1534 James's right to succeed was disputed by Sir John of Desmond, 'de facto' twelfth earl of Desmond, and Sir John's son James fitz John Fitzgerald, later thirteenth earl (d. 1558), on account of the doubts over his parents' marriage -- Maurice and Joan were first cousins, having a common grandmother, and having married without papal dispensation, their marriage was considered invalid by the majority of the Geraldines. James fitz Maurice was therefore illegitimate, and consequently barred from the succession, leaving Sir John as the rightful heir and 'de facto' earl. 
James fitz Maurice, described as a young man who spoke very good English, was supported in his bid for the earldom by his father-in-law Cormac Og Laidhir MacCarthy, lord of Muskerry. James was in Ireland until 1535. The following year he was in England, where he remained until 1539. During that time there were numerous calls to have him sent back to Ireland in order to help defeat James, thirteenth earl of Desmond, both from agents of Piers Butler, eighth earl of Ormond, and from the council of Ireland. It was possibly at this time that fitz Maurice served as page to Henry VIII, although this is uncertain. In 1539 he returned to Ireland, receiving $40 from the king in July for his journey home. In November to December 1539 Lord Deputy Leonard Grey and James Butler, ninth earl of Ormond, marched through Munster and secured the territories of Imokilly and Kerrycurrihy in co. Cork for James. This success was not followed up, however, and James's possession of his lands was restricted to these areas in eastern co. Cork. 
At an unknown time before April 1535 James married Mary (died 1548), daughter of Cormac Og Laidhir MacCarthy, lord of Muskerry, with whom he had a daughter, Judith (died 1565). His widow would subsequently marry Daniel O'Sullivan More. James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald was killed by Maurice an Toitean (Maurice of the Burnings), brother of James, thirteenth earl, near Youghal, co. Cork, on 19 March 1540, and was buried in Youghal. His lack of support among the Desmond Geraldines had proved fatal for his claim to the earldom of Desmond. 


@@@@@


doc= 9562


Fitzgerald, James fitz Maurice (d. 1579), soldier and landowner, was the second son of Maurice fitz John Fitzgerald (died 1564), called Maurice an Toitean (Maurice of the Burnings), and Julia, second daughter of Dermot O'Mulryan of Sulloghade, co. Tipperary. He married Katherine, daughter of William Burke of Clanwilliam, with whom he had two sons, Maurice and Gerald, who both died in 1588, and a daughter. In 1573 he was also said to have abandoned his wife and married an O'Brien, the widow of O'Connor Kerry, although this appears unlikely. Fitzgerald's father was a loyal military retainer of James fitz John Fitzgerald, thirteenth earl of Desmond (d. 1558), and James fitz Maurice was to fulfil a similar role for Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl (c.1533-1583). 
In late 1563, during Gerald's absence in England, James fitz Maurice was involved in attacks on the estates of Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond (died 1614), Gerald's arch-rival. James's career might have consisted of little more than such military encounters had it not been for Gerald's fateful defeat by Ormond at the battle of Affane, co. Waterford, in February 1565. Gerald, after a period of detention in England in 1565-6, was recaptured by the lord deputy, Sir Henry Sidney, in March 1567, and in December was sent to the Tower of London. Gerald's imprisonment, together with that of his brother Sir John of Desmond, created a power vacuum within the earldom of Desmond which James was quick to fill. Appointed captain of the Desmonds by Gerald during the latter's absence, James was initially challenged for leadership of the Desmonds by Thomas Roe fitz James, older half-brother of Gerald, but had overcome Thomas by March 1568. In July of that year he invaded Clanmaurice, co. Kerry, the territory of Thomas Fitzmaurice, baron of Lixnaw, a collateral branch of the Desmonds, and captured a prey of cattle which James claimed in lieu of rents due to the earl. James then unsuccessfully besieged Lixnaw; although he suffered heavy casualties he survived that temporary setback. 
The following year James fitz Maurice participated in two acts which were to transform the political situation in Munster. In February 1569 he, along with MacCarthy More and other lords of Munster, held an assembly at which they agreed that the Henrician Reformation, supported and furthered by Edward VI and Elizabeth, had broken the conditions of the bull 'Laudabiliter' by which Pope Adrian IV had granted Ireland to Henry II for the maintenance and propagation of the Catholic faith in Ireland. As a consequence Adrian's grant was void, as were obligations of loyalty to Elizabeth, and the pope was thus free to nominate a new overlord for Ireland. The assembled lords therefore dispatched two papal bishops as envoys to Spain, namely Maurice MacGibbon, archbishop of Cashel, and Thomas O'Herlihy, bishop of Ross. They called on King Philip II to nominate a Habsburg of his choice to be monarch of Ireland, subject to Rome's agreement. Unfortunately for fitz Maurice this endeavour to change the constitutional relationship between Ireland and England came to nought as Philip had his own concerns and consequently gave MacGibbon no support. The second event occurred in June 1569 when fitz Maurice attacked the barony of Kerrycurrihy, co. Cork, starting the first Desmond rebellion. Kerrycurrihy, which had previously belonged to James's father, had been mortgaged by Gerald to Sir Warham St Leger, and James's attack on such a prominent English official increased the seriousness of the situation. However, even more important was the religious component of James's actions, the rebellion, at least in James's eyes, turning into a Catholic crusade against the English 'heretics'. He captured Kilmallock, calling for the restoration of the Roman Catholic faith within the town, and on 12 July sought the same within Cork, demanding the expulsion from the city of all protestants. He was also joined in rebellion by Sir Edmund and Piers Butler, Ormond's brothers, who had their own dispute with Sir Peter Carew over lands in co. Carlow. 
The English response to these rebellions was swift, Humphrey Gilbert defeating James's forces in September near Kilmallock. Gilbert's uncompromising campaigning soon weakened the resolve of James's allies for the conflict, with MacCarthy More submitting in December, while the Butlers did likewise in February 1570. James remained steadfast, however, attacked Kilmallock again in February 1570, and was engaged in negotiations with a French agent in December. In spite of the crown's best efforts James remained at large, once more assaulting Kilmallock in February 1571. Shortly afterwards Sir John Perrot, lord president of Munster, arrived at Waterford and pursued the rebels throughout the province, although he failed to capture Castlemaine Castle despite a five-week siege in June and July. Perrot's frustration at his inability to end the rebellion led him to challenge James to a duel in November, eventually agreeing to a combat between the two leaders along with twelve horsemen and twelve footmen each. Having made the match, however, James did not turn up, reasoning that if he was killed the rebellion would collapse, while if Perrot was killed Elizabeth would merely send someone else to take his place. 
The lord president attacked Castlemaine again in June 1572 and captured it after a three-month siege. James was soon initiating contact with the crown to end the rebellion, meeting Captain Bourchier on 8 December, and on 23 February 1573 he submitted to Perrot at Kilmallock. Peace was not yet restored to Munster, however, as towards the end of the year James occupied Carrigafoyle Castle, a strategically located castle on the north Kerry coast, and began gathering men, while Gerald, having been sent back to Dublin in March 1573, escaped in November and made his way home, being met by James at Limerick. Gerald re-established his control over Munster, retook castles, including Castlemaine, and in the summer of 1574 James captured Bourchier, the English commander at Kilmallock, holding him captive for about a month. From this position of strength Gerald entered into unsuccessful negotiations with the crown, but after a short campaign in August by Lord Deputy Sir William Fitzwilliam, highlighted by his sacking of Derrinlaur Castle, Gerald submitted in September. 
The first Desmond rebellion was over, but James had not yet given up hope of relaunching his religious crusade, and in March 1575 he sailed to France with his family and some supporters. On the continent he became deeply involved in the machinations of international affairs, first seeking aid at the French court. The month after his arrival in France he was presented to the young King Henri III, who in July wrote to Queen Elizabeth urging her to pardon James and restore him to his lands in Ireland. James had meanwhile settled at the port town of St Malo where he was to remain until 1577. He again met Henri in August 1576, but sensing that there was no French support coming he decided to go to Rome. There he was greatly encouraged by Pope Gregory XIII, who on 25 February 1577 issued a papal brief urging the people of Ireland to support James when he returned to Ireland, Pope Gregory stating that those who did so would gain a plenary indulgence and remission of their sins. With papal backing for his plans, James set out for the Iberian peninsula to recruit and equip his forces. Arriving in Madrid in May, he was refused an audience with the king, although he did meet Nicholas Sander who was part of a group of English Catholic exiles on the continent seeking support for their plans to return to England. 
Disappointed by Philip's lack of interest, James was in Lisbon by July 1577, although here he was twice refused access to King Sebastian. Undaunted, he succeeded in hiring a ship, and on 19 November his crew sailed from Lisbon bound for Ireland with an assortment of weapons and munition. However, the ship was forced to shelter in Moruiero harbour, near Corunna, after it was damaged in a series of storms. There the crew mutinied, whereupon James had them arrested for breach of contract, but they escaped, and when James returned from mass on the feast of the Epiphany, 6 January 1578, the ship with his cargo was gone. James returned to St Malo, ending the year at Bilbao where he hired a new ship and recruited about fifty troops. Joined by Sander in March 1579, James and his small force set sail from Ferrol with four ships on 17 June. On the sea voyage they captured a French ship, which was released, and two English ships, which were not. 
James landed at Dingle, co. Kerry, on 18 July 1579, his men fortifying Dun an Oir at Smerwick harbour. He appealed to various Irish lords to join him, although initially few did. Then, on 1 August, Gerald's brothers Sir John and Sir James killed Sir Henry Davells, constable of Dungarvan, and nineteen others of his party while they slept in Tralee, Davells having been sent to secure Gerald's loyalty to the crown. This act, which committed the brothers to the rebellion, greatly increased the rebel strength. However, James fitz Maurice and Sir John soon fell out with each other, apparently over the death of a woman in the rebel camp, and James decided to journey to the north of Ireland. On the way his band became involved in a skirmish with the Burkes of Clanwilliam over stolen horses, and he was killed on 18 August 1579. His followers cut off his head and hid his body, it being subsequently found by the English forces. Lord Justice Drury then had the body quartered, with a quarter each being sent to Limerick, Kilmallock, Cork, and Waterford. James had possessed the cantred of Kerrycurrihy until it was mortgaged to St Leger, and on 23 April 1574 Gerald had granted James the castles of Glin, co. Limerick, and Tarbert and Carrigafoyle, co. Kerry, until the mortgage was repaid. However, James had lost 'de facto' possession of these castles when he left Ireland the following year, and consequently died a landless man. 
By the time of his death James fitz Maurice, a tough, proud man with a strong faith, had made a highly significant contribution to events in Ireland during the latter half of the sixteenth century. He participated in the formulation of a constitutional challenge to Ireland's position under the crown of England, and twice initiated conflicts with the intention of restoring the Roman Catholic faith in Ireland. Ultimately, however, his legacy was an unintentional one, his return in 1579 sparking off the crisis which developed into the second Desmond rebellion (1579-83) which destroyed the earldom of Desmond and its society, and paved the way for the plantation of Munster. 


@@@@@


doc= 9563


Fitzgerald, James fitz Gerald, fifteenth earl of Desmond (c.1570-1601), nobleman and prisoner, was the son and heir of Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond (d. 1583), and his second wife, Eleanor Butler (died 1636x8), daughter of Edmund Butler, Baron Dunboyne. His sobriquets reflect the fact that much of his life was spent incarcerated in the Tower of London. He was born during his father's third period of detention in London (1568-73), perhaps at the Southwark home of Sir Warham St Leger into whose custody Desmond and his companions had been placed in August 1570. When Desmond returned to Ireland in March 1573 James remained behind as a 'de facto' pledge for his father's good behaviour, and in June that year Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, to whose faction the earls of Desmond were loosely allied, presented young James to the queen at Desmond's behest, presumably as a prelude to securing James's return to Ireland. This was not forthcoming, however, and in June 1575 Desmond was asking William Cecil to intercede with the queen to allow James, then at Bristol, over to Ireland for a time. This appeal also proved unsuccessful. 
By August 1579, however, James was back in Ireland, residing with his mother at Askeaton, co. Limerick. His stay there was short, as once again his father's actions intruded on his life. James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald had returned to Ireland the previous July with a small force of men igniting what escalated into the second Desmond rebellion (1579-83). The earl initially tried to remain neutral in the conflict, but this proved unsatisfactory for the crown, and between 7 and 9 September the lord justice, Sir William Drury, temporarily detained him in an attempt to force him to act against the rebels. He was released on condition that he deliver James to Drury, and a few days later James's mother, Eleanor, handed him over. James was kept at Kilkenny for a while before being placed on 30 October in Dublin Castle, where he remained for almost five years. Initially his circumstances in the castle were relatively good, since he had a nurse and some servants; but the servants were dismissed by the end of 1579, and his health, which appears never to have been particularly robust, suffered during his confinement. His education was also neglected, something his mother complained about in August 1582, Eleanor suggesting that he be taken to England. This suggestion was not acted upon at the time, but following Desmond's death on 11 November 1583 James's usefulness in Ireland was greatly diminished and six days later Adam Loftus, archbishop of Dublin, and Henry Wallop recommended he be transferred to the Tower of London, this being done the following year. 
James spent the next sixteen years in the Tower, ignored by the queen and her officials, his entreaties to be released proving futile. However, the situation was changed in the 1590s when an upsurge in anti-plantation violence in Munster and the outbreak of the Nine Years' War in Ulster made James potentially useful to the crown once again. In 1598 James fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, grandson of James, thirteenth earl of Desmond, led the forces of Munster into rebellion, destroying the plantation and assuming the title of earl of Desmond. James fitz Thomas, known as the Sugan (straw-rope) Earl, allied himself with Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, and quickly gained control of Munster. In response to the worsening crisis there were calls for James to be sent over to Munster to help quell the violence. In October 1599 Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, who earlier that year had been appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland, suggested returning James to Munster where it was hoped he would attract the support of the Geraldines of the region and thereby weaken James fitz Thomas, a strategy advocated the following year by Sir George Carew, lord president of Munster. Elizabeth initially feared that James would either rebel if returned to Munster or prove ineffective and expensive, but Carew's persistence, mediated through Sir Robert Cecil, finally convinced her to implement the plan. He was granted a pension of $500 p.a., and his patent creating him earl of Desmond was signed on 1 October 1600. 
Accompanied by Meiler Magrath, archbishop of Cashel, Desmond sailed from Bristol and landed at Youghal, co. Cork, on 14 October. He was well received by some lords and gentlemen of the region, but this welcome was not universal. The mayor of Cork only grudgingly provided food and accommodation for him, while the undertakers feared that he might be granted lands they had received in the Munster plantation. More damaging was his reception in Kilmallock, co. Limerick, where arriving at the town on a Saturday he was greeted enthusiastically, but when he went to the local Church of Ireland service the following day many of the townspeople shunned him. He did achieve a notable success when the constable of Castlemaine handed over the castle to him, but this was an isolated case and the vast majority of the Geraldines and rebels in Munster ignored him. He was soon complaining to Cecil that he had no money, no troops to command, no land assigned to him, and no respect from the local population, asking to be either given sufficient money to accomplish his task or to be allowed back to England. His mission a failure, the latter option was agreed and James left Ireland on 22 March 1601. He continued to seek support from the crown but by then Elizabeth had abandoned him; he lived out the remaining months of his life in financial distress. James died in London, unmarried, before 14 November 1601, aged about thirty-one, having experienced little freedom during his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 9564


Fitzgerald, James fitz Thomas, 'styled' fifteenth earl of Desmond [known as the 'sugan' earl of Desmond] (d. 1608?), nobleman, was the eldest son of Sir Thomas fitz James Fitzgerald, known as Thomas Roe or Red Thomas (died 1595). His mother may have been a daughter of David, Viscount Roche, or Ellice, daughter of Richard, first Baron Power of Curraghmore, co. Waterford, or a daughter of Theobold Butler, third baron of Cahir. Sir Thomas was bastardized when his father James fitz John Fitzgerald, thirteenth earl of Desmond, annulled his marriage to Joan, daughter of Maurice, Lord Roche, as Joan was his grandniece. James remarried, and when he died in 1558 he was succeeded as fourteenth earl by Gerald, eldest son of his second marriage. 
At the outset of the first Desmond rebellion, initiated by James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald in 1569, Sir Thomas supported the rebellion but soon changed his mind and was thereafter actively engaged in prosecuting the rebels. James fitz Thomas and his father were steadfast in their loyalty to the crown during the second Desmond rebellion (1579-83), also instigated by James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald. In 1581 James petitioned the queen for his father to be made earl in place of Gerald as a means of removing support from Gerald, but the idea was not acted upon. Gerald was killed on 11 November 1583, and the crown determined to dissolve the earldom, this being accomplished by the act of attainder passed by the Irish parliament in 1586. With that, James's hopes of ever becoming earl seemed to have died. Four years later James and his father were reported to be very poor. 
In 1598, however, the situation changed when James fitz Thomas proclaimed himself earl. He was known as the 'sugan' (straw rope) earl from then on. Taking advantage of the increasing antipathy in the province to the English undertakers in the Munster plantation, and the presence in Munster of rebel forces led by Captain Richard Tyrrell and Owney MacRory O'More, who had been sent there by Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, himself then in rebellion, James notified Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond, in October 1598 that he would now forcibly take what he considered to be his by right, having failed to get legal redress from the queen. Within days his followers had spoiled the barony of Buttevant in co. Cork, and later that same month his forces were reputed to number over 3000 men. The rebels quickly established control over the province, destroying the Munster plantation, and forcing the English undertakers to seek refuge in some towns and castles. In May to June 1599 Robert Devereux, earl of Essex, the recently arrived lord lieutenant, campaigned in Munster, where he captured Caher Castle. However, James refused to engage his men against Essex's troops, only once assaulting them at Finniterstown, co. Limerick, between Rathkeale and Croom. Subsequently James agreed a truce with Essex, during which he captured Castlemaine Castle following a siege of almost a year. 
In February 1600 James fitz Thomas was confirmed by Tyrone as earl of Desmond at a rebel gathering at Inishcarra, co. Cork, while the next month Tyrone appointed him commander of the Old English rebels in Munster. Sir George Carew, the newly appointed lord president of Munster, stabilized the situation, helped by Tyrone's return to Ulster, and in June James was captured by Dermot O'Connor who had agreed a fee of $1000 with Carew for delivering James. James was taken to the castle at Castlelishen, co. Cork, but was freed by a rebel force on the night of 25/26 June before Carew arrived from Kilmallock. He escaped capture the following October by Captain Graeme in the Aherlow woods. Such was the concern over the continuing rebellion that in October, at Carew's instigation, the crown sent James Fitzgerald, the elder son of Gerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, over to Ireland as earl of Desmond in order to draw the allegiance of the Desmond Geraldines away from James. James Fitzgerald, known as the Tower Earl or the Queen's Earl, failed to attract appreciable local support and was back in London by March 1601. 
James fitz Thomas thus successfully saw off his first cousin, but in May 1601 he was finally captured by Edmund FitzGibbon, the white knight, who discovered him in a cave near Mitchelstown, co. Cork. Handed over to Sir George Thornton, the provost marshal of Munster, he was conveyed to Carew's castle at Shandon, co. Cork. Carew initially considered employing James against Tyrone but gave up the idea and instead had him conducted to England by Sir Anthony Cooke in August 1601. Once in England, James was placed in the Tower of London where, in 1602, his imprisonment cost $156 p.a. James appears to have first married Margaret, daughter of John, third Baron Power of Curraghmore, in 1585, and subsequently Ellen, daughter of Piers Butler and widow of Maurice FitzGibbon, brother of Edmund, the white knight. He had no children. James, who rebelled to claim a forfeited earldom which had been denied to both him and his father, may have died in the Tower in 1608; he was perhaps buried in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula in the Tower, although this is uncertain. 


@@@@@


doc= 9565


Fitzgerald, James, first duke of Leinster (1722-1773), politician and landowner, was born on 29 May 1722 at Carton, co. Kildare, Ireland, the second son but surviving heir of Robert Fitzgerald, nineteenth earl of Kildare (1675-1744), landowner, and Lady Mary O'Brien (1692-1780), eldest daughter of William O'Brien, third earl of Inchiquin (died 1719). After being educated at home he embarked on a grand tour through France and Italy, which lasted from February 1737 to September 1739. In April 1740 he became heir apparent to the Fitzgerald estate, with rentals of $15,000 per annum in 1745, and took the title Lord Offaly. He succeeded his father as twentieth earl of Kildare on 20 February 1744. He married Lady Emily Lennox (1731-1814) ['see 'Fitzgerald, Emilia Mary, duchess of Leinster], second daughter of Charles Lennox, second duke of Richmond (1701-1750), and his wife, Lady Sarah Cadogan (died 1751), on 7 February 1747. The marriage brought him important political connections -- for his wife's brother-in-law was Henry Fox -- great happiness, and a small dowry of $10,000. Emily Fitzgerald, Lady Kildare and later duchess of Leinster, encouraged him to complete all the building work and garden design at Carton House and then to commission the same architect, Richard Castle, to build a grand Palladian house in Kildare Street, Dublin. Later home to the Royal Dublin Society and then to the Republic of Ireland's Oireachtas or parliament, Leinster House became the focus of the rapid architectural development on the south side of the Liffey River. Setting or following the trends of fashions in art, architecture, and interiors was to mean that Kildare left debts of $148,000 at his death in 1773. 
On 17 October 1741 Offaly, as he then was, entered political life with a seat for Athy borough in the Irish parliament, and, during the Jacobite rebellion in Scotland of 1745, he offered to raise an infantry regiment to serve if Ireland was invaded. Politics and the military life were to remain the great pressing interests in his life. He was sworn of the Irish privy council on 12 May 1746 and on 1 February 1747 was created an English peer, as Viscount Leinster of Taplow, Buckinghamshire, owing to the influence of his uncle, the third earl of Inchiquin, and his father-in-law. In politics his ambition was to become the leading politician after Speaker Boyle and he sought to achieve this by cultivating his electoral interests in Leinster, particularly in counties Kildare and Carlow, and his growing popularity with the protestant gentry, who shared his patriot politics. Two of the most skilled orators in the Irish Commons, Thomas Carter and Anthony Malone, who represented Leinster constituencies, found him politically attractive. In addition, his brother-in-law, Henry Fox, with whom he had a stormy relationship, throughout the 1750s and 1760s seemed on the verge of breaking the Pelhamite hold on whig politics in England. Kildare was always hampered by his major character flaw, an inability to contemplate political compromise, even when it did not threaten his integrity. The decade of the 1750s, when he was in his thirties, was a key one in determining his political career. His fierce opposition, as the most determined patriot leader, between 1750 and 1755 to the viceroy, the duke of Dorset, and his allies, especially Archbishop Stone, marked him out. He was feted in Ireland as a patriot icon and despised in much of the political world in London for his rash memorial of July 1753, which demanded that George II remove his viceroy from Ireland. Although he pursued a stronger opposition line than Henry Boyle, he was persuaded by his family and his sense of whig service to the crown to act as a peacemaker for the next viceroy, Lord Hartington, and was rewarded by his sole appointment as lord justice on 11 May 1756. 
Kildare's hostility to Archbishop Stone and his refusal of any kind of expediency led him in February 1758 to reject a settlement between the primate and the viceroy, the duke of Bedford. However, he was appointed to a post which allowed him to indulge his military ambitions, that of master-general of the ordnance, on 12 October 1758. He threw himself into this office with great energy, creating the Royal Irish Artillery in March 1760 and becoming its first colonel. On 11 November 1761 he was commissioned lieutenant-general and then on 30 March 1770 major-general. Yet he also showed why he was difficult to work with, continually clashing with Lord Ligonier and the earl of Rothes, successive commanders-in-chief in Ireland, over jurisdiction. On 19 March 1761 he was created a marquess, and he finally achieved his ambition to be the first peer in Ireland, when created duke of Leinster on 26 November 1766, after George III fulfilled his promise to ennoble him at the same time as he created a new duke in England. In politics Leinster remained occasionally active in the House of Lords and on the privy council, often as an opponent of the government. Disappointed in his hopes of replacing Henry Boyle as chief undertaker and leading lord justice, he veered between paying court to viceroys, such as Lord Hertford (1756-6), and showing open hostility to them. A victim of the latter was Lord Townshend, who between 1767 and 1772 attempted to reform the system of parliamentary management. Leinster strongly opposed both Townshend's methods, including the division of the revenue board in order to increase civil patronage, and his aims, especially the augmentation of the Irish army. His last intervention was characteristic: after he had been dismissed from the privy council in June 1770 he signed a Lords protest in March 1771 against the continuation of Lord Townshend as the viceroy because of his alleged corruption of the Irish parliament. Despite such gestures, he was becoming outflanked by newer patriot leaders, such as Henry Flood and Lord Charlemont. He died on 19 November 1773, aged fifty-one, at his home, Leinster House, in Dublin, and was buried in Christ Church in the city. He was survived by his wife and fourteen of their nineteen children, of whom two of their sons, Admiral William Robert Fitzgerald, second duke of Leinster (1749-1804), and Lord Edward Fitzgerald (1763-1798), played prominent, albeit differing, roles in Irish politics in the second half of the eighteenth century. Their daughter Lady Lucy Anne Fitzgerald was a renowned radical. 


@@@@@


doc= 9566


Fitzgerald, James (1742-1835), politician, born in Inchicronan, co. Clare, Ireland, was the eldest son of William Fitzgerald ('b'. 1714), attorney, and Eliza Lynch of Rathfilad, co. Galway. He was educated at the Revd Thomas Benson's school, Dublin, and at Trinity College, Dublin (1759-64), where he was made a scholar. On graduating he read law at the Middle Temple and was called to the Irish bar in 1769. He soon built up a large practice, and became a KC in 1776. Encouraged by Marcus Patterson and Colonel William Conyngham, to whom he became 'attached' (Sayles, 269), he purchased a parliamentary seat for the borough of Fore in 1776. Anxious 'not to be frequently troublesome' ('Irish Parliamentary Diary', 2.63), he chose carefully those occasions on which he spoke. His early interventions appertained to procedural and jurisdictional issues, but his carefully researched and legalistic observations gave his predominantly short contributions an authority which was welcomed by the castle interest with whom he sat. His defence of the embargo on Irish exports on 9 December 1777 was particularly impressive, because as well as exposing inaccuracies and inconsistencies in the arguments of its critics he defended the 'wisdom' of recourse to such a tactic in 'a season of monstrous rebellion' (ibid., 3.401). 
It is a fair measure of Fitzgerald's impact, as well as of his dislike of the penal laws, that he was entrusted on 12 March 1778 with the task of introducing legislation permitting Catholics to take long leases and to build in towns and villages. In the following year he was appointed third serjeant, following which he consolidated his reputation as a loyal castle supporter and one of the House of Commons' most skilful debaters. In 1782 he married Catherine Vesey (1759-1832), second daughter of the Revd Henry Vesey, warden of Galway, and Mary Gerry, and the granddaughter of John Vesey, archbishop of Tuam. They had seven children. Fitzgerald's prospects of further political advancement seemed to have ended in 1782 when he was dismissed by the duke of Portland, but his purchase of a Commons seat for the borough of Tulsk in 1783 (an action he repeated in 1790) suggests that he deemed the set-back to be temporary, and his judgement was vindicated when he was appointed second serjeant in April 1784. 
As second serjeant Fitzgerald reverted to the active pro-government stance he had taken in the early 1780s, and his honed, forensic rebuffs of opposition attacks on government policy earned him the appellative 'the silver-tongued sergeant' (Burtchaell & Sadleir, 'Alum. Dubl.', 499). Understandably, the administration supported his request for promotion in the law. His target was the attorney-generalship, and he accepted the prime serjeancy as a stepping-stone in 1787. The fact that he was described in castle circles in the late 1780s as a 'steady, useful fr[ien]d in parliament' (Hobart list) indicates that high legal office was not an unrealistic ambition, but it was not his destiny. For reasons that are not entirely clear, Fitzgerald's relationship with Dublin Castle deteriorated dramatically in the 1790s. This led him to accept the nomination of the duke of Leinster for the borough of Kildare in 1797 and ensured that he was passed over when the solicitor-generalship fell vacant in 1798. More significantly, he was dismissed as prime serjeant in January 1799 when he refused to support the 'Act of Union'. He intimated initially that his opposition derived from 'the reluctancy the bar had to the question' (Stanhope MSS). His stand won him the applause of the Irish bar, which continued to give him the precedence in court over the attorney-general and solicitor-general he had enjoyed as prime serjeant, but his call 'for a sacred adherence to the constitution of 1782' (McDowell, 694) and his attempt in February 1799 to derail the union by advancing a bill to regulate any future regencies indicate that his grounds for opposition were wider. 
Following the ratification of the 'Act of Union' Fitzgerald represented Ennis in the imperial parliament from 1802 to 1808 and from 1812 to 1813. At Westminster his primary focus initially was legal issues until his hostility to Pitt prompted him to become one of the four 'great manufacturers of Irish legislature ['sic']' (Malcomson, 409). This also attests to his disillusionment arising out of the failure of the imperial parliament to accord Ireland greater attention. His decision to resign his seat in 1808 in favour of his eldest surviving son, William Vesey-Fitzgerald, Baron Fitzgerald and Vesey (1783?-1843), politician, was partly determined by this. Indeed, he would have left politics at this point if he could have secured the attorney-generalship or mastership of the rolls. Neither came his way, and following his decision in 1813 to vacate Ennis for his son he retired. Two years later his son's request for a peerage for him was denied, but when he felt unable to accept the offer of ennoblement in 1826 his wife was created Baroness Fitzgerald and Vesey of Clare and of Inchicronan. Fitzgerald died at his home, Herbert House, Booterstown, co. Dublin, on 20 January 1835, three years after his wife, who had died on 3 January 1832 in Dublin. Their youngest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 9567


FitzGerald, James Edward (1818-1896), politician and civil servant in New Zealand, was born on 4 March 1818 in Bath, Somerset, the fifth and youngest son of Gerald FitzGerald of Kilminchy, Queen's county, Ireland, and his second wife, Catherine (died 1819), the daughter of the Rt Hon. Sir Lucius O'Brien, bt. He was educated in Bath and at Christ's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1837 and graduated BA in 1842. In 1844 he entered the department of antiquities in the British Museum and in 1848 became under-secretary of the museum. During the Irish famine of 1846 he became interested in colonization, and was the first secretary of the Colonial Reform Society in 1850. He worked with Edward Gibbon Wakefield and John Robert Godley, who were then organizing the Church of England colony by which Canterbury in the South Island of New Zealand was settled. On 22 July 1850 he married, at St George's, Bloomsbury, London, Frances (Fanny) Erskine (died 1900), the daughter of George Draper of London. Shortly afterwards the couple sailed for Lyttelton aboard the 'Charlotte Jane'. 
Having reached New Zealand on 16 December 1850, FitzGerald combined with humour and energy the various duties of founding editor of the settlement's first newspaper, the 'Lyttelton Times', sub-inspector of police (1851-January 1863), and immigration agent. Active in promoting responsible government, he was elected in 1853 first superintendent of the province of Canterbury and also member for Lyttelton in the first New Zealand general assembly. When parliament met in 1854, on the invitation of the acting governor, Wynyard, FitzGerald, together with Henry Sewell and Sir Frederick Aloysius Weld, formed a ministry. His cabinet was a hybrid body consisting of elected members of the new legislature and old permanent officials, appointed under royal warrant, who had administered affairs while New Zealand had been a crown colony. This singular arrangement broke down after seven weeks. FitzGerald resigned, and responsible government was virtually postponed for two years, by which time he was too ill with heart disease to participate. 
Meanwhile FitzGerald, as superintendent of Canterbury, was active there in promoting the Wakefield land system, under which the public lands were for many years sold without restriction of area to all purchasers able to pay $2 an acre in cash for them. He was also an advocate of national as opposed to clerical school teaching. From 1857 to 1859 he was in England as immigration agent for Canterbury, and on his return, in recognition of his work, he was given the Springs station, west of Christchurch, which he ran as a cattle and dairy farm with only modest success. In 1861 he founded 'The Press' newspaper, of which he was editor, and after a short time sole proprietor (to 1867). He was a lucid, vigorous, and at times brilliant writer, and though journalism yielded him no financial profit 'The Press' quickly became one of the colony's leading newspapers. 
In 1862 FitzGerald re-entered parliament, there honourably to distinguish himself by his eloquent pleading for the right of the Maori to special representation in both houses -- a privilege which was granted, though not until after his retirement. For a few weeks in 1865 he was native minister under Sir Frederick Weld, but in January 1867 he retired from politics to join the civil service at Wellington, in which the last thirty years of his life were spent. At first comptroller of the public accounts, he was made commissioner of audit in 1872 and controller and auditor-general in 1878, and was throughout a diligent public servant. He was a prominent pamphleteer and literary reviewer, and an attractive public speaker who displayed wit, dash, and emotional power. Able, cultivated, and high-minded, FitzGerald needed only more prudence, patience, and tenacity to have left a much deeper mark on the history of New Zealand, and to have been one of the most prominent men of the day. A contemporary biographer, William Gisborne, described him in 1886 as 'a brilliant failure'. FitzGerald died in Wellington on 2 August 1896 and was buried at the city's Bolton Street cemetery. He was survived by his wife and by four sons and three daughters of their thirteen children. 


@@@@@


doc= 9568


Fitzgerald, Sir John (c.1540-1582), rebel and landowner, was the second legitimate son of James fitz John Fitzgerald, thirteenth earl of Desmond (d. 1558), and More or Maud (died 1548), daughter of Sir Mulroney MacShane O'Carroll, lord of Ely O'Carroll. Fitzgerald spent his formative years learning the intricacies of local politics and warfare with his brother Gerald Fitzgerald, later fourteenth earl of Desmond. Their father, recognizing the dangers of absenteeism, ignored suggestions that would have seen his sons raised at court. Gerald Fitzgerald's aggressive and unpredictable personality, however, rekindled hostilities with their traditional rivals for hegemony in Munster, the Butlers. By summer 1560 Fitzgerald had emerged as principal ally in the conflict of his brother, now earl of Desmond, spoiling Butler lands and participating in negotiations at Waterford. Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond, and Desmond were ultimately summoned to court to resolve the matter and Fitzgerald was left in what would become a familiar role, 'de facto' Geraldine leader in Munster. 
Fitzgerald mounted frequent attacks on Butler lands during Desmond's absence and established a reputation as a resourceful leader. The conflict worsened following Desmond's release in early 1564; by December 1565 Ormond insisted that any resolution of the dispute must include placing Fitzgerald under direct supervision by the Irish government. Fitzgerald, however, maintained his independence thanks to a powerful pro-Geraldine faction in Dublin and at court, which considered him a more sensible leader than his mercurial brother. Yet while Sir John Cusack pointed to his talents and loyalty, he was in secret correspondence with Shane O'Neill, the crown's formidable adversary in Ulster. In a letter written to Fitzgerald, O'Neill exhorted him, 'nowe is the tyme or neyver to set against them [the English] as well as youe can, or God will revenge the same upon youe if youe do the contrary' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/19/7). He was not incited into rebellion, however, and recognized instead the opportunity created by Desmond's contumacious dealings with the new lord deputy, Sir Henry Sidney. 
In March 1567 Desmond was arrested and Sidney bestowed a knighthood upon Fitzgerald, whom he appointed governor of Cork, Limerick, and Kerry. Yet Elizabeth I found Sidney's actions unacceptable and rescinded Fitzgerald's appointment. Fitzgerald was lured to Dublin where he was arrested on 12 December; within days Desmond and he were sent to England and committed to the Tower. The brothers were detained until spring 1573 and during their absence James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, their cousin and captain-general, instigated persistent rebellion in Munster. Sidney later noted, 'this harde dealing with Sir John of Desmond was the origyne of James fitz Maurice's rebellion, and consequently of all the evill and mischief in Munster' ('Sir Henry Sidney's Memoir', 3.95). The queen came under pressure from Irish officials to grant Fitzgerald's release so that he might be employed against fitz Maurice. Though it was recommended by Sir John Perrot, president of Munster, that Desmond remain in England, she refused to enlarge Fitzgerald, her hesitation coloured by the earl's history of recalcitrance. Thus Fitzgerald sought to distance himself from his brother, making separate submission and offering his services against the rebels. Elizabeth relented in early 1573, but ordered the release of both Fitzgerald and Desmond following the former's pledge to fight the rebels and the latter's signing of articles for his future good conduct. 
Upon their arrival Desmond was rearrested by Dublin officials unconvinced of his peaceful intentions. Fitzgerald, however, was permitted to return home in May after agreeing to certain concessions rejected by Desmond. His return, though undermining fitz Maurice's authority, did not end the rebellion, as rumours of Desmond's detention fuelled resentment. The earl's escape in November and his defiant posturing lent the rebellion renewed impetus. To end hostilities the government changed tack and sought Desmond's rehabilitation within a Tudor presidential framework in Munster. Fitzgerald remained Desmond's principal ally but was consigned to a subordinate role; his less capable brother overshadowed him. Years of imprisonment and rebellion, moreover, had left his lands in ruin; Tudor composition, in which Desmond acquiesced, would cause their value to plummet still further. Fitzgerald thus sought allies in unlikely quarters: in 1577 he dabbled in Connaught politics, proposing marriage to Mary, daughter of Richard Burke, second earl of Clanricarde, despite being already wed to Ellen, daughter of Sir Tadhg MacCarthy, lord of Muskerry. The foray resulted in his brief imprisonment for complicity to revolt. Finally a dispute with Desmond in early 1579 left him disgruntled and susceptible to fitz Maurice's rebellious overtures. 
Fitzgerald made common cause with fitz Maurice in July. Desmond tried to contain the rebellion but his brother outmanoeuvred him, murdering Henry Davells and Arthur Carter, special envoys to Desmond, in their beds on 1 August. The lurid act placed Desmond's leadership under serious strain. It also allowed Fitzgerald to assume the rebel leadership after fitz Maurice's death on 18 August. He made a formidable military opponent, but lost his only son, Thomas Fitzgerald, in a skirmish at Enabeg, co. Limerick. His leadership, however, was typically short-lived. Government pressure forced Desmond into outright rebellion and he was proclaimed a traitor on 2 November. 
The rising in July 1580 of James Eustace, third Viscount Baltinglass, in Leinster breathed life into Desmond's faltering rebellion and provided Fitzgerald with an independent theatre of operation. He liaised with Baltinglass and his Gaelic allies in the Wicklow mountains but was unable to surmount personal and geographic differences to form a united front. In early January 1582 Fitzgerald, 'en route' for a conference with his confederate David Barry, was surprised and killed in the woods of Eatharlach, near Castlelyons, co. Cork, by John Zouche, governor of Munster. His corpse was sent to Cork and 'hanged in chaynes over the citty gates, where it hanged up for 3 or foure yeares together as a spectacle to all the Beholders to looke on' (Hayman, 391). An experienced leader, Fitzgerald did not rush impetuously into rebellion. Rather it was a calculated, if desperate, attempt to destroy an emerging political situation of composition and plantation in which he had no future. He left an only daughter, Ellen, married to Donald MacCarthy. 


@@@@@


doc= 9569


FitzGerald, John David, Baron FitzGerald of Kilmarnock (1816-1889), judge, was born in Dublin on 1 May 1816, the second son of David FitzGerald, a Dublin tradesman, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Leahy, the daughter of David Leahy, merchant, of Dublin and London, and sister of the portrait painter Edward Daniel Leahy. He was educated at a private school run by Mr Mundy at Williamstown, near Dublin, and was admitted a student of the King's Inns, Dublin, in Hilary term 1834. He was also admitted to Gray's Inn, London, on 1 May of the same year. 
FitzGerald was called to the Irish bar in the Easter term, 1838, and shortly afterwards he joined the Munster circuit, then the leading circuit in Ireland. His progress at the bar was exceptionally fast. He specialized first in the chancery courts and later in the common-law courts, gaining a reputation as one of the best pleaders at the Irish bar. He himself attributed his rapid success largely to the fact that he worked every available moment. In 1846 FitzGerald married Rose, the youngest daughter of John Donohoe of Dublin, a distiller. Before her death in 1850 they had three sons, who later became barristers and attained the rank of KC -- two in Ireland and one in England. 
In 1847, after only five years on circuit, FitzGerald was made a queen's counsel, and almost immediately he became the leader of the Munster circuit, with one of the largest practices in the Dublin courts. As early as 1847 the Irish politician Richard Lalor Sheil advised him to stand for parliament, since he seemed likely to be made a law officer; at the general election of 1852 FitzGerald was indeed returned as Liberal MP for Ennis, defeating O'Gorman Mahon by thirteen votes. In 1855 he was appointed solicitor-general for Ireland by Palmerston's first ministry, and in the same year he was elected a bencher of the King's Inns. In April 1856 he became attorney-general and was sworn of the Irish privy council. 
FitzGerald's seemingly unclouded career received a set-back when he was accused of a serious act of misconduct by the then Irish master of the rolls, Thomas Berry Cusack-Smith. FitzGerald had presided over the winding up of the Tipperary Bank by its directors, John Sadleir and his brother James Sadleir, MP for Tipperary. While the proceedings were still pending, James Sadleir absconded; the master of the rolls charged FitzGerald with having connived at Sadleir's escape from justice 'for reasons which the public well knew'. The charge led to heated discussion in parliament and in the press, but FitzGerald was able to clear his name by convincing the house (on 15 July 1856) that he had acted promptly to investigate the matter as soon as he heard of Sadleir's crime, and that the real fault had lain with the master of the rolls rather than with himself ('Hansard 3', 143, 15 July 1856, 866; 'The Times', 16 July 1856). Apart from his involvement in this 'cause celebre', FitzGerald's first tenure as attorney-general was notable for his passing of a bill to establish a court of chancery appeal in Ireland (1856). 
FitzGerald went out with the Liberal government in 1858, and on their return to power in 1859 he again became attorney-general for Ireland. In February 1860 he was appointed a justice of the court of queen's bench in Ireland; a few months later, on 3 May 1860, he married the Hon. Jane Matilda Mary Southwell, second daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel the Hon. Arthur Southwell, and sister of the fourth Viscount Southwell. They had ten children: four sons and six daughters. 
While attorney-general FitzGerald had been informally offered the chief secretaryship of Ireland but had expressed his desire to continue in his professional career as a lawyer. Among the cases in which he was involved as law officer were 'R. v. Petcherine' (1855), the murder trial 'R. v. Spollen' (1857), and 'R. v. Conway' ('The Times', 16 and 22 Feb 1858). While he was on the Irish bench some of the most politically sensitive cases of the day were tried before him, including those of the Fenians Luby, O'Donovan Rossa, and others (1865 and 1866), Alexander Martin Sullivan and Richard Pigott for seditious libel (1868), and Charles Stewart Parnell and others (December 1880 and January 1881). His statement of the law of criminal conspiracy in the Parnell case, and regarding undue clerical influence in the Longford election case, was generally accepted and followed in subsequent cases. 
On 23 June 1882 FitzGerald was appointed a lord of appeal with a life peerage. He took his seat in the House of Lords on 27 June 1882 and was sworn of the English privy council. He was the first Irish judge to be appointed a lord of appeal, and his appointment was received with general approval in Ireland. From then on he sat regularly in the House of Lords and on the judicial committee of the privy council. He also took part from time to time in the debates in the House of Lords, especially on subjects relating to Ireland, where his knowledge of the country and the perceived balance of his views gave weight to his opinion. He sat in the House of Lords as a Liberal: but when Gladstone supported home rule he became a Unionist. In 1883 he was elected an honorary bencher of Gray's Inn. On the death of Sir Edward Sullivan in 1885 he was offered the lord chancellorship of Ireland with a hereditary peerage, which he at first accepted, but, on further consideration, he later declined. He died on 16 October 1889 at his brother's house, 22 Fitzwilliam Place, Dublin, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin; his second wife survived him. 
As a liberal-minded judge, FitzGerald won the reputation of being both able and fair. He was praised for his legal knowledge and for his sensitivity to legal distinctions, and was thought calm and judicial in manner. He took a strong interest in Irish educational matters and acted as a commissioner of national education (from 1863 to 1889), a visitor of the queen's colleges, and a governor of the Royal Hibernian Military School. In 1870 the University of Dublin granted him the honorary degree of LLD. 


@@@@@


doc= 9570


Fitzgerald, John fitz Edmund (d. 1589), landowner and rebel, was the son of Edmund fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, seneschal of Imokilly, and Shylie, daughter of Mulroney O'Carroll, lord of Ely O'Carroll. He married Honora, daughter of James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, with whom he had two sons, Edmund, who succeeded to Castlemartyr, and Richard, and two daughters, Catherine and Eleanor. Honora married, second, Edmund, eldest son of Sir John fitz Edmund Fitzgerald of Cloyne. 
The barony of Imokilly, to the east of Cork city, came into the possession of the earls of Desmond in the 1420s, and James, the sixth earl, appointed an illegitimate son of the Fitzgerald knight of Kerry to be his seneschal in the barony, the position becoming hereditary among his descendants. In this role John fitz Edmund Fitzgerald was the earl's chief officer within the barony, and emerged as one of the key military men within the earldom of Desmond between the 1560s and 1580s. He supported the rebellion of James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald in 1569 and as a consequence the lord deputy, Sir Henry Sidney, besieged his castle at Castlemartyr, co. Cork, destroying part of the curtain wall with a demi-culverin. Faced with imminent defeat, John and his men escaped during the night through a bog which adjoined the castle. In late October he was captured, and appears not to have been prominent in the rebellion thereafter. He did, however, facilitate the ending of the rebellion in 1573 when he brought fitz Maurice's son to the lord president, Sir John Perrot; two days later, on 23 February 1573, fitz Maurice submitted to Perrot at Kilmallock, co. Limerick. 
In November 1573 Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, escaped from detention in Dublin and made his way to Munster where he gathered his forces to resist the lord deputy, Sir William Fitzwilliam. On 18 July 1574 John fitz Edmund was one of Desmond's kinsmen and counsellors who signed the 'Desmond combination' by which they promised to support Desmond against Fitzwilliam, but, following a brief campaign by Fitzwilliam, Desmond submitted in September. Munster was finally pacified. In March 1575 John accompanied fitz Maurice into exile in France, their stated aim being to get the French king to intervene with Elizabeth on their behalf in relation to lands they claimed; but John and a few others returned to Ireland in July, and after examination he was allowed back to Imokilly. In November 1576 he was complaining of Desmond's levying of exactions upon his lands, but this did not affect his good relationship with the earl. John was pardoned three times in the 1570s for his actions -- in September 1574, May 1576, and May 1577. 
In July 1579 fitz Maurice ignited the second Desmond rebellion (1579-83) when he landed at Dingle with a force of approximately sixty men, declaring a religious war to rid Ireland of the heretical Queen Elizabeth. John fitz Edmund was to be extremely active over the next four years, proving an able and committed confederate of Desmond. He participated in the latter's attack on the town of Youghal in November 1579, and narrowly escaped death when Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond, burnt Imokilly the following month. He was similarly fortunate in early 1580 when, during his escape from the siege of Strancally Castle across the Blackwater River, a number of men in his boat were killed while he was uninjured. He unsuccessfully attempted to ambush Sir Walter Ralegh in co. Cork in February 1581, and took part in a raid on the barony of Decies, co. Waterford, in mid-1581 in which the rebel forces were believed to number over 1300. By 1583, however, the tide had turned in favour of the crown forces under the command of Ormond, who before 5 May captured John's mother in co. Cork and had her executed. During the final year of the conflict attempts were made to use John to broker Desmond's submission, but these proved fruitless. With the rebellion virtually over, John submitted on 11 June 1583, Ormond subsequently praising him for his courage as an opponent and his honesty as a reformed rebel, and on 14 May 1585 he was pardoned. By then the decision had been taken to settle English planters in Munster, and over the next few years efforts were made to agree a division of Imokilly between planters and John. He was arrested soon after 8 March 1587 and placed in Dublin Castle, remaining there until January 1589 when he was again pardoned and informed he would receive the income of his lands for the period of his detention. Within days, however, the turbulent life of this key supporter of Desmond was over; he was dead by 26 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 9571


Fitzgerald, Sir John fitz Edmund (1528-1612), landowner, was the son of Edmund fitz James Fitzgerald, and succeeded his father as lay dean of Cloyne following his father's death in 1567. His mother may have been a daughter of either a seneschal of Imokilly, a Skiddy of Cork, or a man of Muskerry. At an unknown date he married Honor O'Brien, niece of the earl of Thomond, with whom he had three sons, Edmund, Thomas, and James, and two daughters, Joan and Eleanor. 
In 1569 fitz Edmund remained loyal when the first Desmond rebellion, instigated by James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, erupted. Sheriff of co. Cork in 1570, on 22 April of that year he was given a commission to execute martial law in the county as part of the crown's efforts to defeat the rebellion, and was appointed to a commission to shire the province of Munster into counties on 11 November 1571. In July 1579 violence returned to Munster when James fitz Maurice landed at Dingle, co. Kerry, at the head of a papal-sponsored expedition of approximately sixty men, igniting what became the second Desmond rebellion. Again he stayed loyal to the crown, suffering many rebel attacks as a consequence, some at the hands of his namesake John fitz Edmund, the seneschal of Imokilly, one of the principal rebel leaders. A raid on his lands in June 1580 resulted in the reputed loss of 3000 cattle, while the town of Cloyne was burnt the following March. By May 1581 it was estimated that he had lost over $6000 in goods and cattle. 
In late April 1582 fitz Edmund led troops under Colonel John Zouche against David Barry, Lord Barrymore, one of the main rebels in co. Cork, killing up to eighty rebels in the skirmish. As a reward for his loyal service, and recompense for his losses, he was granted an annuity of 100 marks ($66 13's'. 4died) on 31 January 1583, although in July 1603 he was seeking Sir Robert Cecil's help in receiving this money. Reappointed sheriff of co. Cork, he was commissioned to execute martial law in Cork on 14 March 1586. However, he was involved in controversy in 1586 during the parliamentary session where a bill for the attainder of Gerald Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, killed in rebellion on 11 November 1583, was to be passed. He produced a feoffment made by Gerald, dated 10 September 1574, by which Gerald enfeoffed fitz Edmund and two others of his lands, with the use thereof accruing to Gerald and his heirs. Gerald's lands would therefore have been exempt from forfeiture as he was only proclaimed a traitor five years later, on 2 November 1579. Sir Henry Wallop, vice-treasurer of Ireland (1579-98), then produced a document, the 'Desmond combination', whereby Gerald and some of his leading followers pledged themselves to resist Lord Deputy Sir William Fitzwilliam. This document, dated 18 July 1574, showed that Gerald had been engaged in treasonable activities prior to his feoffment, and therefore his lands would be forfeit on the passing of the bill of attainder, which was duly passed. As a result of this episode fitz Edmund's prestige suffered greatly, but he was eventually forgiven, being appointed to a commission to settle a dispute involving Sir William St Leger and Sir Richard Grenville on 21 June 1591, while in 1594 he was a commissioner for ecclesiastical causes. 
In January 1595 fitz Edmund became embroiled in more controversy, this time with William Saxey, chief justice of Munster, when a number of witnesses alleged that he had made seditious and treacherous comments to the effect that the queen was engaged on a campaign to dispossess loyal subjects of their legally held land in Munster. In June 1596 he was indicted, and in September a three-man commission was appointed to hear his case. Saxey objected to this, insisting the case be heard in England, away from those friendly to fitz Edmund, but by 1597 circumstances had changed. Growing unrest since 1596, together with his previous loyalty, encouraged the queen to direct Lord Deputy Russell to dismiss the case against fitz Edmund in April 1597, and the following month he was pardoned. 
In 1598 the unrest reached its zenith when James fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, the 'sugan' earl of Desmond, broke out in rebellion in support of the earl of Tyrone, also in conflict with the crown. For the third major rebellion during his lifetime fitz Edmund supported the crown, and once again had his lands attacked by the rebel forces. In October 1600 one of his sons accompanied James fitz Gerald, the queen's earl of Desmond, who was sent to Ireland to counter the 'sugan' earl. After landing at Youghal, James fitz Gerald spent a night at fitz Edmund's house at Cloyne. For his service to the crown he was knighted by Lord Deputy Mountjoy on 7 March 1602. 
As dean fitz Edmund enjoyed possession of church lands in Cloyne, while he also had a number of other properties. On 20 November 1566 he received a twenty-one-year lease of three rectories in co. Cork, while on 24 January 1571 he got a similar lease for part of the possessions in co. Cork formerly belonging to the Augustinian abbey of St Thomas the Martyr (Thomas Court) in Dublin, receiving a regrant of these lands on 28 April 1584. By December 1600 he had received a custodiam of some of the 'sugan' earl's lands, including his castle at Conna, co. Cork, getting a lease of these lands, as well as the Franciscan friary at Youghal, on 18 October 1602. In 1596 fitz Edmund's income was reputed to be $1000 p.a., although, given the sustained periods of warfare and destruction and depopulation which afflicted Munster, by the time of his death it was probably much reduced. Fitz Edmund died on 15 July 1612, and was buried at Cloyne Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 9572


Fitzgerald, Sir John Forster (1784/5-1877), army officer, was a younger son of Edward Fitzgerald (died 1815) of Carrigoran, co. Clare, who sat for that county in the Irish parliament and was a colonel of Irish Volunteers in 1782, and his second wife, the daughter and coheir of Major Thomas Burton, 5th dragoon guards, and granddaughter of the Rt Hon. John Forster, lord chief justice of Ireland, and consequently was younger brother of the first two baronets of Carrigoran. 
On 29 October 1793 Fitzgerald was appointed ensign in Captain Shee's independent company of foot in Ireland, and became lieutenant in January 1794. In May 1794 he was given a half-pay company in the former 79th (Royal Liverpool volunteers) regiment, which had been disbanded before he was born. After seven years as a titular captain on the Irish half-pay list, on 31 October 1800 he was brought into the 46th foot, and joined the corps, then consisting of two strong battalions of short-service soldiers, in Ireland. The regiment was much reduced following the peace of Amiens, and Fitzgerald was again placed on half pay, but the year after was brought on full pay again in the newly raised New Brunswick fencibles, in which he was senior captain and brevet major. 
In 1809 Fitzgerald was promoted major in the 60th Royal Americans (later the 60th rifles) and in 1810 became brevet lieutenant-colonel. He joined the 5th or Jager battalion, 60th, in the Peninsula, and was present at the storming of Badajoz (where he was among the regimental commanding officers specially commended by Sir Thomas Picton), at Salamanca, Vitoria, the Pyrenees, and many minor actions. Part of the time he was in command of a provisional battalion of light companies, and in the Pyrenees commanded a brigade and was taken prisoner by the French, but exchanged. At the end of the war he was made CB and decorated. He accompanied the 5th battalion, 60th, from the south of France to Ireland in 1814, and from there in 1816 to the Mediterranean. In 1818 it was brought home from Gibraltar and disbanded, Fitzgerald, then senior major, with most of the other officers and men, being transferred to the 2nd battalion, 60th, at Quebec, which then became the 1st battalion and was made rifles. Fitzgerald, who became brevet colonel in 1819, remained some years in Canada, most of the time as commandant of Quebec, and afterwards of Montreal. 
On 5 February 1824 Fitzgerald took command of the 20th in Bombay, which he held until promoted to major-general in 1830. He was made KCB the year after. In 1838 he was appointed to a divisional command at Madras, but was afterwards transferred to Bombay, and commanded a division of the Bombay army until his promotion to lieutenant-general in November 1841. He was colonel of 85th (1840-43), colonel of 62nd (1843), transferred to colonelcy 18th Royal Irish (1850), general (1854), GCB (1862), and field marshal (29 May 1875). He was Liberal MP for County Clare from 1852 to 1857, when he was defeated. 
Fitzgerald married first, in New Brunswick, in 1805, Charlotte, daughter of the Hon. Robert Hazen of Saint John, New Brunswick, with whom he had a son, John Forster Fitzgerald -- killed as a captain 14th light dragoons in the Second Anglo-Sikh War -- and two daughters. He married second, in 1839, Jean (died 1863), daughter of the Hon. Donald Ogilvy of Clova, formerly of the Madras army and afterwards colonel Forfarshire militia; they had children. 
Fitzgerald, who some short time before had been received into the Roman Catholic communion, died at his home, 43 rue Sebastopol, Tours, France, on 24 March 1877, the oldest officer in the British army. By order of the French minister of war, the garrison of Tours paid him the funeral honours prescribed for a marshal of France. He was buried in St Symphorien cemetery, Tours, on 27 March 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 9573


Fitzgerald, Katherine, countess of Desmond (d. 1604), noblewoman, was the daughter of Sir John Fitzgerald, second lord of Decies (died 1524), and Ellen, daughter of John FitzGibbon, the white knight. After 1505 she married, as his second wife, Thomas fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, who in 1529 became eleventh earl of Desmond, their union producing one daughter, Katherine. Her husband died in 1534, and thereafter she did not remarry, apparently residing for the rest of her life at Inchiquin Castle, co. Cork. In August 1575 she granted the castle and lands to Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, but it would appear that she retained possession of the property as thirteen years later Sir Walter Ralegh held Inchiquin of her. Katherine died in 1604, but interest in her did not -- due to the writings of two eminent men of letters of the Elizabethan and Stuart periods, the aforementioned Ralegh and Fynes Moryson, who both held her up as an example of remarkable longevity. 
Ralegh, who had known the 'Old Countess' during his time as an undertaker in the Munster plantation in the late 1580s, wrote in his 'History of the World', published in 1614, that she had been married during the reign of Edward IV. If she had married in 1483, the year of Edward's death, Katherine would have been 140 years old at the time of her death, assuming she was approximately twenty years old when she married. The truth is more prosaic. Her husband's first wife, Sheila or Gilis, daughter of Cormac Laidhir McTeige MacCarthy, lord of Muskerry, was alive in 1505, so Katherine could not have been married during Edward IV's reign. Ralegh's information was therefore at least partially flawed. Three years after Ralegh's account of her, Fynes Moryson claimed in his 'Itinerary' that the countess had died aged about 140. This would appear to support Ralegh's assertions, but again the evidence calls this statement into question. If Moryson's age for her is correct, Katherine would have been approximately forty-one years old in 1505, the earliest date she could have married. Thomas fitz Thomas presumably hoped for children, and it seems doubtful that he would have married a woman already in her forties. It would therefore appear that Moryson's treatment of her is similarly defective. 
That said, Katherine was indeed old when she died. If her daughter had been born in 1534, the year of her husband's death, and presuming she was perhaps eighteen or twenty when she gave birth, then she would have been born about 1514, making her aged about ninety at the time of her death in 1604. Later writers added further embellishments to the story of this legendary lady, including one anecdote which claimed that she had danced with Richard, duke of Gloucester, the future Richard III. Her death was variously described as being due to injuries received after a fall from a tree while collecting apples, nuts, or cherries. Others confused her with Eleanor, widow of Gerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, who went to London on a number of occasions during the latter half of Elizabeth's reign and the early part of the reign of James I. Katherine thus achieved posthumous fame for a longevity which Ralegh, Moryson, and others appear to have overstated; but given that she was at least ninety years old when she died, together with the fact that she had been a widow for seventy years, she none the less still merits the sobriquet 'the Old Countess of Desmond'. 


@@@@@


doc= 9574


Fitzgerald, Maurice (d. 1176), soldier, was the son of Gerald of Windsor, castellan of Pembroke, and Nest, daughter of Rhys ap Tewdwr, king of Deheubarth (south Wales). He was thus uterine half-brother of Robert fitz Stephen, paternal uncle of Raymond fitz William Fitzgerald (Raymond le Gros) (d. 1189x92), and maternal uncle of Meiler fitz Henry and Gerald of Wales, who recounted his deeds with great partiality. Gerald linked him with the cantred of Llansteffan, an association supported by a mandate of Bernard, bishop of St David's (1115-48), ordering him not to interfere with the land of Pentywyn which he had confirmed to the priory of St John, Carmarthen. When Llansteffan Castle fell to the Welsh in 1146, its recapture was attempted unsuccessfully by 'the sons of Gerald', among whom, no doubt, Maurice may be numbered. 
In 1167 Fitzgerald mediated with Rhys ap Gruffudd, king of Deheubarth, for the release from captivity of Robert fitz Stephen, on condition that he would go to fight in Ireland, and was himself recruited by Diarmait Mac Murchada, exiled king of Leinster, to help recover his kingdom, on promise of a grant of Wexford and two adjoining cantreds to Robert fitz Stephen and himself. In autumn 1169 he landed at Wexford with ten knights, thirty mounted archers, and about a hundred foot archers. In the company of Mac Murchada he went to the relief of O Morda, king of Laigis, against Mac Gilla Patraic, king of Osraige, who had recruited Maurice de Prendergast, and, early in 1170, campaigned with Mac Murchada in the vicinity of Dublin where the surrounding districts were laid waste, resulting in the submission of the citizens. Gerald of Wales depicted Mac Murchada suggesting marriage to his daughter, Aife, to Robert fitz Stephen and to Fitzgerald in turn; but as both men already had legal wives, they were obliged to decline. It is likely that Gerald invented this sequence to explain why, if Gerald's own relatives had achieved so much, Mac Murchada was still anxious to secure the personal intervention of Richard fitz Gilbert, earl of Pembroke and lord of Striguil, known as Strongbow. 
Following the taking of Waterford by Strongbow and his marriage to Aife in August 1170, Fitzgerald joined him at Waterford, arriving in the company of Mac Murchada and Robert fitz Stephen. In 1171 he was one of the defenders in the two-month siege of Dublin by Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, king of Connacht, and claimant to the high-kingship. Gerald of Wales depicts him making an exhortatory speech arguing that the besieged could not look to succour from England, for 'just as we are English as far as the Irish are concerned, likewise to the English we are Irish' (Giraldus Cambrensis, 'Expugnatio', 80-81), and urging a vigorous attack on Ua Conchobair's forces, which was inspired partly by anxiety for the safety of Robert fitz Stephen and his own (probably second) wife and children, who had been left in the garrison at Carrick, Wexford. Three companies, in the third of which were Fitzgerald and the earl, as well as two of Fitzgerald's sons, Gerald and Alexander, then mounted a surprise attack on Ua Conchobair's decamped army. Henry II, during his visit to Ireland in 1171-2, reserved Wexford as royal demesne, thus overriding Mac Murchada's grant to Fitzgerald. Before his departure, Henry assigned him to the Dublin garrison under Hugh de Lacy and at some time before 1173 granted him the middle cantred of Ui Faelain in which Naas was situated, possibly only in custody, since it was to be restored to Strongbow as lord of Leinster by Henry II about 1173. Fitzgerald was present at the hill of Tlachtga, Meath, when Tigernan O Ruairc, king of Breifne, was killed during negotiations with Hugh de Lacy, Fitzgerald supposedly saving Lacy's life by having been forewarned by a dream of his nephew, Griffin, of an impending treacherous attack by O Ruairc. He returned to Wales, but was recalled by Strongbow, who enfeoffed him in the middle cantred of Ui Faelain, and lands in Wicklow between Bray and Arklow (where he, in turn, granted lands to Meiler fitz Henry). Fitzgerald's brother, David fitz Gerald (d. 1176), bishop of St David's, granted him stewardship ('dapiferatum') of the lands of the see of St David's. 
Fitzgerald's daughter Nest married Hervey de Montmorency and his son William (died 'c'.1199) married Alina, daughter of Strongbow. He died at Wexford about September 1176 and was succeeded by William, whose tenure of the middle cantred of Ui Faelain (but not Wicklow) was confirmed to him in 1185 by Henry II's son John, lord of Ireland. Gerald of Wales depicted William fitz Aldelin as royal custodian of Leinster during the minority of Strongbow's heirs, forcing Fitzgerald's sons to give up Wicklow Castle in exchange for the castle of Ferns. It is probable, however, that Gerald obscured the distinction between custody and hereditary grant and that Fitzgerald had merely had custody of the castle of Wicklow. His son Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1204) married Eva of Bermingham and succeeded to the lordship of Offaly (Ui Failge) in right of his wife; and his son Thomas fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (died 'c'.1213) was ancestor of the earls of Desmond. 


@@@@@


doc= 9575


Fitzgerald, Maurice (d. 1268), magnate, called by the annals of Connacht Muiris Ruadh ('Maurice the red'), was the son of Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1242/3), the eldest son of Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1257), justiciar of Ireland from 1232 to 1245. The identity of his mother and the date of his birth are not known. His father died during, or shortly after, his service on the Gascon expedition of 1242-3. Between 1254 and 1257 his grandfather gave the extensive lands he had himself acquired in Connacht and west Ulster to his second son, Maurice fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1286). The grandson was, however, heir to the family lands in Kildare, Offaly, and Limerick, though there seems to have been some doubt about the position of Offaly in 1257, when he was still under age. The careers of the two Maurices, nephew and uncle, are not easy to disentangle, and they have often been confused by historians. In 1264 Maurice the uncle became involved in a bitter dispute with Walter de Burgh, lord of Connacht and Ulster. The Fitzgeralds seized and imprisoned Richard de la Rochelle, the Lord Edward's justiciar of Ireland (who may have been aligned with de Burgh), Theobald Butler, and John de Cogan. This outbreak was appeased by Geoffrey de Geneville, the acting justiciar, in April 1265. According to the Waverley annals, Maurice the nephew was among several barons of Ireland who arrived in England soon after the battle of Evesham (4 August 1265) 'to assist the Lord Edward' ('Ann. mon.', 2.365). The annals go on to say that he was sent with Hamo Lestrange on a sortie against Llywelyn ap Gruffudd in the following September. After this he was drawn into court circles through a marriage to Agnes de Valence, the second daughter of William de Valence, lord of Pembroke and Wexford, Henry III's half-brother. In August 1266 at Kenilworth, in a charter witnessed by Maurice the uncle, the Fitzgerald holdings in Limerick were settled jointly on the couple. 
Fitzgerald died in July 1268, drowned in the Irish Sea as he was returning to Ireland. His marriage to Agnes appears to have been childless. After his death she married Hugh de Balliol (died 1271), elder brother of the future king of Scots, and then Jean d'Avesnes, seigneur de Beaumont (died 1283). Fitzgerald did, however, leave a son and heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 9576


Fitzgerald, Maurice (c.1194-1257), justiciar of Ireland, was the son of Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1204), who obtained half of the cantred of Offelan, centred on Maynooth and Rathmore, from his brother William (died 'c'.1199) before 1189, owned land at Croom in Limerick and Imokilly in Cork, and before 1189 held Offaly as its first lord with centres at Lea and Geashill. Gerald fitz Maurice acquired Offaly through his marriage to Eva, daughter of the first grantee of the area, Robert of Bermingham, and Maurice Fitzgerald was the child of this marriage, which took place in or shortly before 1193. On his father's death in 1204 Maurice was a minor of about nine years of age. He and his lands were placed in the wardship of William (I) Marshal, who in 1207-8 successfully resisted King John's attempts to take them from him. Maurice came of age in 1215 and in the following year his Irish lands, with the exception of those in Offaly, were delivered to him. On Gerald fitz Maurice's death his widow had married Geoffrey fitz Robert and then, after 1211, Geoffrey de Marisco with whom she had several children. The lands in Offaly were Eva's inheritance and they went with her to Marisco, who was entitled to hold them for his life, even after Eva died about 1225. 
In 1234 Marisco lost his Irish lands for supporting Richard Marshal, who was mortally wounded on the Curragh on 1 April that year. Fitzgerald had been appointed justiciar in 1232, replacing Richard de Burgh, who shared temporarily in the downfall in that year of his uncle Hubert de Burgh. He led the force which confronted Richard Marshal on the Curragh and was subsequently rewarded by regaining Lea and Geashill from Marisco. It was recorded in the local chronicle that Richard was murdered 'by the Geraldines, holding the place and taking the part of the king' ('Annals of Ireland', ed. Butler, 7). Fitzgerald was summoned to England after Marshal's death but no action was taken against him. In the following year, however, his messenger, Henry Clement, was murdered by William de Marisco who had been with Marshal on the Curragh. Fitzgerald suspected the involvement of Richard's brother and successor, Gilbert Marshal (died 1241), and relations between the two men were cool. 
The conquest of Connacht in 1235 provided the opportunity to heal the rifts among the English magnates in Ireland caused by the murder of Marshal. In that year the settlers gathered under Fitzgerald to make good Richard de Burgh's claim to the province. From Athlone they travelled north to Boyle in Roscommon, but failed to encounter Fedlimid O Conchobhair, who soon fled to O Domnaill for protection. The invaders then attacked the islands of Clew Bay before besieging and capturing temporarily the island of Loch Ce, which belonged to the Mac Diarmada family. Fedlimid came to terms and agreed to hold the king's five cantreds in Connacht as a tenant of the crown, but in 1236 Fitzgerald banished him and replaced him with a rival. Fedlimid soon returned to contest the situation and with the support of Richard de Burgh eventually re-established his position in 1237. 
In 1235 Richard de Burgh granted Sligo to Hugh de Lacy. He in turn granted a large part of this, namely Carbury and the northern half of the barony of Leyny, to Fitzgerald who acquired the other half of Leyny from Jordan d'Exeter, another of de Burgh's grantees. In 1238 Fitzgerald and Hugh de Lacy ousted Domnall Mac Lochlainn, king of Cenel nEogain and as a reward Lacy granted Fitzgerald his claims as earl of Ulster on Tir Conaill and Fermanagh. In 1239 Fitzgerald plundered Carbury, which at this period was subject to O Domnaill. In 1242 he entered Tir Conaill with Fedlimid O Conchobhair and took the submission of the local families. Thereafter he built castles at Banada and Ardcree in Leyny and in 1245 built the castle of Sligo, again with the assistance of Fedlimid. In 1253 he founded a Dominican friary in the town. After losing the justiciarship in 1245 he continued to raid into Tir Conaill, taking hostages and setting up kings. In 1252 he built the castle of Caol Uisce, which was destroyed by O Domnaill in 1257. Sligo was burnt at the same time. This effectively saw the end of the English thrust into the north-west. 
Fitzgerald gained land elsewhere in Connacht after 1235. Richard de Burgh granted him land in the baronies of Dunkellin and Kiltartan in Galway and he established manorial centres at Ardrahan and Kilcolgan. The territory had previously belonged to the family of O hEidhin and they were allowed to retain some of their former land as Fitzgerald's tenants. In Mayo, Fitzgerald received land in the barony of Kilmaine from Gerald de la Roche and Raymond fitz Griffin. Here he established the manor of Lough Mask where he also built a castle. 
Henry III had confidence in Fitzgerald's ability, as justiciar, to raise money for his enterprises. In 1240 the king ordered him to prepare for a royal visit to Ireland which was subsequently cancelled, and in 1242-3 he complied with Henry's demands for men, money, and supplies from Ireland for his French campaign. In 1245 Fitzgerald was entrusted with the task of organizing a force from Ireland for Henry III's campaign against Dafydd ap Llywelyn in Wales. He gathered upwards of 3000 men, including Fedlimid O Conchobhair and many other Irish. This force arrived at Gannock (Deganwy) late in October, by which time the king was preparing to return home and the force from Ireland ravaged the island of Anglesey. Fitzgerald's punishment for arriving late was to be replaced as justiciar by John fitz Geoffrey in 1245. He was not disgraced, however, and in August 1248 was in Gascony at the king's bidding. In 1249 he and fitz Geoffrey punished Aed, son of Fedlimid, for an attack on the Berminghams and replaced Fedlimid with a rival O Conchobhair. Fitzgerald had founded a Franciscan friary at Youghal, Cork, in 1224 or 1231 and he died there, in the habit of a Franciscan, in 1257. 
Nothing is known of Fitzgerald's wife except her first name, Juliana. Their eldest son was Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, who died in Poitou in 1242/3. He in turn had a son, Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1268), who succeeded his grandfather as third lord of Offaly upon reaching his majority, some time before 1262. He was drowned in 1268 while crossing from England. Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald also had a daughter, Juliana, who married John de Cogan. The second son of Maurice Fitzgerald and Juliana was Maurice fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1286). He acquired the Tir Conaill, Fermanagh, and Connacht lands by feoffment from his father and served as justiciar in 1272-3. About 1258 he married Matilda (Maud), the widow of Maurice de Rochford and daughter of Gerald de Prendergast. The third son of Maurice Fitzgerald and Juliana, Thomas fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, was given Banada in Leyny, Sligo, by his brother Maurice. He was the father of the first earl of Kildare, John fitz Thomas Fitzgerald and he died at Lough Mask in 1271. 


@@@@@


doc= 9577


Fitzgerald, Maurice fitz Maurice (d. 1286), justiciar of Ireland, called Muiris Mael ('Maurice the Bald') by the annals of Connacht, was the second son of Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1257), the justiciar, and his wife, Juliana. The death of his elder brother, Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, in 1242/3 and the minority and early death of his nephew, Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1268), made him for most of his active life the most powerful member of his family. His position was reinforced by a considerable landed base. Shortly before he died, his father got from him the abandonment of all claims to the family lands in Kildare and Offaly, in return granting him the property, mostly in Connacht and Ulster, that he himself had acquired during a long career of military expansion and royal service. This included Sligo and largely theoretical claims in Fermanagh and Tir Conaill. In addition Maurice fitz Maurice held lands in Mayo, together with the extensive manors of Ardrahan and Kilcolgan in Galway and the manor of Inchiquin with the port of Youghal in Cork. His first marriage, about 1258, to Matilda (Maud), daughter of Gerald de Prendergast and widow of Maurice de Rochford, brought him Corran, which consolidated his possessions in Sligo. His second, before 1276, to Emeline (died in or after 1330), daughter of Stephen Longespee and his wife Emeline (the daughter and coheir of Walter Ridelisford, who had earlier been married to Hugh de Lacy, earl of Ulster), added Corrofin, Galway, to his possessions. He also obtained Ossurres in Kerry from the other Ridelisford heiress and Corcomohide in Limerick from Richard Fitzwilliam. In 1259 he was appointed keeper of the Lord Edward's castle of Athlone and sheriff of Connacht. 
This accumulation of power in the west and north of Ireland made Maurice fitz Maurice a serious rival to his overlord, Walter de Burgh (died 1271), lord of Connacht, who also held lands in Limerick and Tipperary and in 1263 was granted Ulster by the Lord Edward. Serious disputes broke out between them in 1264; in December fitz Maurice and his nephew, Maurice Fitzgerald, lord of Offaly, captured and imprisoned Edward's justiciar, Richard de la Rochelle, and other magnates. Walter de Burgh responded by seizing the Fitzgerald castles and lands in Connacht. It is possible that fitz Maurice was at this stage in favour with the Montfortians: in September 1264 he had been ordered by the Montfort government to assist the earl of Gloucester (who was still in Earl Simon's camp) in recovering seisin of Kilkenny, the custody of which Walter de Burgh had held. But if this was so, the connection was not deep. In April 1265 Geoffrey de Geneville succeeded in negotiating a settlement which involved a restoration by all parties of lands that had been captured. According to the Waverley annals, fitz Maurice, together with other Irish barons, arrived in England shortly after the battle of Evesham 'to assist the Lord Edward' ('Ann. mon.', 2.365). In the spring and early summer of 1266 he had a further safe conduct to England and in August of that year he was with the court at Kenilworth, where he witnessed a charter relating to the marriage-settlement of his nephew with a daughter of William de Valence, Henry III's half-brother. 
During the 1270s Maurice fitz Maurice was heavily involved in the attempt to occupy Thomond, where earlier settlements had failed. In the summer of 1272 he took part in an expedition by the justiciar, James Audley, against the Ui Bhriain of Thomond. When Audley was killed in a fall from his horse, he succeeded him as justiciar. His appointment was accepted by Edward's representatives in England, and he seems to have remained in office at least until April 1273, renewing the campaign against the Ui Bhriain and taking hostages from them. In 1274 or 1275 he married his daughter, Juliana, to Thomas de Clare, brother of the earl of Gloucester, settling Youghal and other lands upon them. He was the first witness of a charter in which Clare granted the church of Corcomohide to St Mary's Cathedral, Limerick, for the souls of himself and his wife, his parents, and his parents-in-law. Through an exchange with the Muscegros family and a grant by Edward I, Clare acquired a title to the lordship of Thomond. A close alliance developed between him and his father-in-law. In 1276, when they were involved in helping the justiciar, Robert Ufford, to quell Irish disturbances in Wicklow, fitz Maurice brought troops from his Connacht lands to fight in Glenmalure. In the following year, according to 'Caithreim Thoirdhealbhaigh', the Gaelic history of the wars in Thomond, he and Juliana were present with Clare at Bunratty Castle and advised him, after an unsuccessful campaign, to revenge himself by killing Briain Ruadh O Briain, with whom he had earlier been allied. In 1283 he was again associated with Clare and other lords in an expedition against the MicCharthaigh of Desmond. 
Maurice fitz Maurice had died by November in 1286, when his widow, Emeline, was in England. According to 'Caithreim Thoirdhealbhaigh', he had had a son named Patrick, who was killed in Thomond in 1277, but there is no confirmation of this. His heirs were his two daughters, Juliana de Clare and Amabilia. Long before, he had enfeoffed his younger brother, Thomas fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1271), of Banada in Sligo. Between 1288 and 1293 Thomas's son, John fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, later first earl of Kildare (d. 1316), whose aim was to achieve the reintegration of the lands of his grandfather, negotiated the acquisition of Amabilia's share. He also obtained property from Emeline, who was still living in 1330, and for more than forty years appointed attorneys to protect her interests in Ireland. These transactions, together with the earlier settlement of lands on Juliana, led to protracted lawsuits between the various parties. During the 1290s John's aggrandizement provoked further clashes with the de Burghs. These eventually resulted in the loss by the Fitzgeralds of many of the lands that had allowed Maurice fitz Maurice's father to endow him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9578


Fitzgerald, Maurice fitz Thomas, fourth earl of Kildare (c.1322-1390), magnate and justiciar of Ireland, was the youngest of three sons of Thomas fitz John Fitzgerald, the second earl (d. 1328), and his wife, Joan (died 1359), a daughter of Richard de Burgh, earl of Ulster. He was born about 1322 and was generally known as Maurice fitz Thomas. On the death of his brother Richard, the third earl, in 1331, Maurice became heir to the Kildare inheritance, which included manors in Limerick as well as the primary cluster of lands in Kildare and Offaly. His mother had married, secondly, in 1329 John Darcy, justiciar of Ireland and later steward and chamberlain to Edward III; Darcy received custody of the Kildare lands in 1334. Maurice was given their keeping in 1340 and had livery of his inheritance in April 1342, when the Dublin government questioned whether he was quite of full age. 
Kildare's early public career was stormy. In August 1345 he was arrested at a council meeting in Dublin by William Burton, an English knight in the retinue of Ralph Ufford, the justiciar, on Ufford's orders. Ufford was in Munster on campaign against the unruly earl of Desmond. In October 1344 the pope had given permission for Kildare to marry Desmond's daughter, and it seems likely that Ufford feared an alliance between them. The Dublin annalist, bitterly hostile to the justiciar, condemns the arrest as treacherous. The earl's imprisonment was followed by the judicial resumption of the liberty of Kildare, which neither he nor his successors succeeded in recovering. Earl Maurice remained in custody until May 1346, a month after Ufford's death, when he was released on the surety of leading families of Kildare, in order to participate in a campaign against the O Mordha family of Leix (Laois), and on condition that he would afterwards go to England. In the event his departure was delayed until May 1347 and his destination was the siege of Calais, to which he led a force of Kildare gentry. 
This episode marked a turning point in the earl's career. Edward III moved quickly to repair the damage to political relationships during the period of Ufford's rule, and the rehabilitation of Kildare was a priority. After the fall of Calais he seems to have remained at court and was knighted by the king during the Christmas festivities at Guildford in 1347. Arrangements were in train for his marriage to Elizabeth, daughter of Bartholomew Burghersh (currently the king's chamberlain) and his wife, Elizabeth, who, as one of the daughters and coheirs of Theobald de Verdon, held property in Meath and Louth. On her marriage to Kildare, Elizabeth Burghersh was provided with a jointure of 500 marks in Ireland. In April 1348, 'for his good service in foreign parts' ('CPR', '1348-50', 56), Kildare was pardoned the offences of which he was said to stand indicted. These were never specified, the Dublin government telling Edward III that Ufford had kept them secret, intending to inform him about them personally. From this time onwards, despite a dispute in 1355 with the justiciar, Thomas Rokeby, over the earl's alleged failure to contribute as he should to defensive operations in the Kildare marches, relations with the authorities were generally good. He tried to maintain and exploit his connections with the English court and government, seeking, for example, to recover his liberty rights by an approach to William Wykeham, the chancellor, in 1367. Based at Kildare and Maynooth, he was an obvious candidate to fill gaps in the succession of justiciars, and he acted as justiciar or deputy for short periods in 1355, 1356, 1357, 1360-61, 1372, and 1376. Although he refused office in October 1379, this was an action taken by other magnates at the same period because of the underfunding of Irish government. 
As well as playing a role in royal administration, the earl was a warrior and diplomat on his own account, maintaining a zone of influence in the Irish midlands. Documents preserved in the 'Red Book of Kildare' reveal him between 1349 and 1368 entering into compacts with prominent members of the settler and native lineages of, for example, Bermingham, Mac Eochacain, O Diomusaigh, and O Conchobhair of Offaly. Typically, he offered land, favour, and support in return for rents and military service. In his role as a marcher lord, he provided essential protection for the settler communities of east Kildare and Dublin. 
Earl Maurice visited England in 1379 and appears to have remained active well into his sixties. In 1387, as the most senior magnate in Ireland, he was appointed to arbitrate in disputes that had arisen between the earls of Desmond and Ormond. He died in 1390, after May, and was buried in Holy Trinity Cathedral, Dublin. Gerald Fitzgerald (died 1432), the eldest of his three legitimate sons, succeeded him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9579


Fitzgerald, Maurice, eighteenth knight of Kerry (1774-1849), politician, was the elder son of Robert Fitzgerald, knight of Kerry (died 1781), and his third wife, Catherine, daughter of Launcelot Sandes of Kilcavan, Queen's county. He was born in co. Kerry on 29 December 1774 and succeeded his father as knight of Kerry in 1781. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1789 but failed to take a degree; a spell at Lincoln's Inn, London, proved equally fruitless and he was not called to the bar. He was elected MP for County Kerry in 1794 but as he was then under age he had to wait several months before taking his seat. He subsequently represented County Kerry uninterruptedly for thirty-seven years in the Dublin and, after 1801, Westminster parliaments. The knight of Kerry entered public life at the same period as two of his personal friends, the duke of Wellington and Lord Castlereagh. He proved a harsh critic of the Irish parliament, and blamed it for the rebellion of 1798, in which he served as a major in the Kerry militia. Not surprisingly, in the aftermath of the rebellion, he emerged as a firm advocate of union, which he saw as the solution to the Catholic question. On 22 January 1799, a day after he had made a particularly robust defence of union in parliamentary debate, he was offered a seat at the Irish revenue board, Lord Cornwallis, the viceroy, pronouncing him to be a 'young man of excellent abilities'. He held this position until January 1801. On the resignation of William Pitt and Lord Cornwallis in 1801, he was chosen by the latter to explain Pitt's position on the question of Catholic emancipation to leading Catholic activists in Dublin. In the same year, following his election to the imperial parliament as member for county Kerry, he was sworn of the privy council and given a seat at the Irish treasury board. Also in 1801 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the Kerry militia, a position he retained until his death. Despite these honours, for a number of years he showed himself to be a very irregular attender at Westminster. On 5 November 1801 he married Maria (died 1829), daughter of David Digges La Touche, of the Dublin banking family, and it is possible that her many confinements (she bore eleven children) made him reluctant to travel. In 1807 he resigned his office out of sympathy with the whig ministry of the duke of Bedford, which had just fallen as a result of the Catholic question. From that date until 1827 he attended parliament regularly and generally took an opposition stance. He was particularly active throughout this period in advocating the cause of Catholic relief, frequently acting in close concert with Daniel O'Connell, and he was bitterly disappointed that the union had not fulfilled its promise in that respect. With the passing of the 'Catholic Relief Act' in 1829, however, 'The Knight' (as O'Connell dubbed him) began to move towards the tories; Wellington had been a friend from his youth and he took office as vice-treasurer of Ireland in Wellington's ministry in 1830. This proved to be his political undoing, for O'Connell, despite Fitzgerald's services to the Catholic cause, denounced him as 'an avowed ministerialist' and turned his political weight against him in co. Kerry. He was defeated in the elections of 1831 and 1835. In the latter electoral contest he was overwhelmed by the unscrupulous popular party, which practised intimidation and drew up 'the patriot's curse', to be pronounced on anyone who voted for the knight of Kerry: 'May his wife, if he have one prove incontinent, being found oftener in the brothel than by the home fireside and may he nightly repose himself in sheets contaminated and adulterous. Amen. 
May his children prove ungrateful and disobedient, and should he need a crutch, may they pluck it from their old limping sire, and with it beat out his brains. Amen. (Fitzgerald MSS, PRONI, T3075/15/46)' He held office for a brief time as a lord of the Admiralty in Peel's short-lived administration of December 1834, but he never recovered his seat in parliament. In 1845 he addressed a 'Letter to Sir Robert Peel on the Endowment of the Roman Catholic Church of Ireland' in which he claimed that William Pitt was in fact the originator of Peel's scheme. 
Fitzgerald inherited an encumbered estate and the debts mounted as the years passed. He was very interested in 'improvement' in his local area and to that end he promoted slateworks on Valentia Island and a fish-curing business at Cahirciveen, and he and O'Connell were shareholders in the American and Colonial Steam and Navigation Company set up to establish navigation between Valentia harbour and places abroad. None of these projects enjoyed more than a brief success, and his debts mounted. He vigorously opposed the Irish poor law, 'concocted in English cupidity and a selfish jealousy of Ireland', which he forecast would bring ruin to Irish landlords. By the 1840s his estate on Valentia Island was grossly overcrowded with impoverished subtenants. He died at Glanleam, Valentia, on 7 March 1849. His four eldest sons predeceased him, and he was succeeded by his fifth son, Peter George Fitzgerald. His second wife, Mrs Cecilia Maria Knight, survived him until 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 9580


Fitzgerald, Pamela (1776?-1831), celebrity and associate of Irish nationalists, was almost certainly the illegitimate daughter of Louis-Philippe Joseph, duc d'Orleans (1747-1793), cousin of Louis XVI of France, and his mistress, (Caroline) Stephanie Felicite Brulart, comtesse de Genlis 
('nee' Du Crest; 1746-1830)
, educationist. She was probably born at Spa in the Southern Netherlands, where Mme de Genlis was unexpectedly convalescing in 1776. It was claimed by Mme de Genlis that Pamela was the daughter of Mary Sims ('fl'. 1773-1780), that her father was named either Seymour or William Brixey, and that she had been born in 1773 on Fogo Island, Newfoundland. Mary Sims was said by Mme de Genlis to have returned to Christchurch, Hampshire, almost destitute after the death of her husband, with the eighteen-month-old girl called Nancy Sims. In the spring of 1780 the child was taken by Nathaniel Forth, former secretary to the British embassy in Paris, into the family of Louis-Philippe to become the companion and fellow pupil of his children under the tuition of their governess, Mme de Genlis. De Genlis's intention that Pamela would help her other charges to learn English was part of her educational experiment, inspired by Rousseau's 'Emile', to educate children apart from their parents. It was at this time that Mme de Genlis gave her the name Anne Caroline Stephanie, as well as the pet name Pamela in honour of Samuel Richardson's heroine. Pamela herself believed that she was the daughter of the duc d'Orleans and the comtesse de Genlis; it has been suggested by Stella Tillyard that soon after her birth she was sent to England in the care of a nurse called Mary Sims and was subsequently reunited with, if not officially recognized by, her natural parents (Tillyard, 306). 
From 1780 Pamela formed part of the Orleans household at Bellechasse and, under her adoptive mother, received an education that was largely guided by the principles of Rousseau. Pamela blossomed as a perfect female example of Mme de Genlis's educational ideals. The comte de Neuilly described her as: 'an entirely divine creature with a pale oval face, the most beautiful eyes in the world, although of different colours, charming unpowdered brown hair which she wore in curls, with a nonchalant graceful bearing and always dressed in simple but exquisite taste. (Tillyard, 141)' During 1791-2 she accompanied Mme de Genlis to England, where the pair were snubbed by conservatives but feted by the increasingly small circle of radicals and Foxite whigs, including Richard Brinsley Sheridan, who noted Pamela's similarity to his wife, Elizabeth. This resemblance was also noted by Lord Edward Fitzgerald (1763-1798), a radical Irish aristocrat, who first saw Pamela in a Parisian theatre in 1792. Fitzgerald immediately had himself introduced and was invited to dinner at Bellechasse. A few days later, however, while Fitzgerald was still at Bellechasse, Pamela, Mme de Genlis, and her entire school were thrown into turmoil by the news that one of their number, Adele, another illegitimate daughter of the duc d'Orleans (who was now known as Philippe-Egalite), had been placed on a list of undesirable counter-revolutionaries. Lord Edward followed the group to Tournai, proposed to Pamela, and was accepted; the couple married at Tournai on 27 December 1792. The following month Pamela arrived in Ireland and, with her husband, settled in Kildare town in 1794. Together they had three children, Edward Fox, Pamela, and Lucy Louisa. 
Despite her acceptance by the Fitzgerald family, particularly by Lord Edward's aunt, Sarah Napier, Pamela was regarded by many within the Dublin social scene as a dangerous radical. In 1796 she accompanied her husband and Arthur O'Connor to Hamburg while the pair negotiated support for a French invasion of Ireland. She informed Mme de Genlis on this occasion that she did not share Lord Edward's revolutionary enthusiasm but her house in Kildare became a centre of radical organization and was frequented by Lord Edward's closest confidants. By 1798 he was in hiding in Dublin, preparing for an Irish rising, and Pamela saw him only intermittently. Following his capture on 19 May 1798 Pamela made strenuous efforts to see him in prison and may even have bribed access from one of the gaolers, who in turn double-crossed her (Madden, 2.529). Lord Edward died in prison, two weeks after he was taken, on 4 June 1798. The government informer Thomas Reynolds claimed that Pamela was also involved in United Irish business, and the act of attainder against her husband resulted in the loss of the couple's property and her banishment from Ireland. 
Initially Pamela travelled to Goodwood, England, where she stayed with her husband's uncle, the third duke of Richmond, who, it was rumoured, proposed to her. Leaving her children Edward Fox and Lucy Louisa in the care of her Irish relatives, she travelled to Hamburg, where she joined her childhood companion Henriette Mathieson ('nee' de Sercey) on 13 August 1798. She continued to associate with and to assist exiled members of the United Irishmen who arrived in the city after the failure of their uprising. In 1800 Pamela married Joseph Pitcairn ('fl'. 1763-1831), the United States consul in Hamburg, with whom she had a son, who died in infancy, and a daughter, Helen, born in 1803. However, the marriage was evidently unhappy and the couple may have separated before Pamela left Hamburg in June 1806. Despite the brevity of her marriage to Pitcairn and her subsequent resumption of the Fitzgerald name, the occasion provided the Fitzgerald family with an excuse to distance themselves from her, and a promised stipend of $200 per year was withdrawn. In some senses Pamela provided a convenient scapegoat for the Fitzgeralds, who could pin partial responsibility on her for Lord Edward's revolutionary politics. According to Gerald Campbell, Pamela lived in Vienna for a year before returning to France but her precise whereabouts are often difficult to ascertain. 
During the following years Pamela's financial situation worsened considerably. In 1812, while fleeing English creditors, she apparently met her stepbrother Casimir at Dover and accompanied him to Paris. However, she refused discreet offers of assistance from Mme de Genlis and abruptly left the city shortly afterwards. She subsequently lived in France at Abbaye-aux-Bois and at Toulouse. Her most permanent home was at Montauban in a house owned by her friend the duc de la Force. She paid a number of visits to Paris and was finally reconciled with Mme de Genlis, possibly in 1820. In 1830 she returned to Paris hoping to benefit from the Orleanist revolution, which placed her former playmate Louis-Philippe on the throne, but was disappointed. She died at the Hotel de Danube, 7 rue de Richepanse, Paris, on 8 November 1831. Though in receipt of a pension from the Orleans family, Pamela apparently died penniless. She was buried at Montmartre; in 1880 her remains were removed and buried at Thames Ditton, Surrey, by her grandchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 9581


Fitzgerald, Sir Peter George, nineteenth knight of Kerry (1808-1880), civil servant and landowner, eldest surviving son of Maurice Fitzgerald, eighteenth knight of Kerry (1774-1849), and his first wife, Maria (died 1829), daughter of the Rt Hon. David La Touche of Marlay, co. Dublin, was born on 15 September 1808. He married on 11 August 1838 Julia Hussey (died 1896), daughter of Peter Bodkin Hussey of Farranikilla House, Dingle, co. Kerry, a Catholic of Old English ancestry. They had four sons and seven daughters. He began work in the banking house of his maternal grandfather at Dublin. He subsequently entered public service, and was appointed vice-treasurer of Ireland in the 1841-6 ministry of Sir Robert Peel. Succeeding his father in 1849, he found the estate to be heavily mortgaged, but was assisted by his La Touche relatives in repurchasing his lands from the encumbered estates court. From that period he resided almost constantly on Valentia Island, devoting himself to the duties of landlord, the improvement of his estates, and the welfare of his tenantry. He especially earned the thanks of the people by the erection of substantial homesteads in place of the wretched cabins with which the middleman system had covered the west of Ireland. Nevertheless, he encountered passive resistance and press criticism of some of his consolidation schemes. 
Fitzgerald manifested a keen interest in all questions which had a practical bearing on the progress or prosperity of Ireland; and in contributions to 'The Times' he deprecated the censure which was cast indiscriminately upon all Irish landlords. He was the author of several tracts on the law of marriage, the Irish church question, and landlord-tenant relations. The Atlantic cable had its British termination on his estates, and he evinced much public spirit and energy in connection with the successful laying of the cable. Fitzgerald was a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for co. Kerry, and was high sheriff of co. Kerry in 1849, and of co. Carlow in 1875. On 8 July 1880 the queen conferred upon him a baronetcy. Fitzgerald was by then, however, suffering from a dangerous illness, and he died at Glanleam, Valentia, on 6 August 1880. He was succeeded in the title and estates by his eldest son, Captain Maurice Fitzgerald, who served with distinction in the Second Anglo-Asante War, and who restored the family's decaying fortunes by marrying a German Jewish heiress. 


@@@@@


doc= 9582


Fitzgerald, Raymond fitz William (d. 1189x92), soldier, frequently known as Raymond le Gros, was the son of William Fitzgerald (died 1173), son of Gerald of Windsor, constable of Pembroke, and Nest, daughter of Rhys ap Tewdwr, king of Deheubarth (south Wales). He was therefore a first cousin of Gerald of Wales, who recounted his participation in Anglo-Norman intervention in Ireland with great partiality. 
In April 1170 Raymond le Gros led ten knights and seventy archers in advance of Richard fitz Gilbert, earl of Pembroke and lord of Striguil, known as Strongbow, to whose household he was attached, and from whom Diarmait Mac Murchada, exiled king of Leinster, had sought military assistance to recover his kingdom. He landed at Dun Domnaill, near Waterford, and constructed an earthen fortification, with the consent of Mac Murchada, from which he and his men plundered the surrounding countryside, seizing cattle. It was besieged by a large force of Irish drawn from Waterford city and Osraige and accompanied by Domnall O Faelain, king of Deisi, and O Riain, king of Ui Drona, who managed to penetrate the camp; but the cattle, which had been impounded within, stampeded and scattered the attackers, who were then pursued by Raymond and his men. Over five hundred were slain; seventy more were taken captive and subsequently killed, their bodies thrown from cliffs into the sea. Following Strongbow's landing at Waterford on 23 August 1170, Raymond joined forces with him and Waterford city was besieged and taken two days later. Raymond was also present with Strongbow at the capture of Dublin in September 1170. When Henry II closed the ports to Ireland and summoned the return of subjects who had gone there without his consent, Strongbow sent Raymond to negotiate with the king on his behalf; Raymond was following the royal court in Aquitaine and awaiting a response when news broke of the murder of Thomas Becket, archbishop of Canterbury. Raymond's meeting with Henry was inconclusive. He returned to Ireland and was with Strongbow at Dublin when the city was besieged by Ruaidri O Conchobair, king of Connacht, and claimant to the high-kingship, in the summer of 1171. 
On the testimony of Gerald of Wales, when Henry II visited Ireland in 1171-2 he sought to attract Raymond le Gros into his service and away from Strongbow's party, and Raymond seems to have left with the king in April 1172. In 1173, following Strongbow's military service on behalf of the king in Normandy, Henry II consented to his return to Ireland; Raymond went with him and undertook a series of plundering expeditions in the vicinity of Lismore and Waterford. About 1173 he left for Wales: according to Gerald, this was on learning of the death of his father; but according to the so-called 'Song of Dermot and the Earl' it was because Strongbow had refused him marriage to his sister, Basilia, widow of Robert de Quincy (died 1173), who had been Strongbow's constable in Leinster. Gerald claimed that, as a result of Anglo-Norman military reverses in 1174 under Strongbow's uncle, Hervey de Montmorency (whom Gerald portrayed as Raymond's jealous rival for leadership of Strongbow's troops), Strongbow was obliged to seek Raymond's return, now promising him Basilia in marriage. Raymond landed at Wexford, with additional forces (including Meiler fitz Henry), and his marriage to Basilia took place shortly afterwards, with Raymond being enfeoffed by Strongbow with lands in Fotharta Ui Nuallain and Ui Drona (Carlow), and Ui Dega and Glascarrig (Wexford). 
About October 1175 an Anglo-Norman expedition under Raymond le Gros's leadership captured the city of Limerick from Domnall O Briain, king of Thomond. Gerald of Wales depicted Hervey de Montmorency accusing Raymond to Henry II of seeking to seize control not only of Limerick but of all Ireland on his own behalf, and of acting as the leader of a band of mercenaries who fought in the manner of Brabantine soldiers. Henry dispatched messengers to recall Raymond, who was on the point of departure for England, when it emerged that the Anglo-Norman garrison in Limerick was being besieged by Domnall O Briain. It was decided that Raymond should go to its relief. Following the retaking of Limerick, Diarmait Mac Carthaig, king of Desmond, sought Raymond's assistance against a revolt of his son, Cormac Liathanach; Raymond hosted into Desmond in support of Diarmait Mac Carthaig and secured large quantities of booty. On learning of Strongbow's death in April 1176, Raymond decided that the Anglo-Norman garrison in Limerick should abandon the city; and the royal agents determined for the time being to leave him in charge of the Anglo-Norman forces in Ireland. Henry II sent William fitz Aldelin to Ireland, to whom Raymond surrendered the cities, castles, and hostages which he held. Gerald of Wales accused fitz Aldelin of depriving Raymond through motives of jealousy of lands which he held in Ui Faelain in north Leinster and in the vicinity of Wexford. Gerald, however, consistently magnified Raymond's military role, obscuring the distinction between the office of royal constable and that of constable of Strongbow's household, and between custodial and enfeoffed lands. About 1183 the royal officials, John the Constable and Richard de Pec, built a castle for Raymond le Gros in Fotharta Ui Nuallain, indicating that it was his main landholding. In 1185 Raymond witnessed the charter issued by John, lord of Ireland, at Dublin in favour of St Mary's Abbey. On the death of his maternal uncle, Robert fitz Stephen, some time after 1185, Raymond acquired his lands in the kingdom of Cork (Desmond). 
It is unlikely that Raymond le Gros had died before 1189 since Gerald of Wales has no account of his death in the 'Expugnatio Hibernica', of about that year. He had no legitimate heirs. His widow, Basilia, subsequently married Geoffrey fitz Robert and confirmed land grants in Fotharta; a charter issued by Geoffrey and Basilia to St Thomas's Abbey, Dublin, witnessed by William Piro before his elevation to the see of Glendalough in 1192, indicates that Raymond was dead by that date. 


@@@@@


doc= 9583


Fitzgerald, Thomas fitz John, second earl of Kildare (d. 1328), justiciar of Ireland, was the son of John fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, the first earl (d. 1316), and his wife, Blanche de Roche (died in or after 1331), and was therefore generally called Thomas fitz John. On 16 August 1312 his marriage at Greencastle, on Carlingford Bay, to Joan (died 1359), daughter of Richard de Burgh, the 'Red Earl' of Ulster, was the symbol of the union of the two greatest baronial families in Ireland. On 8 September 1316, during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, he succeeded to the new earldom of Kildare on his father's death. He had already served against the Scots at the battle of Skerries, near Ardscull in Kildare, in January 1316. During the early months of the following year, when Robert I, king of Scots (who was married to a sister of his wife), joined Edward on an expedition into Leinster and Munster, he took part in the campaign that turned the Scots back from Limerick. He was then appointed captain of the unruly band of dispossessed Ulster settlers that pursued the Bruces as they retreated northwards. He was thanked by Edward II for his services against Bruce and, also in 1317, he received from the king the office of hereditary sheriff for his county of Kildare, which involved full jurisdiction and liberties within the earldom. 
In 1319 Kildare received a patent empowering him to admit to English law such of his Gaelic tenants as wished to be governed by it. In 1319 and again in 1320 he served on a commission to inquire into the treasons committed during the Bruce invasion. In September 1320 Roger Mortimer appointed him deputy justiciar; he was confirmed in office by the king in April 1321, after the English appointee, Sir Ralph Gorges, was captured during disturbances in south Wales, and acted until August. In 1322 Kildare was summoned to serve against the Scots, but does not seem to have accompanied the justiciar, the earl of Louth, on the expedition that left Ireland in August. In 1324 he was at the Dublin parliament, where the magnates of Ireland pledged themselves to arrest felons of their lineages and lordships and deliver them up to royal justice. Also in 1324 he was accused of being an adherent of Roger Mortimer and of corresponding with him after his escape from the Tower of London. 
There may have been some truth in this, for one of the first acts of the English government after the accession of Edward III in 1327 was to reappoint Kildare as justiciar of Ireland. Nevertheless, he had been on good terms with the Despensers: in June 1323 the pope had granted a dispensation for his son, John, who was a hostage in England, to marry Joan, daughter of Hugh Despenser the younger. The Irish magnates, several of whom had also formed links with the Despenser regime, were notified of his appointment as justiciar in February 1327. He faced a series of crises. Feuds involving the Fitzgeralds of Desmond, the Berminghams, Butlers, de Burghs, and Poers were causing widespread disturbances across southern Ireland. While these had their origins in territorial disputes, the political weakness in England had allowed them to get out of hand. Kildare conducted negotiations with the parties at Kilkenny and in parliament at Dublin in May. At the same period, Robert Bruce, who may have hoped to exploit the uncertain allegiances to Edward III, landed in Ulster and forced the seneschal to agree a truce. Kildare sent an emissary north, and persuaded the king of Scots to withdraw. But as late as 23 July he and his fellow ministers reported to England their fears of a Scottish conquest. Soon after this he faced a challenge from the Irish of Leinster, who in an unusual fit of unity chose Domnall, son of Art Mac Murchadha, as their king. Domnall was quickly captured by the English of Wexford, and Kildare sent the chancellor, Roger Outlaw, to Carlow to negotiate his delivery into the government's hands. 
Kildare, described by the Dublin annals as 'a prudent man' (Gilbert, 2.352), died in office on 5 April 1328 at Maynooth, and was buried in the Franciscan friary at Kildare. The previous year he had granted the advowson of Kilcullen, Kildare, to the priory of Holy Trinity, Dublin, in return for perpetual prayers for the souls of himself, his wife, and his relatives and friends. He had at least three sons: John (died 1324); Richard, the third earl (died 1331); and Maurice fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, who became the fourth earl (died 1390). The countess had further children with John Darcy, Kildare's successor as justiciar, whom she married at Maynooth on 3 July 1329. When she died in 1359, having long outlived Darcy, she was buried with her first husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 9584


Fitzgerald, Thomas, seventh earl of Desmond (1426?-1468), administrator, was the son and heir of James Fitzgerald, sixth earl (died 1462/3), and his first wife, Mary, daughter of Ulick Burke, lord of Clanricarde. He was probably born in 1426 but little is known of him before his father's death in 1462 or 1463. Unlike the sixth earl, who had shown little inclination for affairs of state, Earl Thomas was an active and ambitious politician. In Edward IV's appointment of him on 2 August 1462 as steward of Connacht and constable of Limerick Castle, he was already styled earl of Desmond and his previous service to Richard, duke of York, is also mentioned. The appointment coincided with a Lancastrian invasion of Ireland led by Sir John Butler, heir to the attainted earl of Ormond, who took prisoner Desmond's brother, Garret Fitzgerald, and then captured Waterford. In pitched battle at Piltown, near Carrick-on-Suir, Desmond defeated the Butlers of Polestown, who had joined the Lancastrians, after which the Lancastrian rising gradually subsided. Edward IV rewarded him for this victory by appointment in April 1463 as deputy to George, duke of Clarence, the nominal lieutenant of Ireland, despite the risk that the earl was too compromised by close relations with Gaelic chiefs in Munster to command universal support among the Englishry. Thus, by conferring the governorship on the most remote of the three Irish-based earls, Edward inaugurated an unusual experiment in the crown's efforts to extend the Dublin administration's normal range of operation. 
Desmond's comparatively meagre landed inheritance in Kerry, Cork, and Limerick offered little help in the primary task of ruling the strategic heartland of English Ireland, around Dublin; but this problem was solved by associating with the earl in government two previous governors with extensive lands there -- Roland FitzEustace, Lord Portlester (died 1496), who remained as treasurer; and Desmond's kinsman, Thomas Fitzgerald, seventh earl of Kildare (d. 1478), who soon took over the chancellorship. Edward ordered Desmond to govern with Portlester's advice and, more pointedly, to have 'a special respect to the observance of oure lawes and statutes there', and in particular not to impose on the king's subjects 'that dampnable and unlawful extortion and oppression used upon thaime called coyne and liverie' (Cosgrove, 'Execution', 16). In fact, Desmond's deputyship was overshadowed by complaints about his attempts to maintain his retinue by introducing into the English pale coign and livery (the free quartering of troops in the manner of a Gaelic chief) and other Gaelic exactions; these eventually proved his undoing. Within months, a Drogheda merchant laid charges before the king of coign and livery imposed on Meath. In 1464 a feud between the earl and William Sherwood, bishop of Meath, who spearheaded the Meath gentry's opposition to his rule, led to the killing of nine of Desmond's followers in Fingal. And after Desmond had ignored the king's appointment as chancellor of John Tiptoft, earl of Worcester, with Sherwood as his deputy, and appointed Kildare instead, both Sherwood and Desmond were summoned to court. Desmond left with a glowing testimonial from the Irish parliament, which stressed his service in upholding law and order and repressing Lancastrian risings by the Butlers and in Meath. Indeed, parliament's proceedings underlined not only the continuing wide support for Earl Thomas but also the unwontedly vigorous activity in outlying parts of the English lordship which characterized his deputyship. The king confirmed him in office and also rewarded him with an annuity of $100, financed by a life grant of six manors in Meath, so strengthening his hand there. 
Despite this and a parliamentary act of resumption, however, Desmond remained hard pressed to maintain an adequate retinue without financial assistance from England; and by mid-1465, when Worcester was appointed to replace him as deputy and then countermanded, Earl Thomas's influence was waning. While campaigning in Offaly in 1466, he was taken prisoner by the O Conchobhair Failghe chief, Conn, though he was later rescued by the English of Dublin. Continuing Gaelic raids on Meath and north Kildare, however, called in question his ability to defend the pale; and in Munster the O Briain family exploited Desmond's troubles to strengthen their power east of the Shannon. Thus, in spring 1467, Edward decided to replace him and the earl of Worcester arrived in October with the considerable retinue of 700 English archers to restore order. Despite Worcester's fearsome reputation as 'the butcher' his relations with the Geraldines remained ostensibly civil. Yet when Worcester's parliament reconvened at Drogheda on 4 February 1468, a bill of attainder was introduced and Desmond, together with the earl of Kildare and Edward Plunket, found himself attainted without warning of 'horrible treasons and felonies... as well in alliance, fosterage and alterage, with the Irish enemies of the king, as in giving them horses and harness and arms, and supporting them against the king's faithful subjects' (Berry, 465). Portlester was also accused of treason for having urged Desmond to make himself king of Ireland. The earl, who had attended parliament against the advice of his friends, was within eight days arrested at the Dominican convent in Drogheda. From Friday 12 February until the following Monday, he remained in custody 'in daily expectancy of death' (Cosgrove, 'Execution', 23) and was then taken out and beheaded. He was buried in St Peter's Church, Drogheda, but a century later Sir Henry Sidney removed his tomb to Holy Trinity Cathedral, Dublin. Gaelic annalists praised his hospitality, bounty, and patronage of the learned classes (he founded the college at Youghal). His widow, Ellice, daughter of Lord Barry of Buttevant, later married Maurice Fitzgibbon, the white knight. 
Desmond's execution both shocked and puzzled contemporaries. The annals of Ulster related that Ireland had never had 'a foreign youth that was better than he. And he was killed in treachery by an English earl' ('Annals of Ulster', 3.220-21). An English chronicler reported that Desmond's execution displeased the king; and Richard III later admitted that he had been slain against 'all manhode, reason and good conscience' (Gairdner, 69-70). A later tradition had it that the queen, Elizabeth Woodville, in revenge for the earl's criticism of her marriage, had surreptitiously secured his death warrant by procuring the king's signet while he was still in bed. Yet the most likely reason for Desmond's execution is the charge of imposing coign and livery. This indeed was Sir William Darcy's view: in a report to the English council in 1515 he observed that Desmond was the first to impose coign and livery on the English pale. Serious disturbances followed his execution, during which Kildare and Portlester fled to Desmond's brother. Kildare's attainder had to be reversed and Desmond's son, James (died 1487), received livery of his inheritance even though under age. Yet the family remained estranged from the crown; the earl's brother disputed the succession; and English influence in the south-west was greatly reduced. 


@@@@@


doc= 9585


Fitzgerald, Thomas, seventh earl of Kildare (d. 1478), administrator, was the son of John Fitzgerald (died in or before 1434), reputedly the sixth earl, and his wife, Margaret de la Herne, and grandnephew of Gerald Fitzgerald, the fifth earl (died 1432). In 1432 James Butler, fourth earl of Ormond, had secured possession of most of the Kildare estates in right of his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter and heir of the fifth earl of Kildare. 'Thomas fitz Morice of the Geraldynes' first emerges in 1453-4, when he was disputing the Butler claim to the Kildare ancestral manors of Maynooth and Rathmore. He was probably recognized as earl only during 1454. In October 1454 he was elected justiciar of Ireland after the death of the deputy of Richard, duke of York, and he served as York's deputy lieutenant from 1455 until the duke took refuge in Ireland in 1459 after the battle of Ludford Bridge. Kildare's association with the Yorkists during these years, and the eventual attainder of the Lancastrian earl of Ormond and Wiltshire, enabled Earl Thomas to retrieve all the Kildare estates and more from the Butlers. He also began the recovery of those possessions in the Kildare-Carlow region which had been reoccupied by Gaelic clans during the abeyance in the earldom, notably the border manor of Rathangan, probably in 1459 after the earl's defeat of Conn O Conchobhair Failghe. In this way, Earl Thomas laid the foundations for the later Kildare ascendancy. 
After York's departure in 1460, Kildare again served as governor, being rewarded by Edward IV in 1461 by confirmation of Duke Richard's grant of the manor of Moylagh, Meath. The next year he was superseded by Roland FitzEustace, Lord Portlester, but in January 1464 he was made lord chancellor. Kildare was married to Joan, daughter of James Fitzgerald, sixth earl of Desmond (died 1462/3), and sister of Thomas Fitzgerald, the seventh earl (d. 1468), and in 1464 he and his wife founded the Franciscan convent at Adare in Limerick. In 1468 he incurred, with his brother-in-law Thomas Fitzgerald, the hostility of the new deputy, John Tiptoft, earl of Worcester. Both were attainted by parliament at Drogheda, but the reprisals which followed Desmond's execution brought out so clearly the weakness of a government without Fitzgerald support that Kildare was respited. On his promise of faithful service and to cause the Irishmen of Leinster to be at peace, parliament repealed the attainder and restored Kildare to his estates. During autumn 1470 he was re-elected justiciar and held a parliament in Edward IV's name in November. He was serving as deputy lieutenant for Henry VI the following February, as justiciar for Edward IV in May, and, on Clarence's reappointment, became deputy again and remained in office until 1475. By building a dyke to protect the pale, and by excluding 'disloyal Irish' from garrisons, Kildare sought to uphold English rule. In 1472 eighty archers were provided for him as the nucleus of a permanent force, but he was expected to defray half the cost. In 1473 the archers were increased to 160, with sixty-three spearmen; and in 1474 a Brotherhood of the Arms of St George was established to defend the pale, of which Kildare was president, while his son Gerald was its first captain. This put a force of 120 mounted archers and forty men-at-arms in his hands. The period of Kildare's government is also an epoch of some importance in the history of the Irish coinage. 
In 1475 Kildare was superseded by William Sherwood, bishop of Meath. He was re-elected justiciar in February 1478, but he died on 25 March and was buried in the monastery of All Hallows in Dublin. He and his wife apparently had four sons and two daughters, and Kildare was succeeded by his eldest son, Gerald Fitzgerald (1456?-1513), the eighth earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 9586


Fitzgerald, Thomas, tenth earl of Kildare (1513-1537), nobleman and rebel, was born in London, the only son of Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare (1487-1534), and his first wife, Elizabeth (died 1517), daughter of Sir John Zouche. Little is known about his early years, but after his mother's death he was raised by Janet Eustace, wife of the earl's steward, Sir Walter Delahide. He spent some years at court and married Frances, youngest daughter of Sir Adrian Fortescue, perhaps before his father's return to Ireland in August 1530. A gunshot wound at Birr Castle left Kildare unable to campaign, and in spring 1533 Lord Offaly, as he was known, led an unsuccessful raid upon O'Reilly. He was apparently again at court in summer 1533. In November Kildare gave him custody of the key border manor of Rathwire, Meath. Following discussions between them about the lordship's government in Kildare's absence, and immediately before sailing for England, Kildare surrendered the sword of state to Offaly at a council meeting in Drogheda in February 1534, nominating him his vice-deputy -- to the surprise of his critics, who thought him 'yong and wilful and moste to this tyme orderyd by light counsaill' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 2.183). In fact, Kildare forbad Offaly to act except by the advice of his leading counsellors, notably Delahide and Janet Eustace. 
Following Kildare's arrival at court, Henry VIII (who feared for himself that he was 'not like to live long', and that the Fitzgeralds might create trouble for the incoming governor, Sir William Skeffington) dispatched two officials with instructions to Offaly to convene the council, at which his further pleasure would be declared. Kildare, however, forestalled these plans, sending a messenger to Offaly advising 'that he shulde play the best or gentilst parte, and... not trust to the kinges counsaill ther. For if he did, he shulde be brought perforce into Englande and ther sholde lose his liff' (LPL, MS 602, fols. 138'v'-139'v'). After consulting the earl's counsellors, Offaly summoned a council for 11 June 1534. Riding through Dublin city with a strong company of horse wearing silken fringes on their headpieces (whence his sobriquet, Silken Thomas), he then surrendered the sword before the council at St Mary's Abbey, formally defied the king, and denounced royal policy. These acts of defiance were probably not intended as outright rebellion, but to pressurize the king to confirm Kildare as deputy. There followed a lull as Offaly, awaiting Henry's response, built up support in the English pale and among Gaelic chiefs beyond. It was only about mid-July, upon news of Kildare's arrest on 29 June, that the rebels made serious efforts to win control of the pale. 
Essentially, Offaly pursued a three-pronged strategy. Within Ireland, the basis of rebel support was Kildare's extensive bastard feudal connection (notably the pale aristocracy, including key members of the Dublin administration like chief justice Delahide and under-treasurer Bath), plus his Gaelic satellites. This connection remained apparently solid during the revolt's initial phase, until the arrival of the king's army in mid-October. In a bid to harness to his cause traditional regional sentiments among the Englishry, Lord Offaly denounced the king as a heretic and proclaimed that those born in England should leave Ireland immediately on pain of death, requiring instead an oath to himself, the pope, and the emperor. Those who refused were clapped in Maynooth Castle. This crusade won him some support from conservative clerics (notably the English-born chancellor of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, who wrote in support of the papal primacy and was later executed for treason) and a posthumous reputation as a founding father of Irish Catholic nationalism. At least sixty-one benefices were vacant after the revolt. In England, Offaly's propaganda seriously embarrassed the king. Henry apparently offered a pardon and Kildare's release, but not the earl's confirmation as deputy -- Offaly's main aim. Abroad, it was widely believed that religion was the real cause of the rising. Yet the agents whom Offaly, O'Brien of Thomond, and, before his death in December, the earl of Desmond dispatched to Charles V and Rome, and the three imperial agents sent by Charles to Ireland, provided little more than prayers, promises, and the odd shipload of arms. The emperor, in fact, viewed the revolt chiefly as a useful distraction to prevent Henry VIII combining with the French during his expedition to Tunis (May 1535), so encouraging Offaly to hold out when a tactical surrender might partly have retrieved Fitzgerald fortunes. 
To replace Offaly, the Irish council elected as justiciar the aged Lord Delvin, but Offaly brushed aside their feeble attempts to organize resistance. The earl's political opponents initially took refuge in Dublin Castle, which Offaly besieged, while two more rebel armies campaigned in counties Louth and Wexford. As the siege intensified, English-born officials escaped to England, but Archbishop Alen of Dublin -- captured when his ship ran aground -- was killed by the rebels (28 July 1534), perhaps as a result of their misunderstanding Offaly's orders. In early August a truce with the citizens allowed Offaly to renew the siege from the city. Despite occasional reverses, Offaly gradually consolidated his control over the pale, Carlow, and Wexford. Desmond, supported by O'Brien and the MacCarthies, held the south-west. Other Gaelic chiefs also intervened, attracted by prospects of plunder. Resistance was largely confined to the Butlers (who rejected Offaly's overtures) and three urban centres, Dublin, Kilkenny, and Waterford. Within the pale, the citizens broke truce in September on the king's orders. His father's death in the Tower on 2 September 1534 made Offaly tenth earl of Kildare, and in a final bid to capture the castle (particularly its military stores) he besieged Dublin with 15,000 men. Very few pale gentry were not 'personelly with Thomas FitzGerot, or gave hym aide of men, money or victailes' (Ellis, 'Tudor policy', 262), even though many participated unwillingly, shooting headless arrows into the city. The rebels, none the less, did considerable damage, breaking into the city before being driven out again. 
The situation was transformed with Skeffington's arrival on 24 October with an English army. Kildare enjoyed some initial success in opposing Skeffington's landing of troops at Howth, killing or capturing forty footmen and driving away the ships with his artillery. Yet the pale gentry mostly deserted to the deputy once it was safe to do so, and Skeffington had Kildare proclaimed a traitor from the high cross at Drogheda. Even after the English parliament had attainted the tenth earl in December, however, the gentry 'dare[d] not be ernest in resisting of him, in doubte he shuld have his pardon herafter as his graundfader, his fader, and diverse his auncessours have had' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 2.222). Rather than risk a pitched battle and prejudice his chances of outside support, Kildare withdrew to Maynooth, which he had prepared against a siege, and burned other parts, 'wherby he thinke to inforce this army to departe' (ibid., 2.226). He was assisted by Skeffington's tactics. The deputy distributed the army into small garrisons, which could be picked off, and then fell sick. Only in late February 1535 did the campaign recommence. Its one significant military event was the ten-day siege of Maynooth, which Kildare's constable surrendered for a bribe on 23 March, after the basecourt had been taken. Skeffington's reputation disappeared with the garrison's summary execution, but the army Kildare had raised to lift the siege melted away upon hearing of 'the pardon of Maynooth' (as it was subsequently remembered). The earl fled, initially to Lea Castle, and then into O'Brien's country, intending to sail for Spain to plead for assistance. His other co. Kildare castles were quickly retaken but then, having dispatched an embassy to Charles V and repudiated his English-born wife, he returned to the pale borders and with O'Connor's assistance began sporadic raids on the Englishry. Militarily, these raids had little value, but they were a serious embarrassment to the government. Skeffington's army was ill-suited to the task of hunting down rebels in the Gaelic midlands. Thus when Kildare, despairing of Spanish aid, wrote to Lord Leonard Grey (Skeffington's replacement as army commander and his uncle-in-law), soliciting pardon for his life and lands, Grey and Lord Butler willingly promised him his life. 
Kildare surrendered on 24 August 1535 and was brought up to court by Grey. For a few days he remained at liberty: 'if he had beene apprehended after suche sorte as was convenable to his deservynges', the king growled, 'the same had been moche more thankfull, and better to our contentacion' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 2.280). Yet he was soon sent to the Tower, and was later joined by his five uncles and a leading supporter, Sir John Burnell. Grey pleaded hard for his promise, but the duke of Norfolk's comment, 'Quod defertur, non aufertur' ('What defers does not set aside'), more accurately reflected the king's strategy. Only the earl's younger half-brother, Gerald Fitzgerald, escaped the general round-up of Geraldines and, after a peripatetic existence in Ireland and abroad, was restored as eleventh earl (1554-85) with most of his father's estates. In May 1536 the Irish parliament attainted the ninth earl, with effect from 8 July 1528, probably so as to secure those estates which were entailed to Gerald, but incidentally depriving Thomas of the title of tenth earl accorded him in the English attainder and so altering the mode of his execution. Yet since the English attainder had specifically excluded two of his uncles, since pardoned, the king's decision to execute them too required a third act of attainder against Fitzgerald and his five uncles, passed by the English parliament in July. Meanwhile, Thomas whiled away his time in very reduced circumstances, dressed in 'old hosyn and shoys and old shyrtes' given by other prisoners (ibid., 2.403), and engraving his name on the wall of the Beauchamp Tower. He had reached THOMAS FITZGERA when, on 3 February 1537, all six Fitzgeralds, plus Burnell, were: 'draune from the Tower un to Tyborne, and there alle hongyd and heddyd and qwartered, save the Lorde Thomas, for he was but hongyd and heddyd and his boddy buryd at the Crost Freeres in the qwere, and the qwarteres with their heddes set up abowte the citte. (Nichols, s.a. 1537)' Lord Offaly was 'ung ieusne home desperit hardy et vaillant' ('a young man of spirit, brave and bold'), so the Spanish ambassador heard (TNA: PRO, PRO 31/18/3/1, fol. 109). He was remembered forty years later as tall, handsome, and eloquent. He acquitted himself well militarily, but the political difficulties he faced in 1534-5 would have taxed even the most experienced politician. 


@@@@@


doc= 9587


Fitzgerald, William (1814-1883), Church of Ireland bishop of Killaloe, was a son of Maurice Fitzgerald MD and his second wife, Mary, daughter of Edward William Burton of Clifden, co. Galway. He was born at Lifford, co. Limerick, on 3 December 1814 and was the younger brother of Francis Alexander Fitzgerald, third baron of the exchequer. He was educated privately and then attended Midleton School, co. Cork. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in November 1830, obtained a scholarship in 1833, the primate's Hebrew prize in 1834, and the Downes premium for composition in 1835 and 1837. He took his degree of BA in 1835, his MA in 1848, and his BD and DD in 1853. He was ordained deacon at Elphin on 25 April 1838, and priest on 23 August 1847. 
While serving as curate of Lackagh, Kildare, Fitzgerald made his first attempt to publish. Philip Bury Duncan of New College, Oxford, had offered a sum of $50 for an essay entitled 'Logomachy, or, The abuse of words'. Fitzgerald won the prize with the special commendation of the donor and an additional grant of $25 to pay for the printing of the essay. After serving as curate of Clontarf, Dublin, from 1846 to 1848, he became vicar and prebend of Donaghmore, in the diocese of Dublin, on 16 February 1848. 
From 1847 to 1852 Fitzgerald was professor of moral philosophy in Trinity College, Dublin, and from 1852 to 1857 was professor of ecclesiastical history in the same university. His next promotion was to the vicarage of St Anne's, Dublin, on 18 July 1851 and he also became private chaplain to Archbishop Richard Whately. In 1855 he moved to the perpetual curacy of Monkstown, Dublin, and was also appointed prebendary of Timothan, Dublin, and archdeacon of Kildare. On 8 March 1857 he was consecrated bishop of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross, and in 1862 was moved to Killaloe by letters patent dated 3 February. After disestablishment he was one of the most influential and persuasive speakers in the general synod. His moderate, broad-church views helped to settle the controversy over the revision of the prayer book between 1874 and 1877. He published many works both under his own name and anonymously, and was the chief contributor to the series of papers called 'The Cautions for the Times', which was edited by Archbishop Whately in 1853. His edition of Joseph Butler's 'Analogy of Religion' was much praised by contemporaries; according to the 'Dublin University Magazine' of 1857 it was learned, without pedantry, and its depth of judgement superseded all earlier editions. His other published works include many sermons and charges, often addressing controversial topics. He was the author of 'Episcopacy, Tradition and the Sacraments Considered in Reference to the Oxford Tracts' (1839), 'The Connection of Morality with Religion' (1851), 'Thoughts on Present Circumstances of the Church of Ireland' (1860), and 'The Athanasian Creed, a Letter to the Dioceses of Killaloe and Kilfenora, Clonfert, and Kilmacduagh' (1875). 
In 1840 Fitzgerald married Anne, the elder daughter of George Stoney of Oakley Park, Queen's county. They had six children: three sons, including the physicist George Francis FitzGerald, and three daughters. Anne died on 20 October 1859, aged thirty-six, and was buried in Cork Cathedral. Fitzgerald died at Clarisford House, Killaloe, Clare, on 24 November 1883 and was buried in the family vault at St Nicholas's Church, Cork, on 28 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 9588


Fitzgerald, William Robert, second duke of Leinster (1749-1804), landowner and political reformer, was born on 12 March 1749 at Arlington Place, Piccadilly, London, the second of nineteen children of James Fitzgerald, first duke of Leinster (1722-1773), politician, and his wife, Lady Emily Mary Lennox (1731-1814) ['see 'Fitzgerald, Emilia Mary], daughter of Charles Lennox, second duke of Richmond, and his wife, Lady Sarah Cadogan. On the death of his elder brother George in 1765 he became earl of Offaly and the following year, when his father was created duke of Leinster, he assumed the title marquess of Kildare. He was educated at Eton College between 1758 and 1765, and then received a commission as cornet in the army. In the same year his parents sent him to a military academy in France, which led to a grand tour in Europe, ostensibly to study military tactics and fortifications. In his absence he was elected MP for Dublin City in 1767, though he was too young to sit in parliament. He was re-elected the following year and returned to Ireland in October 1769 to take his seat. 
On his father's death in 1773 Kildare became second duke of Leinster and assumed the role of Ireland's premier peer. Financial pressures on the family were temporarily eased two years later when on 7 November 1775 he married Emilia Olivia St George (1759-1798), daughter and heir of St George Saint-George, Baron St George, and Elizabeth Dominick. He and Emilia had ten children, of whom their second son, Augustus Frederick, born in 1791, became the third duke of Leinster. The duke's social position, coupled with his patriotic reputation, led to his being closely involved in the volunteer movement in Ireland, most notably during the 'free trade or else' demonstration in Dublin on 4 November 1779. Despite his appointment as commander-in-chief of the volunteers in 1779 his essentially moderate stance on legislative independence resulted in his replacement in 1780 by Lord Charlemont. 
During the 1780s, because of his pressing financial situation, Leinster vacillated between the parliamentary opposition, with whom he shared a natural whig outlook, and the Irish administration. The lord lieutenant, Rutland, described him as 'fickle and unsteady in his opinions'. He was the first knight created under the newly instituted Order of St Patrick in 1783 and took a place in the privy council in the same year. By 1788 he had entered government with the lucrative sinecure of master of the rolls. However, the duke's stance in favour of the prince of Wales during the Regency crisis resulted in his loss of office and his alignment with the Irish Whig Club. During the early 1790s he declared in favour of parliamentary reform and full Catholic relief and organized the short-lived Association of the Friends of the Constitution, Liberty, and Peace in an attempt to combat the ineffective Irish Whig Club and radical United Irishmen. His opposition to the war with France slowed his appointment to the command of the Kildare militia, which he received a year late in 1794. 
The duke, with other reformers, was gradually stranded by the growing polarization of Irish politics in the late 1790s, and his support for a radical petition and meeting of Kildare inhabitants in 1797 resulted in a serious rift with the lord lieutenant, Lord Camden, and the loss of his political and military positions. As a result of the decision by Irish (and English) whigs to withdraw from parliamentary activity he effectively abandoned his political position in Ireland shortly afterwards and travelled to Bristol with his wife, who was dangerously ill and died the following year on 23 June 1798. In Ireland the rising of 1798 destroyed large areas of his Kildare estates. The capture and death of his brother Lord Edward Fitzgerald, a leading United Irishman, together with unfounded suspicions in Ireland and England that Leinster secretly supported the rebels, seriously damaged his reputation. The 'Act of Union' of 1800 destroyed the major plank of his political power though he received much-needed compensation for his disenfranchised boroughs of Kildare and Athy. In July 1803 he had just returned from London when United Irishmen from Maynooth, close to his seat at Carton, rose in support of a second, smaller, rebellion, in which he was again implicated. He died of strangury on 20 October 1804 at his residence, Carton House, and was buried at St Bridget's Cathedral, Kildare, five days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 9589


Fitzgerald, Sir William Robert Seymour Vesey (1816/1818-1885), politician, was born in 1816 or 1818, one of the two illegitimate children of William Vesey-Fitzgerald, second Baron Fitzgerald and Vesey (1783?-1843), politician, who left him a share of personalty of over $150,000. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 21 February 1833, and migrated to Oriel, where he was Newdigate prizeman in 1835, and graduated BA in 1837, with a second class in classics, and MA in 1844. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1839, and went on the northern circuit. In 1846 he married Maria Triphena, eldest daughter of Edward Seymour MD. She died in 1865, having borne at least one child. 
In 1848 Fitzgerald was elected as a Conservative for Horsham, Sussex, but was unseated on petition. He was returned again for the same borough in 1852, and retained his seat until 1865. He was foreign under-secretary in Derby's administration, with Lord Malmesbury as foreign secretary, from February 1858 to June 1859. Derby appointed him governor of Bombay in November 1866; he was sworn of the privy council, and made knight commander in the Order of the Star of India in the same year, and grand cross of the same order in 1868. He was relieved in March 1872. In February 1874 Fitzgerald was again returned for Horsham, and held this seat until November 1875, when he was appointed chief commissioner of charities in England. Fitzgerald, who was an honorary DCL Oxon. (1863), and a magistrate and deputy lieutenant of Sussex, died at his residence in Warwick Square, London, on 28 June 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 9590


Fitzgerald, William Thomas (1759-1829), poet, was born in England on 13 April 1759, the son of John Austen Fitzgerald, a colonel in the Dutch service, and his wife, Henrietta, daughter of Samuel Martin ('c'.1674-1776) of Antigua, and sister of Samuel Martin, secretary of the Treasury. He also later claimed connection with the duke of Leinster's family. Fitzgerald was educated at the academy at Greenwich under the predecessor of Charles Burney, and then at the College de Navarre in the University of Paris. He returned to England and entered as a member of the Inner Temple and pupil of Sir Vicary Gibbs. In 1782, he obtained a post in the navy pay office as a clerk, and worked there until his retirement twenty-five years later. 
Fitzgerald enjoyed writing, although his enthusiasm was more pronounced than his talent. As the 'Gentleman's Magazine' put it: 'his pen seized every opportunity of proving that his heart was as loyal as his principles were constitutional' (p. 472), and his more notable productions were either prologues for plays or appeals to the loyalty and valour of England's citizens, including such works as 'Nelson's Triumph' (1798), 'Tears of Hibernia Dispelled by the Union' (1802), and 'Nelson's Tomb' (1806). More characteristically spirited, however, were two 1803 productions: ''Britons never shall be slaves!!' Address to every loyal Briton on the threatened invasion of his country', and 'Britons! to Arms!!' Works of this sort executed in Fitzgerald's passionate manner left him open to criticism, and it is likely that his claim to fame will remain the parody 'The Loyal Effusion', found in James and Horace Smith's 'Rejected Addresses' (1812). William Cobbett called Fitzgerald 'The Small Beer Poet', and it is to Fitzgerald that Byron refers in the first couplet of 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers' (1809): '
-- Still must I hear? -- shall hoarse Fitzgerald bawl 

His creaking couplets in a tavern hall? 

' Fitzgerald bore all of this parody in the best of humour. His enjoyment in rousingly reciting his poetry continued, and his recitals were warmly received at the annual public dinners of the Literary Fund, of which he was one of the earliest and strongest supporters, and for which he acted as vice-president. In 1814 he issued a collected edition of his verses in denunciation of Napoleon Bonaparte. 
Fitzgerald died at Paddington on 9 July 1829, survived by his wife, Maria, and at least three sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 9591


Fitzgerald, William Vesey-, second Baron Fitzgerald and Vesey, and Baron Fitzgerald (1783?-1843), politician, was the elder son of the Rt Hon. James Fitzgerald (1742-1835) and his wife, Catherine Vesey (1759-1832), who was in 1826 created Baroness Fitzgerald and Vesey in the peerage of Ireland. He spent five years at Christ Church, Oxford, where he made a reputation as a young man of ability, and he succeeded his father as MP for Ennis in 1808. He was involved in the famous scandal resulting from the connection of the duke of York with Mary Ann Clarke, but rendered services to the government and the court in bringing facts to light, and secured his appointment as a lord of the Irish treasury in 1809 and a privy councillor in Ireland in February 1810. His motives at this time were impugned by Mrs Clarke in a 'Letter' which she published in 1813, but though there probably was a grain of truth in her assertions, there was not enough to damage Fitzgerald's reputation, and she was condemned to nine months' imprisonment for libel. 
Fitzgerald's rapid political rise was due in large part to the patronage of John Foster, with whose family he became connected. In 1812 he was sworn of the English privy council, and appointed a lord of the Treasury in England, chancellor of the Irish exchequer, and first lord of the Irish treasury. In January 1813 he again succeeded his father as MP for Ennis, having been defeated for County Clare in 1812. He worked closely with chief secretary Robert Peel, despite having overlapping responsibilities. He followed Foster's policy of promoting the amalgamation of the Irish and British exchequers, but was frequently in dispute with other ministers on questions of patronage. In March 1816 he moved a bill for uniting the treasuries, thus making himself redundant. 
In 1815 Fitzgerald assumed his mother's name of Vesey in addition to his own, on succeeding to some of the Vesey estates. In 1818 he was elected MP for County Clare. In 1820 he was appointed minister-plenipotentiary to Sweden, where he spent three years in fruitless attempts to persuade King Karl XIV (Bernadotte) to repay the large sums of money advanced to him during the war with Napoleon. In 1823 he was recalled in something like disgrace. Lord Liverpool, however, knew his value as a speaker and man of business, and in 1826 made him paymaster-general to the forces. 
After the resignation of Huskisson and others from Wellington's administration in June 1828, Peel persuaded the duke to appoint Vesey-Fitzgerald to the cabinet as president of the Board of Trade. This made it necessary for him to seek re-election for County Clare. His long-standing support for Catholic emancipation had up until then made his position secure, but the Catholic Association was now committed to opposing all supporters of the Wellington government. He was opposed by Daniel O'Connell, and was decisively beaten at the poll; the defeat led directly to the concession of Catholic emancipation in April 1829. A seat was, however, found for Vesey-Fitzgerald at Newport in Cornwall in 1829, and in August 1830 he was elected for Lostwithiel. In February 1830 he resigned office and in December he gave up his seat in parliament, but next year he was again elected for County Clare, and held that seat until his accession to his mother's Irish peerage in January 1832. 
When Sir Robert Peel took office in 1834-5, he did not forget the services of Vesey-Fitzgerald, who was created a UK peer, Lord Fitzgerald of Desmond and Clangibbon in co. Cork, on 10 January 1835. In 1835-41 he was an active opposition spokesman on Irish issues in the Lords. He did not form part of Sir Robert Peel's original cabinet in 1841, but he became president of the Board of Control on 28 October 1841, and held that office until his death in Belgrave Square, London, on 11 May 1843. His funeral at Kensal Green cemetery was attended by Peel and other cabinet ministers. 
At the time of his death Vesey-Fitzgerald was a trustee of the British Museum, president of the Institute of Irish Architects, and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He was unmarried, but left most of his personal property to his two illegitimate children, one of whom was the politician Sir William Robert Seymour Vesey Fitzgerald. At his death his United Kingdom peerage became extinct, but he was succeeded in his Irish peerage by his brother Henry, dean of Kilmore, at whose death in 1860 that title also became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 9592


Fitzgibbon, Edmund fitz John, eleventh white knight (c.1550-1608), chieftain and rebel, was the second of three children of John Oge Fitzgerald, or Fitzgibbon, tenth white knight (died 1569), and Ellen (died 'c'.1579), daughter of Patrick Condon. He was born in Mitchelstown, co. Cork. Having spent many years abroad, Fitzgibbon returned to Clangibbon upon news of his father's death. He played a prominent role in James fitz Maurice's rebellion (1569-73), however, and was attainted. With his ancestral lands declared forfeit, the white knight fled to France with fitz Maurice in March 1575, accompanied by his wife, Joan Tobyn, daughter of the lord of Cumshionagh, co. Tipperary. Yet he did not intend permanently to remain in exile and urged Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond, 'to write in my favour to the queen, requiring her grace to accept me into her grace and to restore my country' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/50/21 (ii)). 
The white knight was pardoned in May 1575 and, upon his return in July, received a lease of the preponderance of his father's lands. Some of these lands, however, were subsequently leased to James Roche, the landless and bastard son of Viscount Roche of Fermoy. This development aggravated the historic enmity that existed between the two families and contributed to James Roche's killing. The white knight was pardoned for Roche's death in January 1581 and had, following his mother's death, received a lease of his lands formerly leased to Roche. Yet his legacy was threatened by the reversion of his lease to Englishmen upon its expiration. Thus, while not playing a prominent role in the rebellion of Gerald Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, he doubtless winked at rebel activity until the outcome became clear. Following Desmond's death he accompanied Sir John Perrot, the new lord deputy, to Ulster on his expedition against Sorley Boy MacDonnell in 1584. Despite this most tangible demonstration of his loyalty he remained suspect and was arrested in April 1587 and imprisoned in Dublin. Government officials like Sir Henry Wallop, not content to wait for the white knight's lease to expire, moved to have him executed so that his lands might be distributed among English planters. 
The white knight was spared execution, but remained a prisoner until the summer of 1590, when he received a warrant from the English privy council permitting him to travel to court. He pledged his loyalty to Elizabeth I and, in return, received a grant in tail male of all his lands held on lease. In practice the grant reversed his father's attainder and legitimized his position. He consolidated his power through the ruthless persecution of cadet branches and the marriage of his two sons, Maurice and John Fitzgibbon, and four daughters into prominent neighbouring families. He was appointed sheriff of co. Cork in 1596, achieving a notable success in defending the county from the MacSheehy clan. The white knight reluctantly surrendered the position in 1597 but was drawn into rebellion as violence swept across Munster the following year. Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone, dispatched a letter to him and deemed him to be his greatest ally in Munster after James fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, the 'sugan' earl of Desmond. Yet the white knight's support for the rebellion was contingent on its success: the first display of English power saw him submit unconditionally to Sir George Thornton in May 1600. This behaviour did not go unnoticed; Sir George Carew noted before his submission, 'a more faithless man never lived upon the earth' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/207/6). Nevertheless the white knight, privy to the rebels' actions, proved a vital component in the uprising's suppression. 
In May 1601 the 'sugan' earl escaped into Clangibbon, co. Cork. The white knight's failure to apprehend Desmond earned him a sharp rebuke from Sir George Carew, the president of Munster, and gave his enemies leverage in their complaints against him. Threatened with expropriation, he quickly captured Desmond, who was hidden in a mountainous cave. Concerning Desmond's capture, Carew wrote that the white knight 'performed the same more in respect of his duty to her Majesty than for the benefit of the $400 head money...; and for the doing whereof he was not ignorant to purchase himself the general malice of the province' (Brewer and Bullen, 1601-3, no. 79). 
The white knight's earlier involvement in the rebellion -- ironically confirmed by Desmond's confession -- was forgotten and on 12 December 1601 the queen declared her intention to restore him to his lineage. By this time he had married Joan MacCarthy, daughter of the lord of Muskerry, with whom he had two sons, who died young. James I conferred on him the title of baron of Clangibbon in July 1604, but no parliament met and this was not confirmed. The white knight died, probably at Old Castletown on 23 April 1608, perhaps of disease. He was buried in a tomb in Kilmallock, co. Limerick, on 30 April with his eldest son, Maurice, who had died the previous day. His grandson Maurice Fitzgibbon succeeded, but he died in adolescence and his estate passed to his sister Margaret and through her to her husband Sir William Fenton. 


@@@@@


doc= 9593


Fitzgibbon, Edward (1803-1857), writer on angling, was born at Limerick in August 1803, the son of a land agent. From boyhood, when he fished in the trout streams near his home, he was devotedly attached to fishing. His education was interrupted when he was fourteen years old by his father's death, and he moved to London. At sixteen he was articled to a surgeon in the city, but he loathed the profession and quit two years later. He became a classical tutor in various parts of England for three years, finding time everywhere to practise his favourite sport. 'En route' for Greece he visited Marseilles, where he remained six years, teaching English. He became involved in politics, and his study of French language and literature made him a welcome guest in all literary and polite circles. Having taken some part in the revolution of 1830, he returned to Britain and gained a position with the 'Morning Chronicle', working as a parliamentary reporter in the gallery of the House of Commons. He was also a theatre critic of considerable acumen, and wrote for 'The Observer'. 
Fitzgibbon's real fame as a writer, however, lay in piscatorial matters, where his books and essays helped to popularize angling. For many years he wrote on the sport in 'Bell's Life in London' under the pseudonym Ephemera, and he produced several books on the subject and contributed widely to country sports journals. His 'Handbook of Angling' (1847) reached a third edition in 1853; he regarded 'The Book of the Salmon' (1850), which he compiled with Andrew Young of Invershin, as the acme of his teachings on fishing. Writing elegantly with force and humour, he had the ability to impart knowledge in a way that could be readily understood and appreciated. He was an expert in practice as well as theory and claimed to have once killed fifty-two salmon and grilse on the Shin River in fifty-five hours of fishing, a remarkable feat considering the standard of equipment available at that time. 
Fitzgibbon became an alcoholic. The phenomenon of his bouts of heavy drinking, after periods of abstemiousness and even refined living, interested doctors, and he often spoke of writing an account of his experiences of intoxication. But he had become a wreck some years before his death from haematemesis in London on 19 November 1857. A Roman Catholic priest visited him on his deathbed. He was married but had no children and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 9594


Fitzgibbon, Gerald (1793-1882), barrister, was born at Glin, co. Limerick, on 1 January 1793, the fourth son of Gerald Fitzgibbon, an Irish tenant farmer, and his wife, of whom little is known. He was educated at home and later obtained employment as a clerk in a mercantile house in Dublin, in 1814. His spare time was spent studying the classics, and on 12 October 1818 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1825, and MA in 1832. In 1830 he was called to the Irish bar. During his college course and preparation for the bar he had kept himself by teaching; by 1835 he evidently felt financially secure enough to marry Ellen Patterson, the daughter of John Patterson of Belfast. They had two sons, Gerald Fitzgibbon (1837-1909), and Henry (died 1912), who later became vice-president of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland. 
Fitzgibbon's rise at the bar was rapid, his mercantile experience standing him in good stead, and in 1841 he became queen's counsel. In 1844 he (unsuccessfully) defended Dr John Gray in the state trial of that year, through which Daniel O'Connell's influence with mass Irish opinion was said to have been destroyed. In the course of the trial Fitzgibbon used language concerning Cusack Smith, the Irish attorney-general, which was construed by the latter to be an imputation of dishonourable motives and drew from him a challenge. Fitzgibbon returned the cartel and, on the attorney-general declining to take it back, drew the attention of the court to the occurrence. The chief justice suspended the proceedings, in order to give the parties time for reflection, observing that the attorney-general was the last man in his profession who ought to have allowed himself to be betrayed into such an expression of feeling as had been stated to have taken place. The attorney-general then expressed his willingness to withdraw the note, in the hope that Fitzgibbon would withdraw the words which had elicited it. Fitzgibbon disclaimed any intention to impute unworthy conduct to the attorney-general, the matter was dropped, and the trial proceeded. 
Fitzgibbon continued in practice until 1860, when he accepted the post of receiver-master in Chancery. In 1868 he published 'Ireland in 1868, the battle field for English party strife; its grievances real and fictitious; remedies abortive or mischievous', which dealt with educational, land, religious, and other questions of the time. The last chapter, 'The former and present condition of the Irish people', was published separately in the same year. Fitzgibbon was of the view that any Irish prosperity was due to the country's English connections. A second edition, including an additional chapter on the land question, was brought out also in 1868. This was followed up with a pamphlet entitled 'The Land Difficulty of Ireland, with an Effort to Solve it' (1869). Fitzgibbon's central idea for reform was that fixity of tenure should be granted only to farmers who implemented improvements to the satisfaction of a public official appointed to oversee standards. In 1871 he published 'Roman Catholic Priests and National Schools' (2nd edn, 1872), which laid stress on the teaching of Catholic priests on the doctrines of hell and purgatory. 
Having in 1871 been charged in the House of Commons with acting with inhumanity in the administration of certain landed property belonging to wards of the Irish court of chancery, Fitzgibbon published in pamphlet form a vindication of his conduct, entitled 'Refutation of a Libel on Gerald Fitzgibbon, Esq., Master in Chancery in Ireland' (1871). A few years later he also brought out 'A Banded Ministry and the Upas Tree' (1873). 
Fitzgibbon resigned his post in 1878 and died on 27 September 1882. As an advocate he enjoyed a high reputation for patience and hard work. It would seem that a dislike for party politics prevented him from aspiring to judicial office. 


@@@@@


doc= 9595


FitzGibbon, John, first earl of Clare (1748-1802), lord chancellor of Ireland, was born in Donnybrook, co. Dublin, the youngest son of John FitzGibbon (1708-1780), lawyer and Irish MP for Newcastle, co. Dublin, and Elinor Grove (died 1786), daughter of John Grove of Ballyhimock, co. Cork. 
Many of FitzGibbon's enemies jeered at his supposed descent from Catholic peasants. While FitzGibbon's ancestors were indeed Catholic, they were at once loftier and more pathetic than his enemies claimed: minor gentry convinced that they had unjustly lost splendid wealth. FitzGibbon's cousin insisted that the family had lost an estate worth thousands of pounds because of their ancestor's refusal to betray his Catholic religion. In the duller realm of documented fact the FitzGibbons appear to have been doctors and gentlemen farmers. 
FitzGibbon's father initially followed the family profession of medicine. After a brief stint in Paris as a medical student he decided that he would get nowhere as an obscure Catholic physician. He conformed in 1732 and took up study of the law. The elder FitzGibbon was phenomenally successful in his profession, leaving an estate worth $100,000. Not surprisingly his surviving cases usually involved disputes between Catholics and their converted relatives. 
FitzGibbon's enemies often held up this hardened opportunist as a model of simple virtue. Edmund Burke, who loathed John the son, proudly claimed kinship with John the father, praising him as a 'good Irishman' ('Correspondence', 7.192), tragically torn between sympathy for his 'blood' (ibid.), the Irish Catholics, and his ambitions for his family. FitzGibbon senior apparently did retain some residual sympathy for the Catholic Ireland he had left behind. William Gerard Hamilton implied that attacks on King William always amused the elder FitzGibbon, 'who is a Papist' (Hutchinson papers, TCD, C/1/16, 29). But he placed far greater faith in two secular gods: money and the rapid social elevation of his family. He could acquire both only by submitting to the dominant English and protestant order. This insight was the father's most enduring legacy to his son. 
The reliable facts about the younger FitzGibbon's early life are sketchy. His three elder brothers died young, though his sisters all survived to adulthood. The eldest, Arabella, married St John Jeffereyes and became the chatelaine of Blarney Castle in co. Cork. Elizabeth married William Beresford, brother of John Beresford and son of the earl of Tyrone. Elinor, the youngest, became the wife of Dominic Trant. Trant, like FitzGibbon, was the son of a convert and a loyal supporter of government. Elizabeth provided FitzGibbon with a major political advantage by marrying into one of the most powerful families in Ireland. He also had a reasonably good relationship with Elinor, but Arabella he eventually came to detest and disinherit. Her eccentric radicalism and her improvidence made her a lifelong source of trouble. 
FitzGibbon entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 6 June 1763 as a fellow-commoner, and obtained his BA in 1766. In that same year he seems to have entered Christ Church, Oxford, but he was not incorporated until 7 June 1769, and proceeded MA on 9 May 1770. As was the standard practice for Irish barristers at the time FitzGibbon received legal training both in Ireland and in England. In Trinity term 1767 he entered the Middle Temple in London, and in 1772 was admitted to the degree of barrister-at-law by the King's Inns in Dublin. 
According to legend his most exacting legal training came from his father. None the less FitzGibbon's own experience probably had an equally important influence in his professional development. He acquired an especially keen understanding of the complexities of Irish property law, a great asset when he became lord chancellor. 
FitzGibbon made his first step in public life in March 1778 when he was elected member for Trinity College, Dublin, in the Irish parliament. He had been elected at a by-election after the expulsion of Richard Hely-Hutchinson, the son of John Hely-Hutchinson, the unpopular provost of Trinity widely regarded as a placeman. FitzGibbon presented himself to the electors as an opponent of jobbery, and once in the Commons he maintained the role of friend of the people, at that time the surest strategy for political advancement. Encouraged by the progress of the American War of Independence, the patriot party, under the leadership of Henry Grattan, were demanding the repeal of Poynings' law, which denied the Irish parliament the right to introduce or revise bills, and vested most legislative power in the British or Irish privy councils. They also called for an end to the power of the British House of Lords to judge Irish cases on appeal and a repeal of the so-called 'Declaratory Act', which gave the British parliament the right to legislate on behalf of Ireland. Under ordinary circumstances the government probably would have ignored or bribed Grattan and his friends, but the American war prevented the government taking action. 
In one of his first speeches in the Commons, FitzGibbon, true to patriot form, accused the sheriff of Kilkenny of withholding election returns, thereby violating the rights of the electors, who of course wanted to know the outcome. FitzGibbon's speech displayed many of the qualities that would characterize his political career: savage indignation against perceived injustice, and still more savage demands for punishment. 
FitzGibbon's opposition to the first major Catholic relief bill of 1778 was perfectly in keeping with patriotic sentiments. In the view of the patriots, government support for the bill offered enough reason to oppose it. Any favour shown to the Catholics, however minor, favoured despotism and bigotry. FitzGibbon especially opposed the repeal of two major penal restrictions: giving a conforming son the right to immediate ownership of all property, thus making a father and other siblings tenants for life and continued division of an estate into equal portions if none of the children conformed. 
FitzGibbon did not act solely for partisan motives. He had always hated violations of the rights of property, even Catholic property, and he favoured limited rights of purchase. But the bill offered no rights of outright ownership, only a tenancy for a fabulous maximum of 999 years. In his view such tenancies were liable to seizure for the most trivial reasons. Unfortunately the final act included everything FitzGibbon had objected to both as a zealous protestant and as a careful lawyer. 
In spite of his growing reputation as an opponent of government FitzGibbon soon recognized that patriotism could offer only fleeting popularity. The government, even at its nadir, conferred the more substantial reward of office. His instincts were right, though the pay-off was frustratingly slow. In November 1779 his relative John Beresford, one of the few remaining supporters of the beleaguered lord lieutenant, John Hobart, second earl of Buckinghamshire, promised FitzGibbon whichever of the offices of prime serjeant, solicitor-general, or attorney-general should first become vacant if he would oppose the latest patriot initiative. The opposition wanted parliament to refuse the usual two-year grant of supply to the government, granting funds only for a six-month period, unless Ireland received unrestricted access to Britain's West Indian trade. Negotiations broke down when the government succumbed to pressure from the patriots, conceding the six-month supply; the ministry in Britain then conceded the patriots' commercial demands. Beresford probably won FitzGibbon over not only by the prospect of office, but by playing on his fears of an uprising by the dispossessed Catholics against the propertied protestants, who would render meaningless the struggles of FitzGibbon's father. From 1780 FitzGibbon opposed most major patriot measures, including Grattan's famous resolution asserting the autonomy of the Irish parliament, and the 1780 'Tenantry Act', which in confirming tenants in abeyant life leases, seemed to him to overturn the fundamental rights of landlords in their property. He did, however, oppose the British government's amendments to the 'Mutiny Bill' of 1780, believing that it placed Ireland under permanent military government and curtailed the freedom of Irish protestants. 
Yet another opportunity arose in 1781, with the advent of the administration of Frederick Howard, fifth earl of Carlisle. FitzGibbon became lifelong friends with Carlisle's chief secretary, William Eden. With Eden's encouragement he continued to oppose any new efforts to attain Irish autonomy. In the area of trade he resisted Irish efforts to retaliate against Portugal for alleged trade violations after it seized Irish woollen goods in August 1781. In debates in the Commons during February 1782 he took the reasonable, if unpopular, view that Ireland was not in a position to force Portugal to accept unwanted woollen goods and that the British ministers in London, rightly, should handle any such grievances. He also lent his support to a second Catholic relief bill, sponsored by the government, in 1782, although he did express reservations over the possibility that Catholic landowners could wield electoral influence. Thanks to Catholic loyalty during a threatened French invasion the bill received widespread support and quickly passed into law. In FitzGibbon's view the new act, especially the freedom to purchase property, satisfied all reasonable Catholic grievances. 
The favour of the Carlisle administration, and the renewed promise of office, ended in 1782 when Carlisle was recalled at the fall of the North ministry. The new Rockingham administration appointed William Bentinck, third duke of Portland, in his place. FitzGibbon felt no loyalty to this new administration. On the contrary he wanted to avenge his friend Eden, who had been dismissed along with Carlisle. He immediately assumed a place as one of the most violent supporters of Irish autonomy. Portland, faced with a revitalized Irish opposition, reinforced by FitzGibbon and other former supporters of government, agreed to the repeal of Poynings' law and the 'Declaratory Act' of 1719, measures carried through by his successor, George Nugent-Temple-Grenville, third Earl Temple. 
FitzGibbon's career received a set-back in summer 1783 when he lost his Commons seat at Trinity College. In August he stood for co. Limerick, but despite furious electioneering and the help of relatives and legal connections he could not prevail. One of his clients, Silver Oliver, then offered him the pocket borough of Kilmallock, co. Limerick, where he remained for the rest of his career in the Commons. FitzGibbon's support for Irish autonomy revived his friendship with Henry Grattan and finally won him the office he had sought for over four years. With Grattan's support FitzGibbon was nominated by the Fox-North coalition's lord lieutenant, Robert Henley, second earl of Northington, for the vacant office of attorney-general. Not surprisingly Charles James Fox felt some doubts about appointing a former enemy as the government's chief law officer, but Grattan had assured Northington that FitzGibbon had behaved honourably in 1782 and deserved the appointment. Fox reluctantly agreed and in November 1783 FitzGibbon became attorney-general of Ireland. As Grattan himself later acknowledged, he made a fatal misjudgement. 
Soon after the appointment of FitzGibbon the Fox-North coalition fell and William Pitt the younger appointed the 29-year-old Charles Manners, fourth duke of Rutland, lord lieutenant. The two established a relationship based on FitzGibbon's admiration for the British ruling elite and Rutland's almost filial regard for him, even though they were only a few years apart; FitzGibbon would enjoy a similar relationship with the earl of Westmorland. 
Continued pressure for reform came, by spring 1784, to centre on demands for parliamentary reform. For many patriots in the Commons this was a step too far, and leadership passed to a group of Dublin tradesmen and professionals. They formulated a plan to establish a congress made up of electors who would draw up a plan of reform and present it to parliament. However peaceful its intentions the campaign inevitably provoked the government's fears. Government members sat for many of the unreformed boroughs. Worse, some reformers briefly considered Catholic participation in this newly reformed parliament. Above all the movement had strong support in Dublin, the centre of political agitation in Ireland. 
FitzGibbon, in common with other members of the Irish administration, suspected a French sponsored conspiracy of Catholics and Presbyterians which would lead to a republic. When it became clear that many sheriffs had agreed to hold the elections to the congress he threatened the Dublin sheriffs with prosecution if they followed suit. FitzGibbon managed to intimidate the city sheriffs into passivity, but he was less successful with the sheriff of co. Dublin, Stephen Reily. When FitzGibbon arrived in person to stop elections taking place on 21 September 1784 Reily was idolized by the radicals as a constitutional hero; FitzGibbon indicted him for summoning an illegal and seditious assembly. FitzGibbon chose to proceed against Reily by attachment, a legal device by which an attorney-general could lay a complaint before a panel of judges who would then determine the merits of the case. The point was, of course, to avoid the terrible possibility of an acquittal by a Dublin jury. 
The opposition newspapers responded with a virulence extraordinary even for the eighteenth-century Irish press. They portrayed FitzGibbon as an incompetent lawyer, an avid reader of French pornography, and a callous seducer of innocent women. More seriously the recorder of Dublin, Samuel Bradstreet, one of Reily's prospective judges, raised doubts about the legality of attachments. In the end the judges, including a converted Bradstreet, found Reily guilty. 
FitzGibbon's later career had occasional set-backs. In 1785 a revived opposition resisted a bill creating a commercial union with England on the grounds that the measure struck a blow against Irish autonomy. FitzGibbon responded that Ireland would in fact share the benefits of the English navigation laws; by contrast, rejection of the bill would exclude Ireland from the British commercial system and wreak havoc on Ireland's economy. He pointed out that opponents of the measure, such as Henry Flood, had once supported free trade with Britain and her colonies. In anger, he described his countrymen as a 'besotted nation' (Kavanaugh, 92), implying that reason had been overturned by the patriots' belief in independence at any price. The bill passed, but by such a small majority that Rutland abandoned it. 
Other aspects of FitzGibbon's career as attorney-general were more rewarding. In 1786 he travelled to co. Mayo, where he successfully prosecuted George 'Fighting' Fitzgerald for murder, and also that year successfully carried the 'Dublin Police Act' through the Commons, ably manipulating the fear shared by many Irish protestant gentlemen that public order was on the verge of breakdown to give the government wide powers to search houses and seize arms in private hands, as well as limiting the opening hours of public houses. 
One of FitzGibbon's most serious challenges came with the revival of the Whiteboy movement, which re-emerged from late 1784. The Whiteboys sought to seize control of parishes and enforce the reduction of tithes paid to the Church of Ireland, and in this incarnation acted with greater organization and discipline than before. Although the Whiteboys were Catholic they received encouragement from some protestant landlords with their own personal or political grudges against the established church. FitzGibbon's eldest sister, Arabella Jeffereyes, was a prominent supporter, herself playing a part in the setting of tithes and recruiting Whiteboys to help drain a lake on her estate. 
FitzGibbon overcame his sympathy for the rural poor and in February 1787 introduced a bill for the flogging, hanging, or transporting of convicted active Whiteboys. Initially it also included a clause calling for the destruction of Catholic chapels used for Whiteboy meetings. The majority of his fellow members recoiled from this particular assertion of protestant supremacy and demanded its withdrawal. FitzGibbon reluctantly agreed, and the revised bill passed with its more secular terrors intact. The fact that some Whiteboys had started to demand reductions in rents as well as tithes undermined much of their former support among landlords, including Mrs Jeffereyes. FitzGibbon sought to secure public order by extending the provisions of the 'Dublin Police Act' to the rest of Ireland, but the proposed measures placed too great a burden on the time and finances of the country gentlemen, and very few counties took advantage of the act. 
As his opposition to the Whiteboys had distanced FitzGibbon from his father's Catholic background, so did his marriage, on 1 July 1786, at St Stephen's Green, Dublin, to Anne Whaley or Whalley (died 1844), sister of the infamous gambler Thomas Whaley, and daughter of Richard Chapel Whaley ('c'.1700-1769) and his second wife, Anne Ward ('b'. 'c'.1741). The Whaleys were a well-established protestant family from co. Wicklow, and Anne's father had been known as Burn Chapel Whaley from his alleged pastime of destroying Catholic places of worship by arson. Anne was recognized as one of the most elegant ladies in Dublin society, and was undoubtedly an asset to the socially uncultivated FitzGibbon. They had five children, although their two eldest daughters both died of smallpox in childhood. Anne would often be accused of adultery during their marriage, but if this was true FitzGibbon seems to have excused her on the grounds that he neglected her in favour of his career. 
The regency crisis of 1788-9 almost ended FitzGibbon's career. Late in 1788 George III became incapacitated by insanity. The Irish opposition, guided by their English whig friends, agitated for the immediate transfer of the regency in Ireland to George, prince of Wales. While for the whigs in London this was their opportunity to form the ministry, for the Irish opposition this was a means of establishing the constitutional separation between Ireland and Great Britain. The lord lieutenant, the marquess of Buckingham (formerly Earl Temple), was convinced that the victory of the prince and the whigs was almost inevitable; many government supporters shared his view and defected to the opposition. FitzGibbon stood practically alone in opposing any independent action on the part of the Irish parliament. When Grattan moved for an unrestricted regency in the Commons, on 11 February 1789, FitzGibbon was almost the only speaker to oppose him. He eloquently repeated his lifelong article of faith: the crown was the sole, unifying link between Ireland and Great Britain, and the sole protection for Irish protestants. They could maintain this link only by choosing the same regent as the English parliament. Following the king's recovery his political virtue was rewarded. Buckingham recognized his loyalty, proved again by his rapid moves to reconcile the defectors to the government, by persuading Pitt that FitzGibbon was the only possible lord chancellor in succession to James Hewitt, Viscount Lifford; the appointment was made public on 13 June, and on 6 July FitzGibbon was created a peer as Baron FitzGibbon of Lower Connello, co. Limerick. 
FitzGibbon's love of show as lord chancellor provided ammunition for his enemies. He commissioned a sumptuous state coach from English craftsmen, opening himself to the charges of excessive vanity and a lack of patriotism; his defenders said he was setting a good example to Irish craftsmen. Even his worst detractors, however, had to admit his abilities as a judge. The nineteenth-century legal historian J. F. O'Flanagan best expressed the general consensus: FitzGibbon 'reformed abuses with no niggard hand and purged the court of much that called for reform' (O'Flanagan, 2.280). 
Most of his recorded chancery decisions show a powerful grasp of the complexities of chancery law, a comprehensive knowledge of Irish life, and constant compassion for the poor. FitzGibbon also had a gift for narrative. Legal literature is often difficult for lawyers, and baffling to lay people, but FitzGibbon's decisions are vividly written and mercifully devoid of jargon. 
In contrast with his conduct in parliament he showed a striking favour toward Catholics. He acted out of the same desire to expiate past injustices that moved him in 1782. FitzGibbon especially resisted efforts by protestant relatives to seize Catholic property, because of past evasions of the penal laws. He demanded a strict standard of proof in all cases, and in most of them he decided in favour of the Catholic party, such as in 'Barnewall v. Barnewall' (Ridgeway, 3.24-79). 
His decision in 'Kiely v. Monck' (Ridgeway, 3.206-66) best illustrates his general compassion for the weak and hard-pressed. Ann Kiely, 'nee' Monck, disputed a provision in her father's will which denied her a legacy unless she married a man with a freehold estate worth at least $500, free of all encumbrances. Her husband, while perfectly respectable, did not meet the late Mr Monck's financial specifications. For this reason Ann's brother denied her the legacy, worth $1800. To FitzGibbon's mind this provision was both cruel and unreasonable. Few men, he argued, even the wealthiest, could meet this qualification. As a result, this 'weak old man', Ann's father, had virtually condemned his daughter to spinsterhood. His action clearly violated legal precedents prohibiting undue restraints on marriage. 
FitzGibbon prided himself, above all, on his integrity as a judge. When Edward Strafford, second earl of Aldborough, a fellow peer and disappointed suitor, dared to suggest, in a 1797 pamphlet, that he had behaved corruptly in his court FitzGibbon responded with frightening vindictiveness. Aldborough endured a humiliating trial in the House of Lords and six weeks in prison. 
The French Revolution of 1789 led to renewed support for political reform in Ireland. FitzGibbon was naturally opposed to any alteration to the constitutional settlement. When the Catholic committee of Dublin resolved, in February 1791, to petition the government for further relief he impressed upon the lord lieutenant, John Fane, tenth earl of Westmorland, that the increase in activity by the armed Catholic society, the Defenders, and the expressions of goodwill towards Catholics made by the radical United Irishmen, made any further concessions towards Catholics highly dangerous to the protestant and British interest. Rebuffed by Westmorland, the Catholic committee opened up their own channels of communication with William Pitt's government, which had already supported an English Catholic relief act that year. Pitt persuaded Westmorland to introduce an Irish Catholic relief bill that opened the bar to Catholics and removed restrictions on education and intermarriage, but FitzGibbon and his allies prevented the introduction of the right to serve on juries or carry weapons. The bill passed at the beginning of 1792. 
The act failed to meet Catholic expectations, and the committee leaders, who now retained the protestant lawyer and United Irishman Wolfe Tone as their secretary, organized elections to a Catholic convention. FitzGibbon organized a meeting of protestant freeholders in co. Limerick in the summer, in the hope that it and similar meetings would deter the Catholics from establishing what was feared would become a parallel Catholic Irish parliament. He was frustrated by what he saw as British naivety and inactivity: where FitzGibbon wanted to expand the regular army, raise a protestant militia, and introduce legislation to ban meetings of elected delegates, Pitt believed that by granting all political rights short of holding office he would ensure the loyalty of Catholic Ireland during the coming war with France. Despite their close links with the United Irishmen the Catholic convention, when it met in November 1792, refused to receive a delegation from them and, far from raising its own army, stressed its loyalty to the crown. At the same time it insulted the Irish government by presenting its petition to George III directly. The delegation was warmly received by the king and Pitt, who ordered a further relief bill. FitzGibbon dutifully managed the passage of the bill through the Lords, but showed his true sympathies on 10 January 1793 in his speech to the Lords, in which he gave a comprehensive history of Catholic treachery and argued that the Catholics aimed at secular and religious tyranny; the consequence of the bill's passage would be the retreat of reason and the transformation of Ireland into a Catholic state hostile to protestantism and Britain. He was mocked by several bishops, but the speech reflected protestant fears, was published, and was regularly reprinted by opponents of Catholic emancipation. Meanwhile, he learned that Pitt, in the medium term, sought a union of Great Britain and Ireland, and became convinced that only this could preserve protestant authority. 
While FitzGibbon could not prevent the Catholic concessions of 1793 he did succeed in eliminating conventions, their successful political tool. His 'Convention Act' forbade the election of any extra-parliamentary groups 'under pretence of preparing or presenting public petitions' (33 Geo. III c. 29; 'Irish Statutes', 16.794). He was not only getting retrograde revenge on the Catholics, he was thwarting their allies, the United Irishmen, whom he suspected of co-ordinating riots during that year, and who were planning to organize a similar convention to press for parliamentary reform. A year later, in 1794, the United Irish organization was banned. Meanwhile FitzGibbon's enthusiastic support of the protestant interest had brought him a promotion in the peerage, to Viscount FitzGibbon of Limerick, in December 1793. 
In January 1795, a new lord lieutenant, William Wentworth-Fitzwilliam, fourth Earl Fitzwilliam, arrived in Ireland, intent on repealing all remaining Catholic disabilities. He was dismissed within three months, thanks largely to his own bad judgement. He had ignored repeated cautions from London not to raise Catholic issues so soon after the concessions of 1793. While he had been informed in no uncertain terms to leave FitzGibbon alone he engaged in a ruthless purge of other loyal servants of the British government whom he considered unfavourable to his political views. FitzGibbon's position as the leader of an unchallengeable protestant party in parliament has been exaggerated in 1795 and subsequently; in fact he was conscious that a hostile lord lieutenant made his position vulnerable, and fell back on pressing a union on Fitzwilliam as the best means of maintaining protestant supremacy. 
Later Fitzwilliam and his supporters, especially Grattan, attributed the dismissal to FitzGibbon. Supposedly he had turned the once favourable king against the Catholics. FitzGibbon did indeed inform George III in 1795 that further concessions to Catholics would betray his coronation oath to defend the protestant establishment in church and state, but the king's education, temperament, and prejudices had already led him to decide that he could not agree to further Catholic demands. FitzGibbon's emphasis on the coronation oath simply confirmed him in his own inclinations. The Fitzwilliam episode confirmed FitzGibbon's ascendancy over most shades of opinion in the Irish parliament. To the British government he had made himself indispensable as a manager and interpreter of Irish politics. On the recommendation of Fitzwilliam's successor, John Jeffreys Pratt, second Earl Camden, he was created earl of Clare on 12 June 1795. 
Even if Fitzwilliam had remained in Ireland he probably would have failed to restore peace. The banned United Irishmen were now a revolutionary organization in contact with the French, and in an uneasy alliance with the Defenders. Clare viewed the rebels as a disciplined revolutionary hierarchy, the United Irishmen directing their Catholic allies, and he responded to their threats in his usual fashion. In 1795 he turned areas of Defender activity over to the punishment of martial law. According to his own admission he encouraged the disarmament of revolutionary Ulster in 1797. He had been vice-chancellor of Trinity College since 1791, and used the post to purge undergraduates with United Irish sympathies, most dramatically in April 1798 when nineteen students were expelled, including Robert Emmet. 
None the less, in the wake of the rebellion of 1798 Clare was the strongest advocate of clemency. Following the capture of the United Irish directory in Dublin in March 1798 he offered exile in return for testimony before parliament. He also played a major role in drafting a general pardon for rebels. Exceptions included United Irish political or military officers, and anyone found guilty of murder or conspiracy to commit murder, but even these individuals were given time to go into exile before the law took effect. His motive was always the same: better discredited and exiled rebels than martyrs to inspire later revolutions. 
Towards condemned rebels his conduct varied. He accompanied Lady Louisa Conolly to the deathbed of her nephew, Lord Edward Fitzgerald. Pity for Lady Louisa, a beloved friend, probably influenced him more than any feeling for Lord Edward. He took a harsher view of Wolfe Tone, by 1798 a captured rebel. When Tone attempted suicide by cutting his own throat Clare fretted over the decision to give him a respite. In his opinion Tone should have been hanged, even with a severed throat. 
Clare was often accused of having engineered the rebellion of 1798 for his end of forcing union with Great Britain on Ireland, but to Clare the rebellion was an inevitability which he did his best to prevent. He viewed Irish history as a cycle of violent uprisings against the English or protestant interest; a union with Britain would make the Irish Catholics a minority and confirm the protestant character of the state. The strong pro-union majority in the House of Lords meant that Clare played no part in the squalid campaign of bribery that the chief secretary, Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh, and the lord lieutenant, Charles, first Marquess Cornwallis, embarked on in the Commons, and they were careful to separate him from charges of corruption by making him a British peer, as Baron FitzGibbon of Sidbury, Devon, in September 1799, in advance of the large number of new peerages promised in return for votes. Clare assumed the role of chief propagandist for the measure, most notably in his great speech of 1800 to his fellow peers. With extraordinary eloquence, he reviewed his lifelong version of Irish history: feckless protestants who dabbled in political reform while their embittered Catholic subjects, 'brooding on their wrongs in sullen discontent' ('Speech... 10 February, 1800', 22), sought their chance to raise a savage rebellion in the tradition of 1641. Only the union could compel the protestants to abandon political fantasy and assume their true responsibilities: 'taming and civilizing' (ibid., 84) the barbarous Catholics by living on their estates and introducing much needed improvements. 
Clare soon found himself resenting the union he had supported so wholeheartedly. His resentment arose from political negotiations involving Cornwallis, and two old nemeses, the Catholics and Pitt. After much consideration Pitt and Cornwallis promised Catholics full political equality in return for their support of the union. Understandably they kept these negotiations a secret from Clare, but shortly after the union the truth came out. The measure failed, thanks mainly to zealous resistance on the part of the king and Clare. Clare had the satisfaction of seeing the treacherous Pitt resign, but a sense of betrayal haunted him for the rest of his life. 
For their part, even allies avoided him after the union. Henry Addington, Pitt's anti-emancipation successor, excluded Clare from his cabinet. Although Addington opposed further political concessions to Catholics he did not want to insult them by giving office to a violent opponent. Even George III, a warm admirer of Clare, warned Philip Yorke, third earl of Hardwicke, the first post-union lord lieutenant, about the Irish lord chancellor. While praising Clare as a trustworthy man the king added, 'if not attended to [he] may attempt to guide, which can neither be expedient nor creditable' ('Later Correspondence of George III', 3.530). 
Clare never learned of the king's warnings or Addington's reason for keeping him out of the new union government, but he sensed a decline in his influence and wanted desperately to reassert it. If he had acted with his usual skill he probably would have succeeded. Despite the warnings about Clare, Hardwicke welcomed his guidance. Unfortunately Clare came to despise Hardwicke as a fool. As for the new chief secretary, Charles Abbott, Clare dismissed him as 'the most arrogant, presumptuous, empty prig I have ever met with or heard of' (Keele University, Sneyd muniments, Clare to Auckland, 19 Sept 1801). Clare's sudden death on 28 January 1802, at his home, 6 Ely Place, Dublin, spared him further conflict. Two weeks before he had complained of a nosebleed lasting several days. He also suffered from oedema. Although no definite diagnosis is possible his symptoms suggest cirrhosis. He was a heavy drinker, a fact that both friends and enemies acknowledged. He was buried at St Peter's churchyard, Dublin, on 30 January. His funeral was a carnival of loathing. An angry mob waited outside his house and cheered when the coffin was carried out of the door. As the hearse travelled to the church onlookers threw debris on the coffin. In 1983 Clare's corpse suffered a final indignity when St Peter's was demolished. The bodies in the churchyard, including Clare's, were moved to a mass grave at Mount Jerome. 
Throughout his life Clare maintained an impressive public image. His good looks certainly aided him. According to one otherwise antagonistic journalist FitzGibbon was a 'handsome youth', with 'beautiful' grey eyes ('Dublin Evening Post', 27 Jan 1781). Even when age and alcoholism took their toll he remained striking. His wealth also enhanced his image. He was noted for his lavish hospitality at his townhouse in Dublin and his estate at Mount Shannon, near Lisnagry, co. Limerick. Lady Clare's beauty complemented him perfectly. 
Clare's letters reveal him as a devoted father and an indulgent husband. His children continued to revere his memory. John, second earl of Clare (1792-1851), an object of Byron's adolescent passion, even fought a duel with Henry Grattan's son, in response to an alleged defamation of his father. 
Clare's beloved family rejected much of his political legacy after his death. His wife took the lead. After his death the fashionable lady became a pragmatic politician, throwing her support behind pro-Catholic candidates in Limerick elections. Unlike her husband Lady Clare recognized that she needed the Catholic vote to maintain the political interests of her sons. While remaining loyal to their father's memory by supporting the union both John and Richard Hobart, third earl of Clare (1793-1864) were, like their mother, supporters of Catholic claims. Clare's daughter, Isabella (1795-1873), remained at home as her mother's companion, and never married. 
Richard's daughter, Lady Louisa FitzGibbon, went even further than her father, uncle, and grandmother, converting to Roman Catholicism and adding a chapel to Mount Shannon. Her overspending drove the family into bankruptcy. After arranging for her own retirement to a convent Louisa gave a final ball at Mount Shannon. Hundreds of people attended the final auction of FitzGibbon property in 1888. According to one account a Limerick merchant paid $98 for a single teacup. An Irish-American businessman purchased the house, but hatred for the most notorious owner persisted. During the 1918-21 war of independence, the IRA burned Mount Shannon, and at the end of the twentieth century it was a vine-covered ruin in the middle of a suburban housing estate. 
Clare's memory continued to suffer insult in the pages of anti-union or United Irish memoirs that poured from the presses during the nineteenth century. In his memoirs Henry Grattan condemned Clare as a cynical opportunist and bigot. W. E. H. Lecky, a scrupulously fair historian, came to the same conclusion. He never could forgive Clare for opposing Grattan and supporting the 'Act of Union'. 
Clare was as ardently loved, especially among arch-protestants and imperialists. Sir Richard Musgrave made him one of the heroes of his anti-Catholic 'Memoirs of the Different Rebellions in Ireland' (1802). J. A. Froude, author of 'The History of the English in Ireland in the Eighteenth Century' (1881), eulogized Clare as the unrelenting enemy of everything that threatened the British empire in Ireland, especially disaffected Catholics and foolish humanitarians. He even had Catholic defenders, notably James Roche, a lifelong acquaintance of the FitzGibbon family. According to Roche, Clare was a 'generous and indulgent landlord, a kind master and an attached friend'. Roche also contradicted claims of Clare's cruelty in 1798, maintaining that he had saved many people 'whose legal guilt could not be gainsaid' from 'the lash and the halter' (Roche, 2.113-14). 
A modern biographer inevitably faces frustration when sorting through this welter of hagiography and demonology. Clare is difficult to understand because he himself was never sure of his place in eighteenth-century Irish society. Throughout his life he strove to escape his Catholic origins and embrace a new, protestant identity, yet could never entirely reject his Catholic past. He hated Irish Catholics, yet he also pitied their past sufferings and current poverty. He never fully belonged to the Irish protestant elite, and worse, the English, whom he idolized, never fully accepted him either. The cause of an Ireland ruled by a class of Church of Ireland landowners dependent on the link with Great Britain, where Catholics were excluded from any role in political life, was effectively dead within thirty years of his death. His best qualities, perhaps, were revealed in his statements as a judge; his ruling in 'Kiely v. Monck', for example, could still be cited in the European Court of Human Rights two centuries later. 


@@@@@


doc= 9596


Robert fitz Haimon (d. 1107), magnate and soldier, was the son of Haimo, steward of William I and William II and sheriff of Kent. Robert was a grandson of Haimo Dentatus (as Denzs), lord of Torigny, Creully, and Evrecy, who was killed at the battle of Val-es-Dunes in Normandy in 1047. Haimo the steward may well have come to England in the train of Odo, bishop of Bayeux, of whom he held the Norman honour of Evrecy. Haimo became sheriff of Kent and a minor tenant-in-chief in that county, over which Odo had been granted the rights of an earl. He had at least two sons, Robert, who was probably the eldest as he inherited the Norman estates, and Haimo, who succeeded to his father's lands and office in England. 
A man named Robert FitzHaimon occurs as a witness to a charter of King William of 1074. It is not certain that this figure is identifiable with Robert fitz Haimon (died 1107), nor has it been possible to trace an earlier reference in a Bayeux charter mentioned by G. T. Clark ('Land of Morgan', 2) and cited in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. The first clear reference to Robert fitz Haimon (died 1107) occurs in 1088 as one of the barons loyal to William Rufus when a coalition of magnates, headed by Odo of Bayeux, sought to advance the claim of Robert Curthose, duke of Normandy, to succeed to the whole inheritance of William the Conqueror. Odo held Rochester against the king, and after the revolt Robert, with Henry de Beaumont, is mentioned as having persuaded Gundulf, bishop of Rochester, to build a stone castle (one of the earliest in England) for the king at Rochester. Robert's loyalty during the revolt was soon rewarded by the grant of the lands that had been Queen Matilda's in England, despite the fact that the king's brother, Henry, had petitioned for them. Henry might reasonably have expected to receive them, but the king had other plans. In addition Robert was granted estates in the south-west and in Buckinghamshire forfeited by Geoffrey, bishop of Coutances, one of the rebels of 1088. Robert's marriage to Sibyl, a daughter of Roger de Montgomery, was a step that allied him with the lord of Shropshire and with the most powerful family in late eleventh-century England. It has also been suggested (Keats-Rohan, 27) that at about this time he recovered the lordship of Creully, which his grandfather had possibly lost in 1047. 
It is for his role in the conquest of Glamorgan that Robert is chiefly remembered. Soon after 1066 the Normans had moved across the Welsh border and, under William fitz Osbern, had established bridgeheads in south-east Wales. William the Conqueror travelled to Wales in 1081, and is said to have ordered the building of a castle at Cardiff in the kingdom of Morgannwg. The discovery there of coins of the Conqueror has led to debate whether an Anglo-Norman colony was established at this time, possibly even with a local mint; but the evidence is inconclusive. If a start was made on the conquest under William the Conqueror, the breakthrough nevertheless occurred during his son's reign, and was spearheaded by Robert fitz Haimon. 
Information about the conquest is supplied by accounts composed by sixteenth-century antiquarians, Edward Stradling, Humphrey Llwyd, and David Powel, in which history, legend, and family pride are intermingled. Robert was said to have been invited to assist a man named Einion, possibly a son of Cedifor ap Gollwyn. The latter was in alliance with Iestyn ap Gwrgant against Rhys ap Tewdwr, a native Welsh leader in south Wales. From the standpoint of the Normans there was the prospect of gains in Wales. By endowing Robert with rich estates in Gloucestershire, including the port of Bristol, William Rufus had given his friend the resources of men and money for further conquests. According to Stradling, Robert and his forces arrived by water, presumably via the Bristol Channel. Their initial intervention was successful, and they were on the point of departure but returned, either because they were summoned by Einion, who according to Llwyd had failed to secure the hand of Iestyn's daughter in marriage, or, according to Stradling, because Robert did not receive the payment in gold he had been promised. When the Normans returned, however, they began to take lands for themselves. 
The date of Robert's initial arrival in Morgannwg cannot be established precisely. William Rufus was preoccupied with suppressing the baronial revolt in 1088, and arguably would have not have had time to turn his attention to Wales at least until the following year. It may even have been the case that Robert's intervention in Glamorgan did not occur until 1093 when a more general Norman advance into Wales occurred after the death of Rhys ap Tewdwr, with advances into Brycheiniog, Ceredigion, and Dyfed. 
It is likely that Robert remained only long enough to parcel out territories for his followers, to order the building of castles at key points, and to make donations from his new lands to the church. Here a mixture of piety and more mundane considerations intermingled. The church in south Wales was conservative by Norman standards, without clearly defined territorial dioceses, and as yet untouched by contemporary movements for reform. By giving Welsh monasteries to English houses, the Normans could strengthen their own authority in Wales and at the same time make pious benefactions. Robert was particularly generous to Gloucester Abbey which, under Abbot Serlo, was rapidly expanding its numbers and attracted several donations in the 1090s from members of Rufus's court. Robert gave to Gloucester the church of St Cadog, Llancarfan, and land at Penhow, probably in the closing years of the eleventh century and before he had decided to turn his attention to Tewkesbury. The broad outlines of the later lordship of Glamorgan may have begun to take shape under Robert. The original limits of his power seem to have been the region between the rivers Rhymni and Ogwr, and a start may have been made in establishing other lordships in the south, along the low-lying lands, while the Welsh retained the uplands. 
Robert was one of William Rufus's closest friends, and his frequent presence at court is attested in the witness lists of royal documents. The suggestion has even been mooted that the two were lovers (Barlow, 436), though there is no evidence of this. Robert was a member of the hunting party in the New Forest in August 1100 when Rufus was killed, and, according to one source, was warned by a monk of an ominous dream, which Robert duly reported to the king. The chronicler Geoffrey Gaimar, writing in the 1130s, added details about Robert's grief at the king's death, and noted that his new cloak was placed on the bier that conveyed Rufus's body to burial in Winchester Cathedral ('L'estoire des Engleis', lines 6351-5, 6388-92). 
Robert immediately entered the service of Henry I, and occurs as a witness to the charter of liberties, which the latter issued on 5 August 1100. Both he and his brother were witnesses to the letter that the new king sent to Archbishop Anselm, then in exile, to beg him to return to England. Henry I took advantage of his brother's death to seize the English throne while the eldest brother, Robert Curthose, was still absent on crusade. It soon became obvious that a rebel coalition, partly composed of those who had adhered to Curthose in 1088, was forming once again. At this critical juncture Robert fitz Haimon was mentioned as one of the few barons to remain loyal to the king, and when Curthose landed at Portsmouth in Hampshire in 1101 Robert acted as an intermediary. 
Robert occurs frequently in the witness lists of documents issued in the early years of Henry's reign. In 1105 he was serving with the king's military household in Normandy, when he was surprised by Duke Robert's troops from Bayeux and had to take refuge in the tower of the church at Secqueville-en-Bessin. When the church was set on fire, Robert fitz Haimon was captured and taken as a prisoner to Bayeux. Here he was threatened by the local people because of his disloyalty to Duke Robert, and Henry, hearing of the plight of one of his key men, landed in Normandy and besieged Bayeux. Gontier d'Aulnay, governor of Bayeux, handed his captive over in the hope of winning Henry's favour, but refused to surrender the city. Henry thereupon set fire to it, and in the conflagration the cathedral was destroyed. 
Robert was afterwards involved in a conspiracy whereby some citizens of Caen were prepared to hand the city over to Henry. Robert then served at the siege of Falaise where he received a wound that caused him to lose his senses, though he did not die until March 1107. According to William of Malmesbury there were those who believed that the wound was a punishment for the firing of Bayeux (Malmesbury, 2.475). It was suggested much later that such odium attached to Robert's name in consequence of the devastation of Bayeux, that it accounted in part for the resistance to the appointment as bishop of Bayeux of his son-in-law's illegitimate son. Robert may have received medical care from the renowned physician Faricius, abbot of Abingdon, for he made a gift of land to that house not long before his death. He was buried in the chapter house of Tewkesbury Abbey, and in 1241 his body was transferred to the church. Later a stone chapel, which still survives, was built over the founder's tomb. 
Other than Gloucester, Tewkesbury Abbey was the chief focus of Robert's religious benefactions. Originally Tewkesbury had been a cell of Cranborne Abbey in Dorset, but at some point Robert decided to establish an abbey there, and in 1102 the community transferred to the new church that was being built on the banks of the River Severn. The first abbot was Gerald, a chaplain of Earl Hugh of Chester. William of Malmesbury praised the new church and the charity of the monks. The abbey again received endowments from Robert's estates in Wales, including the parish church of St Mary, Cardiff, the chapel of Cardiff Castle, the church of Llantwit, and the tithes of Cardiff and his lands in Wales. 
No contemporary details survive about Robert's appearance or personality, but he was clearly highly regarded by both Rufus and Henry I. He was frequently at court in both reigns, and his death was much regretted by King Henry. Robert and Sibyl had no sons, but according to the tradition preserved at Tewkesbury, four daughters. One daughter, Mabel, also called Matilda (by Orderic Vitalis) and Sibyl (wrongly, by Robert de Torigni) became sole heir, and married Robert, earl of Gloucester, the eldest illegitimate son of Henry I. Two sisters entered the religious life: Cecily became abbess of Shaftesbury, Hawise abbess of Winchester. An unnamed daughter, possibly one of these two, became a nun at Malling, for the king confirmed the land that had been granted to the nuns by her father. A fourth sister was said to have been Amice, who married a count of Brittany, but of her no trace has been found. 


@@@@@


doc= 9597


Robert fitz Harding (d. 1171), burgess and merchant, was the grandson, through his father, Harding, of the Saxon thegn Eadnoth the Staller, who died near Bristol in 1068 leading resistance against an invasion by Harold Godwineson's sons. Robert's father appears in the 'Domesday' survey as a Somerset landlord in possession of thegnland and may have had a house on Baldwin Street in Bristol. In the twelfth century some of this land was held by Robert's elder brother Nicholas of the earldom of Gloucester. The persistent claim that Robert served as the borough's reeve is without foundation. Local tradition aptly described him as a Bristol burgess and merchant. His great stone house stood on High Street near Frome Bridge. He engaged in the Bristol land market and was landlord of properties in at least four other urban locations. He also may have been involved in Bristol's trade with Dublin. 
As a financier Robert numbered among his clients Henry FitzEmpress (during the civil war against King Stephen) and St Peter's Abbey, Gloucester. However, the scope of his land dealings went far beyond the limits of Bristol. Suburban tenures which he held across the River Frome in Billeswick may have been existing appurtenances of some of his burghal holdings. He acquired additional suburban property south of the River Avon in Bedminster from Bristol's lord, Robert, earl of Gloucester, before 1147. Further estate building involved acquiring, sometimes by purchase, far-flung lands and knights' fees from royal tenants-in-chief such as the earls of Gloucester, Chester, and Warwick. Robert's role as a proprietary land developer is evident in the charter of liberties he granted to settlers in the borough he established in Bedminster. In keeping with the trend in monastic piety and the stature he had achieved in Bristol by the early 1140s, he founded during that decade St Augustine's Abbey on his Billeswick property. 
Further social and tenurial enhancement came from patronage Robert received from Henry FitzEmpress both before and after Henry became king, almost certainly as a reward for Robert's financial backing during the war against King Stephen (1135-54). In the early 1150s Robert appears as a burgage tenant in Bristol, the earldom of Gloucester's most valuable demesne manor, almost certainly holding of the earl, and also holding of three of the honorial barons whose fees included parts of the borough. He had also begun to expand his holdings to the suburbs and beyond, a process which made him a tenurial knight by 1166 if not before. Before the death of Robert, earl of Gloucester, in 1147 Robert's prominence must have led the earl to include him as an honorial 'familiaris' (follower or companion) at his courts held at Bristol, a role he continued to enjoy under Earl Robert's heir, William (died 1183). Then came a series of ducal and royal grants from Henry FitzEmpress, datable to 1153/4 and 1154/5, and a marriage treaty Henry sanctioned, which are recorded in a remarkable series of original charters preserved in the Berkeley Castle muniments. Henry first granted Bitton and land worth $100 at Berkeley, with the right to fortify a castle, for the service of two mewed hawks; a second ducal grant added Berkeley Hernesse with important proprietary rights for the service of one knight or 100's'., in return for a payment of 500 marks; and finally Henry as king adjusted the service quota of his tenant-in-chief to five knights. 
Several of Henry's grants were made to Robert's presumptive heir, Maurice. As a complement to these grants, in 1153 Henry sanctioned, if not arranged, a marriage between Maurice and Alice, the daughter of the dispossessed Gloucestershire tenant-in-chief and lord of Berkeley, Roger. The agreement between Robert and Roger, which was formalized in Robert's Bristol house in Henry's presence, also provided for the transfer of additional Berkeley land to Maurice. Its terms created through Maurice, Alice, and their heirs the second house of Berkeley with relentless determination: should Robert's son or Roger's daughter die before the nuptials, their places would be taken by their respective brothers and sisters so long as the supply would last. Another interesting aspect of these ducal and royal charters and the marriage treaty is that they may very well have been written by scribes provided by Robert. The treaty and at least four charters appear to be the work of two monastic scribes from Robert's foundation, St Augustine's. 
In spite of Henry II's early favour, Robert never became one of his intimates. His importance remained local and regional. But in this capacity he twice provided hospitality at Bristol for the king of Leinster, Diarmait mac Murchada, during his mission of 1166-7 to enlist Anglo-Normans, notably Richard de Clare, to campaign for him in Ireland; and it is possible that Robert played some role in bringing together Clare and the Irish king. 
Robert and his wife, Eva (d. c.1173), had five sons and three daughters. He retired from public life some time after 1166-8 to St Augustine's, where he died a canon on 5 February 1171. Bristol tradition held that shortly afterwards, about 1173, Eva founded on St Michael's Hill near St Augustine's a nunnery, St Mary Magdalene's, which she ruled as prioress; however, in the early thirteenth century the house was a hospital with a mixed community. Robert and his wife were buried in St Augustine's. 


@@@@@


doc= 9598


Fitzharris, Edward (d. 1681), conspirator, was the second son of Sir Edward Fitzharris, baronet (died in or before 1700), of Kilfinane, Ireland, and Ellen Fitzgerald. He was baptized a Roman Catholic and educated in France from 1662 to 1665 before returning to Ireland. In 1668 he left to seek service in the emperor's forces in his war with Hungary. Arriving at Prague he found that peace had been declared and therefore sought alternative military service. He received a commission in the regiment being raised by Sir George Hamilton for service in Louis XIV's army. Although Fitzharris took his company to France he was discharged soon afterwards. He then lived in poverty for nearly a year in Paris. During this time he met the future informer Edmund Everard and later claimed that he had also uncovered a popish plot to depose Charles II. At an unknown date he married Anne (died in or after 1689), daughter of William Finch, a naval commander. She, according to some, was a woman whose husband had to 'move and do as she inclined him' (North, 276). 
Fitzharris returned to England in October 1672 where he obtained a commission in Albemarle's regiment alongside other Catholic officers, until the 'Test Act' of 1673 disabled him from service. He was later to allege that further rumours of the Popish Plot had reached him as he mixed with some highborn Catholics and that in 1679 the envoy of the duke of Modena had offered him $10,000 if he would kill Charles II. He refused, but was to maintain that the duke of York was privy to these designs. While in Paris in 1680 Fitzharris claimed to have met a priest who gave him further details of the Popish Plot, and Father Kelly, one of the alleged murderers of Sir Edmund Godfrey, who told him that Miles Prance's version of Godfrey's death was true and that the murder had been planned at Windsor. But despite his later denials it seems that his actual contact at this time was his relative Mrs Wall, the maid of the duchess of Portsmouth. This had enabled him to act as a go-between, with money provided by the king, in an attempt to bribe the whig lord, Howard of Escrick, to switch sides. 
In February 1681 Fitzharris wrote a libellous pamphlet, 'The True Englishman Speaking Plain English in a Letter from a Friend to a Friend', advocating the deposition of Charles II and the exclusion of the duke of York. It seems that he had hoped to plant this pamphlet in the home of a prominent whig and then make a 'discovery'. Unfortunately he had joined with Edmund Everard to forward this scheme and Everard, whose loyalties were, at least temporarily, whiggish, drew him into a trap. Fitzharris was duped into betraying the entire scheme before Sir William Waller, was promptly arrested, and was sent to Newgate on a charge of high treason. In prison he was persuaded to turn informer by Henry Cornish and Slingsby Bethel, the whig sheriffs of London and Middlesex. He presently claimed that he had known of the Popish Plot since at least 1672, and that he knew the real circumstances of Godfrey's death and tried to implicate the earl of Danby in the crime. The whig opposition was naturally keen to put these tales to political use, but in an attempt to forestall this Charles II sent Fitzharris to the Tower. In order to get the luckless Fitzharris back into its own hands the House of Commons impeached him, and Fitzharris then became the object of a constitutional wrangle between the Commons and Lords, as well as the king. 
With the use of plot witnesses substantially undermined by the many other Irish informers whom Shaftesbury, among others, had imported to give their dubious evidence, the fate of Fitzharris began to take on great significance. Failure to protect him would undoubtedly have led others to claim that they had also been suborned and so the whigs and tories fought out a series of delaying actions in an attempt to rescue or stifle Fitzharris and his dubious evidence. His eventual trial in Westminster Hall on 9 June 1681 was attended by many whig peers and others, but as Fitzharris himself plaintively admitted 'these are great persons, that I have to do with; and where great state matters are at the bottom, it is hard to make them tell anything but what is for their advantage; And so I am left in a sad condition' ('State trials', 8.378). Fitzharris's supplications that the court had no jurisdiction over him having been found legally defective, he was tried and sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. In the remaining three weeks prior to his death he was subjected to great pressure to earn a pardon. Both he and his wife, who had publicly and valiantly stood by her husband during the trial, vainly attempted to please all parties in the hope that he would be respited. His published confession accused Cornish and Bethel of having prompted him to swear against the queen, York, and Danby, but in his private letters to his wife Fitzharris claimed that he was only mouthing falsehoods in an attempt to save his life. No pardon emerged and with not a little sense of irony he was executed at Tyburn on 1 July 1681 alongside the rather more innocent Oliver Plunket. His body was buried in London later that month. Cornish and Bethel, as well as Howard of Escrick, attacked his confession and proved it to be littered with falsehoods, while his devoted wife continued to protest his innocence. She and Fitzharris's three children lived in some poverty thereafter; Anne and two children were still alive in 1689. 
In retrospect Fitzharris was an unlucky man who was caught up in a plot largely of his own making. While seeking to make money out of both the government and the opposition he managed to ensnare himself. Like many of the other informers of this period of the Popish Plot, his evidence was unreliable. As it was his foolishness ultimately caused himself and his family considerable suffering, like so many other victims who were caught up in the plot. 


@@@@@


doc= 9599


Meiler fitz Henry (d. 1220), soldier and justiciar of Ireland, was the son of Henry, illegitimate son of Henry I and Nest, daughter of Rhys ap Tewdwr, king of Deheubarth (south Wales), who also had children with Gerald, constable of Windsor, and Stephen, constable of Cardigan. Meiler was thus a first cousin of Henry II and related also to prominent Cambro-Normans of south Wales, including Robert fitz Stephen, Maurice fitz Gerald Fitzgerald (d. 1176), David fitz Gerald (d. 1176), bishop of St David's, who were his uncles, and Raymond Fitzgerald le Gros and Gerald of Wales, who were his cousins. His father, who had acted as steward ('dapifer') of the lordship of Pebidiog, which had been granted by Henry I to Bernard, bishop of St David's, was slain in 1157 during Henry II's campaign in Wales. Meiler, then quite young, succeeded to his father's interests in Pebidiog and Narberth in Dyfed, the precise nature of which is unknown, but was exaggerated by Gerald of Wales; certainly, the stewardship of St David's subsequently was granted by David fitz Gerald, as bishop of St David's, to Maurice Fitzgerald. 
In 1169 Meiler accompanied his uncle, Robert fitz Stephen, on his first expedition to Ireland where Gerald of Wales and the so-called 'Song of Dermot and the Earl' depict Meiler distinguishing himself in military engagements between 1169 and 1176. In 1171, before his departure from Ireland, Henry II left Meiler under the constableship of Hugh de Lacy at Dublin. About 1173-4 Meiler departed for Wales with Raymond le Gros, but, when the latter returned to Ireland, Meiler went with him and received a grant of the cantred of Conall in Ui Faelain from Richard de Clare, earl of Pembroke (Strongbow), as well as the cantred of Cairpre. In October 1175 he accompanied Raymond le Gros on his expedition to Limerick, and, alongside his cousin, David of Barry, withstood the Irish attack until the Anglo-Norman party had crossed the River Shannon. Following Strongbow's death in 1176 William fitz Aldelin, a royal official, arrived to administer the lordship of Leinster during the minority of Strongbow's heirs. Gerald of Wales depicted fitz Aldelin as harassing Meiler and his Geraldine relatives. In 1181 two other royal administrators, John the Constable and Richard de Pec, exchanged Meiler's custody of the castle of Kildare in the cantred of Conall in Ui Faelain for the border territory of Laigis. About 1182 Hugh de Lacy, lord of Meath (at that time also Henry II's agent in Ireland), built a castle for Meiler at Timahoe and gave him his niece as a wife. It may have been on the same occasion that Hugh enfeoffed him with the cantred of Ardnurcher (Westmeath). In 1192 a castle was erected at Ardnurcher. 
On John's accession as king of England, when documentary evidence on Angevin lordship in Ireland increases, Meiler is named as justiciar on 4 September 1199. He witnessed a charter (without title of justiciar) of John on 25 June 1200 at Chinon. On 28 October 1200 the king granted him (without title of justiciar) two cantreds in Ciarraige, Tricha Cet an Aicme and Ui Ferba, and Eoghanacht Locha Lein (Kerry) in the kingdom of Cork, to be held for the service of fifteen knights. No later than 2 November 1201 he was reappointed to the custody of Ireland, John reserving to himself pleas touching the crown, the mint, and exchange. On 22 December 1201 the king threatened to remove him from the justiciarship unless he acted as instructed in 'the affair of William de Briouze', who had been granted the honour of Limerick on 12 January 1201 ('Calendar... Ireland', 1, no. 160). About 30 August 1204 he was directed by the king to build a castle in Dublin 'to administer justice to the city', as well as for defence ('Calendar... Ireland', 1, no. 226); he was also to compel the citizens of Dublin to fortify their city. On 2 November 1204 the king ordered that Meiler's writs as justiciar should run throughout his land of Ireland. 
Meiler's actions as justiciar, while also a tenant of the lords of Leinster and of Meath, were to create serious tensions among the Anglo-Norman baronage in Ireland. In January 1204 he took the lordship of Ui Failge into his own hands, following the death of Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, thereby encroaching on the rights of William (I) Marshal, as lord of Leinster. He was also in dispute with the Marshal over custody of the castle of Dunamase in Laigis, a situation to which King John had contributed by confirming to Meiler, on 6 November 1200, Laigis and Ui Chremthannain to be held of the king for the service of five knights; this grant also encroached on the rights of the Marshal as lord of Leinster. On 26 March 1204 the king appointed commissioners, authorizing them to act with the powers of justiciar, to hear the actions and plaints which Meiler fitz Henry had against William de Burgh. On 12 February 1207 King John wrote to Meiler concerning William (III) de Briouze's complaints against Meiler and his son, in relation to custody of Limerick city. In the same year Meiler contrived the recall from Ireland of William Marshal, and, in his absence, Meiler's followers invaded Leinster; but the tenants of Walter de Lacy's lordship of Meath supported the Marshal's men against the justiciar's army. Meiler's castle of Ardnurcher was besieged for five weeks and eventually captured by Walter and Hugh de Lacy. During November 1207 Meiler persuaded King John to recall William Marshal's seneschal in Leinster so as to weaken his position in Ireland. By 20 March 1208, however, John had reached an accommodation with the Marshal and subsequently withdrew support for his justiciar, electing to settle the dispute between him and the Marshal by authorizing the latter's recovery of Ui Failge and removing Meiler from office. The latest writ addressed to him as justiciar was dated 19 June 1208. 
In 1211-12 the cantreds of Laigis, Conall, and Cairpre, the land which Meiler held in the cantred of Aghaboe, and the castle of Dunamase in Laigis, were accounted by William (I) Marshal as being in the king's hand, probably resulting from John's expedition to Ireland. About 1212 Meiler's name appeared immediately after that of the Marshal in the declaration of loyalty offered by the Irish barons to John against his threatened deposition by the pope. In August 1219 the expenses he had incurred during his justiciarship were defrayed from the exchequer. On 24 November 1219 the citizens of Dublin offered half of the debt owed them by Meiler to the king, the other half to be deployed for the fortification of the city, an arrangement which was reiterated on 28 September 1220. Meiler must by that date have been a very old man. Already in 1216 it was thought likely that he might die, or at least retire into a monastery; in the same year, his lands in Ciarraige and Eoghanacht Locha Lein were granted to his Leinster feoffee, John de Clahull. On 28 May 1216 King John commanded Geoffrey de Marisco, justiciar of Ireland, to cause William Marshal to have all his fees in the lands held by Meiler fitz Henry. On 2 December 1219 Henry III restored to William Marshal, by then acting as regent, the service due from Meiler which King John had taken into his hand and ordered Meiler to render that service to the Marshal and to be attentive to him as his lord. 
About 1202 Meiler had founded the Augustinian priory of Greatconnell (Kildare), affiliated to the Augustinian house of Llanthony Prima in Glamorgan, and which he endowed with the churches and benefices of his lands in Ireland, and with a tenth of his household expenses, rents, and produce. From the royal confirmation to Greatconnell, 10 September 1205, it is apparent that Meiler also held five burgages in Dungarvan. About July 1203 the king had issued letters of presentation to the bishop of Waterford directing that David, clerk of Meiler fitz Henry, be admitted to the church of Dungarvan and on 19 October 1204 the king gave his assent to the promotion of David, clerk and cousin of Meiler fitz Henry, to the see of Waterford (David was to be murdered in 1209). Meiler granted to Llanthony prima the churches and tithes of his land in Wicklow, where he held Kilpool and Killoughter of Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1204). He died in 1220 and was buried in Greatconnell. He had no legitimate heirs, a punishment, according to Gerald of Wales, writing in 1210, for the fact that he had not been sufficiently generous to the church. His brother, Robert fitz Henry, had died about 1180; of his other brother, Morgan, who witnessed his charter in favour of Llanthony, nothing more is known. The same charter refers to his heirs; if the son, Meiler, mentioned in 1206, was legitimate, he must have been dead before 1210, when Gerald stated that Meiler had no legitimate heirs. 


@@@@@


doc= 9600


Fitzhenry, Elizabeth (d. 1790), actress, was the daughter of the innkeeper of the Ferry Boat tavern in Abbey Street, Dublin, where she was born. Her precise date of birth is uncertain, but was presumably in the early 1720s, calculating from the date of her marriage on 15 January 1742 to Captain John Gregory, the commander of a ship trading between Dublin and Bordeaux. The deaths of her father and husband between about 1750 and 1752 resulted in her travelling to London in 1753 and to her first engagement a year later at Covent Garden, as Hermione in Ambrose Philips's 'The Distressed Mother' on 10 January 1754. Again, the circumstances leading to this choice of a career in acting and to a debut with such a celebrated company are unknown; interestingly, unlike many of her contemporaries on the stage, she never excited gossip or scandal of a kind which gave rise to speculations, reminiscences, or anecdotes about her early life and the stages of her rise to fame. Although she added Alicia, in Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore', to her repertory on 23 March 1754, she did not reappear at Covent Garden in the ensuing season; it has been supposed that a marked Irish accent may account for this, but, if so, it did not prevent her returning to Covent Garden in 1757 to play, in addition to Hermione, Calista in Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent' and, for her benefit on 26 March, Lady Macbeth and Catherine in Garrick's 'Catherine and Petruchio', when she acted opposite Edward Shuter. During the intervening years, still appearing as Mrs Gregory, she performed for two seasons at the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, as Hermione, Zara in William Congreve's 'The Mourning Bride', Zaphira in John Brown's 'Barbarossa', and Volumnia in 'Coriolanus'. That in Dublin she could command a salary of $300, rising rapidly to $400, argues that after only one season at Covent Garden she was already viewed as a highly accomplished and indeed an established actress. 
It was at the Smock Alley Theatre in October 1757 that she was first billed in the role of Calista as Mrs Fitzhenry, the name by which she is best known. Her marriage to Edward Fitzhenry (died 1772), a lawyer of some standing, with whom she had a son and a daughter, must therefore have taken place in the summer of 1757. For some time she became caught up in the rivalry between Benjamin Victor and Spranger Barry, and later between Barry and Henry Mossop, which occasioned her moving between the companies at Smock Alley and Crow Street; clearly she was seen as enough of a draw to make her a sought-after asset for either of the Dublin managements. Between 1759 and 1764 she extended her range further by playing Isabella in 'Measure for Measure', Emilia in 'Othello', Gertrude in 'Hamlet', Queen Katharine in 'Henry VIII', Cleopatra in John Dryden's 'All for Love', and Mandane in Arthur Murphy's 'The Orphan of China', roles which, with Roxana in Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens' (first played at Drury Lane on 9 April 1766), Margaret of Anjou in Thomas Francklin's 'The Earl of Warwick', and Aspasia in Rowe's 'Tamerlane', she was to sustain for the remainder of her career. Although her second husband died in October 1772, she continued to perform for some years in Dublin (there are records of appearances at the Smock Alley Theatre as Mrs Belleville in Hugh Kelly's 'The School for Wives' in the 1773-4 season, and of a final performance there on 12 March 1783). It would seem significant that, with the notable exception of the role of Catherine, in which she appears to have been replaced after one performance, the parts in which she consistently excelled were from the tragic repertory (Mossop billed her when he took his company to the New Theatre Royal, Cork, in 1768 as the 'noted 'tragedienne''). Her technical range within the tragic mode was extensive and subtle, to judge by the list of roles which first won and then sustained her eminence, though she was clearly more an admired than a popular actress. She died in November 1790 at Ballinahallen, near Enniscorthy, co. Wexford, where she lived after her retirement. 


@@@@@


doc= 9601


Fitzherbert, Alleyne, Baron St Helens (1753-1839), diplomatist, was born on 1 March 1753 at a house called St Helens in Derby, the fifth and youngest son of William Fitzherbert (1712-1772), MP, of Tissington Hall, near Ashbourne in Derbyshire and his wife, Mary, daughter of Littleton Poyntz Meynell, of Bradley, near Ashbourne, and Judith, daughter of Thomas Alleyne of Barbados. Both his parents were good friends of Samuel Johnson, who said of his mother that 'she had the best understanding he ever met with in any human being' (J. Boswell, 'Life of Johnson', ed. P. Rogers, 1980, 59). William Fitzherbert became overwhelmed by anxiety about his financial affairs and committed suicide on 2 January 1772. Fitzherbert was educated at Derby grammar school (1763) and at Eton College (1766-70) before matriculating from St John's College, Cambridge, in June 1770. At Cambridge he took his BA in the mathematical tripos in 1774 and received his MA in 1777. After graduating he received a scholarship from the university to travel in France and Italy during 1775, and soon after that he embarked upon a diplomatic career; in April 1777 he was appointed minister resident in Brussels, a post he held until 1783, in the last year as minister-plenipotentiary. In 1782 he was also appointed minister-plenipotentiary to negotiate the peace agreement at Paris between Britain and France, Spain, and the United Provinces at the end of the American War of Independence. It should be noted, however, that while Fitzherbert conducted negotiations in Paris between August 1782 and June 1783 with the French representative the comte de Vergennes, the substantive negotiations which brought the war to an end were actually conducted in England between the prime minister, Lord Shelburne, and Vergennes's deputy Gerard de Rayneval in late 1782. 
Fitzherbert's next posting was to the court of Catherine the Great at St Petersburg, a position he held from October 1783 until August 1787. Perhaps the most important aspect of this posting was his role in the failed attempts to negotiate a trade agreement with the Russians. On 18 March 1785 he alerted ministers in London to the fact that the commercial treaty of 1766 between Britain and Russia would reach the end of its twenty-year duration in the following year. In November 1785 he was sent full powers to negotiate, and early in February 1786 he proposed to the Russian government a renewal of the 1766 agreement, with some minor modifications. The Russians, for their part, however, were interested in renegotiating the terms of the treaty more fundamentally, and in particular they wished to obtain some relaxation of the 'Navigation Acts' in their favour. They responded with a paper of their own which ignored Fitzherbert's proposals and made a number of strongly worded demands for British concessions on navigation and the issue of the rights of neutral trade in times of war. 
It was as much the tone of the Russian response as its content which alienated ministers in London, and they set their faces against any concessions to the Russians, although Fitzherbert, with his greater knowledge of Russian attitudes and intentions, was aware that if the negotiations were to be successful some concessions to the Russian position would be inevitable. The Russian proposals were forwarded to London by Fitzherbert on 20 February 1786, but no official reply was made to the Russians by the ministers in London until 17 November 1786, owing largely to a combination of ministerial complacency and the need to attend to what ministers regarded as more pressing business. The ministerial response, consisting of six lengthy dispatches to Fitzherbert, amounted to a rejection of Russian demands, which coupled with the lengthy delay only exasperated the Russians further. One of the strategic aims of the British negotiating position was to weaken Russian links with France, but, partly as a result of the failing negotiations with Britain, the Russians signed a new commercial treaty with France in January 1787. 
By early 1787, therefore, the negotiations between Britain and Russia for a commercial agreement had to all intents and purposes ground to a halt, and the existing treaty finally lapsed in April 1787, having been temporarily extended for the duration of the negotiations. Fitzherbert wrote to the foreign secretary Carmarthen claiming that 'though a well-wisher to the negotiation, I saw plainly from the first that it could not possibly succeed' and asking for home leave, 'having now no business of importance to transact' (Ehrman, 'British Government', 111 and n. 1). Fitzherbert's last major task as ambassador was to accompany Catherine the Great on a tour of the Crimea during the summer of 1787 before leaving Russia in August. 
In November 1787 Fitzherbert was appointed chief secretary for Ireland under the marquess of Buckingham and as a consequence was sworn of the privy council. In 1788 he was returned to the Irish House of Commons as MP for Carysfort, and he held the seat until 1790. He ended his chief secretaryship in March 1789, and was thereupon sent as ambassador to The Hague (June 1789 to March 1790), where he had to deal with the difficult issues raised both by the possibilities of French support for the Dutch patriot movement and by resistance to Habsburg rule in the Austrian Netherlands to the south. 
In May 1790 Fitzherbert was transferred to Madrid specifically to deal with the complex Nootka Sound affair, which almost brought Britain and Spain to war. The affair had its long-term origins in colonial rivalry between Britain and Spain on the Pacific coast of North America, but its immediate origins lay in the Spanish seizure of British ships and men at Nootka Sound, Vancouver Island, in 1789. Fitzherbert was closely involved in the complex diplomatic and military manoeuvrings which ensued. By the judicious use of military threats, he was able to induce the Spanish foreign minister Floridablanca to sign, on 24 July 1790, a declaration to return the ships and compensate their owners. In a counter-declaration signed by Fitzherbert the British agreed to accept the Spanish offer. Crucially, however, neither side would give way on the larger and more fundamental issues relating to their respective rights on the Pacific coast of North America, and the next phase of the negotiations was devoted to these aspects of the affair. In August Fitzherbert was instructed by the foreign secretary, the duke of Leeds, to demand of the Spanish that they renounce any claims to sovereignty over the coastline. Fitzherbert presented his demands to Floridablanca on 8 September 1790 and received a reply the following week in which Floridablanca accepted the British proposals in principle but left the details imprecise. 
Fitzherbert was optimistic that this might be the basis of a settlement but, as in the case of the Russian trade negotiations, ministers in London felt otherwise. Imbued with confidence owing to the completion of British naval mobilization in preparation for possible war with Spain, the British ministers responded to the Spanish proposal by sending Fitzherbert two alternative drafts of a treaty which were to be presented to the Spanish as an ultimatum and which reached Fitzherbert on 12 October 1790. Despite resistance from other ministers in the Spanish government, Floridablanca was eventually forced to sign a convention with Fitzherbert on 28 October in which Spain effectively abandoned her claims to sovereignty over the north-west coast of North America. Fitzherbert, as he put it, 'negotiating with 60 sail of the line at one's back' (Black, 254), had played an effective role in forcing the Spanish to back down twice, once over the specifics of the Nootka Sound incident and again over their claims to sovereignty in the Pacific. His contribution was recognized when he was raised to the Irish peerage as Baron St Helens on 26 January 1791. 
In October 1790, while the final convention with Spain over Nootka Sound was being negotiated, Fitzherbert had suggested to the Spanish the possibility of a more comprehensive treaty. The idea languished until July 1791, when Floridablanca took up the invitation and serious negotiations began. These negotiations, which initially focused on the possiblities of a commercial agreement, were hampered by Floridablanca's fall from power in February 1792 and his replacement by a noted Anglophobe, the Count d'Aranda. By mid-1792 the negotiations for a commercial agreement were effectively abandoned. The deteriorating international situation, however, evident in the outbreak in 1792 of the war against revolutionary France (which Britain finally entered in early 1793), made the Spanish more receptive to the notion of an alliance with Britain. In March 1793 St Helens was able to negotiate an alliance with Spain, although in commercial matters it included only terms relating to trade during a time of war. 
During the period from June 1792 to March 1793 St Helens's poor health had necessitated a period of absence from his post at Madrid, and health concerns were behind his decision finally to leave Madrid in early 1794. In April 1794 he returned as ambassador to The Hague, from where he was forced to flee in January 1795 in the face of the advancing French armies. Lord Malmesbury, who visited The Hague in May 1794, described St Helens as 'very friendly, but 'insouciant' as to business and not attentive enough for his post' (Harris, 3.98) and this perception of St Helens's declining abilities may lie behind the fact that it was six years before he received another diplomatic posting. On his return from The Hague, however, he appears to have been warmly welcomed in ministerial social circles. George Canning, who met him for the first time in April 1795, described St Helens as 'an able and well-informed man' and noted that he 'derived much instruction from his conversation', adding none the less that '[h]is manners are cold -- but perfectly gentlemanlike' ('Letter-Journal', 239). On 16 July 1797 a fire at St Helens's London house burnt it to the ground, destroying everything he possessed. 
In April 1801 St Helens was sent as ambassador to St Petersburg in the aftermath of the accession of Alexander I. He negotiated a convention (17 June 1801) with Russia regarding maritime rights, for which he was rewarded with a United Kingdom peerage, becoming Baron St Helens of St Helens on 31 July 1801. He successfully negotiated the accession of both Denmark (October 1801) and Sweden (March 1802) to the Anglo-Russian convention before ill health once again forced him to leave his post in August 1802: indeed as early as July 1801, Lord Hawkesbury, the foreign secretary, was informing George III that St Helens's health would necessitate his return from Russia. In April 1803 St Helens left the diplomatic service with a pension of $2300 p.a. and became, somewhat reluctantly owing to the expense it would entail, a lord of the bedchamber; he held this post until January 1820 and again under George IV from July 1820 until 1830. 
Baron St Helens died on 19 February 1839 at his home at 19 Grafton Street and was buried on 26 February in the Kensal Green cemetery. His peerages became extinct on his death. 
His eldest brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 9602


Fitzherbert, Sir Anthony (c.1470-1538), judge and legal writer, was the youngest son of Ralph Fitzherbert (died 1484) of Norbury, Derbyshire, and Elizabeth (died 1490), daughter of John Marshall of Upton, Leicestershire, and Sedsall, Derbyshire. The Fitzherberts had been seated at Norbury since the twelfth century and were very numerous: Ralph had twelve surviving children, his father Nicholas seventeen. Since his father had been unable to provide for him, Anthony's mother left him $10 a year in 1490 'towards his exhibition att court appon condition that he contynue his lernyng at the same' (Boersma, 'Sir Antony Fitzherbert', 13). This condition he fulfilled by joining Gray's Inn and becoming one of its most learned alumni. An early sign of professional engagement occurs in 1494, when he acted as a feoffee; in 1505 he is mentioned as an arbitrator in Staffordshire; and in 1507 he is noticed three times as counsel in the court of requests. 
About 1508 Fitzherbert became a bencher of his inn, choosing to read on the 'beaupleader' chapter of the 'Statute of Marlborough'. The lectures, which survive, were an exposition of the law relating to pleading, beginning with counts and ending with dilatory pleas, and a promise that if he read again he would tackle special pleading. The following year he became a justice of the peace in Leicestershire and Warwickshire and recorder of Coventry. Only two years or so from his reading, while still comparatively junior in the profession, he was called to the degree of serjeant and created in November 1510. As the junior serjeant from Gray's Inn he gave the serjeant's reading, taking the same text again and apparently covering the same ground, doubtless for want of long enough notice to fulfil the promise made in his first reading. The pressure of work as a serjeant, and perhaps also a shift in his principal residence, forced him in 1512 to resign his recordership of Coventry. His appointment as one of the king's serjeants came on 24 November 1516, and on 20 May 1522 he was elevated to the bench as a justice of the common pleas, with a knighthood the same year. 
The latest year-books, and the reports of Dyer and Spelman, show that Fitzherbert's judicial opinions were held in high regard by his contemporaries, though he took a strict view of precedent and did not always agree with more purposive interpretations of the law. In 1535 he famously denied the authority of an innovative king's bench decision of 1520 that an action on the case would lie against executors to recover the simple debts of their testator -- a decision won by his own advocacy when a serjeant -- with the outburst, 'Put that case out of your books, for it is not law without doubt' (Baker and Milsom, 448). He also held that actions on the case could not be used for spiritual defamation, such as an accusation of heresy, and he is known to have rejected several other recent developments which departed from older precedents. Besides routine commissions and work as an assize judge on the northern and midland circuits, Fitzherbert was employed as the legal member of a special commission to restore order to Ireland after the earl of Kildare's quarrel with Sir Piers Butler in 1524, and sat on most of the celebrated state trials of the 1530s. He was involved in the proceedings leading to Cardinal Wolsey's fall in 1529, sat as a commissioner in chancery on his resignation, and signed the articles against him. His conservatism doubtless extended to the spiritual as well as the legal sphere. At any rate, he had qualms about the dissolution of the monasteries and on his deathbed is said to have commanded his children not to acquire any monastic land. Several of his immediate descendants, moreover, including his son Thomas and his grandsons Thomas Fitzherbert and Nicholas Fitzherbert, suffered for their adherence to the papal cause. Fitzherbert's want of enthusiasm for government policy in the 1530s could account for his lack of further promotion. Despite his pre-eminence in the law, he remained a puisne judge until his death. 
Fitzherbert is one of the best-known English legal writers of the sixteenth century. His major work, the 'Magnum abbreviamentum' (printed in three parts between 1514 and 1517), entitled in later editions 'La graunde abridgement', was an enormous enterprise for its day, a massive digest of 13,845 cases from the year-books arranged under alphabetical headings. Its publication is thought to have consumed 250,000 large sheets of paper, and it was so far superior to Statham that the latter was never reprinted. Its preparation must have occupied Fitzherbert for many years, and he is known to have been helped in the task by William Owen. The work probably began in the time of Henry VII, and the entries include thirty-nine brief original reports of cases between 1499 and 1504 taken by Fitzherbert himself as a barrister of Gray's Inn, including an important dictum of Sir John Fyneux in 1499 on the law of contract. Also included were extracts from several unprinted year-books, such as those from the reign of Richard II that were later extracted by Richard Bellewe and printed separately as 'Les ans du Roy Richard le Second' (1585). Although Fitzherbert's headings were chosen conservatively, and there was little in the way of comment, subdivision, or cross-reference, the new resource had a profound effect on legal research and writing. William Staunford, for instance, recommended that its contents be 'ordered and disposed in such sort that all the judiciall actes and cases in the same might be brought and appeare under certaine principles, rules and groundes' (Staunford, preface): advice that he followed himself in preparing his 'Plees del coron' (1557) and 'Exposition of the Kings Prerogative' (1567), and which was also taken up in Simon Thelwall's 'Digest des briefes originals' (1579). The abridgement was reprinted in 1565 and again (in smaller format) in 1577. It was to some extent overtaken by Sir Robert Brooke's 'Graunde Abridgement' (1573), which contained fewer entries but more recent material and useful marginal headings. 
A smaller but more original work was Fitzherbert's 'La novel natura brevium' which was published towards the end of his life in 1534. It was inspired by the so-called 'old 'Natura brevium'' (the name given to two or more different medieval treatises, or lecture courses, on writs) but was a new treatment and much more detailed, with references both to recent cases and to the abridgement. It remained the principal reference work on writs until the abolition of the forms of action in the nineteenth century. The original French text (with the forms of writs in Latin) was reprinted eleven times, the last edition appearing in 1635. A rather poor English translation by William Hughes was printed in 1652 and four times reprinted, the last version (1730) with notes attributed to Sir Matthew Hale. A new translation by George Wilson, serjeant-at-law, was published in 1755 and reprinted in 1794. 
A third book, which appeared in the year of Fitzherbert's death, was 'The New Boke of Justices of the Peas' (1538), which appeared in both law French and English editions bearing the same date but differing slightly in content and arrangement. The adjective 'new' again paid due respect to an earlier work, this time the anonymous late medieval 'Boke of Justices of Peas' which was printed about 1506, but Fitzherbert's treatment was characteristically more thorough and detailed. These two 'books of justices' are hailed as the first printed treatises on English criminal law, and Fitzherbert's remained in use until it was overtaken by Dalton and Coke in the seventeenth century. There were eight reprints between 1540 and 1566, and an enlarged edition by Richard Crompton in law French (1583) which was itself reprinted five times. The latest edition of 'Crompton's 'Justice'' was in 1617. A tract entitled 'Offyce des Vyscountes, Bailiffes' first appeared as an appendix to the French version of the 'Boke' and was sometimes printed separately. It is not certain that it was composed by the same hand. 
Several other works were formerly but mistakenly attributed to Sir Anthony. 'The Boke of Husbandrie' and 'The Boke of Surveyinge', both printed in 1523, were by one Master Fitzherbarde, but this is now known to have been the judge's brother John. There is no evidence for attributing the anonymous 'Diversite de courtz' to Sir Anthony other than an unreliable later note in a copy in the British Library. Some sources mention a printed reading on the 'Extenta manerii', but this is a ghost. 
Although he was the youngest of a large family, Fitzherbert established himself as a substantial property owner in Derbyshire and Staffordshire. In 1507 he married Dorothy, second daughter of Sir Henry Willoughby of Wollaton, Nottinghamshire, but the marriage ended within months when Dorothy died on 5 November. His second wife was Maud, daughter and heir of Richard Cotton, who brought him a substantial inheritance including the great house at Hamstall Ridware, Staffordshire. The marriage probably took place about 1511, when Fitzherbert was added to the Staffordshire commission of the peace. Norbury and the other family estates were entailed on Anthony under the will of his eldest brother, John, dated 1517, and Anthony moved into Norbury Hall under an 'inter vivos' arrangement in 1526. The settlement, intended to disinherit John's daughters, led to an allegedly riotous altercation at John's funeral in 1531 and a subsequent Star Chamber suit. 
Sir Anthony Fitzherbert died on 26 or 27 May 1538. He was buried at Norbury, where there is a brass figure in judicial robes, parts of which (including the head) were detached in 1842 and lost. The judge's eldest surviving son, Sir Thomas, served in parliament in 1545 but refused to accept the Elizabethan religious settlement and died in the Tower in 1591. His fourth son, William, became a bencher of the Inner Temple and member of parliament for Lichfield in 1553 but died in 1558 or 1559, leaving among other children Thomas Fitzherbert, Jesuit. 


@@@@@


doc= 9603


Fitzherbert, Maria Anne (1756-1837), unlawful wife of George IV by a marriage invalid under the Royal Marriages Act of 1772, was born on 26 July 1756, the first of two daughters and four sons of Walter Smythe (died 1788), former soldier, of Acton Burnell, Shropshire, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1741-1807), daughter of John Errington of Andover, Hampshire. Both the Smythes and the Erringtons were well-established members of England's Roman Catholic 'cousinhood'. It is not known where Mrs Fitzherbert was born, but there is a tradition that it was in the Red Room at Tong Castle, Shropshire. She spent her infant years at Brambridge, Hampshire, where her father bought an estate, and where she later endowed a mission house. At about the age of twelve she went to the faubourg St Antoine, Paris, to be educated at an English convent run by Conceptionist nuns. On 16 July 1775 she married Edward Weld (1741-1775), landowner, of Lulworth Castle, Dorset, who died on 23 October 1775; then, three years later, Thomas Fitzherbert (1746-1781), also a landowner, of Swynnerton, Staffordshire, who died at Nice on 7 May 1781, reportedly as the result of an illness contracted during the Gordon riots. From her husbands' estates she received jointures amounting in value to over $2500 per annum, as well as the remainder of the lease of Fitzherbert's London house, and all its contents. Her movements are obscure during the following few years, but she was probably in Brighton in 1782, for during the summer of that year a local artist dedicated four views of the Steyne to her. 
There are several accounts of when and where Mrs Fitzherbert first attracted the attention of George Augustus Frederick, prince of Wales (1762-1830), later George IV. According to her own account, it was about 1780 near Corney House in Chiswick. She was driving with her husband, when the prince stopped his carriage to look at her. They did not speak, however, and it was not until March 1784, after a chance meeting outside the opera house, that he began his pursuit of her in earnest. The romantic story that they first met on Richmond Hill, and that she was the original 'sweet lass' of Richmond Hill of the popular ballad, seems to have originated in Charles Langdale's edition of the 'narrative' by William Joseph Stourton, fourteenth Baron Stourton, of Mrs Fitzherbert's life and can be discounted. From the start she provoked an attitude of recklessness in the romantic prince. Finding her unwilling to become his mistress, he eventually offered to marry her. Three acts of parliament stood in his way, however: the 'Act of Settlement' of 1701, the 'Act of Union' of 1707 (both excluding a prince or princess married to a Catholic from succeeding to the throne), and the 'Royal Marriages Act' of 1772, and she declined his proposal. On learning that she was about to travel abroad, he stabbed himself in Carlton House on 8 July. He sent his surgeon, Thomas Keate; his groom of the stole, Charles Fitzroy, first Baron Southampton; and two other friends to tell her that he would tear open his bandages unless she came to him. Arriving in company with Georgiana Cavendish, duchess of Devonshire, she then agreed to marry the prince, and he placed a ring upon her finger. It was a decision she immediately regretted. After returning to Devonshire House she signed a memorandum composed by the duchess: 'We went there [Carlton House] & she promis'd to marry him at her return [from the continent] but she conceives as well as myself that promises obtain'd in such a manner are entirely void' ('Georgiana', 87). According to Lord Stourton, Mrs Fitzherbert also wrote to Lord Southampton, 'protesting against what had taken place, as not being then a free agent' (Langdale, 119). 
Shortly afterwards Mrs Fitzherbert left London for the continent. The prince wrote to her repeatedly while she was abroad, begging her to return, and on several occasions he threatened to join her. In October 1785 she decided to honour her promise after all and return to London. 'I have told him I will be his', she told her confidante Lady Anne Lindsay; 'I know I injure him and perhaps destroy for ever my own tranquillity' (Hibbert, 51). The prince arranged the details of the marriage with Mrs Fitzherbert's uncle Henry Errington. On 3 November he wrote Mrs Fitzherbert an extravagant 42-page letter. She arrived in London early in December. The couple were then married in great secrecy in Mrs Fitzherbert's drawing room in Park Street on the evening of 15 December 1785 by one of the prince's chaplains in ordinary, the Revd Robert Burt, whose debts (of $500) were paid by the prince to release him from the Fleet prison. The marriage was witnessed by one of her brothers, John Smythe, and Henry Errington. Reportedly a friend of Mrs Fitzherbert's, the MP Orlando Bridgeman, stood outside the doors to protect the couple against intruders. Afterwards the prince wrote out the marriage certificate: 'We the undersigned do witness that George Augustus Frederick, Prince of Wales, was married unto Maria Fitzherbert this 15th of December, 1785. John Smythe, Henry Errington, George P., Maria Fitzherbert' ('Correspondence of George, Prince of Wales', 1, frontispiece). The couple honeymooned, apparently at a house on Ham Common near Richmond. 
Mrs Fitzherbert's arrival back in England and the mysterious circumstances surrounding her relationship with the prince turned her into a figure of controversy. She even helped to fuel a caricature boom. Few people outside her immediate family knew for certain that a marriage had taken place. The couple kept separate establishments, but the prince bought a house for her in Pall Mall, near Carlton House. Her appearances in public with the prince suggested that she had compromised herself. 'I know very little of her history, [no] more than that it is agreed on all hands that she is a very ambitious and clever woman,' remarked the actress Sarah Siddons; 'it seems everything goes on with the utmost formality; provision made for children, and so on' ('Journals and Correspondence of Thomas Sedgewicke Whalley', 1.419). In February 1786 Horace Walpole reported that 'all ranks' talked of the affair (Walpole, 'Corr.', 33.514). It was also spoken of in court circles on the continent. The ambiguity in her position affected Mrs Fitzherbert's social standing. She was abandoned by her former husbands' families. In July she joined her husband in closing up her London house, as both were heavily in debt. They spent the summer at Brighton, where Mrs Fitzherbert rented a small villa close to the Marine Pavilion. Reportedly, the holiday was not a success. 'It is supposed that the place wd have been more frequented if people had not wish'd to avoid an intimate acquaintance with the lady or her lover', noted the bluestocking Elizabeth Montagu ('Mrs Montagu', 2.207). 
In 1787 the prince pressed his political friends to settle his debts, though at the risk of grave hurt to himself and Mrs Fitzherbert. In the Commons on 20 April 1787 Alderman Nathaniel Newnham gave notice that he intended to introduce a motion on the prince's behalf. Three days later John Rolle hinted that if Newnham did not back down he would bring Mrs Fitzherbert into the discussion. On 30 April Charles James Fox -- speaking, so he said, from the 'immediate authority' of the prince -- described the prince's marriage as nothing more than a 'miserable calumny' (Wilkins, 1.189, 190). He denounced the story of the marriage 'in toto, in point of fact as well as law. The fact not only never could have happened legally, but never did happen in any way whatsoever' (ibid., 1.194). Naturally his speech offended Mrs Fitzherbert. Fox, she later told Sir Philip Francis, had 'rolled her in the kennel like a street-walker'; he knew 'every word' he had uttered was 'a lie' ('Memoirs of Sir Philip Francis', 2.452). Distraught, she immediately broke off relations with her husband. Subsequently the prince deputed Richard Brinsley Sheridan to make a mollifying speech in parliament on her behalf, which was notable for its tact and dexterity. It failed to pacify her, however, and it was not until he had made another suicide attempt that she agreed to return to him, although Fox was never forgiven. One happier and unexpected consequence of the drama in parliament was that she was more popular socially than at any time since her marriage. The 'knocker of her door was never still during the whole day' following Fox's speech, she later reminisced to Lord Stourton (Langdale, 123). Some of this support was prompted by the prince. According to Lady Sarah Napier, in June, he actually begged his friends to visit her. 
During the Regency crisis of 1788-9, Mrs Fitzherbert's relationship with the prince again exposed her to ridicule and danger. The pamphleteer Philip Withers published a rumour that she was corresponding with the 'Gros Abbe', one of the half-brothers of Louis-Philippe-Joseph, duke of Orleans, and that she was part of a secret Catholic cabal whose purpose was to subvert the government. Other, less absurd, rumours of infidelity were prompted by her intimacy with Sheridan. In public, at least, the prince distanced himself from Mrs Fitzherbert. 'I find it is a measure of the party to say that the Prince, from his amiable character, retains a friendship for Mrs Fitzherbert; but that she has not the least remaining influence; that he is quite tired of her, and in love elsewhere, therefore the public need have no further alarm on her account', reported Lord Harcourt (Wilkins, 1.249). The prince sent Sheridan to Rolle in an attempt to forestall any further mention of his marriage in parliament. He failed. On 7 February Rolle moved an amendment to a clause in the 'Regency Bill', which again alluded to Mrs Fitzherbert. Fox was at Bath on this occasion, but Charles Grey spoke on his behalf. He repeated Fox's declaration that the reports of the marriage were calumnious. 
Mrs Fitzherbert was rarely the sole object of the prince's amorous attentions, in spite of his constant protestations. During the 1790s he embarked on several brief affairs. In 1795 she told the architect George Dance that she had lived the life of a 'Galley Slave' for four years (Farington, 'Diary' 2.293), though by then they had been parted for six months, so she may have exaggerated her unhappiness. In spring 1794 he had fallen in love with Frances Villiers, countess of Jersey (1753-1821), who had persuaded him to marry his cousin Caroline of Brunswick. Mrs Fitzherbert spent the day of the prince's second wedding, 8 April 1795, at a rented mansion, Marble Hill Hall, near Twickenham in Middlesex. The mansion had once belonged to Henrietta Howard, mistress of George II. Presumably Mrs Fitzherbert was conscious of the irony. The impact upon her of the prince's desertion was profound. She remained affectionate towards him, however, and refused to be provoked into making use of their marriage certificate, which was in her possession, and of the many compromising letters that he had sent her. The prince claimed, probably unjustly, to have been misused in some way, though his sentiments towards her remained warm, and on several occasions during the following few years he made attempts to persuade her to return to him. On 10 January 1796, afraid that he was about to die, he wrote an extraordinary, passionately written will, ignoring Lady Jersey and his German-born wife, and naming Mrs Fitzherbert as practically his sole beneficiary. Both of them, he claimed, had been calumniated by ''base, vile & scandalous wretches'' ('Correspondence of George, Prince of Wales', 3.133). On a later occasion he again threatened suicide. If Mrs Fitzherbert did not return to him, it would, he said, be the only course left to him. 
This and similar avowals appear to have softened Mrs Fitzherbert towards the prince and during the summer of 1799 she agreed at least in principle to return to him. Her final determination depended on her church, however, for which reason a messenger was dispatched to Rome. Fortunately for the prince, the Vatican told her that she was the prince's canonical wife and should return to him. By the end of the year they appear to have been on good terms again. On 16 June 1800 they were formally reunited at a public breakfast at her Tilney Street house. 'She hardly knew how she could summon resolution to pass that severe ordeal', she told Lord Stourton, 'but she thanked God she had the courage to do so' (Langdale, 129). He added that the 'next eight years were, she said, the happiest of her connection with the Prince. She used to say that they were extremely poor, but as merry as crickets' (ibid.). From 1801 to 1806 Mrs Fitzherbert was much preoccupied with the fate of Mary (Minney) Seymour, the daughter of Lord Hugh and Lady Horatia Seymour, whom she had virtually adopted. In 1801 Minney's parents died and their executors moved to reclaim the child. The prince put together his own plan for the child's future welfare, and offered assurances that she would be educated as a protestant. The anxiety affected Mrs Fitzherbert's health. She was 'so totally wrapped up [in] and devoted' to Minney that she would not bear the pain of losing her, she told the child's uncle Lord Robert Seymour ('Letters', ed. Leslie, 126). A lengthy court case began in 1803. The prince took the fight to the House of Lords, and in June 1806 he reached a compromise with the executors under the terms of which Minney would remain with Mrs Fitzherbert, but under the sole guardianship of the child's eldest paternal uncle, Francis Ingram-Seymour-Conway, second marquess of Hertford. This was carried without a division. Thereafter Minney remained with Mrs Fitzherbert until 1825, when she married Colonel George Dawson, the second son of John Dawson, first earl of Portarlington. 
In the autumn of 1806 the prince embarked on an affair with Lord Hertford's wife, Isabella, and Mrs Fitzherbert's intimacy with the prince once more declined. For a while her status puzzled observers. During the height of his infatuation with Lady Hertford he treated Mrs Fitzherbert contemptuously. At other times he assured her that he still loved her. Eventually Mrs Fitzherbert tired of the prince's repeated declarations. On 18 December 1809 she refused an invitation to join him at the Marine Pavilion, citing the 'very great incivilities' she had received there ('Letters', ed. Leslie, 133). The final break occurred eighteen months later, in June 1811, over the seating arrangements for a fete at Carlton House. Denied her customary seat at the prince's table, Mrs Fitzherbert preferred not to go at all. Thereafter they saw very little of each other. In 1814 Mrs Fitzherbert wrote to the prince requesting an increase in her income. In 1810 the prince had increased her annuity from $3000 to $6000; in 1820 he raised it again, to $8000, and again in 1830, to $10,000. She spent much of her time during these years at Brighton, where according to John Wilson Croker she was treated like royalty. 'They don't quite 'Highness' her in her domestic circle, but they 'Madam' her prodigiously, and stand up longer for her arrival than for ordinary folks, and in short go as near to acknowledging her for 'Princess' as they can, without actually giving her the title' ('Croker Papers', 1.124). She is supposed to have had some sympathy for the prince's estranged wife, Caroline; during Caroline's 'trial' for adultery in 1820, she remained in Paris, fearful that Henry Brougham would subpoena her. She wrote to the prince during his final illness in 1830, but does not appear to have received a reply. Probably he was too ill. During his illness he wore a miniature of Mrs Fitzherbert around his neck. It was buried with him. Subsequently the duke of Wellington and William Charles Keppel, fourth earl of Albemarle, burnt most of her correspondence with the prince. She did, however, reserve some documents to herself, which were deposited at Coutts. Among them were the prince's marriage certificate of 1785 and his will of 1796. Apparently William IV offered to make her a duchess as a recompense for the difficulties she had suffered on his brother's behalf. Mrs Fitzherbert replied that 'she had borne through life the name of Mrs Fitzherbert; that she had never disgraced it, and did not wish to change it' (Langdale, 138). She travelled widely in old age, often for her health, and as late as 1835 paid a visit to Paris. She died at her home, 55 The Steyne, Brighton, on 27 March 1837, and was buried in St John the Baptist's Church, Brighton, on 6 April. 
In her late teens and early twenties Mrs Fitzherbert was a short, good-looking woman, smooth-skinned and fat, her hair a mass of golden curls, and 'perfectly unaffected and unassuming in her manners' ('Journal of Mary Frampton', 13). She became obese in later life. The caricaturists emphasized her large Roman nose and ample bosom. Unlike most of the prince's other women friends, she was not a sparkling society figure. Most of her intimate friends appear to have been Catholics. She was shocked at Charles James Fox's marriage to the former courtesan Elizabeth Armitstead and was 'all for' Lady Nelson in her battle with Lady Hamilton. Yet she was not malicious. 'Poor Creature! I am sorry for [Lady Hamilton] now, for I suppose she is in grief', she remarked on hearing of Nelson's death ('Creevey Papers', 71). She was a great card player. In politics, if she had any affiliation at all, she seems to have been a moderate whig, caring little for Devonshire House, but supporting the prince in most of his political undertakings. Her dislike of Fox influenced the prince when he indicated that he would retain Addington in office in the event of a regency in 1801. According to Lord Stourton, the prince asked her for her advice at the time of the unrestricted regency in 1811, and she encouraged him to call on the services of his old whig friends: 'Only retain [the whigs], Sir, six weeks in power. If you please, you may find some pretext to dismiss them at the end of that time; but do not break with them without some pretext or other' (Langdale, 143). Like the prince she was closely identified with the charitable effort on behalf of the French emigres. She was cautious on the subject of Catholic emancipation. She was a close friend of the prince's brother Frederick, duke of York, with whom she carried on a long and candid correspondence. Few of their letters survive. During her years with the prince she was often in debt -- the consequence, she claimed, of the prince's extravagance. The numerous stories that she had a child or children by the prince have not been proved; they remain, however, suggestive. The most plausible candidate is Mary Anne or Marianne Smythe (died 1859), officially the daughter of her brother John, and who would have been born after the 1800 reconciliation. She married Edward Stafford-Jerningham (1804-1849), son of George Stafford-Jerningham, second Baron Stafford, and had descendants. When urged by Mrs Creevey to write her autobiography Mrs Fitzherbert replied that the details 'would break her heart' ('Creevey Papers', 71). 'She said she supposed it would [be written] some time or other, but with thousands of lies; but she would be dead and it would not signify' (ibid.). For many years after her death Mrs Fitzherbert's marriage to the prince of Wales continued to provoke controversy, and it was not until 1856, with the publication of Charles Langdale's 'Memoirs of Mrs Fitzherbert' (which contains his brother Lord Stourton's narrative), that a more or less accurate account of that event was published. Later biographers, particularly W. H. Wilkins and Shane Leslie, have added additional anecdotal details to her life. All are to some extent vindications. 


@@@@@


doc= 9604


Fitzherbert, Nicholas (1550-1612), author, was the second son of John Fitzherbert of Padley, Derbyshire, and his wife, who was the daughter of Edward Fleetwood of Vache. He was a cousin of the Jesuit Thomas Fitzherbert, rector of the English College, Rome. Fitzherbert was at Exeter College, Oxford, in 1568 and his name appears in the matriculation register as senior undergraduate in 1572. His father and two uncles died in prison for their religious beliefs. An elder brother converted to the Church of England and joined with Richard Topcliffe in a plot to secure hold of the family estates. Another brother was a Franciscan friar in Spain. This religious division in the family helps to explain some of Fitzherbert's subsequent ambiguous conduct. 
It was about the 1570s that Nicholas Fitzherbert left England for the continent. He did not take holy orders but in 1580 he was studying civil law in Bologna and in his absence he was attainted of treason in England. In a letter from Rheims of 23 April 1583 to the rector of the English College in Rome, Allen expressed his gratitude to Fitzherbert for assistance he had given him. When Allen became cardinal in 1587 Fitzherbert entered his service and his name occurs in a list of Allen's household in 1594. After Allen died he served Cardinal Palavicino but he was also in contact with his convert brother in England. He was critical of Richard Barret's administration of the college at Rheims, and was opposed to the policies of Robert Parsons and inclined to the views of Owen Lewis. This led to accusations that he was fomenting trouble among the students at the college in Rome. In a letter of 10 December 1596 to the Jesuit-General, Acquaviva, he was named as one of the laymen in Rome who was supporting the rebellious students. 
Fitzherbert lived for several years in Rome as the pope's pensioner, but he was suspected by his opponents of acting as intelligencer to the English government, and it seems certain that he corresponded with and visited Anthony Standen, the English ambassador in Venice. Parsons tried to get Cardinal Palavicino to have Fitzherbert transferred to Spain. He had already translated and published in Rome in 1595 a Latin version of Galateo's 'Tratto dei costumi', and this was followed by a Latin work describing Oxford University (published in Rome in 1602) and by his 'De antiquitate et continuatione catholicae religionis in Anglia', which includes a Latin biography of Cardinal Allen (Rome, 1608). It is in this work that Fitzherbert criticizes Richard Barret and pays tribute to Owen Lewis's part in the foundation of the English College in Rome. He speaks highly of the way in which Allen treated the members of his household as sons rather than as servants or employees. 
Fitzherbert himself had his admirers, and in a letter he received from Augustine Bradshaw, the prior of the English Benedictines at Douai in 1607, he learned that Bradshaw was prepared to forward his name as a candidate should there be a decision to appoint a bishop for the Catholics of England. His status as a layman, it was argued, ought not to be any more of an obstacle than it was for St Ambrose's election as bishop of Milan. However, Nicholas Fitzherbert was accidentally drowned while on a journey to Rome when he was attempting to ford a stream called La Pesa a few miles south of Florence on 6 November 1612. He was buried in the Benedictine abbey at Florence. 


@@@@@


doc= 9605


Fitzherbert, Thomas (1552-1640), Jesuit, was born on 4 September 1552, the oldest son and heir of William Fitzherbert (died 1558/9) of Swinnerton, Staffordshire, and Elizabeth or Isabella (died 1616), second daughter and coheir of Humphrey Swynnerton. His grandfather was Sir Anthony Fitzherbert, the noted jurist, while the recusant author Nicholas Fitzherbert was his cousin. He went in 1568 to Oxford University, where he made the acquaintance of Edmund Campion. But his Catholic faith got him into trouble and in 1572 he was gaoled for recusancy. When Campion went to England with Robert Parsons in 1580 Fitzherbert joined the association of young gentlemen around George Gilbert to aid the two Jesuits. He was given the task of verifying the patristical citations in Campion's 'Decem rationes'. In 1580 he married Dorothy (died 1588), the only daughter of Edward East of Bledlow, Buckinghamshire. 
In 1582 Fitzherbert and his wife migrated to France, where he defended the interests of Mary, queen of Scots. He also served Catherine de' Medici, and was a firm member of the Allen party among the English Catholic exiles. In 1589, after the death of his wife and the defeat of the Spanish Armada, he moved to Spain. There, with the help of the duke of Feria, he received a pension from Philip II. In 1596, after the death of Sir Francis Englefield, he succeeded him in the post of Philip's English secretary. 
During these years Fitzherbert's name was often mentioned in reports from English agents abroad. When on a visit to Brussels in 1595, he was charged before the state of Flanders with holding a correspondence with the English secretary of state, and with a design to set fire to the magazine at Mechelen, but was extricated by the duke of Feria. In 1598 he was accused of being one of the conspirators in the bizarre Squire plot, in which a deadly substance was to be spread on the saddle which Queen Elizabeth was to use in a ceremonial parade, in order to poison her. 
Fitzherbert defended himself vigorously in his first published book, 'An Apology of T. F.', dated Madrid 31 August 1599. It was printed along with 'A Defence of the Catholic Cause' (1602), in which he wrote proudly of how he had been proven trustworthy by kings and nobles during the fifteen or sixteen years he had lived as a courtier. 
In 1601 Fitzherbert made a vow to become a priest. He moved to Rome where he was ordained on 24 March 1602. After that he devoted himself to writing. He had thought long and hard about the relationship between politics and religion. In 1606 he published the first part of his 'A Treatise Concerning Policy and Religion'. It dealt with the chief questions raised by Nicolo Machiavelli in 'The Prince'. The second part followed in 1610, the same year in which he published a shorter treatment of the same theme, 'An sit utilitas in scelere, vel, De infelicitate principis Machiavelliani'. The two volumes of the English treatise were reprinted at least four times in the course of the seventeenth century. Some have seen a new accent in this work. Whereas there was a note of optimism and enthusiasm in the Roman Catholic cause after 1580, 'Policy and Religion' concentrated on the 'natural imbecility of man's wit' and the despair that is inevitable for those who put their trust in princes. 
For a good while Fitzherbert was the agent in Rome of the vicar apostolic, the leader of the secular clergy of England. He discussed the instructions he received and the suggestions he made with Robert Persons, prefect of the Jesuit mission. This was deeply resented by one party among the secular clergy, since they felt that Persons was against establishing the hierarchy in England. He resigned his position as agent at Rome for the English clergy, and entered the Society of Jesus in 1615. After his noviciate was completed he was sent to Brussels to be the agent of the English Jesuits there. In 1618 he took his solemn vows in Louvain. The next year he was named rector of the English College in Rome, a post which he held until 1639. He died in the college on 7 August 1640 and was buried in the chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 9606


William of York (d. 1154), archbishop of York, was probably born not later than the 1090s. 
His father, Herbert of Winchester, has traditionally been identified as the illegitimate son of Herbert (II), count of Maine, and his mother as Emma, illegitimate daughter of Stephen, count of Blois, and thus half-sister of King Stephen. However these identifications appear to be late additions to his genealogy. Herbert's parents are unknown, and there is evidence that his wife was not a member of the house of Blois but rather the daughter of Hunger fitz Odin, Domesday tenant of Broad Windsor, Dorset. 'Domesday Book' shows Herbert to have been a Hampshire landowner, of local significance only. Under William II he was chamberlain of the Winchester treasury and after 'c'.1100 combined the office with that of treasurer. It has been traditional to place Herbert's death in 1129 or 1130, when the pipe roll records his son, Herbert, paying a relief for his father's lands. However, there is no definite record of Herbert after 1111, and a convincing case can be made for his identification with 'H. the Chamberlain' whom Suger of St Denis named as the would-be assassin of Henry I in 1118, mutilated by Henry in punishment. 
Between 1109 and 1112 Archbishop Thomas (II) of York (died 1114) enfeoffed Herbert the Chamberlain and his son (probably his elder son, Herbert) with Londesborough, Towthorpe, Weaverthorpe, Helperthorpe, Luttons Ambo, and other Yorkshire lands, as well as estates in Gloucestershire, for the service of three knights. The acquisition by the family of lands in Yorkshire may have been made when Archbishop Thomas was in Winchester in 1108. William and his brother Herbert fitz Herbert were associated with the grant of the church of Weaverthorpe to the Augustinian canons of Nostell, made with the consent of Archbishop Thurstan (died 1140) and confirmed by Henry I in 1121. 
It was not many years after the family's acquisition of their Yorkshire estates, by 1114 at the latest, that Herbert the Chamberlain's younger son, William, became treasurer of the cathedral church of York, an office that in the twelfth century was held with the archdeaconry of the East Riding. It was during his tenure of the office that he granted to the canons of York the church of Nether Wallop with the chapel of Grateley, Hampshire, and that of Market Weighton, Yorkshire. As treasurer William attested various 'acta' of Archbishop Thurstan, and was one of those who accompanied the archbishop on his visit to St Mary's Abbey, York, on the October day in 1132 when the secession took place that led ultimately to the foundation of Fountains Abbey. 
Following the resignation and death of Archbishop Thurstan early in 1140 there was a prolonged dispute as to who should succeed him, which deprived the diocese of York of an effective archbishop for seven years. William fitz Herbert was not the first choice of the York electors. After lengthy discussions they agreed first on Waldef, prior of Kirkham (died 1159), whose appointment was vetoed because of his connections with the Scottish king, and then on a nephew of King Stephen and Bishop Henry of Winchester, Henry de Sully. Henry, however, refused to resign the abbacy of Fecamp, and his election was overruled by the pope. William may have seemed to many to be an obvious candidate for archbishop. He had enjoyed a long association with the church of York; and he was clearly in the king's favour -- a charter of Stephen issued between 1136 and 1139 refers to him as a royal chaplain. Although he evidently acquired a reputation for being somewhat indolent -- William of Newburgh described him as 'a man who was clearly of noble birth, likeable, and with a certain lightness of morals' (William of Newburgh, 'Historia rerum Anglicarum', ed. R. Howlett, Rolls Series, 1884, 1, 55) -- William was elected archbishop in January 1141, a year after Thurstan's death, in the presence and under the eye of Stephen's earl of York, William, count of Aumale and earl of York ('c'.1110-1179). Indeed, it was alleged by John of Hexham that Earl William brought a direct message from the king that William fitz Herbert be elected, a factor that led to the first charge against the latter -- that of intrusion. There was clearly much resistance to the election, and William was opposed by the archdeacons of the church of York -- prominent among them Thurstan's nephew Osbert de Bayeux and Walter of London -- and by the precentor. The earl of York forestalled an early attempt to complain that William's election had been irregular when he seized and imprisoned Archdeacon Walter, and William was received and his election confirmed by King Stephen at Lincoln on 2 February, shortly before the king's imprisonment. 
Whereas the prospect of Waldef or Henry de Sully as archbishop had apparently provoked no controversy, a powerful group in the York chapter objected to William fitz Herbert's election. Their concern may have been due less to any general unsuitability on his part, than to his long experience at York, which would have made him less easily swayed or influenced by factional interests among his colleagues. As for the senior archdeacons, frustrated personal ambition may also have played a part. Added weight was given to the opposition to William with the entry into the dispute of members of the 'new' monastic orders which had recently reached Yorkshire. Seen from a European angle, the Cistercian involvement in the York election dispute can be interpreted both as a response to the decree of the Lateran Council of 1139 that allowed monks and canons -- 'viri religiosi' -- of a diocese a voice in the election of a bishop or archbishop, and to the encouragement of Bernard of Clairvaux, who had himself intervened in the Langres election (1138). The affair can also be seen in a local context, with the Yorkshire Augustinians and Cistercians mobilized in opposition to William by their patrons, some of whom had family connections with members of the chapter. Several Yorkshire monks and canons, notably the Cistercian abbots of Rievaulx and Fountains and the Augustinian priors of Kirkham and Guisborough, now added their voices in protest against him. With members of the chapter they accused the archbishop-elect of intrusion and unchaste living, and appealed against his election first to the papal legate Henry de Blois, bishop of Winchester (died 1171), brother of the king, and then to Rome. The opposition's delegates to the curia were Walter of London and Ailred, later abbot of Rievaulx (died 1167). When all the parties presented themselves in Rome on 7 March 1143 the opposition consisted of a formidable team, including William, precentor of York, William, abbot of Rievaulx, Richard, abbot of Fountains, Waldef, prior of Kirkham, and Cuthbert, prior of Guisborough. To the charges brought against William fitz Herbert they now added that of simony, but it would appear that it was the accusation of intrusion that was given prominence. 
Pope Innocent II ('r'. 1130-43) referred the case to bishops Henry of Winchester and Robert of Hereford as judges-delegate in England. Their instructions were to obtain an oath from the dean of York to the effect that William's election had been canonical and not made under pressure from the king, and if this was forthcoming, to allow the election to stand and William to be consecrated. As to the other charges, if no one came forward to accuse him he was to be allowed to clear himself by oath. When William returned to England he carried with him a second letter from the pope, allowing a witness to be substituted for the dean -- a letter that Bernard of Clairvaux and later Pope Eugenius III ('r'. 1145-53), maintained was a forgery. When Henry of Winchester held court in Winchester in September 1143, the dean of York, who had been consecrated bishop of Durham three months before, was unable to attend, and Archbishop William was allowed to clear himself on all charges by compurgation, his oath being supported by the abbots of St Mary's, York, and Whitby. Bishop Henry then consecrated William archbishop on 26 September at Winchester, two days after the death of Pope Innocent II which signalled the end of Henry's legateship. 
William fitz Herbert's movements in the four years after his consecration are difficult to trace, but there is some record of his activities in his diocese. He confirmed the privileges granted by his predecessor to the men of Beverley, and an agreement between Bridlington Priory and Serlo, canon of York, concerning tithes. In a synod held at York he heard a complaint of the monks of Shrewsbury concerning their church of Kirkham, Lancashire. The first of these 'acta' was witnessed by William, count of Aumale, other leading nobles, and a number of canons of York; and the last by Ralph, bishop of Orkney (died 1144), and by the Benedictine abbots of Whitby and Selby. He played a part in the ecclesiastical politics of the diocese of Durham where he acted as a mediator between William Cumin, who was attempting to make himself bishop of Durham, and William de Ste Barbe (died 1151), formerly dean of York, who had been elected and consecrated bishop in 1143. Archbishop William enthroned Ste Barbe as bishop of Durham on 18 October 1144. 
But the question of the validity of William's election had not been settled, and was further inflamed by the international figure of Bernard of Clairvaux, the most influential Cistercian of his day, who wrote denouncing him as 'that idol of York', and 'a man rotten from the soles of his feet to the crown of his head' ('Letters', 280, 261). Bernard added a new and powerful voice to the opposition when he sent one of his own disciples, Henry Murdac, to Yorkshire where he was elected abbot of Fountains. The dispute was protracted, too, by the deaths, in quick succession, of popes Innocent II (24 September 1143) and Celestine II (8 March 1144). Lucius II withstood the strongly worded letters of Bernard of Clairvaux urging action against William fitz Herbert, and dispatched Cardinal Imar of Tusculum with the pallium for him, but William failed to meet Imar before news of the death of Lucius II (15 February 1145) reached England and the legateship expired. With the election of Eugenius III, a Cistercian monk and protege of Bernard of Clairvaux, the reform party received a substantial boost, and William was stirred to visit Rome in person, allegedly selling treasure from the cathedral church to finance his journey. Eugenius, under pressure from Bernard, suspended him until such time as the former dean of York, now bishop of Durham, should swear the oath required by Innocent II. At this stage William seems to have lost heart and retired to Sicily. When news reached Rome that William fitz Herbert's supporters had attacked the Cistercian abbey of Fountains, the pope moved on from suspension to deposition, and William was deprived of his see on 21 March 1147 at the Council of Rheims. 
Following this news William returned to England and lived in quiet retirement at Winchester until 1153. The annalist of Winchester recorded that he lived among the monks, sleeping in the common dormitory and eating with them in the refectory. In that year three deaths removed much of the opposition to him: on 8 July Eugenius III died, followed by Bernard of Clairvaux on 20 August, and Henry Murdac, William's successor as archbishop, on 14 October. William journeyed to Rome, according to William of Newburgh after learning of the death of Bernard of Clairvaux, but as recorded by Roger of Howden after that of Henry Murdac, and was restored to the see of York by Pope Anastasius IV ('r'. 1153-4). He returned to York by way of Winchester and the Yorkshire Cistercian abbey of Meaux where, in a gesture of reconciliation, he made a grant to Fountains Abbey in restitution for the damage done by his followers some years before, and confirmed the gifts made to Meaux Abbey by Henry Murdac. He arrived in his cathedral city in May 1154. But he did not long enjoy his restoration. He was taken ill on 1 June after celebrating mass in York Minster and died a week later (8 June) amid rumours that he had been given poison in the chalice that he had used at mass. A charge of murder was brought by one of his chaplains, Symphorian, against Archdeacon Osbert de Bayeux. The case went first to the king's court, then to the ecclesiastical authorities, and finally on appeal to Rome. The precise outcome is not documented, but by 1158 Archdeacon Osbert had been defrocked and deposed from office. 
William fitz Herbert had the misfortune to become archbishop at a time of change. Had he been elected just a few years before there is every likelihood that as king's candidate he would have been accepted without question. But the presence of a number of powerful and ambitious men in the York chapter, the growing prestige and power of the monastic orders, especially the Cistercians, and the weakness of royal authority, particularly after the capture of the king at the battle of Lincoln in 1141, combined to increase opposition to the archbishop-elect, and to maintain the pressure after his consecration in 1143. William's enemies showed themselves to be persistent and tenacious. However, the citizens of York proved equally determined. Despite the shortcomings alleged by his opponents, William had clearly won a secure place in the affections of the cathedral city, which denied Murdac entry until he had been reconciled to the king. 
Although initially William fitz Herbert was not promising material for a saint, the manner of his death increased his chances of canonization. His cult was promoted as York's answer to St Thomas of Canterbury, and he was officially canonized in 1227. His remains were translated in 1284 from the nave of York Minster to a shrine behind the high altar (an event depicted in the stained-glass window of 'c'.1423 in the north choir aisle of York Minster), which became the centre of local veneration. The portable shrine of St William's head became the greatest of the treasures of the medieval minster, and the miracles associated with the archbishop and his triumphal return to York in 1154 were portrayed in the fourteenth- and fifteenth-century stained-glass windows of the nave and transepts. 


@@@@@


doc= 9607


Sir William Fitzherbert, first baronet (1748-1791), lawyer and legal writer, was born probably at Tissington Hall, near Ashbourne, Derbyshire, on 27 May 1748. He was educated at Westminster School and St John's College, Cambridge, whence he graduated MA (1770). He was called to the bar from Lincoln's Inn, where he had chambers opposite Jeremy Bentham. Although Bentham had forgotten it, the two had been schoolmates at Westminster, and William and, through him, his brother Alleyne became close friends of Bentham and his circle; Alleyne referred to Bentham later as 'the Newton of legislation' ('Correspondence of Jeremy Bentham', 1.362-3 n. 2). William Fitzherbert married Sarah (died 1795), daughter of William Perrin of Jamaica, on 14 October 1777; they had two sons, Anthony (1779-1798) and Henry (1783-1858). He served as recorder of Derby and as gentleman usher and gentleman usher-in-extraordinary to George III, receiving a baronetcy in recognition of his services on 22 January 1784. As a consequence of a quarrel with the lord chamberlain, the marquess of Salisbury, he resigned his position at court soon after this. He was the author of a number of works on legal and other matters. He died on 30 July 1791 at Tissington Hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 9608


Robert fitz Hubert (d. 1140), soldier, was Flemish by birth. His parents are unknown, but his father, Hubert, was said to have been 'nobilis', and he was himself reported to be a kinsman of William of Ypres (d. 1164/5), the son of Count Philippe of Ypres. From the fact that he would later announce his intention of sending from England to Flanders for knights to act as his bodyguard, it would appear that by the late 1130s he had acquired wealth and a following, either through inheritance or by military arts. Perhaps he was one of the mercenary captains active in Flanders in the confused period 1127-8, since he later claimed to have been responsible for the destruction of a monastery where eighty monks were burnt in their church. But Robert is first recorded by name only in 1139, when he may have been one of the Flemings who accompanied William of Ypres to England in that year at King Stephen's summons. Accompanied by at least two nephews and other kinsmen, by 7 October he had occupied the castle at Malmesbury, pursuing the fugitives from the garrison into the monastery nearby and only withdrawing when he had taken possession of their horses. Soon dispossessed of Malmesbury by the king, Robert took service with Robert, earl of Gloucester, but he was acting on his own behalf when on 26 March following he used ingeniously made leather scaling-ladders to capture Devizes Castle. Refusing to surrender his prize to Earl Robert, he used the castle as a base from which to terrorize the neighbourhood, and announced his intention of winning control over 'the whole district from Winchester to London' (Malmesbury, 'Historia novella', 43-4). 
But Robert overreached himself when he tried to outwit John Marshal and take Marlborough Castle by guile. Captured himself, he was handed over to Earl Robert who made him promise to surrender Devizes by threatening to hang him. Robert and his comrades had earlier sworn to one another not to give up the castle, and the wily Marshal sent messengers to the garrison urging them to stand firm, promising that no harm would befall their leader. Consequently neither Robert, once outside the castle, nor the garrison within, would agree to give it up for fear of perjuring themselves, whereupon first Robert's two nephews, and then Robert himself, were hanged, at a date before 15 August 1140. The violent course and bitter end of Robert fitz Hubert's English career made a strong impression on chroniclers of events in the west of England in the early years of Stephen's reign. The author of the 'Gesta Stephani', for instance, describes Robert as 'a man of great cruelty and unequalled in wickedness and crime' ('Gesta Stephani', 93), and attributes his death to the righteous vengeance of God. The horror he aroused may have owed something to the impact of continental methods of warfare upon a countryside that until recently had long been at peace; the fact that Wiltshire and Gloucestershire lay on the ill-defined border between regions giving allegiance to Stephen and to Matilda no doubt gave a man like Robert fitz Hubert additional scope for the exercise of his ambitions and skills. 


@@@@@


doc= 9609


Fitzhugh, Robert (c.1383-1436), bishop of London, was the youngest surviving son of Henry Fitzhugh, third Baron Fitzhugh (1363?-1425) of Ravensworth, Yorkshire, and of Elizabeth Grey (died 1427), heir to the Marmion and St Quentin estates. Like many Lancastrian prelates he attended university. In 1399 he was recorded at Exeter College, Oxford, and was MA by 1405. Although he was renting rooms in University College in the years 1409-10 and 1415-16, by 1422 he was studying theology in Cambridge, and had graduated DTh by 1424. In the meantime he had been ordained subdeacon by Bishop John Fordham of Ely (died 1425) on 19 February 1418, and deacon on 21 May following. 
Fitzhugh's first known benefice was the rectory of Mottram, Cheshire, which he had obtained before October 1398. During the thirty-three years that followed before he became a bishop he acquired another five rectories, four prebends, the chancellorship of St Patrick's, Dublin, in 1404, and the archdeaconry of Northampton in 1419. His father's position in Henry V's government ensured that Fitzhugh was not lacking in preferments. In 1415 the king granted him the mastership of St Leonard's Hospital, York, a benefice reserved for royal clerks. As master he settled for the time being a notoriously bitter dispute between the hospital and local inhabitants over the payment of the ancient due of petercorn. On 10 September 1416 he was elected archbishop of Armagh, but his election was subsequently annulled by Pope Martin V ('r'. 1417-31). By April 1423 he was chancellor of Cambridge University, an office he still held in November 1428. During this time he was named to various royal commissions of the peace for the town of Cambridge. From July 1424 until July 1431 he was also warden of King's Hall, a college founded for the education of clerks in the royal service. In 1428 he preached in convocation against Lollardy. 
Like many other bishops, Fitzhugh owed his promotion to the episcopate to a successful career in royal service. His principal activity on the king's behalf was as a diplomat. On 20 June 1429 he was appointed Henry VI's proctor at the papal curia, and in the following July one of the ambassadors to treat for an alliance with the king of Aragon. During his stay at the curia he was entrusted with the delicate task of requesting Pope Martin V to appoint favourable mediators between England and France, and to permit Cardinal Henry Beaufort to be present on Henry VI's behalf during peace discussions. On 30 April 1431 he was provided to the see of London by Pope Eugenius IV ('r'. 1431-47) and on 6 August received the spiritualities. He was ill at this time, and though he was consecrated bishop on 16 September 1431 at Foligno, Italy, he did not return to his diocese until a year later. He may, however, have briefly represented the crown at the Council of Basel, as he had been appointed to do. 
According to the evidence from his surviving episcopal register, Fitzhugh personally supervised his diocesan administration, instituted clerks to their benefices, and held visitations of St Paul's Cathedral and various religious houses in his diocese. He remained active in diocesan affairs while attending to royal matters at Westminster -- he attended meetings of the great council, for instance, in April and May 1434. Indeed, he spent two-thirds of his episcopate outside the diocese as Henry VI's proctor and ambassador. Appointed leader of the second English delegation to the Council of Basel, he left London some time after 14 May 1434. During his stay at the council he actively defended the English position. Soon after his return to London in September 1435 he was elected to the wealthier see of Ely, following the death of Bishop Philip Morgan, but died before his own translation was put into effect. At a time when the affairs of the realm were dominated by the well-known quarrel between Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and Cardinal Beaufort, Fitzhugh diligently carried out his diplomatic assignments regardless of faction. Like many other bishops, Fitzhugh belonged to a group of dedicated public servants whose paramount interest was the well-being of Henry VI and his government. He died at St Osyth, Essex, on 15 January 1436. In accordance with his last wishes he was buried in St Paul's in front of the cathedral's high altar, but his tomb did not survive the great fire of 1666. 


@@@@@


doc= 9610


Fitzjames, James, duke of Berwick upon Tweed (1670-1734), army officer in the French service, was born on 21 August 1670 at Moulins in the Bourbonnais, France, the natural son of James, duke of York, later James II and VII (1633-1701), and Arabella Churchill (1649-1730), daughter of Sir Winston Churchill, and the elder sister of John Churchill, first duke of Marlborough. 
Fitzjames was educated in France from the age of seven, first under the care of Father Gough at the College de Juilly in 1677, then until 1684 at the College du Plessis and then at the Jesuit college of La Fleche in Anjou. After the defeat of the Monmouth rebellion in 1685 he paid a visit to England, ostensibly to visit his sister, Henriette, now Lady Waldegrave. He then returned to France to complete his education at the academy of Monsieur de Vaudeuil in Paris. In the spring of 1686 he was sent by his father to join the Holy Roman emperor's forces besieging Budapest, distinguishing himself in the action against Turkish attempts to raise the siege. By December 1686 he was back in England, where on 1 November his father had appointed him colonel of an infantry regiment (afterwards the 8th foot, later the King's Liverpool regiment). Rumours reached Sir John Reresby about this time that Henry Cavendish, second duke of Newcastle (but not his wife or daughter) wished to marry his youngest daughter to Fitzjames. While in England on 19 March 1687 Fitzjames was created duke of Berwick upon Tweed. He then returned to the imperial army, where he served in the cuirassiers at the battle of Mohacs. Following the battle he visited Vienna. 
Berwick returned to England in October 1687. There James II made him governor of Portsmouth on 1 December 1687, and lord lieutenant of Hampshire on 24 December. On 4 February 1688 he became colonel of the Royal Horse Guards. Berwick administered the 'three questions' to the officers of the two regiments stationed at Portsmouth -- asking the officers whether they would vote for the repeal of the 'Test' and 'Penal' Acts if they were elected to parliament, whether they would support the candidature of those that did, and whether they would co-operate with a declaration of indulgence planned by James to ensure religious toleration for all denominations. Most refused to agree to the first two. Further problems arose in September when he attempted to integrate some surplus Irish soldiers into his own infantry regiment; several officers refused to co-operate and were subsequently court-martialled and cashiered from the army. Berwick was nominated a knight of the Garter on 28 September 1688, but was never installed. On 29 November, following the landing of William of Orange, he replaced his uncle, Lord Churchill, who had deserted to William's army, as colonel of the third troop of Horse Guards. He was at James II's military encampment at Salisbury, before returning to Portsmouth. Realizing he could not hold the port, he joined his father at Rochester on 22 December and proceeded with him to France, where they landed on 25 December. Berwick was sent to Versailles to announce their arrival to Louis XIV. 
Berwick joined in his father's expedition to Ireland, landing on 17 March 1689 and entering Dublin on 24 March. He was made a major-general and saw action at Coleraine, Derry (where he was wounded), and Newry, and commanded the cavalry on the right at the battle of the Boyne (1 July 1690). When Richard Talbot, duke of Tyrconnell, left for France to solicit more French aid, Berwick was left in command of the Jacobite forces with a council of officers to advise him. Upon Tyrconnell's return in January 1691 Berwick was ordered to France. Almost immediately he was given permission by Louis XIV to attend the siege of Mons as a volunteer, and following the end of that action in April 1691 he joined the army in Flanders under the duke of Luxembourg, again as a volunteer. 
On 14 December 1691 Berwick was made captain and colonel of the first troop of Jacobite horse guards. He stood ready as part of the French invasion force, which never sailed as a consequence of the naval battle of Barfleur in May 1692. He saw action on 3 August 1692 at Steenkerke. He served as a brigade commander at the battle of Landen on 29 July 1693, being cut off and captured by his uncle George Churchill. A frosty interview took place with William III, and Berwick was kept for a time at Antwerp after the release of the other captured general officers and exchanged for James Butler, second duke of Ormond. After his release he served in Flanders in the campaign of 1694. On 26 March 1695 Berwick married, in the royal chapel at St Germain-en-Laye, Honora Sarsfield, 'nee' Bourke 
(or de Burgh; 1675-1698)
['see 'Fitzjames, Honora, 'under' Sarsfield, Patrick, Jacobite first earl of Lucan (d. 1693)], daughter of William de Burgh, seventh earl of Clanricarde, and the widow of Patrick Sarsfield, first earl of Lucan. They had one son, James Francis (1696-1738), known as earl of Tinmouth until he became duke of Liria in 1716. Volume two of the 'Complete Peerage' (1912), following earlier authorities, thought that he was attainted in England about this time, but an appendix in volume twelve, part two, showed that no act of attainder was brought against Berwick in parliament and that there is no evidence that Berwick was outlawed, which would also have resulted in attainder. Berwick thus probably retained his English peerage until his death. 
Early in February 1696 it was announced that Berwick would embark on a tour of Irish troops in French service, but this was merely a ruse to cover a secret visit to England to encourage a Jacobite rising in order to convince Louis XIV to commit French troops. After a week he returned to France, largely to avoid involvement in Sir George Barclay's assassination plot against William III. He later told the Williamite Lord James Cavendish that 'he came over to stir up rebellion, but knew nothing of the assassination' ('Letters Illustrative', 2.111) but his 'Memoirs' show that he was informed of a plot to 'kidnap' the king, which he did not countermand. He met his father starting for Calais on 18 February (28 February NS). A proclamation of 23 February, the day after the plot's exposure, offered $1000 for his capture along with the assassins. He never returned to Britain. Berwick spent the campaign seasons of 1696-7 in Flanders, but saw little fighting. After the treaty of Ryswick in 1697 James II's army was broken up, but Berwick received a regiment in the French service. On 16 January 1698 his wife died of consumption at Pezenas in Languedoc; she was buried at Pontoise. In order to recover he embarked on an extended sojourn to Italy, meeting Victor Amadeus II, duke of Savoy, in Turin and travelling via Venice and Ancona to Rome. He returned to France by way of Florence, Genoa, and Turin. In Paris on 18 April 1700 he married Anne ('c'.1675-1751), daughter of Henry Bulkeley, master of the household to James II. They had eight sons and five daughters. 
In January 1701 Berwick was sent by James II to consult with Victor Amadeus II (next in line to the throne after James's children) over the implications of the death of William, duke of Gloucester, son of Princess Anne. He then proceeded to Modena and Rome, whence he was recalled following his father's first stroke. In September 1701 he was recalled from the army in Flanders to attend his father during the exiled king's last illness. The outbreak of war in 1702 saw Berwick serving under Marshal Boufflers in Flanders and in action at Nijmegen on 9 June 1702. In the campaign of 1703 he again served in Flanders, under Marshal Villeroy. After this campaign he received permission from his half-brother, now regarded by Jacobites as James III, and the regent, Mary of Modena, to become a naturalized Frenchman. 
Berwick was appointed on 29 November 1703 to command the French troops dispatched by Louis XIV to assist the French king's grandson Philip V in Spain. Berwick duly entered Madrid on 15 February 1704, and on the following day he was appointed captain-general of the Spanish armies. In May 1704 he invaded Portugal, but after the capture of a few fortified places, stalemate ensued. In the autumn he was forced on the defensive as the forces of the allied candidate for the Spanish throne, Archduke Charles, under Henri de Massue de Ruvigny, earl of Galway, attempted to march on Madrid. He was then recalled by Louis XIV, having membership of the order of the Golden Fleece bestowed upon him by Philip V. In March 1705 Berwick was sent to Languedoc to prevent the Camisards from receiving English assistance and in November he captured Nice, the citadel surrendering on 5 January 1706. In February 1706 he was made a marshal of France and sent back to the Spanish theatre of the war, arriving in Madrid in March. A defensive campaign ended with the forces of Archduke Charles entering Madrid on 27 June, but Berwick's troops had returned to the city by 6 August. 
On 25 April 1707 Berwick led a mainly French army to victory at the battle of Almanza, against a mainly English army commanded by the earl of Galway, a Frenchman. By the end of April 1707 Valencia had been captured, and in November the citadel of Lerida fell. His reward from Philip V for a successful campaign was to be created duke of Liria and Xerica, a grandee of the first class, with Spanish crown lands about Valencia to support his dignity. He was also made governor of Limousin. Berwick arrived back at Versailles in mid-March 1708 after the dispatch of the Jacobite expedition to Scotland. He spent the beginning of the 1708 campaign at Strasbourg with Maximilian II, elector of Bavaria, shadowing Prince Eugene of Savoy, although the latter evaded Berwick and joined Marlborough in July, when they were victorious at the battle of Oudenarde. Berwick was now on the defensive, but he was the recipient of a peace proposal from his uncle, Marlborough, which the French rejected, although Berwick passed on the news in French to show that it 'did not come from me' (Petrie, 233). 
Berwick's inability to get on with Marshal Vendome saw him return to Strasbourg in November 1708. In the spring of 1709 Berwick was sent to the Piedmontese frontier to prevent the invasion of France from Italy. After the battle of Malplaquet, he was sent in September 1709 to assist Marshal Boufflers in rebuilding the army in Flanders. In May 1710 Berwick registered his patent for the French dukedom of Fitzjames. As a peer of France he was eligible to sit in the 'parlement' of Paris. He bought Warties near Clermont in the Beauvoisis and created the territorial duchy of Fitzjames. The title was so drawn as to pass by special remainder to his sons by his second wife, thus separating it from the descent of the elder branch of his family, who were to inherit the Spanish titles and estates. He spent the years before Utrecht in the Italian theatre of the war. After spending the first part of 1714 at St Germain, he was sent to Philip V, ostensibly on a mission of condolence on the death of the queen of Spain, but in reality to persuade Philip to make peace with the Dutch and to join in ending Catalan resistance. The period from July to September 1714 was spent in reducing Barcelona, and after reducing other pockets of resistance in Catalonia he returned to Madrid in late October, and to France in November. 
The death of Queen Anne on 1 August 1714 provided Berwick with an incentive to make Jacobite business his priority again. Before Anne's death Louis XIV had agreed that Berwick, a French subject who needed his king's formal permission to leave France, should accompany James III to Britain as part of a Jacobite force. However, when in June 1715 Berwick asked Louis XIV to renew his permission, Louis refused. When John Erskine, twenty-second or sixth earl of Mar, raised James's standard in Scotland in September 1715, it was still assumed that Berwick would play a leading role in his half-brother's military affairs, and on 13 October 1715 he was formally commissioned captain-general of the Jacobite forces in Scotland. This placed Berwick in an acute dilemma, as his friend Philippe, duke of Orleans, who had become regent of France following the death of Louis XIV, again refused to let him leave for Britain. Berwick decided to comply; James never forgave him. Berwick was appointed to Orleans's council of war, but declined to serve under Marshal Villars. In April 1716 he did accept the office of military governor of Guyenne, on the frontier with Spain. In September 1716 he invested his heir with his Spanish lands and the dukedom of Liria, prompting at least one cynical observer to note that Berwick 'now declares himself to be entirely a Frenchman, I suppose he has sent his son to declare himself a Spaniard, so that all may be secured happen what will' ('Stuart Papers', 2.327). 
Such precautions were wise, for Berwick next saw military service against the Spanish. He invaded Spain in January 1719, taking Fuenterralia and San Sebastian and forcing Philip to end the war. He was appointed to the French council of regency in 1720, before returning to his governorship of Guyenne. In 1723 there were plans to rehabilitate Berwick's reputation in Spain, preparatory to sending him to Madrid as ambassador. The death of Orleans in December 1723 was followed by the abolition of the military governors in February 1724. With France at peace, and as a man associated with Orleans, he spent most of the next nine years out of employment alternating between Paris, Versailles, and Fitzjames. However, in June 1727 he was described as a member of the 'military party' (Campbell, 116) in favour of attacking the Vienna alliance. In 1730 he was appointed governor of Strasbourg. He also busied himself with Jacobite affairs, helping to secure the papers of Bishop Atterbury of Rochester following his death in March 1732. However, the Pretender's distrust of Berwick, and Berwick's commitment to France, ensured that he remained peripheral to Jacobite schemes. 
The outbreak of hostilities in 1733, following the disputed Polish succession, saw Berwick given command of the French forces which crossed the Rhine in October. The following year's campaign saw him lay siege to Philippsburg, about 10 miles south-west of Heidelberg, at the beginning of June 1734. While he was inspecting the front line on 12 June 1734, 'three cannon balls came directly to the place, one of which took off his head from his under-jaw and dashed his brains in the face of the Duke de Duras' ('GM', 4.333). His body was laid in the crypt of Strasbourg Cathedral, but may then have been transferred to the Scots College in Paris. His widow died on 12 June 1751. His 'Memoirs' down to 1716 was published by a grandson in 1777, and continued to his death by Abbe Luke Joseph Hooke, who published a translation in 1779. His descendants continued to use the title of duke of Berwick, but were never recognized as English peers. 
Berwick was the illegitimate son of a king, moreover one who was only eighteen when his father lost his throne. His early military training set him in good stead for a career serving in Ireland, Flanders, Italy, and Spain. In addition to his English dukedom, his military exploits enabled him to acquire both Spanish and French dukedoms. To some observers, such as the queen of Spain, he was a 'great dry devil of an Englishman, who always goes his own way' (Petrie, 51), and he played a significant role in Jacobite affairs, at least until 1715, when he was forced to choose between accepting his half-brother's commission or the orders of the French court. As for the English, Thomas Hearne probably summed up their attitude when he wrote upon hearing of Berwick's death, 'he served in the French army from his infancy, and distinguished himself in several actions during the late war' ('Remarks', 11.353). 


@@@@@


doc= 9611


Fitzjames, Sir John (c.1470-1538?), judge, was the son of John Fitzjames (died 1510) of Redlynch, Somerset, and the Middle Temple, recorder of Bristol, and his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Bluet. Richard Fitzjames (d. 1522), bishop of London, was his uncle. He was admitted to the Middle Temple about 1490, was practising in chancery by 1500, and as 'Fitzjames junior' was elected to read in the autumn of 1504 and in Lent 1508. It was clearly the son who served as treasurer of the inn from 1509 to 1511. By that time he had become attorney-general to the duchy of Lancaster, an office which he held from 1509 until his appointment as the king's attorney-general in 1519. 
Living at Redlynch, Fitzjames was busy in Bristol, where he was retained by the abbey of St Augustine's and succeeded his father as recorder. He was steward of the manor of Bruton by 1502. As attorney-general he was responsible for conducting the trial of the duke of Buckingham for high treason in May 1521. The following month he took the coif at the general call of serjeants, and thereby automatically vacated his attorneyship. However, within the year, on 6 February 1522, he was appointed a puisne judge of the king's bench, and on 7 or 8 February chief baron of the exchequer, the offices being held in conjunction. The king continued to employ him in affairs of state, including the delicate task of negotiating a marriage between Lord Henry Percy, who was supposed to be engaged to Anne Boleyn, and Lady Mary Talbot, daughter of the earl of Shrewsbury. He was knighted about 1526. His circuits were the Oxford (until 1522) and then the western. 
On 24 January 1526 Fitzjames was promoted to be chief justice of the king's bench in succession to Sir John Fyneux, and presided over that court through some difficult years. His opinions were frequently noted by Sir John Spelman, a fellow member of Serjeants' Inn, Chancery Lane. Fitzjames signed the articles against Wolsey in 1529, and presided in court when his confession was recorded on 30 October. His speech to the new serjeants created on 12 November 1531 is summarized by Spelman, who praised it as a 'good oration' on the epistle of St Paul to the 'Ephesians'. Besides the usual advice, he 'exhorted them that they should not be ambitious towards each other, but like brothers and good friends, and that none of them should take advantage of another in pleading by any trick' ('Reports of Sir John Spelman', 1.80). Later in the month he presided over the trial of Rhys ap Gryffydd and other Welshmen for high treason, summing up the evidence to the jury. In a letter to Cromwell, dated 8 March and apparently written at Redlynch in 1533, Fitzjames complains much of illness and begs to be excused attendance in London. He was present, however, at the coronation of Anne Boleyn on 1 June 1533, leading the judges in procession to Westminster on horseback. 
In the spring and summer of 1535 Fitzjames was a prominent member of the special commissions which tried John Fisher, Thomas More, and the Carthusians for expressing treasonable opinions concerning the king's marriage and the break with Rome. It is possible that he secretly sympathized with the prisoners, preserving a discreet silence throughout most of the proceedings. When the lord chancellor directly appealed to him to say whether More's indictment was or was not sufficient, Fitzjames gave the most cautious of responses: 'My Lords all, by St Julian, I must needes confes that if thacte of parliament be not unlawfull, then is not the indictment in my conscience insufficient' (Roper, 95). This equivocal ruling put an end to More's defence, and yet it is difficult to see how else he could have answered without rejecting the constitutional supremacy of the king in parliament. His reputation suffered much at the hands of Lord Campbell, whose errors and fabrications were ably exposed by Foss. Earlier biographers were more positive. Lloyd said he was 'so fearful of the very shadow and appearance of corruption that it cost his chief clerk his place but for taking a tankard... not as a bribe, but as a civility' (Lloyd, 115). Certainly Fitzjames dismissed a servant (Edward Bosgrave) in 1533, an event which led to an action for slander in the common pleas, but it is impossible from the slender surviving evidence to make a final judgment one way or the other as to his character. 
Fitzjames married first Jane, daughter of Thomas More of Melplash, Dorset, a member of the Middle Temple, and second Elizabeth, daughter of his fellow judge Sir Humphrey Coningsby and widow of Sir Richard Berkeley; she outlived him. He made his will on 23 October 1538, being 'weake and feble in bodye with age, and dreading the casualty of this unsure and frayll world' (PROB 11/29, fol. 5), and probably died soon afterwards. The will was not proved until 1542, but a new lord chief justice was appointed in January 1539. Fitzjames asked to be buried at Bruton, Somerset, where he was co-founder of the grammar school, and Foss said there was a fine monument there, but there is no longer any trace of a memorial. The will directed that various pieces of silver, including six parcel-gilt bowls with the Fitzjames dolphin on the knops, should belong to 'that person that shall from tyme to tyme have my howse at Redliche', and that a great book of statutes in vellum or parchment should 'remayne to the howse of Redliche as a implement to the sayd howse', bequests which led to litigation in 1565. All the chief justice's other law books were left to his cousin Aldred Fitzjames, of the Middle Temple, his own son John (a bencher of the inn) having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9612


Fitzjames, Richard (d. 1522), bishop of London, was the son of John Fitzjames of Redlynch, near Bruton, Somerset; the judge Sir John Fitzjames was his nephew. He was educated at Oxford, where he was elected bachelor of Merton College in 1465, and a fellow 'c'.1468; he served as bursar 1474-5, and was warden of Merton from 1483 to 1507. Having proceeded MA, he was DTh by 1481 (incorporated at Cambridge in 1495/6). He was successively ordained acolyte in 1473 and deacon in 1475, and held a variety of ecclesiastical preferments thereafter, typical for one of his academic and administrative ability: rector of Spettisbury, Dorset, 1472-6; canon of Wells, with the prebend of Taunton, from 1475 until at least 1483; and, by papal licence to hold an incompatible benefice, became rector of Trent, Somerset, in 1476. He was treasurer of St Paul's, London, 1483-97, with the prebend of Portpoole, and during these years was also vicar of Minehead and rector of Aller in Somerset, and master of St Leonard's Hospital, Bedford. 
Although it is not easy to determine Fitzjames's whereabouts for much of his early career, it is very unlikely that he resided in any of his benefices for long, if at all, despite their proximity to his birthplace. Thomas Kemp, bishop of London, left him a covered cup in his will in 1489, perhaps indicating that as treasurer Fitzjames was active in diocesan administration as well as in preaching. He was certainly active in the University of Oxford, and from 1489 was chaplain to Henry VII, in which capacity he is known to have preached on ten occasions from 1491 to 1503 and at Paul's Cross six times between 1494 and 1498, as well as at state occasions such as Cardinal Morton's funeral in September 1500, at the wedding of Princess Margaret and King James IV of Scotland in 1502, and at Queen Elizabeth's funeral in 1503. He was one of the bishops present at the reception of Katherine of Aragon in England in 1501 and then at her wedding to Prince Arthur. Fitzjames's evident talent and learning led to his being promoted rapidly under Henry VII. That he did not play as great a role in secular affairs as many others who became bishops may reflect his theological as opposed to legal training, although in 1499 he, William Warham, and Sir Richard Hatton negotiated a commercial treaty with Archduke Philip and the Low Countries. It is perhaps not surprising that he was appointed an executor to Henry VII. 
Fitzjames first became a bishop when on 1 February 1497 he was provided to the see of Rochester; he was consecrated by Warham on 21 May, and enthroned on 30 November. Little can be said of his tenure of the diocese which was poor and typically held by those of theological training. He certainly resided, as his register shows, most often at his manor of Lambeth Marsh, but also at Bromley, Hallyng, and at Rochester itself. He carried out five ordination ceremonies in person, four at Bromley, one at Chislehurst, heard the abjuration of the heretic Christopher Northrop in January 1500, and in 1502 conducted a visitation of his cathedral priory and diocese in person, although he had delegated his primary visitation to his commissaries in 1498. The sparse surviving evidence suggests that Fitzjames attached importance to carrying out episcopal duties in person where possible. In 1502, rather unusually for the time, he and a suffragan bishop (presumably present to enhance the importance of the occasion) blessed the newly appointed abbot of Lesnes in the parish church of Greenwich. By this time Fitzjames seems to have built up the team of officials which he would later use in London -- the same suffragan bishop ('Maiorensis') and his commissary Dr William Horsey. 
On 29 November 1503 Fitzjames was translated to Chichester, the temporalities being restored on 29 January following. Almost nothing can be said of his tenure of his second diocese, from which he was translated by papal provision to London on 5 June 1506, receiving his temporalities on 1 August. The routine records of institutions and collations which make up most of his London register convey an impression of administrative efficiency, with only the occasional glimpse of anything beyond the routine: in 1509 the bishop examined the heretic Elizabeth Sampson; in 1511 Joanna Baker and William Potter abjured before William Horsey, these last two cases presumably not judged serious enough to merit the bishop's presence. On a number of occasions the bishop confirmed the rules of London fraternities, for example that in honour of the visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary in 1509, that of St Barbara in 1511. The detail of these ceremonies and of those accompanying the professions of abbots, or concerning the seventy-one barber-surgeons licensed in March 1514 (Fitzjames owned a book by Galen, suggesting a more than passing interest in medicine), points to a bishop actively involved in diocesan life. Of the eighty-three ordination ceremonies held in London during his episcopate Fitzjames held only thirty in person, the last in September 1515, but he may well have routinely examined candidates for ordination, as he certainly did on three separate occasions in 1507 and 1508. This is the only record of a diocesan bishop acting thus between 1500 and 1559, and is a measure of how seriously he took his duties. 
Fitzjames's tenure of London has been retrospectively dominated by the case of the alleged heretic Richard Hunne. In fact proceedings against this London merchant were first initiated by parish clergy, then by Archbishop Warham's court of audience in 1512, and it was Warham who began heresy proceedings in 1514 via convocation. Fitzjames's first known direct involvement was on 2 December 1514 when he and three other bishops examined Hunne at Fulham Palace. Subsequently Hunne was found dead in his cell, and Horsey, Fitzjames's loyal and probably innocent chancellor, was accused of murder. The issue of who killed Hunne was never resolved, but the case later became particularly prominent as an example to some protestants of an irascible and reactionary bishop meanly persecuting a 'heretic' and being over-assertive in defence of church rights. But Fitzjames was not alone in this defence; Wolsey, the normally cautious Warham, Fox, Nix, and Abbot Kidderminster of Winchcombe were all outspoken in defence of clerical rights in 1514, though it is again Fitzjames's letter to Wolsey which is perhaps best remembered, for its complaint that the Londoners were so anti-clerical that any jury would 'cast and condemn my clerk though he was as innocent as Abel' ('Anglica historia', 229). 
It might well be that the Hunne affair, defused by Wolsey in 1515, had little subsequent significance outside London, but that Fitzjames was active against heresy is clear. There were over sixty heresy hearings in the diocese from 1511 onwards, though it would be unfair to single out Fitzjames as 'an old bigot' (Elton, 57) or even as a persecutor -- many of his fellow bishops (notably first Smith, then Longland, of Lincoln, Blyth of Coventry and Lichfield, Nix of Norwich, and Archbishop Warham himself) were just as active in defence of orthodoxy at this time. Fitzjames's was a high-profile diocese, and one in which heresy cases were more frequent than most. In any case, recantations, not burnings, were his priority. But it is probably true to say that Fitzjames, who may not always have been in very good health, could appear clumsy and aggressive in his dealings: in 1513 he effectively gagged his own dean, the reformist John Colet, by threatening heresy charges, though this may have been less a reactionary stand against reform than the action of a diocesan bishop reluctant to see clerical shortcoming so eloquently denounced so close to home -- such initiatives were best launched by the episcopate. 
Fitzjames was not a humanist reformer in the fashion of Colet, Erasmus, or even Fisher. The books he left to Merton College are theologically conservative: five by Jerome, three by Ambrose, one each by Augustine, Isidore, and Bonaventure. Erasmus was quite scathing about Fitzjames but this should not detract from his diligence and plain desire to uphold clerical and educational standards. The school he endowed at Bruton in 1519 was not to be for 'song nor other petite lernynge, as the Cross Rowe, redyng of the matyns or of the psalter' but 'lernynge of gramer' ('VCH Somerset', 2/2.444). It is hard to imagine him objecting to Wolsey's suppression of six poorhouses in his diocese to help fund Cardinal College; indeed, the scheme to expand Fitzjames's own alma mater was bound to meet with approval. The bishop might well have lived up to his own prescription of 1495: 'that one vertuous prelate dooth moche good in crystis chyrche as well for his owne vertue and zelace obedyence unto the laws of god as in ledynge other men to do the same by his holy doctrine and vertuous example. (Fitzjames, fol. 6)' Fitzjames saw himself as 'nouryssher' to his flock. A decade after his death, Polydore Vergil praised his theological eminence and his austerity, and described him as 'a father of old family, great learning, and the utmost goodness' ('Anglica historia', 130), while in 1601 Francis Godwin, in his not always complimentary survey of past bishops, wrote of him as being 'learned and very vertuous' (Godwin, 154). 
Fitzjames died in London on 15 January 1522 and was buried in the tomb he had had prepared in the nave of St Paul's. His will, entirely conventional for its time, is dated 11 April 1518 -- he may have been ill for some time before his death, as his activity diminishes noticeably from this time. Some money was left for the poor, unspecified goods to his executors, and the pair of 'portatyves' at London and organs at Fulham, jewels, books, and vestments of his chapel to his successor. All the cooking utensils and tables were also to remain for his successor 'that he shall not fynde the houses bayre of suche things when he shall come unto them' -- as he had done (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/3 Ayloffe, fols. 22-22'v'). This was a conventional insurance to avoid dilapidation suits, and in fact Fitzjames had repaired and even extended episcopal manors -- at Fulham he built the western quadrangle and a wing that has since been demolished. He also endowed a school in his native Bruton in 1519, and so it is perhaps not entirely surprising that, careful though he was in administering the finances and leases of his see, he appears to have had virtually no residual income when he died. One further bequest was of his missal of the Sarum which Fitzjames left for his successor as bishop of London, Cuthbert Tunstall. In 1949 the missal was purchased for St Michael's Church, Minehead, where it remains on permanent display. 


@@@@@


doc= 9613


Reginald fitz Jocelin (c.1140-1191), bishop of Bath and archbishop-elect of Canterbury, was the son of Jocelin de Bohun, bishop of Salisbury, and was related to Earl Robert of Gloucester (d. 1147) and to Savaric fitz Geldwin (d. 1205), whom Emperor Heinrich VI ('r'. 1191-7) in 1191 referred to as his own kinsman. It has been plausibly suggested that Reginald's mother belonged to the family of the Savoyard counts of Maurienne. Reginald was born 'c'.1140 and brought up in Italy, whence his epithets Lombardus and Italus. Appointed archdeacon of Wiltshire by his father by 1161, he entered the service of Archbishop Thomas Becket, perhaps in 1162, and went to Paris to study letters (1163-4), carrying a recommendation to Bishop Hugues of Soissons (the French king's chancellor) from Pope Alexander III ('r'. 1159-81) himself. Louis VII ('r'. 1137-80) assigned the abbey of St Exuperius, Corbeil, to him. Philip Augustus of France attested Reginald's long-standing friendship with Louis VII when he wrote in support of his election to Canterbury in 1191. 
However, Reginald did not stay at Paris long enough to acquire the title of master, for he is recorded in Henry II's service from 'c'.1167. From that moment he was a loyal supporter both of the king and of his father, and so lost the friendship of the exiled Becket circle, although he had provided horses for an anonymous Becket messenger in mid-1164. He became one of Henry II's principal emissaries to the papal curia, representing the king's interests against Becket in 1167-8, 1169, 1169-70, and to the papal nuncios Vivian and Gratian in August 1169. After Becket's murder (29 December 1170) he was sent once more to present the king's case at the papal curia (January-April 1171); and his good service was rewarded in 1173, when Henry II secured his election to the see of Bath, one of four 'enemies of the Martyr' (Bouquet and others, 14.645) to be so promoted. His election and theirs (and also that of Richard of Dover to Canterbury) were challenged by Henry, the Young King, who alleged illegitimacy and uncanonical process against him, and he went to the papal curia in the company of Archbishop-elect Richard to defend his position. Walter Map claimed that Reginald succeeded only through bribery; but the well-informed Ralph de Diceto records that he had to clear himself by oath of complicity in Becket's death, and provide sworn evidence that his conception had taken place before his father became a priest, before being consecrated at St Jean-de-Maurienne by the archbishops of Canterbury and Tarentaise on 23 June 1174. In the company of Archbishop Richard he met the king at Barfleur (8-9 August) and was enthroned at Bath on 24 November. 
Reginald at once began to take his place in the public affairs of the kingdom. In 1175 he attended the provincial council of Westminster in May, and the royal council of Woodstock in July, and in 1176 was present at the king's Easter court at Winchester. Recorded at the Westminster council of March 1177, he attested a royal charter at Rouen in the following September, and may have taken part immediately afterwards in the negotiations with Louis VII which led to the treaty of Ivry, although he is not recorded as a witness. These secular duties were interrupted in 1178 by his participation in the joint Anglo-French mission against Cathar heretics in Toulouse, led by Cardinal Pierre of San Crisogono, but Reginald attended that year's Christmas court at Winchester, before going to the Third Lateran Council in March 1179. On his return journey he persuaded Hugh of Avalon to take charge of the Carthusian house of Witham in Somerset, founded by Henry II in partial expiation for Becket's murder. During the 1180s he is only occasionally recorded as attending courts and councils, probably because during that decade his energies were largely devoted to the administration of his diocese, though in 1186 he attended councils at Oxford and Woodstock. But at the coronation of Richard I, on 3 September 1189, he appears in a distinguished position, processing on the king's left hand. 
Reginald was by then one of the longest-serving bishops in England, though not yet fifty, enjoying the precedence of noble descent and experience, and in a position to play a more forceful role in the new reign. He attended the Council of Pipewell on 15 September, and was probably the Reginaldus Italus who unsuccessfully offered Richard I $4000 for the chancellorship. On the king's instructions he secured the legatine title for his rival, Bishop William de Longchamp (died 1197), but he then supported Archbishop Geoffrey of York against Longchamp, and in October 1191 colluded in the latter's overthrow. His own long-standing support of the Canterbury monks against Archbishop Baldwin's foundation of a church at Hackington, dedicated to St Stephen and St Thomas the Martyr, made him a strong contender for the archbishopric when Baldwin died at Acre in 1190, and the monks immediately elected him (27 November 1191), rejecting Richard I's candidate, Guglielmo, archbishop of Monreale. The new justiciar, Walter de Coutances (died 1207), challenged the election; but before the matter could be resolved, on 24 December, Reginald was struck down by paralysis at Dogmersfield in Hampshire, having arranged the election of his kinsman Savaric to Bath. In his only surviving letter as archbishop-elect, dictated on his deathbed on Christmas day, he requested the monastic habit from the prior of Christ Church. He died the following day and was buried near the high altar of Bath Abbey on 29 December 1191 -- the feast of St Thomas of Canterbury. According to Richard of Devizes, he received the monastic habit from Prior Walter of Bath, with the words, 'God did not wish me to be an archbishop, nor do I. He wished me to be your monk, and so do I' ('Chronicon Richardi Divisensis', 56). After his death miraculous cures were attributed to his intercession. 
Although Becket considered him a turncoat, Peter of Blois (died 1212) wrote first (1169-70) that Reginald desired reconciliation with his old master, but was prevented by his associates and by devotion to his father, whom Becket had suspended and interdicted; and later (1173-4) that his defence of his father was understandable, and that he was not alone in misjudging the martyr. Since Peter and Jocelin were friends, these testimonials may be suspect; but Herbert of Bosham (died 1194) spoke highly of him in his account of the 'eruditi sancti Thome' ('St Thomas's learned men'), declaring that he had returned to St Thomas after the murder. This judgement is confirmed both by his dedication of a church of St Thomas the Martyr at St Lo, in Normandy, on his return from Italy in 1174, and by his commission in 1176 of a reliquary pendant containing relics of St Thomas for Queen Margaret of Sicily, mother of William II of Sicily ('r'. 1166-89), whom Henry II's daughter Joanna married in 1177. 
Although Peter of Blois recorded Reginald's delight in hawking (and he secured from Richard I the right to have hunting dogs throughout Somerset), he was a hard-working diocesan bishop. More 'acta' survive from his episcopate than from that of any other twelfth-century bishop of Bath -- 122 in all, at least 73 of them datable to the period 1180-91. Moreover, they reveal a conscientious pastoral bishop. He regulated the relationship between monasteries and the vicars of appropriated churches, to the benefit of the latter, by insisting on rights of tenure and adequate endowment, and as a judge-delegate he applied the latest canonical rules in the execution of papal commissions. At Bath he founded the hospital of St John in 1180, so that the poor and sick could have the benefit of the waters. At Wells he built part of the nave of the future cathedral, and provided funds for the completion of work on the fabric by ordering that the incomes of vacant churches should be devoted to it. He confirmed the canons in nine prebendal churches, and increased their common fund. He erected the liberty of Glastonbury Abbey into an archdeaconry, and made the abbot a member of the Wells chapter. He confirmed the burghal status of the town of Wells, defined its boundaries, and added to its privileges. Reginald's early death may well have deprived Canterbury of a distinguished archbishop -- as it was, he was commemorated there with archiepiscopal honours. 


@@@@@


doc= 9614


Eustace fitz John (d. 1157), justice and baron, was the son of John fitz Richard ('b'. before 1056), a minor tenant-in-chief in Essex and Norfolk, and an unknown mother. He succeeded Serlo de Burg, who is said (perhaps wrongly) to have been his uncle and to have founded the castle of Knaresborough, as the farmer of the royal manors of Knaresborough and Aldborough. He had two brothers, Pain fitz John and William, and two sisters, Agnes and Alice. Like his brother Pain, Eustace became attached to the court of Henry I, and between 1114 and 1133 was a regular witness of Henry's charters. In the only extant pipe roll of Henry's reign he appears as a justice itinerant in the north, acting in conjunction with Walter Espec. He won Henry's special favour, receiving grants that made him very powerful in Yorkshire and Northumberland, including the manor of Malton in the North Riding of Yorkshire, and was reputed to be a man of great wisdom and counsel. His main places of residence were Alnwick and Malton and he was also custodian of Bamburgh Castle and of the castle and honour of Tickhill (sometimes known as Blyth). After the death of Henry I, Eustace submitted to King Stephen (by Easter 1136), and appears to have been employed by Stephen as a justice in the north. His castle of Alnwick was captured by the Scots before 5 February 1136, but was returned by 22 March 1136. He supported Stephen's invasion of Scotland early in 1138, but afterwards was arrested by Stephen and deprived of the castles Henry I had given him, including Bamburgh. As a result he joined David, king of Scots, when he invaded the north of England again after Easter 1138, and intended to give his own castle of Malton to the Scots. He was present at the battle of the Standard, where he and his followers fought alongside the men of Cumbria and Teviotdale in the second line of King David's host. Wounded in the battle, he escaped to one of his castles, after which his town and fortress of Malton were besieged by English forces. By 1142 Henry of Scotland, earl of Northumberland, had restored him to his Northumberland possessions and granted him extensive lands in the honour of Huntingdon. Eustace supported the attempt by the Scottish chancellor, William Cumin, to establish himself as bishop of Durham in 1141, helped to arrange a truce between Cumin and Bishop William de Ste Barbe in 1143, and thereafter allied himself with the earls of Chester and York in what appears to have been an attempt to restore his power, and probably also to promote Scottish authority, south of the Tees. Coins bearing his name were minted at York in Stephen's reign, and, probably between 1149 and 'c'.1151, he destroyed Gilbert de Gant's castle of Hunmanby in Yorkshire in a war fought for control of the earldom of Lincoln, to which Gant was a claimant. Towards the end of Stephen's reign Eustace made a grant to his son, William de Vescy, perhaps as a means of securing William's succession to his lands; this grant was confirmed by Duke Henry of Normandy in 1153-4. 
Eustace was a lavish patron of the church and the special friend of new orders of regulars. His name appears in the witness list of the document purporting to be the charter by which his colleague Walter Espec founded Rievaulx, the first Cistercian house established in Yorkshire. When the first monks of Fountains were in the direst distress and had given away their last loaves in charity, Eustace's timely present of a load of bread from Knaresborough was looked on as little less than a miracle. He also made important gifts of lands to Fountains. In 1147 he founded the abbey of Alnwick for Premonstratensian canons as a daughter house of Newhouse Abbey, which had been the first Premonstratensian community established in England. He was a friend of St Gilbert of Sempringham, and established two of the earliest Gilbertine houses in England. One, probably founded in 1150-51, was a foundation for canons at Old Malton in Yorkshire. The other, founded by Eustace in conjunction with his second wife, Agnes, probably in 1151, was a community for canons and nuns at Watton in the same county. He also made grants to the monks of St Peter's, Gloucester, and to the Augustinian canons of Bridlington. 
Eustace made two rich marriages. His first wife, whom he probably married before 1130, was Beatrice, daughter and heir of Ivo de Vescy. She brought Alnwick to Eustace. She died at the birth of their son, William, who adopted the name of Vescy, and was active in the king's service during the reign of Henry II, being sheriff of Northumberland between 1157 and 1170. He was the ancestor of the barons de Vescy. William's son Eustace was prominent among the northern barons whose revolt from John led to the issue of 'Magna Carta'. Eustace fitz John's second wife was Agnes, daughter of William Fitznigel, baron of Halton and constable of Chester, one of the leading lords of the earldom of Chester. They were probably married by 1135 and had a son, Richard Fitzeustace, the ancestor of the second line of Lacys. After the childless death of Fitznigel's son and heir, William, in 1143 or 1144, Eustace obtained from Earl Ranulf (II) of Chester a grant of Fitznigel's estates and titles, in which he was recognized as leading counsellor to the earl, above all the nobles of Ranulf's lands (Barraclough, 28). In his new capacity he took part in Henry II's first expedition into Wales, and was slain in July 1157 when the king's army fell into an ambush near Basingwerk. He was then an old man. Roger of Howden described Eustace as a one-eyed worthless traitor ('Chronica... Hovedene', 1.193), but the Alnwick chronicle, while also referring to this physical disability, states that Eustace was an energetic and lawful man. 


@@@@@


doc= 9615


Pain fitz John (d. 1137), baron and administrator, was perhaps the eldest son of John, nephew of Waleram, also known as John fitz Richard, and the grandson of a moneyer who held a mill in the Avranchin. He shared two characteristics with several other of the 'new men' who served Henry I: a link with western Normandy and the status of an inferior tenant-in-chief -- in 1086 his father held only a few estates in Norfolk and Essex. His brother Eustace fitz John (d. 1157) was drawn by marriage to northern England; for the same reason Pain was attracted to the west midlands. 
The sources are not precise about dates and offices in Pain's career. He was too young to serve William Rufus, but according to a story retailed by Walter Map, he was (perhaps briefly) a royal 'cubicularius', or chamberlain, to Henry I; but no attestations survive styling him thus, and the story suggests that Pain's duty was body service for the king (in this case the nocturnal supply of wine), rather than any concern with the royal finances. Gerald of Wales, another late source, describes Pain fitz John and his colleague Miles of Gloucester as 'secretarii et praecipui consiliari' ('Gir. Camb. opera', 6.34), a phrase helpfully glossed as 'personal confidants' ('VCH Shropshire', 3.11). Such services notwithstanding, when Pain was allowed, about 1115, to marry Sybil Talbot, niece of Hugh (I) de Lacy, his personal ambitions turned firmly to the southern Welsh march, though he continued to attest royal 'acta' quite frequently, if seldom in Normandy. Pain's interest in the marches is evidenced by a mandate from Pope Calixtus II of as early as 1119, ordering Pain and others to return to the churches of the diocese of Llandaff all lands and other rights which they had 'wickedly withdrawn and retained' (Davies, 2.616). Between 1123 and 1127 he became sheriff of Herefordshire, and in the latter year he was also made sheriff of Shropshire, succeeding Richard de Belmeis as the king's vicegerent. In both shires Pain was almost certainly justice as well as sheriff, and in the pipe roll for 1130 he appears as an itinerant justice in Staffordshire, Gloucestershire, and Pembroke. 
The 'Gesta Stephani' couples Pain with Miles of Gloucester, attributing to Miles the lordship ('dominatum') of Gloucestershire and to Pain that of Herefordshire and Shropshire, and asserting that between the Severn and the sea (that is, the Bristol Channel) they ran a highly acquisitive regime by means of litigation and forced services ('placitis... et angariis'). This may have meant that Pain dealt with the Welsh (his external problem) by impressing men to serve against them. According to the 'Gesta', Pain and Miles were among those who at the beginning of Stephen's reign sought safe conducts when summoned to court, as a precaution against the compulsory surrender of ill-gotten gains. An order of Pope Honorius II in 1128 shows that Pain had continued depredations against the church, in which Miles had joined him. However, at about this time the two men jointly lobbied Henry I to appoint the prior of Llanthony to the vacant see of Hereford. 
There are indications that under Pain the centre of royal power in Shropshire, perhaps even in the marches as a whole, might have moved from Shrewsbury to Bridgnorth. Not only does a writ of the 1120s by Belmeis to the barons of Shropshire show that Pain held his first plea at Bridgnorth with Walter the constable, the father and in this context the forerunner of Miles of Gloucester, but in 1128, soon after Pain had succeeded Belmeis, Mareddud ap Bleddyn, the ruler of Powys, characteristically handed his nephew Llywelyn ab Owain over to Pain, who imprisoned him in Bridgnorth Castle; the king had already confined a noble Norman rebel there in 1126. 
For some years Pain devoted much effort to consolidating his position in and around Ludlow by improving its financial and military resources. Apart perhaps from William fitz Osbern he was the first to see the strategic potential of Ludlow, half-way between Shrewsbury and Hereford and a nodal point for routes into Powys, the Welsh province whose southern portions contained Elfael (part of the Tosny lands, of which Pain had custody) and Ismynydd, which took Pain's name to become Painscastle (just as a former Lacy estate in Gloucestershire became Painswick). 
According to William of Malmesbury, in 1128 Henry I granted the 'comitatus Salopesberie' to Queen Adeliza, perhaps implying a wish to exercise more control over Pain's activities. The latter included conflict with the Welsh, who triumphed at least once; late in Henry I's reign, according to Orderic, they attacked and burnt Caus Castle, west of Shrewsbury, and slew the garrison. Orderic states that the castle was Pain's, but he was probably only its custodian. 
Following King Henry's death Pain was present at his funeral: he declared early for Stephen and witnessed the royal charter of concessions given at Oxford in April 1136. But the Welsh -- perhaps those who had moved on Caus -- drew him back to the border and to his death. On 10 July 1137 he was killed in an ambush while pursuing a raiding party: a missile split his head open and he was buried in Gloucester Abbey. Pain left no son but he had two daughters, Cecily and Agnes, who between them had five husbands. Cecily was married first (in 1137) to Roger, the son of Miles of Gloucester, but Pain's acquisitions did not descend as an entity. In Shropshire his role as a border administrator and guardian was assumed by the Fitzalans and then the Lestranges. 


@@@@@


doc= 9616


Fitzmaurice, Patrick, seventeenth baron of Kerry and Lixnaw (c.1551-1600), landowner and rebel, was the eldest of five children of Thomas Fitzmaurice, sixteenth baron of Kerry and Lixnaw (c.1502-1590), landowner and rebel, and his first wife, Margaret (died 'c'.1564), daughter of James fitz John Fitzgerald, thirteenth earl of Desmond. He was born in Kerry. He was sent to court during Mary I's reign so that he might receive an English education, learning the language and customs in order to instil obedience. Fitzmaurice, however, was also a hostage whose presence at court helped to ensure his father's loyalty. By the early 1570s Kerry had ably demonstrated his loyalty and Fitzmaurice, favoured at Elizabeth I's court, was permitted to return to Ireland. 
Upon his arrival Fitzmaurice impetuously aligned himself with his cousin Gerald Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond. His father complained 'Desmond does prick forward my wilful son against me' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/48/70(ii)). Fitzmaurice joined Desmond in rebellion in 1580, but was captured and imprisoned in Limerick Castle. With the possible assistance of his gaoler, John Sheriff, clerk of the ordnance, Fitzmaurice escaped in August 1581 and took refuge among the Irish. His father reluctantly joined the rebellion in May 1582 and Fitzmaurice embarked for Spain with the Catholic bishop of Killaloe in September seeking reinforcements. Yet significant foreign aid was not forthcoming and Fitzmaurice was wounded at Dingle, Kerry, following his return in early 1583. Despite receiving a pardon in 1585 he remained suspect -- his escape from Limerick was estimated to have cost the queen $20,000. He was recaptured in 1587 and imprisoned in Dublin in March 1588. 
Fitzmaurice was the last participant in Desmond's rebellion to be released. Attempts made by Sir William Herbert, an influential Munster planter, to secure his release fell on deaf ears. Fitzmaurice's wife, Joan or Jane, daughter of David Roche, fifth Baron Roche of Fermoy, and Ellen, daughter of James Butler of Dunboyne, Meath, journeyed to Dublin, but met with a similar response. In early 1591 he was reunited with his wife and five children. He had become seventeenth Lord Kerry following his father's death in 1590. Kerry had the misfortune of presiding over the transfer of many of his ancestral lands to the planters who flooded Munster in the wake of Desmond's rebellion. With little more to lose, he joined the rebellion that swept through Munster in December 1598. He pulled down his principal castle of Beaulieu to prevent its falling to the English. But, faced with ruin, he died soon after on 12 August 1600 at Downlough, Kerry. He was buried with his uncle, the earl of Clancare, in the Grey Friary of Irrelaugh in Kerry. He was survived by his wife, and succeeded by his eldest son, Thomas Fitzmaurice, as eighteenth baron of Kerry and Lixnaw. 


@@@@@


doc= 9617


Fitzmaurice, Thomas, sixteenth baron of Kerry and Lixnaw (c.1502-1590), landowner and rebel, the fourth son of Edmund Fitzmaurice, tenth baron of Kerry and Lixnaw (died 1543), and his wife, Una, daughter of Tadhg MacMahon. He was born in co. Kerry, probably at Clanmaurice. As a younger son Fitzmaurice was sent to the continent where he was trained as a soldier; he settled in Milan and served under the German emperors in the imperial army. Following the sudden death of his brother Gerald, the fifteenth baron of Kerry and Lixnaw, in July 1550, he inherited the ancestral estates in Clanmaurice, Kerry. He returned from Milan about a year later, having been told of his inheritance by a childhood nurse. 
Fitzmaurice initially met with opposition from a John Fitzrichard, who disputed the inheritance for nearly two years. The latter, however, dropped his claim in 1552. In October 1553 Mary I confirmed Kerry in his estates, granting him all the manors and privileges of his predecessors. Reputedly a very handsome man, he was married shortly after his arrival to Lady Margaret (died 'c'.1564), second daughter of James fitz John Fitzgerald, thirteenth earl of Desmond, and More, daughter of Sir Mulroney O'Carroll. They had four sons and one daughter. Patrick Fitzmaurice, the eldest son, was sent to England as a guarantee of Kerry's loyalty. Kerry remained loyal and in September 1553 he received a personal appeal from the queen to assist Sir Anthony St Leger, lord deputy, in the reform of Ireland and sat in the House of Lords in 1557, 1560, and 1568. He became consumed with the defence of his lands from Gerald Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, and James fitz Maurice (Desmond's cousin), who sought to exert their traditional suzerainty over Munster's nobility. Accordingly, during James fitz Maurice's rebellion Kerry remained loyal to the crown, aiding Sir John Perrot, president of Munster, in suppressing the rebellion in autumn 1572. Such loyalty facilitated the return of his son Patrick from England about 1572 and earned Kerry a place on the government's list of 'those who mislike the Geraldines in Munster' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/47/36). 
Yet by the mid-1570s Kerry was engaged in a kind of 'rapprochement' with Desmond. The influx of new English settlers seeking to establish landed claims in Munster -- such as Sir Peter Carew, who claimed Clanmaurice by right of inheritance -- threatened Kerry and inched him closer to his former enemies, who faced a similarly uncertain future. In summer 1574 Kerry, along with much of Munster's nobility, signed a document supporting Desmond's disapproval of Elizabeth I's policy in Munster. This was not tantamount to a military alliance, however. Kerry continually complained to Sir William Fitzwilliam, lord deputy, or to Thomas Butler, eleventh earl of Ormond, of Desmond's exactions and alleged that the earl had turned his son against him. He did not support Desmond's rebellion (1579-83), but threatened rebellion himself to secure his interests and served the crown as a well-placed informer. 
Kerry notified the crown of the arrival of Desmond's foreign aid at Smerwick in September 1580. Desmond responded by laying siege to several castles in Clanmaurice. Kerry, however, held fast and in September 1581 presented himself, with his brother-in-law, the earl of Clancare, to Arthur Grey, Baron Grey of Wilton, lord deputy, in Dublin; the officials there were taken aback by the dress and demeanour of these far-flung lesser nobles. The Fitzmaurices had traditional links with neighbouring Gaelic clans and Kerry, after the death of his first wife, married Catherine (died 1582), daughter of MacCarthy More. He then married Penelope, daughter of Conor O'Brien, third earl of Thomond. His position became untenable: the government's impositions, coupled with Desmond's exactions, had ruined his country. Kerry's role in the murder of a contingent of soldiers at last pushed him into rebellion in May 1582. 
Kerry's defection worried government officials. They feared a major foreign invasion was imminent but doubted if such 'an ould man, wise, and of great experience' would support Desmond's desperate actions (TNA: PRO, SP 63/92/18). Foreign support was not forthcoming and Kerry surrendered by March 1583. Though his association with Ormond spared him a traitor's death, he was watched closely after the rebellion: his extreme poverty, his son's imprisonment, and his displeasure with the settling of planters so near his lands made him a prime candidate for rebellion. He sat in the parliament of 1585-6, but died in Clanmaurice, co. Kerry, on 16 December 1590. He was denied burial in his ancestral tomb, which instead housed a garrison, and was buried in the tomb of Bishop Philip Stack in Ardfert Cathedral. His son Patrick Fitzmaurice succeeded him as seventeenth baron of Kerry and Lixnaw. 


@@@@@


doc= 9618


Fitzmaurice, Thomas, eighteenth baron of Kerry and Lixnaw (1574-1630), nobleman, was the son and heir of Patrick Fitzthomas Fitzmaurice, seventeenth baron of Kerry and Lixnaw (d. 1600), and his wife, Joan or Jane, daughter of David Roche, fifth Baron Roche of Fermoy. The Fitzmaurice lands included the barony of Clanmaurice, north co. Kerry, and their main seat, Lixnaw, 10 miles north of Tralee in the same county. They were kinsmen of the Desmond Fitzgeralds and answerable to the earls of Desmond with whom, however, they were often in a state of feud. In the second Desmond rebellion (1579-83) and again during the campaign against the earl of Tyrone (1594-1603) the Fitzmaurices were in arms against the crown. 
Thomas Fitzmaurice joined his father in the uprising of 1598 to overthrow the Munster plantation. His father died on 12 August 1600 and Lixnaw and Listowel castles were captured at the end of the year, the latter stronghold besieged for three weeks by Sir Charles Wilmot, who massacred the garrison. Kerry fled the region, and went to Ulster to seek aid from the northern insurgents O'Neill and O'Donnell. He was listed among the rebels 'not to pardon' in a directive by the queen to Lord Deputy Mountjoy of 21 December 1600 as one of the 'ringleaders to many monstrous and unnatural outrages' (Brewer and Bullen, 3.499). In January 1601 the privy council advised Sir George Carew, president of Munster, that 'the son of the late Lord Morris of Lixnawe' was among the rebel leaders who 'notwithstanding they are expulsed and driven to misery, are yet not unlike to save their heads a great while, in respect of the manner of their life and the disposition of the country'. He was 'to receive them upon no conditions but upon the pardon of lives only' (ibid., 4.15-16). On 11 May 1601 Carew noted that Kerry had commandeered twelve galleys to invade co. Kerry and was in no mind to avail of the pardon. Late in the year he returned to the south in the company of O'Donnell, regained Lixnaw, and was among the lords who pledged allegiance to Philip of Spain. When the northern forces were driven back Carew reported to the privy council how a few insurgents held out in co. Kerry, including 'McMorrice' (Fitzmaurice) -- 'They live separated in small companies, seeking safety in every bush' (Brewer and Bullen, 4.405). Kerry persistently evaded attempts at capture, including a notable one by Captain Boys. In April 1603, however, it was reported that 'none in Munster are in action saving M'Morris [Fitzmaurice]... he is creeping out of his den to implore mercy from the lord deputy'; 'he saith he never offended the king', the new monarch, James I ('CSP Ire.', '1603-6', 22). 
Kerry was at James's court in 1604, made submission for his own and his father's offences, and was pardoned. He was successful in repossessing all the lands belonging to his father and secured grants of the lands of lesser rebels by letters patent of 16 July 1604, confirmed on 1 July 1612. With his first wife, Lady Honora (died 1600), daughter of Conor O'Brien, third earl of Thomond, he had at least one son, Patrick, and a daughter, Joan. A condition of the royal generosity to him was that his heir Patrick was taken away from him and brought up with Donough O'Brien, the protestant fourth earl of Thomond, as a protestant. By his second marriage, in 1615, to a daughter of Richard Power, fourth Baron le Power, whose name is variously given as Shile or Gyles, he had five sons (prominent in the wars of the 1640s) and three daughters. 
Kerry attended the last and brief Irish parliamentary session of James's reign (April-May 1615), but a quarrel over precedence broke out between him and lords Slane and de Courcy; it was eventually decided in his favour. There was little rapport between him and his son Patrick, yet he promised Patrick a good settlement on his marriage to Honora, daughter of Sir Edmond Fitzgerald of Cloyne. In the event he refused to fulfil his promise and, when Patrick complained, was charged and briefly incarcerated in the Fleet prison, by 1622. As he appeared to have promptly honoured his contract to Patrick he was allowed to return to Ireland but once there refused to acknowledge his bond. Suspected, in addition, of further treachery, by 1624 he was re-arrested in London. Because he was once more permitted to return to Ireland it is presumed that surety of his good faith in the matter of his son's marriage settlement must have been given. He died at Drogheda on 3 June 1630 and was buried in Cormac's Chapel, Cashel, co. Tipperary. 


@@@@@


doc= 9619


Richard fitz Nigel (c.1130-1198), administrator, writer, and bishop of London, was the son, presumably illegitimate, of Nigel (c.1100-1169), Henry I's treasurer and bishop of Ely, who in turn was nephew of Roger of Salisbury (died 1139). Contemporaries referred to him at various stages of his life until he became bishop of London as Richard of Ely or as Richard the Treasurer, and the closeness of family feeling within the group is best illustrated by the devoted tone of Richard's 'Dialogus de Scaccario' ('Dialogue of the exchequer'). His mother was probably English -- a document of 1184 follows Richard's name with that of 'William the Englishman, brother of the treasurer' (Madox, 1.215-16). His youth was far from tranquil; in 1144, and also earlier in the reign, King Stephen took him as a hostage for the good behaviour of his father, Nigel. However, his paternal family, and also the monastery of Ely, ensured that his education was a learned one. His later writings display a fondness for classical phrases, at least a basic knowledge of the categories of logic, and some learning in Roman law. 
Henry II's reign saw Nigel securely restored to royal favour; according to Richard, writing two decades later, his father was brought in to revive the ancient learning and practices of the exchequer. Within the first few years of the reign Richard became treasurer, having already perhaps held the post of chief writing clerk in the exchequer. The 'Liber Eliensis' states that Henry II, eager for money for his Toulouse campaign of 1159, accepted $400 from Nigel so that his son might be treasurer. While the link between Nigel's payment and the treasurership may not be quite so close, and while no other source gives an exact date for Richard's assumption of the treasurership, the association with Nigel's influence and the period 1156-60, and quite possibly with some kind of payment, seems sure. His tenure of the office was lengthy, lasting until just before his death in 1198. If initially he may have been overshadowed by his father, he long enjoyed personal control of the office. His financial activities were wide-ranging. In 1173 Richard, Nicholas de Sigillo, and Reginald de Warenne were responsible for taxing the royal demesnes in Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Kent, Oxfordshire, and Sussex. The pipe roll of 1175 records a payment concerning the king's horses which the treasurer took with him to the continent. It is conceivable, although unprovable, that Richard's trip was connected to financial reorganization in Normandy during 1176. In the late 1170s he was at work on the 'Dialogus de Scaccario', which is both a manual of exchequer business and a celebration of Richard's family as royal servants. Indeed, the family connection with the treasury was continued after Richard's time, for his successor was described as William of Ely 'our kinsman'. 
In common with other royal servants of the time, Richard's involvement in administration was not limited to one field, in his case that of finance. In 1179 he was an itinerant justice, going on a circuit through Hampshire, Wiltshire, Gloucestershire, Dorset, Somerset, Devon, Cornwall, Berkshire, and Oxfordshire. Final concords also record him serving as a royal justice at Westminster, sometimes, but far from always, at the exchequer. Other final concords were made before him elsewhere, for example on 27 January 1188 and 20 January 1189 at Oxford. He also dealt with a variety of other tasks for the king; for instance in the late 1180s he kept a falcon for Henry's use, and in 1189 was one of those sent by the king to Canterbury concerning a dispute between the archbishop and Christ Church. The pipe rolls record some of his reward, with Richard from 1177 receiving $20 a year from the manors of Essendon and Bayford in Hertfordshire. 
Meanwhile Richard was also occupying various positions in the church. He first occurs as archdeacon of Ely 'c'.1158, and may have controlled diocesan affairs during his father's lengthy terminal illness in the 1160s. He also held the prebend of Chiswick from St Paul's Cathedral. Probably in December 1183 Richard was appointed dean of Lincoln. One of his major acts was to buy certain ruinous houses in the churchyard, rebuild them from their foundations, and give them to the deanery as the dean's first proper residence. In 1186 the canons of Lincoln, wanting to please the king, proposed Richard as their bishop. Henry refused to accept either Richard or two other candidates put forward by the canons, and chose the saintly Carthusian Hugh instead. However, Richard was soon to have a bishopric. Following the death of Gilbert Foliot in 1187 Richard was elected bishop of London on 15 or 16 September 1189 at Pipewell, and on 31 December following he was consecrated at Lambeth in the presence of twelve bishops. As bishop he can be seen looking after his diocese in various ways, for example by constructing buildings, by pursuing a dispute with a certain John Picot concerning lands in the bishop's fee at Barnet, Hertfordshire, and by endowing the master of the cathedral school with tithes. That St Paul's was a centre of learning in his time is confirmed by the presence of Ralph de Diceto as dean. 
Before setting off on the third crusade Archbishop Baldwin of Canterbury held a council at Westminster on 19 February 1190 where he made Richard his deputy. Richard took up the pastoral care both in the territory of Kent and in the churches of the archbishop's manors. This position involved Richard in the case of Hugh de Nonant, bishop of Coventry, whom Baldwin had suspended for accepting the shrievalties of Warwickshire, Staffordshire, and Leicestershire. Hugh promised to resign the offices, and not to accept their like in future, whereupon Baldwin wrote to Richard asking him to ensure that Hugh kept his promise, and Hugh duly resigned his offices, and wrote to Richard about his decision. 
On 15-16 October 1190 Richard attended a council held by William de Longchamp as papal legate at Westminster. Ralph de Diceto reports simply that Richard, as the third most important bishop according to the custom of the realm, sat at the legate's right hand. However, Gervase of Canterbury records a long dispute involving the bishop of Rochester concerning the relative claims of the latter and the bishop of London as to the consecration of the bishop of Worcester and the seat at the legate's right hand. Following Archbishop Baldwin's death on crusade in 1190 Richard took a leading role in assembling the bishops for the election of a successor in November and December of the following year. However, in part because Richard was detained in London on the king's business, the bishops were pre-empted by the monks of Canterbury who succeeded in electing their own candidate, Reginald de Bohun, bishop of Bath. But Reginald died on 26 December 1191, and Richard was once more responsible for assembling the bishops for an election on 30 May 1193. Again the monks anticipated any action by the bishops, and on 29 May elected Hubert Walter. This time, despite the infringement of what the bishops regarded as their privilege, the monks' choice was acceptable, and was confirmed the next day when the bishops also elected Hubert at Westminster, and Richard made the public announcement of the election. Hubert was enthroned on 7 November, but this too was an occasion for controversy. Richard, as bishop of London and hence as dean among the bishops of the church of Canterbury, and the bishop of Rochester, as the archbishop's chaplain, both claimed precedence in the ceremony. A compromise was finally reached, allowing Richard to take his place at the archbishop's right hand, and to say prayers when the pall was placed on the archbishop's shoulders and when he was enthroned. As at other times in his episcopate, Richard seems highly attached to the privileges and traditions of his see, just as he was to the customs of the exchequer. 
During Richard I's absence from the realm much of Bishop Richard's time was occupied with the dispute between the king's brother Count John and the chancellor William de Longchamp. On 28 July 1191, at a conference at Winchester, Richard, along with other great churchmen, was a mediator in the peace between John and Longchamp. By the agreement, Richard undertook the keeping of the castle of Bristol. However, in mid-September Geoffrey, the king's half-brother and newly consecrated archbishop of York, landed at Dover, only to be seized by supporters of Longchamp, who violently dragged him from St Martin's Priory wherein he had taken refuge. Richard took a prominent part in the condemnation of this act; he travelled to see Longchamp in the region of Norwich and according to Gerald of Wales threatened an interdict unless Geoffrey were released -- according to Diceto having to pledge his bishopric as the condition for Geoffrey's release. Following his release Geoffrey went to London, where he was received by Richard with great honour on 2 October. 
Meanwhile John had summoned a council at Loddon Bridge, between Reading and Windsor. On 5 October Richard, together with other great men, accompanied William de Longchamp from Windsor towards the meeting, but Longchamp, his position undermined by the scandal of Archbishop Geoffrey's arrest, then turned back to Windsor and proceeded to flee to London. On 8 October a meeting of barons and bishops was held at St Paul's, where all swore an oath of loyalty to the king. According to Diceto only Richard added to his oath 'saving his order and ecclesiastical justice' ('Diceto... opera historica', 2.99). On 9 October the monks of Westminster elected their prior William Postard as abbot, in preference to William de Longchamp's brother, and the new abbot received his staff and a blessing from Richard before the altar of St Paul. On 10 October Richard was present when Longchamp was deprived of his temporal authority. In 1192, however, it was the turn of Archbishop Geoffrey to be cast as Richard's opponent. In March he stayed in London at the New Temple while he attended a council. When he went from his residence to the council, he had his processional cross carried before him, an act that Richard and the other bishops of the southern province declared to be contrary to right. They would hold Geoffrey as excommunicate, and threatened that, if the act was repeated, they would break the cross, as they would already have done if he had not been a king's son, a king's brother, and a new archbishop. Richard also suspended the New Temple from celebration of divine office and sounding of bells because Geoffrey had stayed there. Richard seems to have won this conflict, as Geoffrey was careful not to have his cross carried before him when he left London on his return to York. 
Throughout this period Richard retained his importance to the king and to royal administration. In April 1193 he was made one of the guardians of Richard's ransom. On 10 February 1194 he was one of the bishops who excommunicated John and his supporters in the infirmary chapel at Westminster Abbey as disturbers of the king's peace and of the realm. On the king's return the bishop of London was prominent at the king's formal crown wearing on 17 April 1194. Gervase of Canterbury records that he owed his important position in the procession to the seniority of his see, and that he sat on the left-hand side of the enthroned king. Richard's loyalty to the king was also apparent at the Council of Oxford in 1197, when Hubert Walter put forward the king's request for 300 knights to serve him abroad for an entire year. The incident is famous for the refusal of Hugh of Lincoln to provide such service, but before this occurred Richard had declared his support for Hubert's request. Richard's judicial activities also continued, and he sat regularly as a justice at Westminster until 1196, and then more occasionally until his death. Other final concords show his sitting as a royal justice elsewhere, for example on 22 July 1192 at Hertford. Final concords and the pipe rolls of the fifth and seventh years of the reign show him serving as an itinerant justice in Essex, Hertfordshire, Norfolk, and Suffolk, and perhaps Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire. Richard died on 10 September 1198. 
Richard retains his prominence in historians' eyes not only because of his active life but also because of his writings. Unfortunately not all of these survive, but Richard himself records that before the late 1170s he had written 'a little book... about the history of the realm of England under the illustrious king of the English Henry I.... I called it 'Tricolumnis' because I arranged it all in three columns. The first column dealt with very many affairs of the English Church and some papal bulls. The second dealt with the king's noble deeds, which are beyond human belief. In the third are many matters of public or private interest, and also judgments of the King's court. ('Dialogus', ed. and trans. Johnson, 27)' This description comes from Richard's famous surviving work, the 'Dialogus de Scaccario'. This was composed in the late 1170s, although the existing text includes passages which are probably later interpolations, some not necessarily by Richard. The work takes the form of a dialogue between a master and a student. It is divided into two parts, the first dealing primarily with the staff and structure of the exchequer, the second with the operation of one of its sessions. Also included is a variety of incidental, often historical, material. With the slightly later 'Tractatus de legibus', attributed to Glanvill, Richard's 'Dialogus' marks the emergence of a new type of work, the secular administrative manual. 


@@@@@


doc= 9620


William fitz Osbern, earl (d. 1071), magnate, was from a Norman family connected with the ducal house, his father, Osbern, being nephew to Gunnor, wife of Duke Richard (I) (died 996), and his mother, Emma, a niece of Duke Richard himself. Of an age with the future William the Conqueror (who was born in the late 1020s), he was raised in the ducal household, where his father was the duke's steward. The boys shared a traumatic adolescence marked by Osbern's murder, and William grew up to be Duke William's oldest and most loyal friend. 
Once his brother Osbern had left for England about 1043, William was their father's sole heir; and in 1049 he inherited from his mother's brother Hugues, bishop of Bayeux, the vast estates which had belonged to his maternal grandfather Rodulf, count of Ivry. Probably about then he married Adelize de Tosny and together they founded a monastery at Lyre; a second abbey at Cormeilles followed a decade later. His Norman lands were extensive, their heart in the south-east around Breteuil, where about 1054 Duke William built a major castle which he entrusted to him. William fitz Osbern sought to develop Breteuil as an economic centre by allowing its burgesses extensive privileges. 
By the mid-1060s William was using the title count of the palace ('comes palatii') in imitation of a Carolingian office. He had long been the duke's steward and prominent in all the duchy's affairs, influential, too, in small matters like a squabble between Lanfranc and a royal clerk. He was later remembered as having persuaded the lesser barons to give adequate support for the invasion of England. He himself contributed sixty ships and fought at Hastings. 
After 1066 William fitz Osbern was the king's right-hand man in England, wielding great power throughout the most difficult early years of Norman rule. His authority was based on the implicit trust which the king had in his ability and loyalty, not on any formal position, and to accord him a precise title would be to distort his role. Historians writing in the nineteenth century and for much of the twentieth called William a 'palatine earl', an inappropriate translation of the title which he had used in Normandy; there were no palatine earldoms in England until the thirteenth century. Nor was he really a 'prototype justiciar', as David Bates called him. He was not even 'earl of Hereford', as he appears in most historical writing. The king certainly made him an earl ('comes') in England in 1067, but the title was personal, not territorial, and he had comital authority not just over Herefordshire but probably throughout the southern shires where Harold Godwineson had been earl. His main base, indeed, was not Hereford but Winchester. In the king's absence he and Odo, bishop of Bayeux (died 1097), were co-rulers. Together they built the castles from which others oppressed the English without restraint or the possibility of appeal. It was supposedly on Earl William's advice that the king had the monasteries searched for treasure stashed away by the English. 
The earl also received much land, including the Isle of Wight, the lease of royal estates in Herefordshire and Gloucestershire, many other manors in those shires and Oxfordshire, and at least some in Dorset, Wiltshire, Berkshire, and Worcestershire. Much of it had belonged to Earl Harold, but it was as yet early days for the Normans in England, and much more land might have come William's way had he lived. From those riches he endowed Lyre and Cormeilles and gave manors to his knights and servants, though curiously not to the principal families of Breteuil. 
Because he had taken over as earl from Harold, William was drawn into the Welsh borders and especially the district around Hereford, where he encouraged economic development by extending the privileges of Breteuil to the borough. Herefordshire had been severely disrupted by Welsh incursions in Edward the Confessor's time, though the advantage had already been turned against them by Harold's decisive victories in 1063-4. Earl William secured the Welsh border with castles, notably Chepstow, where he immediately began building in stone, as opposed to the earthwork and timber structures at Wigmore, Clifford, Ewyas Harold, and Monmouth. From those bases he pushed into Brycheiniog and Gwent, where he fought and defeated at least three Welsh kings, Cadwgan ap Meurig and the brothers Rhys and Maredudd ab Owain. Within at most four years he had laid the foundations of the southern marches, taking much land from the Welsh of Gwent for himself and his men and establishing an embryonic division into an 'Englishry' and a 'Welshry'. 
At the same time William remained active in the king's service in England and Normandy. In 1068 he and the Breton Count Brian led an army against English rebels at Shrewsbury and Exeter, and in 1069, after York was sacked, he went north with the king and was put in charge of a new castle there. Some time after Christmas 1070 the king sent him to govern Normandy with Queen Matilda, probably with an eye on Flanders; from there he led a token force, apparently only ten knights, to join the French army which invaded Flanders to assist young Count Arnulf against his uncle Robert the Frisian. They were ambushed at Kassel on 20 or 21 February 1071 and William was killed. His men carried their lord's body back to Normandy for burial at Cormeilles. 
William's wife, who apparently died before him, was buried at Lyre. The king made their elder sons, William and Roger de Breteuil (fl. 1071-1087), their father's heirs in Normandy and England respectively. A third son, Rodulf, was a monk at Cormeilles, and the only known daughter, Emma, married Ralph de Gael in 1075. 
William of Poitiers wrote soon after William fitz Osbern's death of his physical courage, strength of character, and wise advice. Two anecdotes were remembered at Battle Abbey, among a wealth of stories about the Hastings campaign. If accurately remembered, they illustrate his quick mind and a persuasive way of talking. During the landing at Pevensey, Duke William fell, cut himself, and bled. Many of his soldiers feared a bad omen for the battles to come, but Earl William raised their spirits by interpreting it as a sign of success: the duke had grasped England with both hands, he said, and had consecrated the land with his own blood. Later, preparing for battle, the duke was handed his mail shirt back-to-front, another portent of bad luck. Working harder this time, the earl offered the comment that things which were the wrong way round would soon be put right, by a Norman victory. Earl William's qualities were elaborated by twelfth-century historians, unanimous in their praise except for William of Malmesbury's incredible moralistic tale that in 1071 he was intent on marrying Count Arnulf's mother and ruling Flanders himself. For Orderic Vitalis he was the bravest of the Normans, renowned for generosity, ready wit, integrity, and loyalty; even William of Malmesbury thought him 'better than the very best princes' ('De gestis regum', 2.314). Orderic spoke for all in saying that he was 'universally mourned', at least by the Normans (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 2.284-5). 


