@@@@@


doc= 9621


William fitz Osbert (d. 1196), populist leader, was the son of Osbert the Clerk, and also known as William 'cum barba' ('with the beard'). He was a controversial figure of whom one contemporary said that he cultivated his 'barba prolixa' (hence the later name Longbeard) to make himself conspicuous. To the populace it may have signified his learning, and his roles as a pilgrim and opponent of authority. Born in London, but not of a prominent family, William was supported during school vacations by his elder brother, Richard. His father, who died in or before 1185 or 1186, left him city property, part of which he leased to his brother to raise money for a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. He was one of the 'worthy and well-armed young men' ('Chronica... Hovedene', 3.42) on the London ship which sailed for Jerusalem soon after Easter 1190 as part of the third crusade. A vision of St Thomas of Canterbury comforted several of the Londoners during a storm, but their voyage came to an end when the ship was commandeered by the townsmen for the defence of Silves, in Portugal. 
Back in London by Michaelmas 1190, William, who was quick-witted, eloquent, and had knowledge of the law, became embroiled in civic strife. In part he was motivated by animosity towards his brother, who refused his threatening requests for money. In the presence of King Richard, whose favour he enjoyed, and again before the justices at Westminster in November 1194, he accused his brother and others of treasonable words, especially concerning the money levied for the king's ransom: they had proclaimed, he said, that Londoners would have no king but their mayor. He obtained a position in city government, and emerged as spokesman for the poor and middling citizens in their struggle against the rich, including the mayor and members of the commune sworn in 1191. At issue was the evasion of taxes by the wealthy and the heavy burden borne by lesser men -- a cause of great loss to the royal treasury, so William claimed. During assemblies at St Paul's Cathedral he incited, with a zeal for justice and equity, what some perceived as sedition, forming a sworn association said to contain 52,000 citizens who obeyed his authority rather than that of the mayor. While the richer citizens prepared for their defence, he collected crowbars to break into their houses. He visited the king overseas, pleading his own cause and that of the Londoners. 
Matters came to a head in 1196, when Hubert Walter, as regent in the absence of the king and with the support of the leading citizens, took firm action. Summoned to Walter's presence, William appeared with a mob. Later he slew one of two 'noble citizens' sent to capture him. With his mistress and some followers he fled to the church of St Mary-le-Bow, where he made a fortified refuge in the tower. Walter sent troops, and, on 6 April, the church was set on fire. Driven out by smoke William was stabbed in the stomach by the son of the citizen he had killed. He was condemned at the Tower of London and dragged to the gallows at Tyburn, where he was hanged in chains with nine accomplices. The people venerated him as a martyr: a priest reported cures wrought by the chain which had bound him, while the scaffold and the earth beneath containing his blood were taken away as relics. Hubert Walter punished the priest and sent troops to drive away the crowds which flocked to the site. By Michaelmas 1196 William's London house had been sold on behalf of the king. 
Despite contradictions in the evidence, William's story is significant for revealing the complex roots of civic strife in London at a time when new social and political identities were being formed. The drama thrilled and shocked contemporaries, since William confessed to having polluted with his seed the church where he took refuge with his mistress. Moreover, his sanctuary in that church, which belonged to the monks of Canterbury, had been violated on the orders of their archbishop. Most of what is known about William fitz Osbert is derived from the writings of William of Newburgh. For the latter, as for all but one of the twelfth- and thirteenth-century historians, and as for Stubbs, William was a disreputable demagogue whose political cause nevertheless had some merit. Matthew Paris, however, rewrote the story in terms which reflect his distinctive interpretation of civic tyranny during the 1240s. For him William was a hero worthy to be counted as a martyr, and, with implicit reference to his own account of the Norman conquest, he explained the cognomen 'cum barba' as an expression of the contempt felt by William's English ancestors for their clean-shaven conquerors. 


@@@@@


doc= 9622


Fitzpatrick, Barnaby, second baron of Upper Ossory (c.1535-1581), courtier and landowner, was the eldest son and heir of five children of Barnaby (Brian) Fitzpatrick, first baron of Upper Ossory (died 1575), chieftain and landowner, and Margaret, eldest daughter of Piers Butler, eighth earl of Ormond. His father -- under the terms of the Tudor surrender and regrant initiative -- abandoned the Gaelic title of MacGiolla Phadraig in favour of Fitzpatrick, being created baron of Upper Ossory in June 1541. As a demonstration of his loyalty his son was sent to court about June 1543 to receive an English education. Young Fitzpatrick soon found himself attending the royal lessons with the cream of the nobility, including his cousin Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond, and Prince Edward. Consequently he received the finest humanist education available. He could speak English fluently within only a few years and learned Latin and several other languages, including French. He was a member of Edward's household as heir apparent and then king, being among his nine henchmen, the most intimate circle of youths attendant on the king. 
Fitzpatrick's relative poverty and his father's obscure peerage distinguished him from the more prestigious henchmen but he became close friends with Edward. As the king's whipping boy, he received physical punishment for his friend's transgressions. Being a courtier did have its advantages, though. He participated fully in court life and ceremonial and was well provided for. On 16 December 1549 he received 'iiij Shurtts wroughte with bandds of divers colored silke', a handkerchief embroidered with gold and silver, 'with like buttons and tassells for them', and 'ij grosse of silke ribain' (TNA: PRO, LC 5/84, fol. 4'v'). John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, recognized the value of this close friend and had Fitzpatrick sworn a gentleman of the king's privy chamber in August 1551. Later that year Edward dispatched Fitzpatrick to France so that he might finish his education, perfect his French, and observe continental politics and warfare. The sojourn, fully financed by the king, was a resounding success. Sir William Cecil, king's secretary, whose care Fitzpatrick believed to be 'more fatherly than friendly', spoke highly of his conduct and Henri II appointed him a gentleman of his chamber ('CSP for.', '1547-53', 210, 232). Edward, moreover, maintained regular correspondence with him, revealing an intimate friendship that went beyond shared childhood experience; Fitzpatrick, it seemed, was destined for an influential position at the king's court. In December 1552 he was granted permission to visit the English court 'en route' for Ireland where his father had been taken ill. His future prospects, however, were dashed by Edward's death in July 1553 and the religious volte-face that followed. An ardent protestant, Fitzpatrick was injured in an embarrassing fracas, involving Ormond and others, with a priest. He none the less aided in the suppression of Wyatt's rebellion (1553-4), but without a patron or landed interests in England he was forced to make his future in Ireland, returning there with the earls of Kildare and Ormond in 1554. 
Mary I summoned Fitzpatrick to court in late 1555, but -- as 'de facto' head of the family during his father's illness -- he was unable to attend, as events in Upper Ossory necessitated his continued presence. He participated in the siege of Leith in March 1560. In the same year Fitzpatrick married his cousin Joan, daughter of Rowland Eustace, Viscount Baltinglass, and Joan, daughter of Sir James Butler of Dunboyne, with whom he had an only daughter, Margaret. His father, though ill, had married as his second wife Elizabeth, Brian O'Connor's daughter. She harboured deep resentment for Fitzpatrick, even turning his father against him. Sir Thomas Wroth, an Edwardian colleague, writing in October 1564, praised Fitzpatrick for rescuing a prey from the O'Mores of Laois, but noted 'he livith here in continewall peril, for he bie the malice of his stepp mother' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/11/95). He supported Sir Henry Sidney, another former Edwardian, now lord deputy, against Shane O'Neill in 1566 and was knighted by him. English officials expected much from Fitzpatrick and, in June 1568, granted him 'in capite' his father's lands in Upper Ossory so that he might help bring order and civility to the embattled midlands. He sat in the parliament of 1568 and was appointed sheriff of Leix-Offaly in 1569. Praise from government officials and many appointments to commissions, however, could not erase his long absence from local politics or establish the network of alliances that was so vital for political survival. Instead, Fitzpatrick was a conspicuous outsider, in danger of sinking into the morass of Irish politics. 
In June 1571 a bitter feud that was to last a decade began between Fitzpatrick and Ormond. The feud, though temporarily defused by Fitzpatrick's admission that he had wrongly accused Ormond of spoiling his lands, erupted again in early 1573 when the Graces abducted his wife and daughter; Butler involvement was suspected and he resorted to illegal means to secure their return. He appealed to Sidney for redress but also employed the notorious felon Piers Grace who successfully stole back his daughter. Though his wife was returned unharmed and direct involvement by Ormond was never proven, Fitzpatrick and his brothers retaliated by spoiling Butler lands. In May 1574 Elizabeth I wrote: 'Surely if Sir Barnabe who has been so civily brought up here within our realm, even from his young years, should be found either author or committer of such barbarous acts, we cannot but adjudge him worthy of most severe punishment. (TNA: PRO, SP 63/46/21)' Ormond, moreover, persistently accused Fitzpatrick, whom he deemed an unruly vassal, of committing depredations. In an effort to circumvent his influence, Fitzpatrick travelled to court in March 1575 -- followed closely by letters from Ormond -- to plead his case with the queen. His efforts earned him a temporary reprieve. He succeeded his father as baron of Upper Ossory in 1575. His apprehension and murder of the notorious rebel Rory Oge O'More in June 1578 won him great praise and should have placed his loyalty beyond reproach. The outbreak of rebellion in Munster, however, allowed Ormond to level fresh allegations of complicity with the rebels against him. A cautious privy council summoned Upper Ossory to appear before it in May 1580. He appealed to Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, another henchman of Edward, to intercede, but his brothers' drift toward the rebels coupled with his father-in-law's rebellion resulted in his and his wife's imprisonment in January 1581. Though Sir Henry Wallop, Irish vice-treasurer, questioned the validity of his imprisonment Upper Ossory languished in Dublin Castle. He was allowed more freedom but suddenly fell ill and died on 11 September 1581 in the house of William Kelly, a surgeon, in Dublin. He was probably buried there. The four masters note: 'neach eissidhe tuccadh suas I Saxoibh as a oicce, agus baoi foghlamtha i ccaidreabh agus i ccomhaonta na cuirte gur bho hionrnadh la heireandchoibh uile a chongmail i ngeaimhel go ro ecc.(he was a man who had been brought up in England in his youth, and who was acquainted with the manners and customs of the court, so that it was a wonder to the Irish that he should have been detained in bondage until his death. 'AFM', s.a. 1581)' Sidney lamented his death. His brother Florence succeeded him as third baron of Upper Ossory; his widow was still alive in 1585. 


@@@@@


doc= 9623


Fitzpatrick, Richard, first Baron Gowran (c.1662-1727), naval officer, may have been the son or grandson of Andrew Fitzpatrick of Castle Fleming and his wife, Ellice, daughter of Richard Butler, Viscount Mountgarret. He is believed to have been a kinsman of but not, as was formerly thought, the son of John Fitzpatrick of Castletown, Queen's county (GEC, 'Peerage', 6.39). Richard Fitzpatrick entered the Royal Navy and was appointed on 14 May 1687 commander of the 'Richmond'. On 24 May 1688 he was made captain of the 'Assurance', from which in 1689 he was transferred to the 'Lark', in which he cruised against the French in the North Sea. Having distinguished himself on that station, he was advanced on 11 January 1690 to the command of the 'St Alban's', a fourth-rate, with which on 18 July he captured off Rame Head a 36-gun French frigate after a four-hour fight. 
In February 1691 Fitzpatrick drove on shore two French frigates and helped to cut out fourteen merchantmen from a convoy of twenty-two. In command of the 'Burford' (70 guns) he served under Lord Berkeley in 1696, and in July he was detached to make a descent on the Groix, an island near Belle Ile off the west coast of Brittany, from which he took 1300 head of cattle, with horses, boats, and small vessels. He was promoted to the command of the 'Ranelagh' (80 guns) on the outbreak of the War of the Spanish Succession, and took part in the duke of Ormond's mismanaged expedition against Cadiz (1702), and in the successful attack on Vigo which followed; but soon after this he retired from the service. In 1696 he had received a grant of the town and lands of Grantstown and elsewhere in Queen's county. He sat as MP for Harristown in the Irish House of Commons between 1703 and 1713, and for Queen's county from 1713 to 1715. On 27 April 1715 he was raised to the Irish peerage as Baron Gowran of Gowran, co. Kilkenny. He took his seat on 12 November, and on 14 November he helped to prepare an address to George I, congratulating him upon his accession. In July 1718 Fitzpatrick married Anne (died 1744), the second youngest daughter of Sir John Robinson of Farmingwood, Northamptonshire; the couple had two sons, John and Richard. Fitzpatrick died on 9 June 1727 and was buried at Grafton, Underwood, on 21 June. 
Fitzpatrick's elder son, John(1719-1758), was promoted to the Irish earldom of Upper Ossory on 5 October 1751. He married Evelyn, daughter of John Leveson-Gower, second Earl Gower, and their children included the politician and soldier Richard Fitzpatrick. 


@@@@@


doc= 9624


Fitzpatrick, Richard (1748-1813), army officer, politician, and poet, was born on 24 January 1748, the second son of John Fitzpatrick, second Baron Gowran in the peerage of Ireland (1719-1758) who was created earl of Upper Ossory in 1751, and his wife, Evelyn (1725-1763), daughter of John Leveson-Gower, first Earl Gower. His elder brother John Fitzpatrick (1745-1818) was MP for Bedfordshire from 1767 to 1794, when he was created Baron Upper Ossory in the British peerage. Having been educated at Westminster School (1764) and Caen military academy (1767), Fitzpatrick joined the 1st foot (later Grenadier) guards in 1765 and was promoted lieutenant and captain in 1772. He had by then formed an intimate friendship with Charles James Fox, whose brother Stephen, later second Baron Holland, had married Fitzpatrick's sister Mary in 1766. Drawn together by a love of reckless gambling, fast living, and witty conversation they developed a close personal and political relationship that was ended only by Fox's death in 1806. Fitzpatrick was a talented writer of satirical verse -- he published 'The Bath Picture' (1771) and 'Dorinda: a Town Eclogue' (1775) -- a bon viveur, and a balloonist. 
Fitzpatrick was returned to parliament for Okehampton on the interest of his maternal uncle, the fourth duke of Bedford, in 1770, and from 1774 until 1807 he sat for the Bedford pocket borough, Tavistock, on the interest of the fifth and sixth dukes. He supported the North ministry until the outbreak of the American War of Independence in 1776, when he followed Fox into opposition. In early 1777 he was ordered to join his battalion in America, where he served with credit in various actions until his return to England as a captain and lieutenant-colonel in May 1778. His experience reinforced his hostility to the war and, while he was never a frequent parliamentary speaker, he became a leading figure in the whig opposition, constantly advising Fox, who greatly valued his judgement. Their attempt in 1781 to restore their ruined personal finances by setting up a faro bank at Brooks's Club (which Fitzpatrick had joined in 1766) only made matters worse. Fitzpatrick served as chief secretary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland, the duke of Portland, in the Rockingham administration (March-July 1782) and sat in the Irish parliament for Maryborough (1782-3). He opposed the Shelburne ministry, played a key role in the negotiations to form the Fox-North coalition, and was rewarded with the secretaryship at war when it was in power under Portland (April-December 1783). 
A founder member of the Whig Club in 1784, a principal contributor to 'The Rolliad', and a manager of Warren Hastings's impeachment, Fitzpatrick was at Fox's right hand in opposition to Pitt's first ministry for the next seventeen years. He supported parliamentary reform and opposed the French war in 1793, and the following year saw his brother defect to government with the Portland whigs. He took up the case of his friend the marquis de Lafayette and proposed on 17 March 1794 to invite the king to intervene to secure his release from an Austrian gaol but was defeated by 155 to 48. He again unsuccessfully moved for royal intercession on 16 December 1796; he subsequently helped to promote a subscription to ease Lafayette's financial problems. After failing to talk Fox out of the secession from parliament he largely joined in it himself, but Fox persuaded him not to resign his privy councillorship in protest at his own dismissal in May 1798. He strongly resisted the Irish Union. He participated in the Foxite exodus to Paris after the peace of Amiens in 1802, opposed the resumption of war in 1803 (when he reached the rank of general), and took part in the combined parliamentary attack that brought down Addington's administration in 1804. He was a steady opponent of Pitt's second ministry but in March 1805 he got its assistance in having his improvements to court martial procedure incorporated in the 'Militia Bill'. 
Fitzpatrick was an almost automatic choice as secretary at war when Fox came to power under Lord Grenville in February 1806 but Fox's death seven months later dulled his appetite for political life. He was now in poor health and underwent an operation to remove a growth from his chest late in 1806. A planned arrangement to replace him with the disgruntled Samuel Whitbread as soon as he could be suitably provided for was not implemented before the fall of the government in March 1807. At the general election in May he was a reluctant candidate for Bedfordshire, on the Woburn interest, while retaining his option on Tavistock, and was narrowly returned after a punishing contest. An unashamedly negligent county member, who felt that too much was expected of him in his decrepit state, he was often absent from the 1807 parliament, though he generally voted with the opposition on major issues and continued his support for reform and Catholic emancipation. When the whigs were cabinet-making in January 1811 he renounced his claim to office after learning from his nephew the third Baron Holland that Lord Grey felt obliged to exclude him for a younger man. Fitzpatrick, whose financial embarrassments -- largely resulting from gambling losses -- were relieved in 1811 by a legacy of $1000 and an annuity of $500 from the fourth duke of Queensberry, was returned for Tavistock as a locum for Bedford's youngest son in 1812. He died, unmarried, in South Street, Grosvenor Square, Mayfair, Westminster, on 25 April 1813. Holland recalled him as 'the most agreeable man I ever conversed with' (Holland, 171). 


@@@@@


doc= 9625


Fitzpatrick, William John (1830-1895), biographer, was born at Thomas Street, Dublin, on 31 August 1830, the son of John Fitzpatrick, a successful tallow chandler. His father, whose profession gave rise to Fitzpatrick's nicknames of the Knight of Tallow and the Historian of Greece (grease), left William John an adequate income on his death. Fitzpatrick was educated first at a protestant school and later at the Jesuit-run Clongowes Wood College, co. Kildare; he was throughout life a pious Catholic. He early displayed a talent for investigative journalism, focusing in particular on the secret history of eminent persons. In 1855 he published his first book, a solid if unimaginative tome on Valentine Lawless, Lord Cloncurry, a former united Irishman and activist on behalf of Irish Catholics. 'The Life, Times and Contemporaries of Lord Cloncurry' displayed to the full Fitzpatrick's Catholic nationalist sympathies, and enjoyed a modest success. From this point on his output was prolific, though very uneven in quality. 
A series of letters to 'Notes and Queries' in 1855, followed by a pamphlet in 1859, contending that the Waverley novels were in fact written by Sir Walter Scott's brother, Thomas, a regimental paymaster in Canada, proved a deeply unwise venture. Thomas Scott's daughters denounced the claim in a letter to 'The Times' of 5 June 1857. In 1859 Fitzpatrick brought out 'The Friends, Foes and Adventures of Lady Morgan'. Based on a series of sketches published in the 'Quarterly Review', the work was marred by haste, repetition, and lack of style. A companion volume published in 1860, 'Lady Morgan, her Career, Literary and Personal', exhibited the same defects. However, his next book, a two-volume 'life and letters' of Bishop James Doyle of Kildare and Leighlin, the famous Catholic controversialist JKL, published in 1861, was much better, and it remains essential reading both for the life and the times of that powerful personality. 
By this date, Fitzpatrick had begun the work of investigation for which he is best known -- the inner or secret history of Ireland before the Union. A short piece published in 1859 and entitled 'Lord Edward Fitzgerald, or, Notes on the Cornwallis Papers' was followed by 'The Sham Squire and the Informers of 1798' (1866), which went through many editions and reprints. The key questions addressed in these works were firstly, the identity of the person who 'set' (that is, informed on the whereabouts of) the leading united Irishman, Lord Edward Fitzgerald, thus leading to his arrest (during which he was mortally wounded), and secondly, the role of the numerous spies and informers in the pay of Dublin Castle in the years 1798-1800. These works are characterized by maddening repetition and infuriating digressions, but they also contain much of interest. Later books included 'The Life and Times of Dr Lanigan' (1873), a 'Life of Charles Lever' (1879), and 'The Life of Father Tom Burke' (1885), but these were uneven in quality and perhaps only his study of Father Burke, James Anthony Froude's polemical opponent, is still cited. 
In 1888, Fitzpatrick published an important edition of the correspondence of Daniel O'Connell, a work of learning and scholarship. Gladstone reviewed it in the 'Nineteenth Century' (30.149), claiming that the author had shown O'Connell to the English public 'as a great and good man'. 'The Correspondence of Daniel O'Connell with his Life and Times' also won Fitzpatrick recognition in Rome: he received from Pope Leo XIII the insignia of the order of St Gregory the Great. 

'The Correspondence' was followed in 1892 by another equally valuable work, 'Secret Service under Pitt'. Fitzpatrick had been granted access to the relevant Irish state papers for the 1790s, he had worked assiduously among them, and the book, admired by W. E. H. Lecky, confirmed and expanded with incontrovertible documentary evidence the suggestions first advanced in 'The Sham Squire'. It established that it was the Catholic barrister, Francis Magan, reporting to his controller, the 'sham squire', Francis Higgins, who had 'set' Lord Edward Fitzgerald for a fee of $1000, and other inducements. Fitzpatrick's works on the 1790s sold over 16,000 copies and were much in favour with the burgeoning Catholic middle classes in late nineteenth-century Ireland. It may be added that Fitzpatrick's expose of the informers in the united Irish conspiracy chimed well with contemporary denunciations of the Fenian movement by the Irish Catholic hierarchy, and that his revelations concerning the sordid side of the negotiations surrounding the Union influenced W. E. Gladstone's attitude towards that event. 

'Secret Service under Pitt' was Fitzpatrick's last important work. In 1895, shortly before his death, he published a study (later forgotten) of the Irish wit, Father James Healy (equally forgotten); a book on Archbishop Murray, the early nineteenth-century Catholic prelate of Dublin was left in draft form; and a 'History of the Dublin Cemeteries' was completed by his son after Fitzpatrick's death and published by the Catholic cemeteries committee in 1900. 
Fitzpatrick was long actively interested in the work of the Royal Irish Academy and the Royal Dublin Society. In 1876 he was appointed honorary professor of history at the Royal Hibernian Academy of Arts. He was also accorded the honorary degree of LLD by the Royal University of Ireland. He served twice as high sheriff for co. Longford and as JP for co. Kildare and co. Dublin. 
Fitzpatrick was married and had a family of at least two daughters and one son: but he kept his private life resolutely private. He died at his home, 49 Fitzwilliam Square, Dublin, on Christmas eve, 24 December 1895, after a short illness. Fitzpatrick's labours in his special field of study -- the secret history of the 1790s -- and his editions of JKL's and O'Connell's correspondence constitute a serious addition to historical knowledge. He was no stylist, and haste and repetition mar all his works but he was a popularizer; and his books did sell. Judged solely on sales, William John Fitzpatrick was among the most successful Irish writers of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 9626


Geoffrey fitz Peter, fourth earl of Essex (d. 1213), justiciar, was the son of Peter, forester of Ludgershall, Wiltshire, under Henry II, and the younger brother of Simon, Henry II's sheriff of Northamptonshire, Buckinghamshire, and Bedfordshire. His mother's name was Matilda or Maud. The family was one of local royal officials who were minor landholders. In the survey of 1166 Geoffrey held lands of mesne lords: of Girard Giffard a knight's fee at Cherhill in Wiltshire, and, together with Hugh de Diva, another knight's fee of the countess of Clare, and a third of a knight's fee with the wife of Adam son of John son of Guy, held of Walter of Beck. 
Geoffrey made his way in royal service. In 1184 he accounted for the farm of Kinver before the itinerant justices in Oxfordshire. A year later he was sheriff and local justiciar of Northamptonshire, and he heard the pleas of the forest in an extensive circuit, while being custodian of Robert fitz Bernard's land at Newton in Berkshire and of Herbert fitz Herbert's manors in Surrey. He may have achieved this emergence into some prominence as the clerk of the royal justice Thomas fitz Bernard, whom he succeeded as guardian of the heir of Gilbert de Monte in the two hundreds of Sutton, Northamptonshire. At the same time he held the custodies of the land and heir of William de Chauz at Elton in Buckinghamshire and of Burton, Norfolk, which Roger Caperon held of Hugh, earl of Chester. More importantly, he was given custody of Saham in Norfolk which had belonged to William de Say, with the wardship of his two daughters. William's father had married Beatrice de Say, sister of Geoffrey de Mandeville, earl of Essex, and her granddaughter, another Beatrice, was the ward whom Geoffrey fitz Peter married in 1184 or 1185. She was coheir to the Mandeville barony, an extensive complex of lands across the East Anglian counties of Essex, Suffolk, and Cambridge, the neighbouring counties of Hertfordshire, Northamptonshire, and Buckinghamshire, and the counties of Surrey, Middlesex, Berkshire, and Warwickshire. The Mandeville honour owed the service of 113 knights in Henry II's time. Earl William de Mandeville was one of the justiciars whom Richard I appointed to rule England during his absence on crusade in 1189, but he died before the end of that year, leaving no children. 
Geoffrey fitz Peter then claimed the barony in the right of his wife against her uncle Geoffrey de Say. The justiciar, William de Longchamp, at the wish of Say's grandmother Beatrice, awarded the barony to him for a relief of 7000 marks, which he failed to pay. For 3000 marks Geoffrey fitz Peter was then given the barony. He paid only $200 at once, but received seisin of the lands and the third penny of the county of Essex, although not the title of earl. His wife died before April 1197 and was buried at Chicksand, later being transferred to Shouldham Priory, which Geoffrey fitz Peter founded as holder of the barony. He had become a great magnate in 1190, though he had already been rewarded for his service by Henry II with a knight's fee at Cherhill, the house of Master Thomas Brown in Winchester, four knights' fees that a previous justiciar, Richard de Lucy, had held of the honour of Boulogne, and four held of Earl Roger. 
When Richard I became king in 1189, Geoffrey fitz Peter had taken a vow of crusade, but in the arrangements the king made in 1190 for the government of England Geoffrey was one of the named colleagues of the justiciar, as a baron of the exchequer and a royal justice. Consequently he was one of those whom the king, by papal permission, released from his vow. By 1190 he had sufficient administrative experience, and by his marriage baronial status, to be a prominent figure, side by side with William Brewer, Hugh Bardolf, and William (I) Marshal, among those left to serve as colleagues of the justiciar. He was one of those excommunicated for his part in removing Longchamp in 1191, but he became a colleague of the new justiciar, Archbishop Walter de Coutances, and he remained sheriff of Essex and Hertfordshire where many of his own lands lay. He was also an important colleague of Archbishop Hubert Walter, who became justiciar in 1193, and under whom royal administration showed marked innovation. 
Under Hubert Walter's justiciarship Geoffrey's name appeared at the head of the justices before whom final concords were made at Westminster. With Hubert Walter he went on circuit in the midlands and East Anglia. Together they tallaged Norwich in 1198. He accompanied the justiciar on his Welsh expedition in the same year. And when Hubert resigned the justiciarship in July 1198, the king appointed Geoffrey as his successor, for by then he was a justice of considerable experience, who had begun his career in the days of Glanville when Henry II's assizes were being worked out. Indeed, he, as well as Hubert Walter, has been suggested as the author of the treatise on the laws which bears Glanville's name. Geoffrey had had similarly long experience as a baron of the exchequer, and as a local royal officer. Like William Marshal he had become a great magnate by marriage. When, on Richard I's death, there was discussion, and perhaps doubt, about the succession, Geoffrey was said to have secured the barons' allegiance for John at a council at Northampton in 1199; and at John's coronation feast he was girded with the sword of earl. 
As justiciar Geoffrey fitz Peter was at first in the shadow of Hubert Walter who, although archbishop of Canterbury, became the new king's chancellor at the beginning of the reign. Nevertheless, when John was in France, before the loss of Normandy in 1204, and when he was in Ireland in 1210, government ran in Geoffrey fitz Peter's name as regent. He presided over the exchequer, and was the authority to whom the barons looked for instruction even when the king was in England. From 1200 a scutage was levied almost annually, and in 1202 and 1203 the money raised by tallages, and the profits of justice, went through the exchequer audit in the same year, which suggests that he was making a determined attempt to collect and deliver as much as he could as quickly as possible. In 1204 he was himself sheriff of seven counties, with other curial officers holding other shrievalties, which points to a reorganization of the exchequer machinery, under the justiciar's supervision. 
As a justice Geoffrey was no less active. He organized three eyres in the later summer and early autumn of 1199, and himself led the justices who visited Warwickshire, Leicestershire, and Northamptonshire. In 1202 there was a general eyre, as extensive as those of 1194 and 1198, and he led the justices in Surrey, Kent, Berkshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire, and Sussex. He regularly presided over the bench at Westminster, and in his absence pleas were adjourned for consultation with him, even though there had emerged a group of regular and experienced justices who could maintain the legal fiction of the justiciar's presence. 
While Hubert Walter remained chancellor until 1205, it is not certain how much he or Geoffrey fitz Peter was the driving force behind royal administration. Some scholars have spoken of Walter's 'genius' as distinct from Geoffrey's 'competence'. Matthew Paris uses the same unreliable story of both men at their deaths. Of Geoffrey he has the king say: 'when he arrives in Hell, let him greet there Hubert Walter, whom no doubt he will find' (Paris, 'Chron'., 2.559); but in another work he transfers his sentiment to Hubert Walter: 'by God's feet, now at last I am king and lord of England' (Paris, 'Historia Anglorum', 2.104). There is no evidence that Geoffrey was anything other than a loyal servant who furthered the king's interests in the administration of justice and finance, and also served him as a soldier, when he campaigned against the Welsh in 1206 and 1210. The king's presence in England after the loss of Normandy, the disappearance of chancery enrolments between 1210 and 1212, and the cessation of pleadings in the bench after 1210, give the appearance of a diminished role for the justiciar, but there is no evidence of royal distrust of him, nor of a breach between them. The justiciar could always have been dismissed, but Geoffrey held his office until his death. 
After the loss of Normandy he had, indeed, been rewarded by the king. He was granted the castle and honour of Berkhamsted at a fee farm of $100 p.a. in May 1205, its income being $400 p.a., with the right of succession to the children of Geoffrey and his second wife, Aveline. The honour included twenty-two knights' fees held of the honour of Mortain. Geoffrey had married Aveline before 29 May 1205; she was the widow of William de Munchensi; of Swanscomb, Kent, and Gooderstone, Norfolk, and a daughter of Roger de Clare, earl of Hertford. Geoffrey also received from the king a significant part of the lands forfeited by Normans, being granted those of Robert fitz Ernis which included the manors of Hatfield Peverel and Depden in Essex, and other land in Norfolk and Suffolk, in all worth over $100 p.a. In 1208 he was given Queenhithe, and fairs and markets at his manors of Kimbolton and Morton, and in the same year he had custody of the land and heir of Werresius de Valognes. In 1211 his offerings to the king of 30 marks and two Norwegian hawks for the land of Jordan de Ros, and of 20 marks and a palfrey for the land and heir of William of Streetly, were accepted. The only indication of any strained relations with King John comes from 1212, when the king allowed Geoffrey de Say to claim the Mandeville barony in his court, but the case was not determined. Two of the sons of Geoffrey fitz Peter and Beatrice de Say were married to the two daughters of Robert Fitzwalter, who was prominent among the king's baronial enemies, but the Mandeville barony descended in turn to both Geoffrey and his brother William as earls of Essex in succession to their father, both of them dying without heirs. Geoffrey fitz Peter's third son of his first marriage, Henry, was a clerk, while his daughter Maud married Henry de Bohun, earl of Hereford. With his second wife, Aveline, who survived to a date between 22 November 1220 and 4 June 1225, Geoffrey had a son, John fitz Geoffrey, who succeeded to Berkhamsted. Geoffrey himself died on 2 October 1213, but his burial place is unknown, though he had founded Shouldham Priory, Norfolk, before 15 June 1198, and a hospital at Sutton de la Hone, Kent, and was a benefactor of the hospital of St Thomas of Acre in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 9627


Fitzralph, Richard (b. before 1300, d. 1360), theologian and archbishop of Armagh, was born shortly before 1300 in Dundalk, Louth, Ireland, where his family (known as Rauf) had close connections with the Franciscan community. The family was prominent and obviously prosperous. 
From 'c'.1314 to 1315 Fitzralph studied arts and theology at Oxford: he graduated MA in 1325, and was well advanced in the study of theology before acquiring an ecclesiastical benefice. By 25 July 1325 he had already resigned a fellowship at Balliol College, when he was present at a ruling given on the college statutes preventing students of theology from retaining their fellowships. Fitzralph graduated BTh in 1328, and three years later attained the magisterium. There is no concrete evidence that he acquired a fellowship elsewhere, though his close links with Merton College suggest this as a possibility. 
Fitzralph studied in Oxford at a time when the university enjoyed an unprecedented reputation in logic, mathematics, and philosophy. Here he acquired a thorough grounding in logic and metaphysics, an impressive familiarity with the 'Bible', the homiletic skills necessary to use this with effect in the pulpit, and a capacity for competent theological enquiry. Solely on the basis of this academic work, however, Fitzralph would merit little attention beyond the confines of medieval intellectual history. Apart from a brief biblical 'quaestio', the only complete work that survives from this period is his commentary on the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard. This was a statutory exercise, a basic requirement for the magisterium in theology. Whereas many of his academic contemporaries used such exercises to formulate original ideas, and so helped to change fourteenth-century thought, Fitzralph's work has long been regarded as conservative, as that of a conscientious, widely read, but unoriginal thinker. The recent identification and edition of his 'quaestio biblica', composed after his commentary on the 'Sentences', has led to a revision of this view, and suggests that he also helped to shape thought at Oxford in the 1330s. 
Fitzralph soon acquired an influential patron, who was to remain his friend and model for life. John Grandison, bishop of Exeter (died 1369), in 1329 chose Fitzralph as tutor and travelling companion for his nephew John Northwode, a student at the University of Paris. Grandison recommended Fitzralph to his friends in Paris in glowing terms, and thus opened up a new range of intellectual influences among the leading biblical scholars of the day, notably the Franciscan Nicholas de Lyre ('c'.1270-1349), which were to shape Fitzralph's subsequent pastoral work. He also owed early ecclesiastical preferment to the support of Grandison. On 24 May 1331 he was granted an annual pension of 100's'. by Grandison until a suitable benefice became available. By September 1331 he had obtained a canonry and prebend in Crediton, which he vacated in March 1336, and on 27 September 1331 a canonry in Exeter Cathedral by papal provision, which he still held in 1335. Other benefices in the diocese of Exeter followed, possibly also a canonry in his native archdiocese of Armagh. 
Following his return from Paris, Fitzralph incepted as DTh in Oxford in 1331, and his election as chancellor of the university was confirmed by Henry Burghersh, bishop of Lincoln (died 1340), on 30 May 1332. His term of office (1332-4) was marked by turbulent events known as the 'Stamford schism'. The strife arose partly because the student population saw itself as financially exploited by the townspeople, and partly because of tension between the northern and southern nations within the university community. Fitzralph, like all university members from Ireland, belonged to the southern nation. According to most reliable accounts of the episode, the dispute was sparked off by resentment among the northern masters resulting from alleged discrimination in the allocation of fellowships. As a result the northerners seceded to Stamford in Lincolnshire, where they set up an alternative university and rejoiced in the embarrassment of the chancellor. Fitzralph's handling of the crisis was undiplomatic, university authority broke down, and his critics taunted him in a satirical poem with newfound social pretensions and limited intellectual abilities. 
However, Fitzralph retained the confidence of Edward III, of Bishop Burghersh, and of the university itself. The latter decided to take the matter before the pope in Avignon, and chose Fitzralph as one of its representatives. Hence the university schism provided a reason for the first of Fitzralph's four extended visits to Avignon, where curial contacts and papal patronage had a decisive effect on his subsequent career. On his arrival there a theological debate -- provoked by the recently deceased Pope John XXII ('r'. 1316-34) -- was in progress concerning the nature of the beatific vision enjoyed by souls after death and before the last judgment. Theologians newly arrived at the curia were requested to give their opinion: Fitzralph acquitted himself with distinction in opposition to the late pope's viewpoint, and soon became a sought-after preacher in the most renowned pulpits in Avignon, including those of the mendicant orders. On 10 July 1334 Pope Benedict XII ('r'. 1334-42) provided him to the chancellorship of the diocese of Lincoln, but the provision seems not to have taken effect. On 17 December 1335, however, Fitzralph became dean of Lichfield Cathedral by papal provision, and he held this office until he became archbishop of Armagh in 1346. Meanwhile he was a member of the learned circle in the household of the bibliophile bishop of Durham, Richard Bury (died 1345). 
Fitzralph's second, and longest sojourn in Avignon, from autumn 1337 until spring 1344, provided the occasion for the work which guaranteed his subsequent reputation as a churchman of distinction and vision. His 'Summa de quaestionibus Armenorum' outlived the petty squabbles of the mendicant controversies. Because of its discussion of such topics as papal primacy and ecclesiastical authority it was consulted by participants at the fifteenth-century councils of Basel and Ferrara-Florence, who were concerned to promote union with the oriental churches. The work ensured that Fitzralph was remembered and quoted -- not always uncritically -- by distinguished theologians during the Reformation and Counter-Reformation. The 'Summa', consisting of nineteen books in dialogue form, arose from Fitzralph's lengthy debates with representatives of the Greek and Armenian churches, who had come to Avignon to seek papal support against the threat of Islam. The work is revealing for its author's intellectual development, for his attitudes to scripture and speculative theology, as well as for his cultural contacts and place in the history of medieval thought, even though it never made the spectacular impact of either his theory of dominion or his campaign against the friars, both of which he developed later in his career. 
The basis for discussion in the dialogue between Fitzralph and the Armenians was a list of 117 errors allegedly held by the Armenian church, which had been drawn up in 1341-2 following investigations inaugurated by Benedict XII. Fitzralph took as his guideline the literal interpretation of the 'Old' and 'New' testaments. He was careful to point out that this emphasis on scriptural proof was determined by the circumstances: the 'Bible' was the only authoritative source accepted by all parties concerned. The work is nevertheless revealing for Fitzralph's own approach to the 'Bible', and his emphasis on 'sola scriptura' would subsequently be used by the Lollards to claim him as one of their own. The 'Summa' also documents Fitzralph's theological conservatism, his opposition to 'modern' theories circulating in and from Paris in the 1340s. More significantly, it reveals -- in the context of discussion about the rights of infidels to true sovereignty, lordship, and jurisdiction -- the beginning of his preoccupation with the question, later developed further by John Wyclif (died 1384), of whether true lordship ('dominium') was dependent on its holder's being in the state of grace. 
Following the death of Archbishop David O'Hiraghty on 16 May 1346 the cathedral chapter of Armagh immediately elected Fitzralph archbishop, and communicated their decision to the papal curia. The speed with which the canons elected Fitzralph supports the view that he was one of their number. He had also remained in contact with his native archdiocese while in England, and arranged for the education of three of his nephews in Oxford. Pope Clement VI ('r'. 1342-52) quashed the election as a violation of the papal right of provision, but duly confirmed the same candidate on 31 July 1346. Until Christmas 1346 Fitzralph resided in Lichfield, where he is last recorded as preaching on 3 December 1346, before travelling, via Burford, Oxfordshire, where he preached on 6 January 1347, to Devon. He was consecrated bishop on 8 July 1347 in Exeter Cathedral by John Grandison. In the meantime he had done homage to Edward III and received the temporalities of his see on 15 April 1347. Finally he received the pallium, the symbol of his metropolitan authority, from the pope on 28 August 1347. After his consecration Fitzralph spent some months in Devon, where he consecrated churches and administered the sacrament of confirmation -- in preparation for his new duties -- before travelling to Ireland early in 1348. Here his first recorded sermon was preached in Dundalk on 24 April 1348. 
Fitzralph was a talented and conscientious preacher, and preached frequently before the pope and the English king. His remarkable 'Sermon Diary', a unique document in the history of late medieval homiletics, reflects his activities in this field, and its chronological detail helps to replace his missing episcopal register. The diary contains ninety-two items, most of them preceded by the title, date, and place of delivery, and spans the years 1335-59. Fitzralph invariably gives his own title and function at the time of delivering a particular sermon. Of the ninety-two items, fifty-four -- many of them fragmentary -- are classified as having been delivered in the vulgate (English) language, although no English version has survived, presumably because he worked from Latin notes and drafts. The Latin sermons, many of them preached at the papal court in Avignon, survive in full text. In the early sermons preached after his return to Ireland as archbishop, Fitzralph depicts his coming in the same biblical language as the gospel narrative uses to describe Christ's coming among the Jews, thereby inviting comparison with his own arrival among his people, the citizens of Dundalk and Drogheda, as their pastor and guide. The contents of his vernacular sermons indicate that they were intended for unlearned congregations: commonplace themes -- immorality, avarice, usury, assault, murder, penance and restitution, evasion of tithes, and alms-giving -- occur most frequently. 
Fitzralph spent so much of his episcopate outside his diocese that it might seem implausible to characterize him as a conscientious, pastorally minded prelate. Of the fourteen and a half years between his appointment to the see of Armagh and his death, he spent less than half in Ireland. His return to Avignon in 1349 was primarily connected with a pastoral issue for his flock, even if a willingness to linger in the congenial intellectual climate of the papal curia cannot be ignored. During his longest sojourn in Avignon, between 1337 and 1344, he had attained there the status of an 'Irish expert', and he now sought to exploit this position in the interests of his diocese and metropolitan province. His final visit to the curia, in 1357-60, was occasioned by the controversy over the friars' pastoral activities, a problem that potentially affected the entire Western church. 
Fitzralph defended the primatial rights of his see against the archbishop of Dublin, despite the preference of the English crown for the latter. On 20 November 1349 the king forbade Fitzralph to have his primatial cross borne before him in Ireland, and on 18 February 1350 Edward III wrote to Cardinal Adhemar Robert, the nephew of Pope Clement VI, seeking to prevent Fitzralph from claiming primatial jurisdiction over the see of Dublin. Fitzralph also brought the matter to the papal curia. It has been argued that Pope Innocent VI ('r'. 1352-62) decreed a compromise solution whereby the archbishop of Armagh would be 'primate of all Ireland' and the archbishop of Dublin 'primate of Ireland' (titles still in use today), but the original papal bull to this effect does not survive, and the remaining evidence is ambiguous. Because Fitzralph was not prepared to attend parliament in Ireland, or engage in other functions within the English lordship, unless his primatial rights were recognized within the metropolitan jurisdiction of Dublin, his opportunities for engagement in the normal political activities of Anglo-Irish prelates -- which occasioned absenteeism -- were limited. This may explain why his long periods of absence from Armagh aroused little criticism. Furthermore he was seen -- from the early 1350s onwards, with regard to the mendicant question -- by his fellow bishops and by the higher secular clergy as being absent in the pursuit of their common interest. 
In the early 1350s Fitzralph inaugurated a vigorous programme of reform and visitation in his ecclesiastical province, and he held separate synods for the higher and lower clergy. The sermon preached to the higher clergy in 1352, and presumably delivered in Latin, survives in full in his 'Sermon Diary'. It offers guidelines for dealing with pastoral problems and for the selection of appropriate candidates for the priesthood, but it also includes fierce criticism of moral deficiencies such as drunkenness and sexual licence, self-aggrandizement, and neglect of spiritual duties. Much more lenient is his sermon before an assembly of the lower clergy, which only survives in outline in the diary and was presumably preached in the vernacular. Here he is clearly instructing his 'own' clergy in the diocese of Meath and the English part of his archdiocese of Armagh, and expounding before them his concept of the ideal priest. 
In view of Fitzralph's strict approach to problems of moral theology which impinged on the social and economic behaviour of his flock, it is possible that many, including some of his own clergy, welcomed his absence on yet another polemical mission. Fitzralph's sermons reveal him as an attentive observer of social tensions and economic problems. Within a year of taking up office, he had identified two faults for special denunciation -- the war between the English and Irish elements, and the general prevalence of theft and dishonesty. He constantly fulminated against the view that to kill, thieve, or plunder was merely a minor offence if committed against a member of the other community; he defended the rights of the weak, including widows and orphans, certainly numerous after the black death; he criticized the trade guilds, which practised their own form of 'closed shop' by applying more severe conditions for the acceptance of apprentices from the Gaelic nation. Above all he denounced the merchants of Drogheda, who fiddled their account books to show no profit at the end of the financial year, and thus avoid paying tithes. When all other means failed to combat what he saw as greed and fraud, he placed the entire city under interdict (1352-3). In these pastorally orientated sermons in Ireland, Fitzralph frequently touched on the question of lordship, and was in the process of clarifying the distinction between legal rights enforceable in court and those that had a moral justification before God. 
Even allowing for the preacher's inclination to overdramatize the situation, Fitzralph must have had sound reasons for the famous assessment of Irish society that he pronounced in a sermon in Avignon in August 1349. According to this account -- which in his zeal may have done more harm than good -- violence was conditioned by the cultural clash between the two nations, and the Irish reputation for violence and theft was famous throughout Europe. Hence he argued for the benefits of the jubilee indulgence (1350) without the obligation of personal pilgrimage to Rome: his people had suffered so many hardships as a result of the black death, and they dared not go on pilgrimage for fear of the safety of family, lands, and livestock left unprotected at home. 
Fitzralph made a deliberate attempt to promote interest in the cult of St Patrick. One of the most colourful episodes in Fitzralph's episcopate enhanced the opportunities for doing so. This was the pilgrimage of the penitent Hungarian knight, Georg Grissaphan, who had confessed to numerous atrocities committed while on campaign in Apulia, and who sought to do penance by undertaking the ordeal of entry into the cave known as St Patrick's Purgatory on an island in Lough Derg, Donegal, in the diocese of Clogher. Grissaphan's visit was documented in an elaborate account of the twenty-six visions which -- accompanied by the Archangel Michael as his guide -- he allegedly experienced. Grissaphan also claimed to have received messages from the archangel for the pope and secular rulers, and for the archbishop of Armagh concerning the well-being of his church. The core of this message concerned the absolution of a large city in his archdiocese -- clearly Drogheda -- from interdict, a sentence that the angel obviously regarded as unjust, because only connected with financial matters. 
Fitzralph gave Grissaphan testimonial letters affirming his pilgrimage. He also wrote a survey account of the pilgrim's visit and visions to his favourite nephew and his representative at the curia, Richard Radulphi, like himself an Oxford alumnus, so that he would be able to deal with the issue when Grissaphan arrived in Avignon. He further requested his nephew to show his letters concerning the affair to the cardinals. The 'Visiones Georgii' had a wide continental circulation in several vernacular languages. Propaganda for St Patrick and his purgatory was disseminated from Avignon, where it is most likely that Richard Radulphi was responsible for the publicity campaign. As a result Fitzralph succeeded in making the purgatory much more attractive for pilgrims from all over Europe than had previously been the case. 
Fitzralph's attitude to the mendicant friars, whom he had respected in an academic milieu, altered radically when he became archbishop of Armagh. Indeed, they became his principal enemy when he began to identify the causes of tension between the two nations in his archdiocese with the ubiquitous presence of the friars in pulpit and confessional, and to accuse them of leniency towards penitents guilty of crimes of violence against the 'other nation'. He emphasized the offices of bishop and parish priest, and saw confession to a friar as disruption of traditional parochial structures and authority. Possibly because of the relative poverty of the archdiocese of Armagh, Fitzralph was concerned about the extent to which the friars' right to hear confessions, preach, and bury the dead in their churches and cemeteries deprived the parochial clergy of revenue. This preoccupation led to a critical examination of the biblical and legal foundations -- and consequent justification -- of the friars' professed way of life: Fitzralph denied that Christ and the apostles had practised voluntary mendicancy. Furthermore he began to call into question the authority of the papacy to grant the mendicant orders extensive privileges. The first clear statement of Fitzralph's anti-mendicant views are to be found in a 'Proposicio' preached at the papal curia on 5 July 1350 in the presence of Clement VI, nine months after his last invitation to preach before a mendicant community, in the Franciscan church in Avignon on the feast of St Francis (4 October) 1349. 
At the heart of the matter were two separate but related issues, the first of which was theological, concerning the poverty practised by Christ and the apostles, which was the basis of the friars', and most particularly of the Franciscans', existence. The second issue was juridical and concerned the friars' apostolic activity, whereby they engaged in pastoral work outside the parochial structure and were exempted from episcopal jurisdiction. Initially Fitzralph was more concerned about the second problem, with which he had been confronted at a practical level in Ireland. But he soon came to realize that the nature of property, and the question of whether its use could be divorced from lordship, were central to the controversy over Franciscan poverty. 
After his first attack in 1350, Fitzralph further developed his arguments on the question of poverty, and published them in his treatise in dialogue form, 'De pauperie Salvatoris'. His contribution to the mendicant debate in the 1350s was novel in that he employed as the basis of his argument a theory of dominion and grace, whereby lordship, ownership, and jurisdiction, and the valid exercise of authority, were all founded on God's grace to the individual soul. As the logical corollary to this view, he argues that those who abuse their rights and privileges, and thus commit serious sin, deserve to be deprived of these prerogatives. During the long gestation of 'De pauperie Salvatoris' Fitzralph shifted his position more than once, so that his arguments are not coherent or consistent. On the one hand he accuses the friars of not adhering to the strict rule of St Francis concerning absolute poverty: by accepting property, privileges, and dominion they have sinned grievously and so forfeited their rights within the church. On the other hand, Fitzralph also argues against the scriptural justification for Christ's mendicancy. In this work, and in the London sermons of 1356-7, it is clear that the Franciscans are his principal target, but the arguments apply to all four mendicant orders. 
Fitzralph's return to London in the summer of 1356, with the nearly complete text of 'De pauperie Salvatoris' in his baggage, was determined by routine business at the king's court. However, the circulation of the work in Oxford and London, and the consequent intensification of the debate about the poverty of Christ, ensured that the controversy would keep him occupied for the rest of his life. The dispute raged between mendicant theologians and secular clergy, and Fitzralph's friend, the dean of St Paul's Cathedral, Richard Kilvington (died 1361), offered the archbishop the opportunity to defend his position at Paul's Cross, in the most prominent pulpit in London. Although Fitzralph referred in his 'Proposicio', preached before Innocent VI and the assembled papal court on 8 November 1357, to 'seven or eight' sermons preached in English in London during the winter and spring of 1356-7 on the mendicant question, only four survive. These anti-mendicant sermons represent the substance of his arguments subsequently laid before the papal curia in his 'Proposicio': they provoked the opposition of all four mendicant orders, and particularly that of the Franciscans. The friars met at the London Greyfriars on 7 March 1357 to organize the resistance to Fitzralph, and drew up an 'Appellacio', listing twenty-one alleged errors which they had found in the archbishop's public utterances. On 10 March this was delivered to Fitzralph's lodgings by the prior of the London Augustinians, John Arderne. Two days later Fitzralph replied in a final vernacular sermon at Paul's Cross, which has survived as a vigorous piece of anti-mendicant polemic with an independent circulation. 
The friars could rely on royal support. Edward III forbade the archbishop to leave the country without royal permission, and ordered a strict watch on all channel ports, with the -- unsuccessful -- intention of preventing Fitzralph's departure for Avignon to pursue his campaign against the friars there. In an autobiographical prayer, composed after 1357 and appended to the 'Summa de quaestionibus Armenorum', in which he reflects on his previous life and work, Fitzralph gives thanks for deliverance from physical danger in terms which seem to apply to his flight from England to Avignon. 
The legal proceedings between Fitzralph and the four mendicant orders were formally opened by the archbishop on 8 November 1357 with the aforementioned 'Proposicio', which circulated widely and is generally known as the 'Defensio curatorum'. It received additional circulation through an excellent Middle English translation by John Trevisa ('c'.1380). The proceedings were presided over by four cardinals, of whom three drew revenues from English benefices, and two were members of endowed monastic orders with little enthusiasm for the friars. The case generated an enormous amount of -- partly tedious and repetitive -- documentation, and Fitzralph continued his campaign against the friars in sermons preached in the private chapels of the pope and the vice-chancellor. He also completed the eighth book of 'De pauperie Salvatoris', in which he tried to clarify his position and counter some of the objections raised. He apparently no longer had the original draft of the work which he had taken to London in 1356. This came into the possession of a Bohemian admirer of Fitzralph, Adalbert of Ranconis, who proudly announced in 1365 that because of his opposition to the friars in Paris he had acquired the title of Secundus Armachanus. Adalbert brought his manuscript back to Prague, from where it found its way into the library of the imperial court in Vienna (now Vienna, Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, CVP 1430). 
Interim statements by the pope, such as the bull 'Gravem dilectorum' issued to the English hierarchy on 1 October 1358, attempted to calm the situation without prejudicing the outcome of the case. Statutes enacted at a synod of the diocese of Avignon on 16 October 1359 reaffirmed parochial authority in pastoral matters, in apparent agreement with Fitzralph's demands. However, the friars had adequate financial resources for legal proceedings, but contemporary English sources indicate that money for Fitzralph's cause was sought from monastic and higher secular clergy with only modest success. He could count on moral support from some bishops, but few shared his obsession. By the time of Fitzralph's death, in Avignon, on either 16 or 20 November 1360, no verdict had been reached. The following year his principal English supporter, Richard Kilvington, the leader of the Franciscan opposition, Roger Conway, and two members of the tribunal also died, whereupon the matter quietly lapsed into oblivion. 
After his death Fitzralph's papers were obviously collected and circulated by a friend, and the most likely candidate for this role is Richard Kilvington. About ten years after his death Fitzralph's bones were brought home by Stephen Wall, bishop of Meath, and interred in the church of St Nicholas in Dundalk. Here the local cult of St Richard of Dundalk led to a call for his canonization, which was supported by several Irish bishops. In order to examine the case a commission was appointed at the papal curia, one of whose members was Cardinal Perino Tomacelli, who as Pope Boniface IX ('r'. 1389-1404) continued to favour the cause. He had a copy of the 'Summa de quaestionibus Armenorum' made in Perugia in 1393 for the papal library (now MS Vat. lat. 1033). Another copy of the work (now Krakow, Biblioteka Jagiellonska, Cod. 1599), made in Paris in 1375 and subsequently in the possession of the Silesian scholar Laurentius of Ratibor, notes in an early fifteenth-century marginal comment that the work had been declared heretical and burnt at the papal curia in the time of Boniface IX. The examination of Fitzralph's writings had exposed similarities with the teachings of John Wyclif in some areas, notably dominion, and his approach to exegesis. Mendicant polemicists could point to Armachanus as the source of Wycliffite heresy, and an anonymous preacher -- possibly a Franciscan -- at the Council of Constance (1414-18) claimed the Bohemian reformer, Jan Hus, as a disciple of Richard Fitzralph and John Wyclif! Laudatory references to Fitzralph as 'noster sanctus' 'Armachanus' among the followers of Wyclif, together with constant reminders in the testimony given at Lollard trials that the archbishop of Armagh's formulae upon sensitive issues had fallen on fruitful ground, did not help Fitzralph's posthumous reputation at the curia. The one recognition of sanctity negated the other, and alike as Lollard saint, and as candidate for (Roman) canonization, St Richard of Dundalk fell firmly between both stools. 


@@@@@


doc= 9628


FitzRoy, Augustus Henry, third duke of Grafton (1735-1811), prime minister, was born on 28 September 1735, the elder of the two surviving sons of Lord Augustus FitzRoy (1716-1741), a naval officer and the younger son of Charles FitzRoy, second duke of Grafton, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1788), the daughter of Colonel William Cosby, governor of New York. 
FitzRoy's father died of fever in Jamaica, where he was serving with the navy, before the boy's sixth birthday, and his uncle, Lord Euston, died in 1747, so that from an early age Augustus Henry, who from 1747 enjoyed the courtesy title earl of Euston, was heir to an important title. His mother married again, to James Jeffreys, that same year. Euston's relations with his stepfather seem to have been friendly, to judge at least from the duke's later willingness to seek favours both for him and his daughter. However, his mother and stepfather had little involvement with his education, which was rather more influenced by his paternal grandfather, lord chamberlain for thirty-three years and a close friend of the duke of Newcastle. He was educated at Hackney School and from 1751 to 1753 at Peterhouse, Cambridge. In 1753-4 he completed his education in the manner appropriate to an eighteenth-century gentleman by going on the grand tour with a Swiss tutor named Alleon. 
On 29 January 1756 Euston married Anne ['see 'Fitzpatrick, Anne, countess of Upper Ossory (1737/-1804)], the daughter and heir of Henry Liddell, first Baron Ravensworth (bap. 1708, d. 1784), a coal owner, of Eslington, Northumberland, and Anne Delme (1712-1794). They had three children, Georgiana ('b'. 1757), George Henry FitzRoy, later the fourth duke (1760-1844), and Charles FitzRoy (1764-1829), but the marriage was not a happy one. Temperamental differences led first to separation, in January 1764, and finally to divorce, granted by act of parliament on 23 March 1769. In June 1761 the couple had set off on an extended continental tour, thought by some to be an attempt to patch up an already faltering marriage. It was not a success. Horace Walpole's correspondent Sir Horace Mann later commented (17 April 1762): 'I saw such seeds of disagreement when they were here [Florence] as too plainly showed that they neither of them meant to contribute to the other's happiness' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 22.279-80). By the time their third child was born in July 1764 they were virtually living apart and he had already established his relationship with the courtesan Nancy Parsons ('c'.1735-1814/15), the daughter of a London tailor and the former mistress of Horton, or Houghton, a West Indies merchant. He attended the races with her in June 1764, and in September Lord Barrington reported: 'The Duke of Grafton... lives incognito at Woodford in Essex with Nancy Parsons' (Barrington to Buckinghamshire, 24 Sept 1764, 'Lothian MSS', 252). Proceedings for a separation were begun a few weeks later. The duchess had an affair with John Fitzpatrick, second earl of Upper Ossory, whom she married on 26 March 1769, having given birth to their son in August 1768. 
In November 1756 Euston was appointed a lord of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales, a post he held until June 1758. In May 1757 he was appointed lord lieutenant of Suffolk. He was dismissed in December 1762 for voting against the peace preliminaries but was reappointed in 1769 and served until 1790. He also held the posts of recorder of Thetford and Coventry and high steward of Dartmouth, hereditary ranger of Whittlebury and Salcey forests, and several sinecures, including places in the king's bench, common pleas, and court of exchequer. In September 1769 he was appointed KG. 
Euston's political career began in November 1756, shortly after his twenty-first birthday, when he was elected MP for both Boroughbridge, Yorkshire, and Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. He chose to represent the latter, but held the seat for only a few months, until his grandfather's death and his own elevation to the House of Lords the following May. Neither in the Commons nor in the Lords at this period of his life was Grafton especially active, though it was a formative time in establishing his political allegiances. While he was loosely connected with his grandfather's great friend the duke of Newcastle and his circle, and on friendly terms with the Cavendishes (Lord John Cavendish had been his contemporary at Cambridge), the politician he most admired was William Pitt. He had met Pitt quite early in his childhood, and seems to have been treated with rare warmth both by Pitt himself and by his brother-in-law Lord Temple. Both in England and while on his second continental tour Grafton wrote to Pitt on matters relating to politics and patronage. 
Grafton's connection with Pitt was to be central to his political career, though in fact it was with Newcastle's circle that he re-entered politics on his return in 1762. In the run-up to the 1762 session and subsequently Grafton took a leading role among Newcastle's 'young friends', where his warmth and zeal were frequently remarked upon. He led for the opposition in the debate on the peace preliminaries on 9 December 1762, and, though he spoke rather personally against Lord Bute, his speech was commended and was an early indication of his talent for debate. His political rise was noted by Horace Walpole, who observed the following year that Grafton was much commended and was in the front rank of politics. While maintaining his association with the young friends, Grafton also developed links with the senior whigs, the marquess of Rockingham, the duke of Devonshire, and the duke of Cumberland. More than most of Newcastle's circle, however, Grafton kept in contact with Pitt and Temple. In May 1763, following Temple's lead, he attempted to visit John Wilkes in the Tower, an action significant not only as evidence of his association with Temple, but also because of the sentiments which prompted him to go, 'to hear from himself his own story and his defence; and to shew that no influence ought to stop the means of every man's justifying himself from an accusation, even though it should be of the most heinous kind' (Grafton to Temple, 3 May 1763, 'Autobiography... of Grafton', 191). 
Pitt's negotiations to form a ministry in August 1763 failed, and George III patched up his relationship with George Grenville. However, it remained an uneasy relationship, and by the spring of 1765 he was determined to remove Grenville from office and to change his administration. In May he commissioned his uncle, the duke of Cumberland, to commence negotiations. On 14 May Cumberland communicated with Pitt and Temple, Rockingham and Newcastle, and also (though it appears not to have been part of his instructions) summoned Grafton. Though Grafton and Cumberland had had several contacts in recent months, both in political matters and at Newmarket, Grafton was not one of the principal members of Newcastle's circle, and Cumberland's decision to involve him was almost certainly due to Pitt's supposed regard for him and Grafton's own regard for and connection with Pitt. Indeed, Cumberland used Grafton as an intermediary more than once. In spite of strenuous efforts by Cumberland, however, Pitt refused to accept office. Eventually the king agreed to appoint an administration with the marquess of Rockingham at its head. Grafton accepted office as secretary of state for the northern department on condition Pitt could join as head when he wished. 
Grafton's appointment as secretary of state came as no surprise. Though inexperienced (as were many in the administration), Grafton had proven abilities. Clearly apprehensive about his new responsibilities, Grafton commented to Lord Gower, 'that, like a girl who is going to be married, he felt himself much pleased with the general idea, but much frightened as the hour drew nigh' ('Eglinton MSS', 390). He turned out to be a respectably diligent minister and a capable advocate in the Lords. But his connection with Pitt was at least as important as his untried skills. In spite of Pitt's refusal to take part and the manner of that refusal, the new ministry hoped for his acquiescence if not his active support. Grafton's links with Pitt were seen as an advantage to the administration, a signal to Pitt that ministers were serious. In the event, however, Grafton's connection turned out to be a weakness rather than a source of strength. He himself later asserted that he had accepted office only on the understanding that efforts would be made to bring Pitt in. Although Pitt's demands grew increasingly unreasonable, Grafton never wavered from this resolve, and when Rockingham and the king, finally exasperated beyond measure at Pitt, refused to continue with negotiations, Grafton determined to resign. 
Grafton resigned as secretary of state on 14 May 1766. As he himself put it, he had gone out of office not 'from a love of ease and indulgence to his private amusements, as had been falsely reported, but because they wanted strength, which one man only could supply', and that 'though he had carried a general's staff, he was ready to take up a mattock or spade under that able and great minister' (bishop of Carlisle to Grenville, 29 May 1766, 'Grenville Papers', 3.243). Two months later the ministry fell. Pitt this time accepted the king's invitation to form an administration, and, following Temple's refusal of the post of first lord of the Treasury, persuaded Grafton to accept it. Grafton was reluctant, and according to his own later account, accepted only because Pitt threatened to withdraw if he refused: 'Here all that I wished to see established, together with all that I dreaded for myself, crowded at once on my mind... If Mr Pitt's threatenings were to be realised it was easy to see the confusion into which the country would be plunged, and possibly that I should be marked as the principal cause of the disaster. ('Autobiography... of Grafton', 90)' Having accepted, however, Grafton took little part in forming the administration. In all matters, even to the appointing of his own Treasury board, he deferred to Pitt. This was to be typical of his role throughout the next few months, as he relied entirely on Pitt for direction, and would scarcely take even the smallest decision without Pitt's approval. And indeed, he was given little encouragement to act independently, for Pitt could be devastatingly critical of anyone who deviated from the line he had laid down. Yet Pitt's leadership was inadequate from the beginning. In the first place he seriously weakened his position by accepting a peerage (as earl of Chatham). Then, through illness, he spent long periods in Bath, too far removed from the centre of affairs to exercise detailed control. By March 1767 he had been overtaken by illness and was completely incapable of political activity. Grafton, who had not been appointed to direct affairs, was reluctant to take responsibility as long as there was a chance of Chatham's recovery. But such a lack of direction was almost disastrous for the ministry, which suffered both internal division and opposition in parliament. Disunity in the cabinet over East India Company affairs ended in the adoption of a policy totally at variance with Chatham's opinions; the government suffered defeat in February on an opposition motion to reduce the land tax; and throughout the spring it had to grapple with the potentially divisive problem of the disobedience of New York to the 'Mutiny Act' and the issue of raising an American revenue. Opposition to the ministry's handling of American issues built up during April and May, and Grafton was faced with the very real prospect of defeat. When the ministry's majority in the House of Lords, normally the stronghold of administration, sank to three on 26 May 1767 he was very close to resignation. 
That Grafton did not resign was due partly to support and encouragement from Lord Northington, lord president of the council, but most of all to the determined encouragement of the king. It took another month for Grafton to build up sufficient resolution to take on responsibility for leading the administration, and to shake off what by now had become his fear of Chatham. As long as Chatham remained nominally at the head of the ministry he was a destabilizing influence, and the weeks between the vote on 26 May and the beginning of negotiations with the opposition in early July were critical in freeing Grafton from dependence on Chatham and securing his loyalty to George III. Throughout June attempts were made to persuade Chatham to return, but to no avail. Eventually George III, Grafton, and Northington attempted to force Chatham's hand, saying that he must either come forth or retire completely. In the event this stratagem too failed, but Chatham's refusal to respond seems to have been sufficient to persuade Grafton to go ahead alone. 
Grafton now in effect became prime minister, though he remained acting head of the administration until Chatham's eventual resignation in October 1768. His first task was to strengthen the administration. Initially he was unsuccessful. In the negotiations of July he succeeded in splitting the opposition but not in gaining any support. But at the end of the year, following renewed negotiations with the Bedford group, he secured their accession to the ministry. Before this he had secured the appointment of Lord North as chancellor of the exchequer, following the death of the mercurial but unreliable Charles Townshend. The terms with the Bedfords included two cabinet posts, one of which was obtained by the transfer of Henry Seymour Conway (hitherto one of Grafton's closest colleagues and friends) from secretary of state to lieutenant-general of the ordnance, though he retained cabinet rank. A by-product of the negotiations was the division of the southern secretaryship and the creation of a new post of secretary of state for the colonies: this had important consequences for the future both by the alienation of Lord Shelburne (holder of the southern secretaryship) and in the appointment of the relatively hard-line Lord Hillsborough to the new post. 
These changes gave Grafton some useful additional votes in parliament and some effective departmental ministers. North in particular proved himself an able colleague both at the exchequer and in parliament, where he soon took over the leadership of the House of Commons from Conway. But the alliance with the Bedford group did little to strengthen the cabinet, which remained throughout the ministry rather a collection of individuals than a powerful united body. Indeed, Grafton's principal weakness as head of the administration was his inability to weld together a united cabinet. Partly this was due to the personal and political differences of the individuals involved: the cabinet was an uneasy amalgam of ex-Chathamites (such as Camden, Conway, and Shelburne), members of the Bedford group (such as Weymouth and Rochford), and strong-willed individualists without any particular allegiance (such as Hillsborough). But partly also it was due to Grafton's own personality. Personally more industrious than has often been admitted, he was not a strong leader. He believed in collective responsibility, but was all too often unable either to achieve a collective view or to quell dissent. Naturally conciliatory, he also inclined to inaction rather than to risk stirring up trouble. All these characteristics were to become evident in the major issues facing the ministry during the next two years. 
Within a few weeks of its formation, Grafton's new administration was put to the test by the re-emergence of John Wilkes on to the political stage. Though still outlawed, Wilkes had returned to England in February 1768. The following month he stood as candidate for the City of London in the general election. Defeated but undaunted, he tried again in Middlesex, where, to the accompaniment of much riotous behaviour, he came top of the poll. The ministry was faced with two problems: one was the preservation of public order; the other, a much more delicate political question, was what to do with Wilkes. 
On the question of public order Grafton was quite prepared to back strong measures, as soon as they were seen to be necessary -- though he had been reluctant to give the impression of 'finding fault only with the People for their Joy too riotously testified at the late Election' (Grafton to George III, 31 March 1768, 'Correspondence of George III', 2.605). It was the duty of government to keep order and preserve society and the constitution. Although Grafton took little part in arranging measures -- this was Weymouth's department -- he gave his approval to a policy of vigour. In the case of Wilkes himself, Grafton's natural reaction was one of caution. Remembering the trouble that Wilkes had caused Grenville in 1763-4, he had no desire to give gratuitous offence by ill-advised intervention. But those who had pressed for vigorous action against the rioters were also anxious to punish Wilkes. The king adopted a similar attitude. Considering his sense of duty to the king, it is perhaps surprising that Grafton went as far as he did to avoid the application of hard-line measures against Wilkes. He succeeded in ignoring calls for Wilkes's expulsion from the House of Commons for the remainder of the session, and might have avoided facing the issue altogether had not Wilkes published in December what amounted to an accusation that the government had deliberately contrived and premeditated the 'massacre of St George's Fields' earlier in the year (an occasion when troops had been employed against rioters and seven people had been killed). This revived calls for Wilkes's expulsion and, crucially, turned Grafton from opposing the move to acquiescing in it. Several cabinet colleagues remained opposed -- a situation which would cause Grafton difficulties in the future -- but when Barrington moved, on 3 February 1769, that Wilkes be expelled it was carried by a large majority. 
The other major issue that Grafton's administration faced concerned the attitude to be adopted towards the American colonies, which had offered severe provocation during 1768. Grafton was again in a difficult position. On this issue the cabinet was more definitely polarized into authoritarian and conciliatory camps than it had been over Wilkes. Grafton once again favoured moderation, and once again faced a strong force of hard-line opinion. He hoped to defuse the situation and avoid a division in the ministry by offering a compromise solution, but it met with little enthusiasm in the cabinet, and Grafton, though disappointed, did not press it. The crucial decision came in May 1769, when the cabinet met to discuss Townshend's 1767 customs duties. The cabinet was determined that the duties be repealed, but was divided on the question of whether the duty on tea should be retained, as an assertion of the right of parliament to tax the colonies. Hillsborough's proposal that the tea duty be retained was accepted by five votes to four -- with Grafton in the minority. 
Although political problems continued to trouble him throughout the spring of 1769, in his personal life Grafton enjoyed a short respite. Since the beginning of his premiership he had been associated with Nancy Parsons. In the early days, though scarcely concealing the relationship, he had acted with some decorum, arousing gossip rather than scandal. In 1768, however, following the return of his mistress from an extended trip abroad, Grafton threw caution to the winds and offended even the relatively lax society of the day by openly consorting with her, entertaining with her at his London house, and accompanying her to the opera. But this proved to be a final fling. Early in the following year he ended the relationship. At about the same time, on 23 March 1769, his divorce proceedings against his first wife were completed. Now a free man, he began to pay court to the woman who was to be his wife for the next forty years. Elizabeth (1745-1822) was the second daughter of Sir Richard Wrottesley, seventh baronet, dean of Worcester, and his wife, Mary Leveson-Gower, and the niece of the duchess of Bedford. The engagement was announced on 18 May and the marriage took place at Woburn on 24 June. Immediately afterwards the duke and duchess departed for Wakefield Lodge. The duke of Bedford, who dined with them a few days later, noted in his journal: 'It was a great satisfaction to see how happy they were, and how well pleased with each other' ('Cavendish's Debates', 2.619). The couple had twelve children. Grafton's cast-off mistress, Nancy Parsons, found a new lover in the third duke of Dorset, and then married Charles Maynard, second Viscount Maynard (1752-1824), a landowner, in the summer of 1776; she died in France in the winter of 1814-15. 
Shortly after his wedding Grafton left for Cambridge to be installed, on 1 July, as chancellor of the university, a post to which he had been unanimously elected the previous autumn. The customary ode on the occasion was written by the poet Thomas Gray, who had been appointed to the professorship of modern history through Grafton's influence. To celebrate the occasion, Grafton offered $500 towards paving and lighting the town. 
However, politics could not be put out of mind for long. Savage attacks in the press on the government in general and on Grafton in particular had intensified with the arrival on the scene of 'Junius' in January 1769. Between March and July, Junius wrote five letters directly addressed to Grafton and several more attacking him in a very personal way. Meanwhile, opposition to the government's measures against Wilkes were voiced through the petitioning movement in the country at large. Grafton's reaction was concern for the constitution but fear that too vigorous repression would only make matters worse. Finally there was the reappearance of Chatham. Chatham attended court on 7 July, when his manner towards Grafton was particularly cold and ungracious. As the autumn progressed it became clear that he intended to start the new season in opposition and also that he intended to attempt to break up the ministry by detaching Camden and Granby from their allegiance to Grafton. 
It is unclear whether Chatham hoped to persuade Camden and Granby to resign, or whether, by fostering dissension in the cabinet, to force Grafton into resignation and bring about an opening for himself. Undoubtedly at this period relations between Chatham and Grafton reached their lowest ebb. Chatham worked hard in the weeks leading up to the session, and when parliament met in January 1770 he and the Rockingham group launched a strong attack on the government. The divisions in the Commons showed but a slender majority for the government. Worse, Grafton suffered defections from the cabinet. Camden resigned on 17 January and Granby, after wavering, followed suit. Grafton had now lost the last of the colleagues with whom he had entered government in 1766. In spite of their differences, Grafton found the loss of Camden a severe blow. Encouraged by the king he made an attempt to persuade Charles Yorke to take the seals. Yorke hesitated, accepted, and within three days of accepting was dead, widely believed to have committed suicide. Grafton then made a half-hearted attempt to persuade William de Grey to accept. When this too failed, so did Grafton's resolution to continue. Out of loyalty to the king he delayed his resignation until George III had secured Lord North's agreement to take over. Grafton left office on 30 January 1770. 
It is often assumed that George III saw Grafton's resignation as a desertion, and it is true that in later years the king did describe it in such terms. At the time, however, the relationship between the two men remained cordial, and on several occasions in the succeeding months the king referred to his esteem for the duke. Grafton continued to support North's administration, speaking vigorously in its defence in debates in the Lords. Indeed, he soon found himself wishing to be back in office. He let it be known that he was interested in taking the Admiralty, though in the event this went to Lord Sandwich when the post became vacant in 1771, and Grafton had to wait until the summer when a vacancy in the office of lord privy seal occurred, though he did not regain a seat in cabinet. His support for the administration continued, though with gradually diminishing ardour. The issue on which he finally parted company with North was America, and after speaking against North's American policy he resigned on 9 November 1775. 
An attempt was made in February 1779 to bring Grafton and some other former Chathamites back into administration, but it was unsuccessful, and he remained in opposition until the fall of North in 1782. In Rockingham's second administration he was again made lord privy seal. Following the death of Rockingham in July 1782 he continued to serve under Shelburne, but as differences between the two men widened Grafton found it increasingly difficult to support the ministry, and he resigned with the rest of the cabinet in February 1783. He opposed the Fox-North coalition (though this did not prevent him from subsequently establishing friendly relationships with Fox), and initially remained cool towards the younger Pitt, declining the offer of the post of lord privy seal. He later warmed to Pitt, though he continued to decline office and does not appear to have spoken in parliament. Nevertheless, he gave his support until disagreements over foreign policy led him back into opposition in 1794. He never again held office, though he maintained an interest in politics until his death. His autobiography, written in 1804, is largely an account of his political life. 
Grafton's withdrawal from a leading role in government allowed him to devote more time to his other interests. He had always enjoyed hunting and racing, and even during his administration was regularly to be seen at Newmarket and Ascot. His kennels and his stables enjoyed a widespread renown. He also maintained a lively interest in agricultural matters. One writer recalls an occasion, in the midst of his premiership, when he was to be found in the dirtiest corner of a Northampton fair talking to a group of graziers about bullocks. In later years he corresponded with Arthur Young, inviting that noted agriculturist to Euston, Suffolk, on a number of occasions, and he was an occasional contributor to Young's 'Annals of Agriculture'. In 1793 he was one of the first members appointed to the newly formed board of agriculture. He was not a great builder (both Wakefield Lodge and Euston Hall had been remodelled in his grandfather's time), though he was responsible for further building work at Wakefield Lodge in 1770-71; however, he was noted for developing his estates, establishing a large home farm at Wakefield Lodge, and bringing into cultivation at Euston an extensive acreage that had previously been only rough grazing. He employed Capability Brown to improve the grounds at Euston, while Young recorded that on one of his visits he spent two days taking the levels of the river to see how much ground the duke might water. He took a keen interest in new techniques in husbandry -- 'willing to try any experiment, promising to be of public utility', as Arthur Young put it (Young, 15.305) -- and successfully introduced drilling as a method of sowing crops on his Suffolk estates, where he also, with encouraging results, mixed some South Down sheep among his large flock of Norfolks. As lord lieutenant of Suffolk he took an active part in the manoeuvres of the Suffolk militia during the invasion scares in 1778-9. 
From 1770 onwards Grafton developed an increasing interest in theological matters. At Cambridge he was associated with a number of liberal churchmen. Among his friends and correspondents were John Hinchcliffe, bishop of Peterborough, and Richard Watson, bishop of Llandaff, and latterly the Unitarian divine Thomas Belsham. In 1773 he supported a bill to release Anglican clergy from the necessity of subscribing to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', and the following year he became one of the first members of the Unitarian congregation at Essex Street Chapel. His support for unitarianism was personal and did not extend to his family: his son Henry entered the church and became canon of Westminster. He published two theological works, 'Hints Submitted to the Serious Attention of the Clergy, Nobility and Gentry, by a Layman' (1789), which urged amendment of life by the upper classes and greater attention to public worship, together with a revision of the liturgy; and 'The Serious Reflections of a Rational Christian from 1788-1797' (1797), which argued in favour of unitarianism. He also supported the publication of Richard Watson's 'Considerations on the Expediency of Revising the Liturgy and Articles of the Church of England' (1790), and was responsible for the costs of printing 700 copies of an edition of Griesbach's Greek 'New Testament' in 1796. His personal library, sold after his death, was extensive and included a number of rare works. He died on 14 March 1811 at Euston Hall, and was buried at Euston on 21 March. 
Grafton was much criticized in his lifetime and fared little better after his death. But most of his contemporary critics were also his political enemies or, like Horace Walpole (who felt the duke had treated his close friend Conway badly), men who had personal reasons for attacking him. Walpole began by admiring Grafton, and in 1765 presented the duke with a copy of the first edition of 'The Castle of Otranto' as a token of friendship, but by 1768 he described him as a man who thought 'the world should be postponed to a whore and a horse race' (Walpole to Conway, 16 June 1768, Walpole, 'Corr.', 39.101); in his memoirs he referred variously to the duke's 'moody and capricious temper', his 'disgusting coldness', his 'sullen negligence', and his 'mutability' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 3.179, 76, 137, 91). Coupled with Junius's descriptions of the duke -- most memorably as 'sullen and severe without religion, profligate without gaiety' (Junius to Grafton, 30 May 1769, 'Letters of Junius', 69) -- this is the picture transmitted to posterity, and often repeated by historians. Other contemporaries, by contrast, presented a different picture. Joseph Cradock in his memoirs wrote of him as 'punctual in his dealings, kind to his domestics, hospitable to strangers and faithful to his friends' (Cradock, 1.116-17); and John Almon (who from his connection with Wilkes might be expected to have been unfavourable) referred to Grafton's 'honourable character, his virtues as a patriot, and his talents as a statesman' (Almon, 1.26). Almon, indeed, writing about the early 1770s, described Grafton as one of those disinterested politicians whose support for administration 'becomes a pledge to the public that the steps taken by the ministry are taken upon the proper ground' (ibid., 1.24) -- of all the tributes that could have been made, almost certainly the one that would have pleased him most. Personally not always the most relaxed and engaging of men, Grafton nevertheless established and maintained lifelong friendships with men from a variety of backgrounds. His friendship with Richard Stonehewer, his old Cambridge tutor, lasted until the latter's death in 1809, while John Symonds, master of Peterhouse, was a regular Christmas guest at Euston for more than thirty years from the early 1770s. Among politicians his longest and closest friendship was with Camden, who in one of his last letters wrote of his 'real attachment and regard' for the duke (Camden to Grafton, 15 Nov 1793, 'Autobiography... of Grafton', 402); while Charles James Fox, another friend of long standing, with whom he discussed literature as well as politics, once declared that he could act with Grafton 'with more pleasure in any possible situation than with any one I have been acquainted with' (Fox to Grafton, 4 Dec 1775, 'Autobiography... of Grafton', 276). 


@@@@@


doc= 9629


FitzRoy, Charles, second duke of Cleveland and first duke of Southampton (1662-1730), landowner, the first son of Charles II and Barbara Palmer, countess of Castlemaine (bap. 1640, d. 1709), was baptized on 18 June 1662 at St Margaret's, Westminster. Officially his father was Roger Palmer, earl of Castlemaine, his mother's husband; the entry in the baptismal register was 'Charles Palmer, Ld Limbricke, son to the Rt Hon Roger, Earl of Castle-Maine, by Barbara' (GEC, 'Peerage', 3.282), and he bore the courtesy title of Lord Limerick until 1670, when his mother was created countess of Southampton and duchess of Cleveland. As heir to the titles, Charles (who, with his brothers Henry and George, began to be called FitzRoy at about this time) was styled earl of Southampton. 
The duchess of Cleveland intended that her sons should be established with means independent of future royal favour, appropriate to their quasi-royal status, and much of Southampton's early life was dominated by the need to engineer his future security while his mother retained the protection of Charles II. In 1671 a marriage was arranged between the boy and Mary Wood, the seven-year-old daughter of Sir Henry Wood, clerk of the green cloth, and heir to $4000 per annum. Following Wood's death on 25 May 1671, Mary was abducted on the duchess's orders and married to the nine-year-old Southampton. The ceremony was repeated when the couple were of full age in 1677. 
Southampton was installed KG on 1 April 1673 and was created baron of Newbury, earl of Chichester, and duke of Southampton on 10 September 1675. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in December 1675, but it was becoming clear that he was not intellectually equipped for a leading role in society: Humphrey Prideaux, dean of Christ Church, wrote that he would 'ever be very simple, and scarce, I believe, ever attain to the reputation of not being thought a fool' (GEC, 'Peerage', 3.283). 
Following the death of his wife from smallpox on 15 November 1680, Southampton's inheritance of her estate was challenged by the Wood family. After a lengthy process of litigation the House of Lords decided in favour of Southampton in 1692. Southampton was politically inactive, but this did not stop the plot manufacturer William Fuller from naming him, alongside his brother George, duke of Northumberland, as a participant in a Jacobite conspiracy in 1691. Fuller's plot was exposed as a fabrication early in 1692. 
In 1694 Southampton married Anne (1663-1746), the daughter of Sir William Pulteney of Misterton, Leicestershire; the couple had three sons and three daughters. In 1697 he was awarded a pension of $1000 per annum on the proceeds of the lotteries. Although he took little or no part in Lords debates, he joined the protest against the abandonment of the amendments to the 'Irish Forfeitures and Land Tax Bill' in 1700. He was also the patron of a company of actors. 
Southampton succeeded his mother as second duke of Cleveland in 1709, when he also inherited her estate at Nonsuch in Surrey. He voted for the guilt of Dr Henry Sacheverell in 1710; allegedly his wife had arranged that his brother the duke of Northumberland should escort him to the House of Lords to ensure that he voted against, but his half-brother the duke of Richmond smuggled him out of his house and easily persuaded Cleveland to vote for Sacheverell's guilt. He died at his home in St James's Square, Westminster, on 9 September 1730, and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 3 November. Within two years of his death his estates were believed to be worth 'more than 100,000'l' a year' ('Egmont Diary', 26 Jan 1732, 1.217). His widow married the landscape gardener Philip Southcote on 3 February 1732 and died on 20 February 1746. He was succeeded by his only surviving son, William (1698-1774), on whose death the titles became extinct. His daughter Grace (1697-1763) married Henry Vane, first earl of Darlington, and was the mother of the botanist Lady Anne Monson and the grandmother of William Harry Vane, created duke of Cleveland in 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 9630


FitzRoy, Charles, first Baron Southampton (1737-1797), army officer and politician, was born on 25 June 1737, the third, but second surviving, son of Lord Augustus FitzRoy (died 1741) and his wife, Elizabeth Cosby, the daughter of Colonel William Cosby, governor of New York (1732-6). Descended from Henry FitzRoy, an illegitimate son of Charles II, he was the younger brother of Augustus Henry FitzRoy, third duke of Grafton. On 27 July 1758 he married Anne Warren (died 1807), the daughter of Admiral Sir Peter Warren MP and Susanna de Lancy. They had sixteen children, their second son, Charles, being incorrectly rumoured to be an illegitimate son of George III. Lord of the manor of Tottenham Court, FitzRoy and his family lived at FitzRoy Farm, near Highgate, Middlesex, which he inherited from his mother in 1768. 
Little is known of FitzRoy's early life. In 1752 he was commissioned an ensign in the 1st foot guards and, on account of family influence, enjoyed rapid promotion; by 1758 he was a lieutenant-colonel and by 1762 a colonel of the 119th foot. During the Seven Years' War he served in Germany as an aide-de-camp to Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick, from 1759 to 1762. At the battle of Minden, on 1 August 1759, he carried a dispatch from Prince Ferdinand to Lord George Sackville (later Germain) to advance the British cavalry. Sackville's slowness in so doing resulted, at his own insistence, in a court martial in which FitzRoy gave evidence. It concluded in Sackville's disgrace in March 1760. Appointed a groom of the bedchamber in 1760, FitzRoy was present at the battle of Vellinghausen in July 1761, before returning to London in 1762. 
While in Germany, FitzRoy had been elected in August 1759 as MP for Orford, Suffolk, thanks to the influence of the duke of Newcastle, who also secured a secret-service pension for him in December 1759. Re-elected to parliament as MP for Bury St Edmunds in 1761, he at first followed the political lead of his elder brother. He refused to follow the duke of Newcastle into opposition in May 1762, but was none the less dismissed from his court sinecure by Lord Bute for voting against the peace preliminaries in December 1762. He spoke against the 'Regency Bill' in April 1765, and acted as Grafton's political agent in the negotiations with William Pitt regarding the formation of a new administration in May 1765. With his brother back in office, FitzRoy served as colonel of the 14th dragoons (1765-72) and was promoted major-general in 1772 and lieutenant-general in 1773; he was also vice-chamberlain to Queen Charlotte (1768-82). When his relationship with Grafton became strained after 1769, FitzRoy refused an appointment as vice-chamberlain to George III in 1770 and, as the member for Thetford, Norfolk (1774-80), he increasingly went his own way. His refusal to follow Grafton into opposition over Lord North's coercive policy towards America, in October 1775, was rewarded by his creation as Baron Southampton on 17 October 1780, and the court sinecure as groom of the stole to the prince of Wales in December 1780. 
In the Lords, FitzRoy moved the loyal address to the throne in 1781, and on 18 February 1782, when Lord Carmarthen moved a motion protesting against Lord George Germain's elevation to the peerage as Lord Sackville of Drayton, on the grounds that the verdict of the Minden court martial should disqualify him, FitzRoy intervened in the debate to counter Germain's implication that the court martial had been conducted for political reasons. He addressed the Lords on the 'Regency Bill' in February 1789 without committing himself to either side, and was advanced to the rank of general in 1793. He died at his home in Stanhope Street, London, on 21 March 1797 and was buried in St James's burial-ground, Hampstead Road, on 30 March. He was succeeded by his eldest son, George, also an army officer. His widow died on 13 July 1807 at FitzRoy Farm. 


@@@@@


doc= 9631


FitzRoy, Lord Charles (1764-1829), army officer, was born on 17 July 1764, the second son of Augustus Henry FitzRoy, third duke of Grafton (1735-1811), and his first wife, Anne, daughter of Henry Liddell, Baron Ravensworth ['see 'Fitzpatrick, Anne, countess of Upper Ossory (1737/-1804)]. His parents divorced in 1769. He was educated at Harrow School (1774-6), Mr Newcombe's school, Hackney, Middlesex (1776), and Trinity College, Cambridge (matriculated in 1782, MA 1784). After entering the army as an ensign in 1782 he was appointed captain of the 3rd foot guards in 1787, and in 1788 equerry to the duke of York, under whom he served in the Flanders campaign of 1793-4. FitzRoy was present at the siege of Valenciennes. 
In 1795 FitzRoy was made aide-de-camp to the king with the rank of colonel; he became a major-general in 1798, served on the Irish staff from February 1798 to April 1799, and was then on the home staff until 1809, with the exception of the peaceful interlude of 1802. He also commanded the garrison at Ipswich. He was colonel-commandant of a battalion of the 60th foot in 1804-5 and colonel of the 48th foot from 1805 until his death. He became a lieutenant-general in January 1805, and a general on 4 January 1814. On 20 June 1795 FitzRoy married Frances (died 9 Aug 1797), the daughter of Edward Miller Mundy, who had been MP for Derbyshire; they had one son, Charles Augustus FitzRoy. His second marriage, on 10 March 1799, was to Lady Frances Anne Stewart (died 9 Feb 1810), eldest daughter of Robert Stewart, first marquess of Londonderry; they had two sons, Robert FitzRoy and George, and one daughter. 
FitzRoy was MP for Bury St Edmunds between 1787 and 1796, and again from 1802 to 1818, during which time he did not speak in the house. He supported Pitt, and favoured abolition of the slave trade and Roman Catholic emancipation. By 1810 he was considered an adherent of the whigs. During the last twenty years of his life he lived mainly at his seat at Wicken, Northamptonshire, where he endeared himself to the poor by many acts of charity. He died at his house in Berkeley Square, London, on 20 December 1829, and was buried at Wicken on 30 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 9632


FitzRoy, Sir Charles Augustus (1796-1858), colonial governor, was born on 10 June 1796, the eldest son of Lord Charles FitzRoy (1764-1829) and grandson of Augustus Henry FitzRoy, third duke of Grafton. His mother, Frances, daughter of Edward Miller Mundy MP, of Shipley Hall, Derbyshire, died on 9 August 1797 and his father married Lady Frances Anne Stewart, eldest daughter of Robert Stewart, first marquess of Londonderry. FitzRoy was educated at Harrow School (1805-12), commissioned in the Horse Guards in 1812, and was present at Waterloo. On 11 March 1820 he enlarged his aristocratic connections by marrying Lady Mary Lennox (died 1847), whose father, Charles Lennox, was the fourth duke of Richmond and mother, Charlotte Gordon, the daughter of the fourth duke of Gordon; they had two sons and a daughter. 
FitzRoy was promoted captain in 1820 and, after four months on half pay, went to the Cape of Good Hope in October 1825 as lieutenant-colonel and deputy adjutant-general. He returned to England during 1831, entered parliament as member for Bury St Edmunds, supported the 'Reform Bill', and in 1832 surrendered his seat to his brother-in-law. In 1833 he left the army and four years later was made a KH and lieutenant-governor of Prince Edward Island. He served there until 1841 when he obtained a similar position in the Leeward Islands. His capacities as a sound, conciliatory administrator impressed the colonial secretary, Lord Stanley, who in 1845 appointed him to succeed the unpopular Sir George Gipps as governor of New South Wales. 
By the time FitzRoy reached Sydney on 2 August 1846, the colony had recovered from a period of depression and was entering an era of prosperity and growth. Less settled was the political scene. In the legislative council, FitzRoy could normally rely on the twelve appointed members. The twenty-four elected representatives, mainly drawn from the pastoral interest, were more troublesome. Under his predecessor, they had sought additional powers for the legislature, but their demands were rejected by the Colonial Office and this bred ill feeling. Tension eased slightly early in FitzRoy's administration when the new colonial secretary, Earl Grey, allowed council to appropriate the casual revenues of the crown. Moreover, the 'Waste Lands Occupation Act' of 1846 and the order in council of 9 March 1847 ended a lengthy struggle with the squatters by largely accepting their demands concerning their occupancy of crown land. FitzRoy further eased the situation with concessions of his own. In October 1846 he allowed landowners liable to quit rents to discharge them on favourable terms. Subject to certain conditions he also permitted the legislative council to vote on the salaries of government officials. 
This was a promising start, but there was still much to test FitzRoy's talents. Grey became increasingly unpopular among the colonists, for he was at heart a paternalist and had strong ideas about how the empire should be run. He criticized FitzRoy for being too conciliatory, but the governor was undeterred and persisted in his efforts to maintain harmony within the colony. This became evident in his reaction to proposals for constitutional change sent by Grey in July 1847. They provided for the federation of the Australian colonies, the separation of Victoria from New South Wales, and the establishment of representative government and district councils everywhere except in Western Australia. As requested, FitzRoy gave full opportunity for this document to be discussed, but he made no public comment of his own. He also avoided taking sides in the conflict generated by Colonial Office moves to resume convict transportation in modified form. Many pastoralists welcomed this step which also found support in the legislative council; urban elements strongly opposed it. FitzRoy responded calmly to their petitions and to demonstrations of protest held in Sydney in June 1849, following the arrival of convicts on the 'Hashemy'. 
After news of the protest reached London, no more convicts were sent, but FitzRoy did have to contend with protests arising from the 'Australian Colonies Government Act' of 1850. This eliminated some of the controversial features of Grey's earlier proposals and it affected New South Wales chiefly by creating the colony of Victoria. No objection was raised to this decision, but advocates of self-government in New South Wales reacted strongly to Grey's failure to give the legislative council greater powers. Once Grey left office in 1852, however, concessions were made and the council was given the opportunity to prepare a new constitution. FitzRoy's views were not entirely those of the council, but he did not stand in its way and forwarded to London the draft which preserved the ascendancy of the pastoralists and increased the powers of the legislature. Meantime, he had been obliged to tackle problems arising from the gold rushes. He moved promptly to protect the rights of the crown and introduced measures that succeeded in raising revenue and safeguarding order. 
FitzRoy also had the distinction of being Australia's first governor-general. This position was conferred on him in 1851 by Grey, an ardent free-trader, who was anxious to ensure that self-government was not followed by the erection of inter-colonial tariff barriers. The title, however, remained largely nominal, for FitzRoy did not wish to be involved in the affairs of other colonies and made little attempt to exercise his powers. It is for his work as a governor that he deserves remembering. Despite his aristocratic background he mixed easily with the colonists and helped to steer New South Wales through the period of adjustment that preceded the coming of responsible government. Tragedy had struck on 7 December 1847, when a carriage he was driving hit a tree, killing his wife. After her death his reputation suffered when he was accused of forming improper liaisons with a number of women. This was an unfortunate blemish that was highlighted by the fiery Presbyterian minister, Dr J. D. Lang, who attacked him in an amendment to the farewell address moved by the legislative council. Lang was supported by only five other members and the consensus was that, in general, FitzRoy had acted positively to the colony's advantage. 
FitzRoy left Sydney on 20 January 1855, having in June 1854 been created a KCB, and returned to England where, on 11 December, he married Margaret Gordon, widow of J. J. Hawkey and daughter of Lieutenant Alexander Milligan of the 17th rifle brigade; they had no children. FitzRoy obtained no further appointment and died at his home, 2 Half Moon Street, Piccadilly, on 16 February 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 9633


FitzRoy, George, duke of Northumberland (1665-1716), courtier and army officer, was born on 28 December 1665 at Merton College, Oxford, the third and youngest son of Charles II and Barbara Palmer, countess of Castlemaine (bap. 1640, d. 1709). For the first few years of his life he was officially the son of his mother's husband, Roger Palmer, earl of Castlemaine, but from his baptism he was acknowledged as the son of the king, and after his mother was created duchess of Cleveland in 1670 he became known as Lord George FitzRoy. On 1 October 1674 he was created Baron Pontefract, Viscount Falmouth, and earl of Northumberland. 
The choice of Northumberland as a title was probably an aggressive negotiating tactic in his mother's unsuccessful stratagem to win Elizabeth, the heiress of the Percy earls of Northumberland, as her son's wife. Northumberland was encouraged by Charles II to travel on the continent. He visited Venice in 1681 and was a volunteer on the French side during Louis XIV's campaign in the Netherlands in 1683 and 1684, serving at Courtrai and at the siege of Luxembourg. On 6 April 1683 Charles II created him duke of Northumberland, and on 10 January 1684 KG. Soon after his return he and his brother Henry FitzRoy, first duke of Grafton, attempted to end their mother's relationship with the actor Cardell Goodman by having him arrested, first for highway robbery, and then for attempting to poison the brothers, but they failed to end the attachment. 
John Evelyn met Northumberland at about this time and described him as 'of all his majesty's children the most accomplished and worth the knowing', 'extraordinary handsome and well-shaped', and skilled in horsemanship (Evelyn, 'Diary', 24 Oct and 18 Dec 1684). He was appointed captain and colonel of the second troop of Life Guards on 11 February 1685. James II was reported as intending that Northumberland should marry a daughter of Henry Cavendish, second duke of Newcastle, but plans for an advantageous match were ended in March 1686 when it was disclosed that Northumberland had married Catherine (died 1714), the widow of Thomas Lucy, of Charlecote in Warwickshire, a captain in the Horse Guards, and the daughter of Robert Wheatley of Bracknell, Berkshire, who, according to Edward Harley, was 'a poulterer near Fleet Bridge' (Edward Harley to Sir Edward Harley, 20 March 1686, 'Portland MSS', 3.395). The date of the marriage is uncertain, but it may have taken place as early as 8 April 1685. His brother Henry, duke of Grafton, arranged for the duchess to be kidnapped and taken to a convent in Ghent, possibly with Northumberland's connivance, in the hope that she could be induced to deny the marriage, but she was brought back when James II indicated that he regarded the marriage as binding. The Northumberlands had no children. 
In November 1688 Northumberland was made lord of the bedchamber to James II. He remained loyal to the king, and was in attendance on the night of 10 December 1688 when James fled from Whitehall. He did not follow him, and sat in the Lords during the Convention Parliament. Although he lost his command of the Horse Guards to James Butler, second duke of Ormond, Northumberland was not totally eclipsed under William III and was reported to be travelling to the Netherlands with Ormond in May 1689, having secured a pension of $3000 a year from the excise to add to the $2350 he was already receiving from the Post Office. In 1701 he was appointed lord lieutenant of Surrey, constable of Windsor Castle and Park, and ranger of Windsor Forest. Under Anne he was also keeper of Hampton Court Palace. 
Northumberland was able to complement his household appointments with a renewed military career under Anne, although it is uncertain whether he ever took the field during the War of the Spanish Succession. He was appointed colonel of the Royal Horse Guards on 13 March 1703 on the death of Aubrey de Vere, twentieth earl of Oxford, was promoted major-general on 27 April 1708, and when Ormond became captain-general in January 1712 was restored as captain and colonel of the second Life Guards. Northumberland was a tory who voted against the impeachment of Sacheverell in 1710. He was given the lord lieutenancy of Berkshire in 1712 and became a privy councillor in August 1713. Following the accession of George I in 1714, however, he lost the lieutenancies, his posts at Windsor, and his place on the privy council, and in February 1715 he was replaced at the head of the second Life Guards by Algernon Seymour, earl of Hertford. 
The duchess of Northumberland had died on 25 May 1714, and by 10 March 1715 Northumberland had married Mary Dutton. He died, childless, at Epsom, Surrey, on 28 June 1716, and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 11 July. His widow died at Frogmore, Northumberland's house in Windsor Great Park, on 27 August 1738. 


@@@@@


doc= 9634


Fitzroy, George Henry, fourth duke of Grafton (1760-1844), politician, son of Augustus Henry Fitzroy, third duke, and his first wife, Anne, daughter of Henry Liddell, first Baron Ravensworth ['see 'Fitzpatrick, Anne, countess of Upper Ossory (1737/-1804)], was born on 14 January 1760. He was educated at Harrow and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he became an intimate friend of the younger Pitt. On 16 November 1784 he married Lady Charlotte Maria (1761-1808), second daughter of James Waldegrave, second Earl Waldegrave. She died of bilious fever in 1808, having had three sons and four daughters. As Lord Euston he was MP for Thetford from 1782 to 1784, supporting Shelburne's ministry. In 1784, with William Pitt, he was elected as MP for Cambridge University, and held this seat until 1811, when he succeeded to the peerage. 
Euston's career in the House of Commons was useful, but not brilliant. At the outset he supported the government of Pitt, but he rarely addressed the house. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Suffolk in 1790, receiver-general in the courts of king's bench and common pleas, and king's gamekeeper at Newmarket. From 1784 to 1807 he was ranger of Hyde Park and of St James's Park. In addition to these offices, conferred upon him by the prime minister, he was hereditary ranger of Whittlebury Forest, recorder of Thetford, a trustee of the Hunterian Museum, and president of the Eclectic Society of London. His seat at Cambridge was twice contested, first in 1790, and second in 1807 by Lord Palmerston, but in both cases unsuccessfully. Despite Pitt's friendship, and the patronage of the tories, Euston was unable to support all the government's measures over the war against France, and broke with Pitt when he became the centre of embarrassments. In fact, long before Pitt's death, Euston had become a whig. From his accession to the dukedom in March 1811 he steadfastly cast his votes and exercised all his influence in favour of civil and religious liberty. He did not, however, show bitterness towards his former friends, being considerate and urbane in speech and action. When the bill of pains and penalties against Queen Caroline was presented to the House of Lords, he spoke vehemently against the measure, and this was almost the last occasion on which he took a prominent part in the business of parliament. He died at his seat, Euston Hall, Suffolk, on 28 September 1844, and was buried there on 15 October. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Henry. 


@@@@@


doc= 9635


Fitzroy, Henry, duke of Richmond and Somerset (1519-1536), royal bastard, was born in 1519, probably in June and at the priory of St Lawrence, Blackmore, near Ingatestone, Essex, the illegitimate son of Henry VIII (1491-1547) and his mistress Elizabeth Blount (c.1500-1539x41). As the king's only male issue at the time of his birth the child was a valuable asset. Arrangements for his care were initially entrusted to his godfather, Thomas Wolsey. Plans for his elevation were possibly already in hand by April 1525. On 7 June in that year he was elected knight of the Garter (installed on the 25th). On 18 June 1525 he was created earl of Nottingham and on the same day he received the unprecedented honour of a double dukedom. As duke of Richmond and Somerset he was endowed with lands whose revenues amounted to $4845 in the first year. On 16 July 1525 he became lord admiral of England. 
His advancement provoked speculation that the king intended to make Richmond his heir. However his appointment as warden-general of the marches toward Scotland on 22 June 1525 was part of a more immediate policy. From 28 August 1525 to 16 June 1529 he lived principally in Yorkshire, at Sheriff Hutton or at Pontefract, at the centre of a full-scale ducal household, in his capacity as head of the newly resurrected council of the north. Although well educated in Latin, Greek, French, and music, by tutors who included John Palsgrave, Richard Croke, and William Saunders, he was an active child who much preferred outdoor pursuits and had to be bribed to settle to his books. His marriage was first mooted in February 1527 to counter the interest of Henri, duc d'Orleans, and James V of Scotland in the hand of Catherine de' Medici. In March 1527 hopes that a match with the Infanta Maria of Portugal might be a means to fracture a Franco-imperial alliance led to rumours he was to be made king of Ireland. This speculation was fuelled when he became lord lieutenant of Ireland on 22 June 1529. An innovative method of government using an executive board in Dublin was later abandoned when the appointment of a deputy on 22 June 1530 saw a return to the traditional model. On 9 August 1529 he was summoned to parliament, often attending the sessions in person. In his role as a magnate he was treated as if he were adult and great care was taken to see that his authority was respected. 
After Thomas Wolsey's downfall, in October 1529, responsibility for the care of Richmond passed to Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk. This choice was no doubt influenced by Anne Boleyn. At the same time negotiations began for his marriage to one of Norfolk's daughters. From April 1530 he was often resident at Windsor where Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, was among his companions. In October 1532 he accompanied Henry VIII to Calais for his meeting with Francois I. As a result of negotiations between them he was sent to reside at the French court. Accepted as a member of the king's privy chamber and lodged with the dauphin, he spent the winter in Paris before accompanying the court on its summer progress. He was recalled on 25 August 1533, and after his return to England he married, on 26 November 1533, Mary Howard ['see 'Fitzroy, Mary (c.1519-1555?)], younger daughter of the duke of Norfolk and his second wife, Elizabeth Stafford, with a dispensation for relation in the fourth degree of consanguinity. Due to their youth the union was never consummated. Nevertheless Henry's continuing usefulness was demonstrated in a range of responsibilities including lieutenancy of the Order of the Garter (17 May 1534). In November 1534 he hosted a feast in honour of the French admiral, and in February 1535 he entertained the imperial ambassador. His presence at the execution of the Carthusians on 4 May 1535 and of Anne Boleyn on 19 May 1536 was taken as a sign of royal approval in these events. 
The terms of the 1536 'Succession Act' renewed interest in the possibility of Richmond's succeeding his father. In many respects he was an ideal candidate. Widely reported to be as intelligent, articulate, and as athletic as his father, the danger of a minority was fast receding. His relationship with Henry VIII was consistently good. Numerous gifts and letters were indications of a genuine affection between them. However, still confident in his ability to produce a legitimate son, Henry VIII never chose to recognize him as his heir. There is no sign that his premature death was anticipated: his only previous indisposition was a brief illness in January 1532. His appointments as chamberlain of Chester and north Wales, lord warden of the Cinque Ports, and constable of Dover Castle in May 1536 provide evidence of continuing royal favour. At his last recorded public appearance, on 8 June 1536 at the opening of parliament, his health gave no cause for concern. His only known portrait is a miniature attributed to Lucas Horenbout, which shows Richmond bareheaded and in his shirt. Sometimes supposed to have been painted on his deathbed, it was probably taken about 1533-4, and was intended as an 'aide-memoire' for Richmond's inclusion in the illustrations, assigned to Horenbout, for the new register of the Order of the Garter. 
The first notice of Richmond's illness occurs on 8 July 1536. He died barely two weeks later, on the 23rd, of a pulmonary infection, at St James's Palace. Arrangements for his funeral were entrusted to the duke of Norfolk. It seems the intention was to attract as little notice as possible. The wooden coffin was hidden in straw and taken in secret to be quietly laid to rest some distance from the capital. He was buried at Thetford Priory, and after that house's dissolution was interred in St Michael's Church, Framlingham, Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 9636


FitzRoy, Henry, first duke of Grafton (1663-1690), naval officer, the second illegitimate son of Charles II (1630-1685) and Barbara Palmer, nee Villiers, countess of Castlemaine and later duchess of Cleveland (bap. 1640, d. 1709), was born at his mother's house in King Street, next to Whitehall Palace. The date is usually said to have been 20 September 1663 but it may have been some weeks earlier. By early 1664 he had moved with his mother into apartments in Whitehall. There were at first doubts as to his paternity and the king did not acknowledge him along with his brothers in 1670. By 1672, however, Charles II could evidently see a family resemblance. On 1 August 1672 Henry was pre-contracted in marriage to the five-year-old Lady Isabella (1667-1723), daughter and heir of Henry Bennet, earl of Arlington. Sixteen days later he was, in a patent which named him Henry FitzRoy, made earl of Euston, the name of Arlington's house in Suffolk, and on 11 September 1675 he was made duke of Grafton. 
In 1676-7 Grafton and his brother George FitzRoy, earl of Northumberland, went to Paris with their mother to receive part of their education, a sojourn that cost some $2500. On his return his mother attempted to break the Arlington marriage in order to obtain for him the far more lucrative hand of Lady Percy, heir of the previous earl of Northumberland, but Charles insisted on the fulfilment of the original contract. On 6 November 1679, therefore, Evelyn witnessed the marriage of the duke and Isabella: 'the sweetest, hopefulest, most beautiful child, & most virtuous too, was sacrific'd to a boy that had been rudely bred', although he hoped that Grafton would 'emerge a plaine, usefull, robust officer, & were he polish'd, a tolerable person, for he is exceedingly handsome, by far surpassing any of the King's other naturall issue' (Evelyn, 4.184-5). According to Luttrell, they first 'bedded' in April 1681 (Luttrell, 1.77). 
Evelyn's reference to Grafton as an 'officer' indicates the king's intention for his son to enter the navy. In 1678-9 he had served in the Mediterranean aboard the 'Happy Return' under Sir William Poole. In January 1680 he was entrusted to Sir John Berry, another veteran officer, and returned to the Mediterranean in the 'Leopard'. He visited Tangier, Izmir, Alicante, and Malaga before leaving the ship in the Downs on 23 December. During his absence he had been created a knight of the Garter (30 September). He was made colonel of the 1st foot guards in 1681, and served as master of Trinity House in 1682-3. On 13 January 1683 he became vice-admiral of England in succession to Prince Rupert; on 24 April he was appointed admiral and commander-in-chief in the narrow seas, taking command in July of the new third-rate named 'Grafton' in his honour. However, to the fury of both Grafton and his mother, he was suddenly recalled at the end of July and replaced by Lord Dartmouth, who then took the fleet to Tangier to evacuate the colony. In April 1684 Grafton went to France, met Louis XIV, and served at the siege of Luxembourg, leaving Paris on 26 July to return home. In December 1684 the actor Cardell Goodman, who was engaged in an affair with the duchess of Cleveland, was found guilty of a conspiracy to poison both Grafton and his brother Northumberland, and was fined $1000. Goodman may have been the victim of a plot by Grafton and his brother to end his affair with their mother. 
Despite the death of his father, Grafton seemed to continue in high favour when James II acceded, and displayed conspicuous loyalty to the new monarch. He acted as lord high chamberlain at the coronation on 23 April 1685, and played a prominent part in the Sedgemoor campaign: on 27 June he led 500 musketeers on a dangerous reconnaissance to Norton St Philip, where they came under heavy fire and escaped only by charging with fixed bayonets. He then fought at the battle of Sedgemoor itself. Grafton first took his seat in the House of Lords on 19 November 1685. At Chelsea on 2 February 1686 he fought a fatal duel against John Talbot, brother of the earl of Shrewsbury, who had offered him 'an almost insufferable provocation' the night before (Evelyn, 4.501): Talbot's sword struck Grafton's buckle and wounded his hand, but the duke's blow killed him outright. Grafton was pardoned almost immediately, but a few days later was involved in another controversial incident when he helped Northumberland to install the latter's wife in a Ghent convent. Northumberland's secret marriage had been suddenly revealed and caused great annoyance to the king. Grafton appears to have seen the 'abduction' as a way to separate his brother permanently from an unsuitable wife, but after complaints from her family the king ordered her return. On 3 July 1687 the duke escorted the papal envoy, d'Adda, to Whitehall. Two days later he left London to take command of the fleet intended to transport Maria Sophia of Newburg, the new queen of Portugal, to her kingdom. Flying his flag in the 'Anne', he embarked the queen at Den Brielle on 12 July and arrived at Lisbon on 1 August. The fleet sailed on 13 August, and after a visit to Gibraltar, arrived off Algiers on 17 September. Grafton successively renewed England's treaties with Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli before anchoring at Malta on 19 November, where he was made a knight of St John. The fleet returned to the Downs on 19 March 1688, and Grafton left for London a week later. 
Grafton was the obvious candidate -- in his own mind, at least -- to command the fleet set out later in 1688 to guard against William of Orange's invasion force. In September, though, James not only appointed Dartmouth over his head once again, but also abolished the office of vice-admiral of England altogether, a move that one observer in the fleet correctly regarded as 'a wile to be rid of the duke' (Davies, 'James II', 88). Grafton was strenuously opposed to the promotion of Catholics in both army and navy, and to the king's Francophile foreign policy, and had told James this to his face. The duke had been a close friend of John Churchill since the Sedgemoor campaign at least, and had many other contacts in the burgeoning army conspiracy. He almost immediately paid a surreptitious visit to William in the Netherlands; this was discovered by James's agents and reported to the king, who took no action. Grafton then went to the fleet at least once, ostensibly as a volunteer, and at some point, probably in late October, was intended by a shadowy conspiracy in the fleet to be installed as admiral in succession to Dartmouth, who was to be kidnapped while dining aboard the ship commanded by Anthony Hastings (who also held a commission in Grafton's regiment). Even so, the duke joined James's army, swearing that he would fight and die for the king; but when suspicions of his part in the conspiracy grew, he defected with Churchill at Axminster on 24 November. On 14 December, the day after he returned to London, Grafton was shot at by a soldier near Somerset House; the man's pistol misfired, but he was immediately shot dead by the duke's men. 
Grafton voted for a regency in 1689 but carried the orb at the coronation of William and Mary. He was soon out of favour, however, and lost all his offices, including the governorship of Portsmouth, in March 1689, and was not employed again at sea as a flag officer. Nevertheless, he accepted a commission as a private captain in the navy in 1690, and commanded his eponymous warship at the battle of Beachy Head; his conduct there, where he was prominent in helping damaged Dutch warships to get clear, earned him a warm letter of praise from William. After returning from the battle, Grafton spent a fortnight at Euston with his duchess before joining Churchill's force intended for the campaign in Ireland. He arrived at Cork on 20 August, and three days later led the assault on Passage West. Advancing under heavy fire, Grafton was hit by a musket ball which broke two ribs. He lingered until his death in Cork on 9 October. Following a funeral service at Westminster Abbey, he was interred in the new church of St Genevieve at Euston. His young widow was the chief beneficiary of his will, made on 8 July 1687 with a codicil dated 27 October 1688, and by which the earl of Lichfield and Lord Godolphin were appointed executors and guardians of his son and successor, Charles FitzRoy, second duke of Grafton (1683-1757). The duchess later married Sir Thomas Hanmer, and died on 7 February 1723. 
Grafton's death was widely and genuinely mourned, prompting a number of eulogies of variable quality. Handsome, heroic, plainly spoken, and one of the most popular of Charles II's children, Grafton always retained (or affected) the lack of education that Evelyn had commented upon at his marriage. His personality and idiosyncratic grasp of written English are both well summed up in a letter he wrote to the earl of Nottingham after the battle of Beachy Head, when he condemned 'all the damned contrivanses that has bein made euse of above to sett us in faction here' ('Finch MSS', 2.386). Nottingham had been a close friend of the duke's since the early 1680s, and wrote of him, '[he was] a very gallant man, and extremely beloved by the seamen, with whom he was very familiar and often joined them in their rough sports, and had he lived, would have deserved to have been Lord Admiral' (Finch, political papers, 148, fol. 7). 


@@@@@


doc= 9637


FitzRoy, Henry (1807-1859), politician, second son of George Ferdinand FitzRoy, second Baron Southampton, and his second wife, Frances Isabella, second daughter of Lord Robert Seymour, was born on 2 May 1807 in Great Stanhope Street, Mayfair, Westminster. He matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 27 April 1826, but afterwards left Oxford and graduated MA at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1828. 
FitzRoy was elected MP for Great Grimsby in 1831 as a Conservative and for Lewes on 21 April 1837, representing it until his death. He spoke frequently upon practical and administrative topics, and in 1845 became a lord of the Admiralty in Sir Robert Peel's reconstructed government. He joined the Peelites, was quite close to Gladstone, and ultimately became a Liberal. In December 1852 he returned to office under Lord Aberdeen as under-secretary of the Home department, and was largely instrumental in passing the 'County Courts Extension Act' in 1850 (17 & 18 Vict. c. 94, and 13 & 14 Vict. c. 61), the 'Hackney Carriages (Metropolis) Act' and 'Aggravated Assaults Act' of 1853 (16 & 17 Vict. c. 30 and 33), and the 'County Courts Extension Act Explanation Act' of 1854. Leaving this office in February 1855, he was sworn of the privy council and was chairman of committees in the Commons, 1855-9. In Lord Palmerston's administration of 1859 he became chief commissioner of the board of works, without a seat in the cabinet. 
FitzRoy married, on 29 April 1839, Hannah Meyer, second daughter of Baron Nathan Meyer Rothschild, who survived him five years; their children were Arthur Frederic, who died in 1858, and Caroline Blanche, who married Sir Coutts Lindsay, bt. After a long and painful illness FitzRoy died at Sussex Square, Kemptown, Brighton, on 22 December 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 9638


Fitzroy, Mary, duchess of Richmond (c.1519-1555?), noblewoman, was the younger daughter of Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk (1473-1554), and his second wife, Elizabeth Howard (1497-1558), eldest daughter of Edward Stafford, third duke of Buckingham, and his wife, Lady Eleanor Percy. The ages of her siblings suggest that she was born about 1519 and she spent her childhood at Tendring, Hundson, and Kenninghall, all in Norfolk. Arrangements for a marriage with Lord Bulbeck, heir of the earl of Oxford, were abandoned when in December 1529 Henry VIII proposed one of Norfolk's daughters should marry his illegitimate son. Norfolk always maintained the king instigated the match, but his wife later attributed it to the influence of Anne Boleyn. On 1 September 1532 Mary had a prominent role in Anne's creation as marquess of Pembroke and afterwards attended her as queen. Mary embraced the changes in religion, moving her brother Henry Howard, styled earl of Surrey, to seek to dissuade her from going too far in reading the scriptures. In September 1533 she carried the chrism at Princess Elizabeth's baptism. While at court she was a major contributor, together with Margaret Douglas and Mary Shelton, to the anthology of poetry known as the Devonshire manuscript (BL, Add. MS 17492). 
On 26 November 1533 Mary Howard was married, with a dispensation for relation in the fourth degree of consanguinity, to Henry Fitzroy, duke of Richmond (1519-1536), only illegitimate son of Henry VIII and his mistress Elizabeth Blount. Due to their youth the union was not consummated. A portrait by Hans Holbein, commissioned after her marriage, was never completed; the work was perhaps interrupted by Richmond's death, on 23 July 1536. The widow retired to Kenninghall, but the king refused to acknowledge her rights, and she struggled to obtain her jointure. Both she and her father made repeated attempts to press her suit. However, the king's position had nothing to do with the validity of her union, but reflected the uncertain standing of the Howards at this time. In July 1536 Mary herself had fallen under suspicion of having furthered Margaret Douglas's clandestine relationship with Thomas Howard. Not until the Howards' return to favour did she receive (11 March 1539) the first of a number of grants, which by 1540 assured her of a jointure worth over $700 a year. In the interim she incurred numerous debts, being forced to sell her jewels in an attempt to make ends meet. Plans to place her in Anne of Cleves's household in January 1540 were frustrated when the new queen brought her own attendants. 
Although Mary Fitzroy did return to court following Henry VIII's brief marriage to Katherine Howard on 28 July 1540, there was no repetition of the marked favour she had enjoyed under Anne Boleyn, and she was never to remarry. Her father's plan in 1538 for a betrothal to Sir Thomas Seymour of Sudeley, younger brother of the late Queen Jane, was approved by the king, perhaps with the expectation of being released from any financial obligation towards her. However, she remained determined to secure recognition of her status as dowager duchess of Richmond. The proposal was revived in 1546 as part of a suggested triple alliance, also involving the offspring of her brother Henry, and Thomas's brother Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford. Again she rejected the match. In 1547 Sir Garwen Carew testified 'her fantasy would not serve to marry with him' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/227, fol. 105). Her brother Henry scathingly suggested that she might instead use this opportunity to become the king's mistress. On these grounds she has been vilified by Howard biographers for her role in Surrey's execution, on 19 January 1547. 
After the arrest of her father and brother in December 1546 Mary Fitzroy was interrogated by the king's commissioners. Much of her deposition descended into reports of the earl's posturing and name-calling. Writing in 1938 Edwin Casady condemned the petty nature of her testimony as 'evidence that she was vindictive [and] bitter... eager to do anything to harm her brother' (Casady, 199). Mary's intentions were perhaps more laudable. 'Some passionate words of her brother she likewise repeated, as also some circumstantial speeches little for his advantage, yet so as they seemed much to clear her Father' (Herbert, 626). On the crucial, and only significant, point of Surrey's armorial bearings she was so vague that her evidence was no more instrumental in condemning her brother than in securing her father's release. Under Edward VI, Mary continued to petition the council without success. As a Howard, a member of a staunchly Catholic family, her enthusiasm for the protestant faith was sometimes regarded with caution, but her patronage of John Foxe and John Bale suggests she was a willing convert. From 1548 she undertook the upbringing of Surrey's children, engaging John Foxe as tutor. After Queen Mary's accession in 1553 Mary Fitzroy maintained a tactful distance from court. She died perhaps in December 1555 and was buried beside her husband in St Michael's Church, Framlingham, Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 9639


FitzRoy, Robert (1805-1865), hydrographer and meteorologist, was the second son of the second marriage of Lord Charles FitzRoy (1764-1829), son of Augustus Henry, third duke of Grafton, to Lady Frances Anne Stewart (died 1810), eldest daughter of the first marquess of Londonderry. He was born at Ampton Hall, Suffolk, on 5 July 1805. In 1809 the family moved to Wicken, Northamptonshire, where his mother died the following year. He attended school at Rottingdean and at Harrow (1817-18), and then, aged thirteen, went to the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth, where he proved an exemplary student and was the first winner, in 1819, of the mathematical prize. 
FitzRoy joined the 'Owen Glendower' as volunteer, later midshipman, on the South American station, transferring in 1822 to the 'Hind' and the 'Cambrian' in the Mediterranean, and in 1824 to the 'Seringapatam' on the channel station. In his lieutenant's examination he came first out of the twenty-seven candidates and was promoted to that rank on 7 September 1824. He returned to South America with the 'Thetis', moved to the 'Ganges' as flag-lieutenant to Sir Robert Waller Otway, and was soon (13 November 1828) appointed to take command of the brig 'Beagle', following the suicide of her former commander, Captain Pringle Stokes. The 'Beagle' and the 'Adventure', under Captain Phillip Parker King, were engaged in charting the coasts of southern South America. Here FitzRoy's seamanship and endurance were tested when he and his surveying crew spent thirty-three days in an open whaleboat in the depths of the subantarctic winter while exploring away from their ship. On this voyage FitzRoy carried four young Fuegians back to England; one man died soon after landing, the others were kept and educated at FitzRoy's expense ['see 'Exotic visitors (act. c.1500-c.1855)]. 
Having failed to win the parliamentary seat for Ipswich, FitzRoy sailed in the 'Beagle' in November 1831 to return the Fuegians to their families, hoping that they would encourage their peoples to befriend British vessels and especially shipwrecked sailors in need of succour. He was accompanied on this voyage by Charles Darwin. The two men lived in reasonable harmony during the five years that they were away, though Darwin recognized that FitzRoy's drive and ardour, so laudable in most respects, could on occasion lead him to overreact and take offence where none was intended. This aspect of FitzRoy's character, forgivable perhaps in a young man in trying situations, was to dog him throughout his life, yet the fact that many of his crew re-enlisted for the second voyage testifies to their faith in his seamanship and their respect for him as commander. He was promoted to captain on 3 December 1834. 
FitzRoy's hopes for his Fuegians were soon dashed. The main purpose of the voyage being, however, to continue his survey, he decided, without seeking approval, to purchase a companion ship to make the task easier and safer. This impetuous action earned him a rebuke from the Admiralty, which declined to reimburse his considerable expenses. His course home lay across the Pacific and round the Cape of Good Hope, for his instructions included the taking of astronomical observations at certain ports, whereby their longitudes might be more accurately fixed. 
The 'Beagle' arrived home in October 1836. On 8 December FitzRoy married Mary Henrietta, daughter of Major-General Edward James O'Brien; in 1841 the couple made 25 Lowndes Square, Belgravia, their town residence. Four children were born, one dying in infancy. FitzRoy's narrative of the 'Beagle' voyages was published in 1839, Darwin's volume on the zoology following in 1840. In July 1839 he was elected an elder brother of Trinity House. 
FitzRoy's achievements as a surveyor were widely acclaimed. The Royal Geographical Society awarded him its gold medal in 1836 and Sir Francis Beaufort, the hydrographer, reported to parliament in 1848 that 'from the Equator to Cape Horn, and from thence round to the river Plata on the eastern side of America, all that is immediately wanted has already been achieved by the splendid survey of Captain Robert FitzRoy' ('Parl. papers', 1847-8, 61.299). 
In 1841 a general election was declared, and Lord Londonderry, FitzRoy's maternal uncle, offered him the tory candidature for co. Durham. After a quarrel with another tory candidate, William Sheppard, FitzRoy went on to win the seat. In parliament FitzRoy was responsible for a bill of 28 July 1842 'for requiring and regulating examination of Masters and Chief Mates of Merchant Vessels', which was widely seen as one way to reduce the number of shipwrecks; the bill led to the 'Mercantile Marine Act' of 1845, which made certificates obligatory. Appointed acting conservator of the River Mersey in September 1842, he journeyed up the river before preparing a report on its hydrology and how navigation might be improved. Later that year he escorted the visiting Archduke Friedrich of Austria around various dockyards and manufactories. 
In February 1843 FitzRoy was appointed as the second governor of New Zealand, his predecessor, Captain William Hobson, having died in office. Accompanied by his wife and children and his father-in-law, he sailed in a mood of optimism, but arrived in December 1843 to find a country in domestic turmoil, punctuated by sporadic local warfare. Disillusioned by the way the land clause of the treaty of Waitangi (1840) was being applied in practice, the Maori population was divided in its response to the white settlers who were seeking to acquire land for farming. The settlers conceived their interests to be paramount, but FitzRoy held that the Maori had equal claim on his care and said so with more candour than prudence. His sentiments aroused the fiercest indignation among men whose close relatives had been massacred by the Maori. His manner, in the face of this opposition, was not conciliatory. It was spoken of as arrogant and dictatorial, as savouring more of the quarter-deck than of the council chamber. His financial policies were also inept. Admittedly, when swift decisions had to be taken, FitzRoy was hardly in a position to refer to Lord Stanley, the colonial secretary, for mail took several months to make the round journey; but even when he might have sought approval for his actions, he failed to do so, and one reason Stanley gave for his dismissal was his irritation at learning of FitzRoy's actions from third parties. FitzRoy incurred the enmity of the New Zealand Company, which was strongly represented in parliament. The government yielded to pressure; he was dismissed on 30 April 1845 and relieved in November. He sailed for home, with his family now augmented by a fourth child, Katharine O'Brien, born in 1844, and settled at Bradford in Wiltshire. 
In September 1848 FitzRoy was appointed superintendent of the Woolwich Dockyard, to fit out and undertake trials of the 'Arrogant', a steam-powered screw frigate. The 'Arrogant' proceeded to Gibraltar, frequently having to put in to port for attention to her boilers and engines. In February 1850 he retired from active service, though in the course of seniority he became rear-admiral in 1857 and vice-admiral in 1863. He served briefly as a managing director of the General Screw Steam Shipping Company, and equally briefly as personal secretary to his uncle Lord Hardinge. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1851, and a member of the Athenaeum in 1852. FitzRoy's wife died on 5 April 1852. On 22 April 1854 he married a distant cousin Maria Isabella Smyth, fourteen years his junior, at St Peter's, Eaton Square, Westminster; their daughter, Laura, was born in 1858. 
Following the maritime conference at Brussels in 1853, the Board of Trade established a meteorological department, appointing FitzRoy as meteorological statist in 1854. FitzRoy launched himself vigorously into his new job, persuading ships' captains to send in weather logs, from which he compiled charts of winds and currents throughout the year across the oceans, intended to assist navigators to find the fastest and safest route to their destination. He resumed his investigations into the specific gravity of sea water, begun during his years in the 'Beagle', by carrying out tests on deep-sea thermometers. Convinced that the falling barometer generally heralded storms, he provided for display at ports and harbours around Britain the so-called 'coastal' or 'fisheries' barometers: these large, sturdy instruments carried 'FitzRoy's Rules' for simple weather forecasting. His idea was to save lives by preventing small vessels from sailing when bad weather was imminent. His activities were supported and assisted by the British and Scottish Meteorological societies, and by the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, which elected him to its committee of management in 1859. 
In a tremendous storm of October 1859 the steamer 'Royal Charter' was wrecked off Anglesey with the loss of 459 lives. This disaster profoundly moved FitzRoy and strengthened his belief in the importance of predicting such storms. He arranged for weather reports from around Britain and the nearer continent to be telegraphed to his office, where he prepared what he called 'synoptic charts', a term still in use to denote charts showing conditions across an area at any one time. The first cautionary, or storm-warning, signals were sent in February 1861 to the Admiralty, Lloyd's, and various ports; from August 1861 they were published in newspapers. To warn vessels already at sea, FitzRoy devised a semaphore consisting of drums and cones which could be hoisted at headlands to indicate the expected force and direction of strong winds. Although he brought the term 'forecast' into the meteorological vocabulary, FitzRoy emphasized that forecasts were not 'prophesies or predictions... the term forecast is strictly applicable to an opinion' (FitzRoy, 'Weather Book', 171). The fruits of his recent work added to the experience of his years at sea provided the material for his 'Weather Book', published in 1863, and soon reprinted and translated. 
While FitzRoy's work was recognized and honoured abroad, the Board of Trade decided that he was exceeding his instructions, which were to collect data, and that forecasts should cease forthwith. FitzRoy became increasingly despondent, worried about his increasing deafness, and seeing opposition on all fronts, and from this time his mental health deteriorated. He normally sought relief from stress in hard work but this time he was too low for the medicine to take effect. On the morning of 30 April 1865, he rose and went into his dressing-room, where he cut his throat with his razor. He died at his suburban home, Lyndhurst, Westow Hill, Upper Norwood, Surrey. The coroner found that he had taken his life while of unsound mind, which allowed him to be buried at All Saints' Church, Upper Norwood, where his decayed gravestone was renewed by the Meteorological Office in 1981. He was survived by his wife. 
FitzRoy is best remembered for his contributions to meteorology, particularly forecasting. The popular so-called 'Fitzroy barometers', consisting of a siphon barometer with attached thermometer and Fitzroy's Rules, are distinct from the coastal barometers; the former were manufactured only after his death and were still being made in the late twentieth century. His name was given to several geographical features in Patagonia and Australia, and on 4 February 2002 a shipping forecast area off north-west Spain (previously Finisterre) was named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9640


FitzSimon, Henry (1566-1643), Jesuit, was born in Dublin on 31 May 1566, the son of Sir Nicholas FitzSimon (died 1585), a Dublin alderman, and his wife, Anna Sedgrave, also from Dublin. He became a protestant at the age of ten. Following a grammar school education in Manchester he matriculated at Hart Hall, Oxford, on 26 April 1583. He spent some years at the University of Oxford before going to Paris in 1587, the tenth year of his 'education in heresy' (FitzSimon, 'Justification', 115). After some time spent at the University of Paris he converted to Catholicism and studied rhetoric and then philosophy at Pont-a-Mousson University from 1587 to 1591. He was received into the Society of Jesus in April 1592 and spent his noviciate at Tournai. In June 1593 he went to Louvain to study theology; there he was taught by Lessius and met Rosweyde and Peter Lombard. He spent a brief period as professor of philosophy at Douai before returning to Ireland about 1597. 
On the Irish mission FitzSimon was renowned as a persuasive preacher. He conducted his ministry in an open, demonstrative manner, celebrating the first solemn high mass held in Dublin for forty years in 1598. He established a sodality to foster piety, promoted participation in confession and holy communion, and actively sought to attract converts to Catholicism. He was an active supporter of Dublin recusants. His ministry may have been principally among the social elite; he reputedly never dined without six to eight guests, and rode through the countryside with three or four gentlemen as companions. 
FitzSimon's reputation was built on his skills as a controversialist, and he attracted the attention of prominent members of the established church in Dublin, notably Luke Challoner, John Rider, and James Ussher. Much of the theological debate with these men was conducted during the five years FitzSimon spent in custody in Dublin Castle from 1599 to 1604. Although he claimed he was more harshly treated than others in prison, he none the less had access to books, including materials from the library of Trinity College, which he used in his theological disputations. The facilities accorded him suggest that the debate had semi-official approval. FitzSimon himself believed that divine providence ensured that the books he needed were made available to him. He employed a clerk named Cary, who was his nephew, but he was at a disadvantage as compared with his adversaries in that he was denied access to a printing press while in prison. Thus John Rider, dean of St Patrick's, whom FitzSimon had known since his time in Oxford, was able to publish three books against him in these years, to which FitzSimon could not reply in print. He was, however, able to circulate his texts in manuscript, and Rider offered to assist in getting his material printed. 
In June 1604 FitzSimon was taken from Dublin Castle and put on a boat bound for Spain, arriving in Bilbao on 14 June, his request to be sent to the Spanish Netherlands having been rejected by the authorities in Dublin. In Bilbao he made clear his intention to go directly to Rouen or Antwerp to arrange for the printing of his reply to Dean Rider. He spent time as a military chaplain in the Spanish Netherlands, and by September 1607 his book was complete. 'A Catholick confutation of Mr John Rider's claim to antiquity, and a calming comfort against his caveat... and a reply to Mr Rider's rescript' was published at Rouen in 1608. During these years he had also found time to conduct research in the libraries at Louvain and Douai on early Irish church history and the lives of Irish saints. On the instructions of his superior, Acquaviva, in 1608, he abandoned his historical researches and travelled to Rome, visiting the shrine of Loreto 'en route'. He made his final profession as a Jesuit in Rome on 15 August 1608. Two years later he was present in Rome for the ceremony of beatification of St Ignatius, founder of the Jesuits, on 20 February 1610. During three years spent in Rome, FitzSimon wrote a lengthy tract on the mass in English, 'The Justification and Exposition of the Divine Sacrifice of the Masse', which was published, probably at Douai, in 1611. 
FitzSimon also had in mind the compilation of a religious history of Ireland, a history of England, and a study of Irish geography and customs, but these works did not appear in print. He pioneered research into Irish hagiography, compiling a catalogue of some 288 Irish saints and the authors who had written about them. His 'Catalogus praecipuorum sanctorum Iberniae' was completed in April 1611 and evidently first published in the same year. The third of at least nine editions was issued at Liege in 1619 while FitzSimon was living there. His work on early Irish saints was extensively used by the Bollandists, and his researches were an inspiration to Stephen White and John Colgan and aroused the hostility of the Scottish author Thomas Dempster, who wished to claim many of the saints of 'Scotia' for Scotland. In May 1614 FitzSimon's history of the British church was published at Douai. 'Britannomachia ministrorum in plerisque et fidei fundamentis et fidei articulis dissidentium' denounced protestant clergy and sought to provide an appropriate historical underpinning for the Roman Catholic church in Ireland. 
Having returned to Flanders in autumn 1611 FitzSimon worked among the sick. He seems consciously to have sought to minister among victims of the plague, choosing to risk his life in the service of God. His mission he outlined as 'to hold and avow the only common doctrine of the Roman Catholic church, in it and with it to live, and (if God in his mercy says Amen) for it most willingly to die' (Hogan, 'Distinguished Irishmen', 283). As had been the case in Ireland he was no stranger in the households of the elite. He worked as a chaplain at Douai from 1611 to 1616, and at Liege 1619-23, where he spent time ministering to condemned criminals. In 1620 he was a military chaplain in the imperial camp at Bohemia. He remained there through that year and later published, in Latin, a history of the war there under the apt name of Constantius Peregrinus. It was translated into Italian and reissued several times, but was not without its critics. Under another pseudonym, Candidus Eblanius (the candid Dubliner), his account of the battle of Prague was published at Brunn (Brno) in 1620, and also ran to several editions. 
FitzSimon was chaplain at Dinant from 1623 to 1631, when he finally returned to Ireland after more than twenty-six years in exile. He was by then effectively in retirement and evidently living in his native Dublin. The Jesuit letters make no mention of him after his return to Ireland, although he was recorded in 1637 as being in good health for his age, seventy-one, having been forty-six years in the Society of Jesus and six years on the Irish mission. According to his first biographer, Young, writing in 1660 (cited in Hogan, 'Distinguished Irishmen', 309), he was forced to flee Dublin in the winter of 1641, after the outbreak of rebellion, and eventually made his way to Kilkenny, where he died two years later on 29 November 1643. 


@@@@@


doc= 9641


Fitzsimons, Walter (d. 1511), archbishop of Dublin and lord deputy of Ireland, was born into a prominent family of the English of Dublin, being the son of Robert Fitzsimons and Janet Cusack. He first appears as precentor of St Patrick's Cathedral in 1471, and was acting as vicar-general of the diocese in May 1472. In 1476, he was the chapter's proctor in parliament, where he was given the king's licence of absence from Ireland for two years to visit Rome or some other university. Fitzsimons was provided to the archbishopric itself on 14 June 1484, when, on account of blindness, Archbishop Walton resigned in his favour. He was the first Irish-born prelate to rule the see since St Lorcan O Tuathail 
(Laurence O'Toole; died 1180)
, and on 26 September he also became the first archbishop to be consecrated in St Patrick's. Restitution of temporalities was subsequently confirmed by great council ordinance on 15 October, with an additional clause permitting Fitzsimons to reoccupy waste tenements of the archbishop's freeholders. This represented Fitzsimons's opening move in the long-running struggle waged by successive archbishops to preserve their rights against the O Tuathail and O Broin families in disputed wastelands of the south Dublin marches. Yet the archbishop also secured the king's licence for two years to appoint clerks of the Irish nation to benefices in the Irishry where priests of the English nation were unacceptable. 
Fitzsimons played a leading role during the Lambert Simnel conspiracy, acting as chancellor to 'Edward VI' and, as archbishop, crowning him in Christ Church Cathedral. Yet he apparently disapproved of the hanging of the mayor of Waterford's messenger by Simnel's key supporter, the earl of Kildare, and thereafter his relations with the earl cooled. He received the king's pardon in July 1488, and was prominent in the expiatory ceremony following the rebels' formal submission. In May 1492 Fitzsimons was Henry VII's unexpected choice to replace Kildare when the earl was implicated in another Yorkist plot, that of Perkin Warbeck. As deputy lieutenant, Fitzsimons shared viceregal power with Sir James Ormond, appointed governor in June. The archbishop had primary responsibility for the area round Dublin, but proved no match for Kildare's pervasive influence in the four shires. The king sent over 300 troops in March, and about May Fitzsimons visited court to report on Kildare's continuing feud with Ormond. Ormond eventually took refuge in the archbishop's cathedral after renewed clashes in Dublin. From Fitzsimons's perspective, however, the high point of his deputyship was probably the parliament he convened over the summer and the statute enacted annulling grants and leases made by previous archbishops since 1417 -- on the grounds that the see's revenues were so decayed that the archbishop could not maintain his dignity nor defend his possessions. 
In September, in the face of renewed fears of invasion by Warbeck, the king replaced Fitzsimons with Viscount Gormanston as caretaker governor and, with other leading magnates and officials, summoned the archbishop to court for consultations. Fitzsimons sailed for England almost immediately. He was much less prominent during Poynings's deputyship, but was at court again in summer 1496, participating in the official reconciliation at Salisbury which preceded Kildare's restoration. There, on 6 August, the king appointed him lord chancellor, the only office reserved to the king's nomination in Kildare's patent and which Fitzsimons retained until his death. Subsequently, the archbishop's relations with Kildare remained harmonious. He deputized for the earl during Kildare's last visit to England in 1503; and the following autumn attended the king's council himself to report on Kildare's victorious Knockdoe campaign. 
Fitzsimons was apparently a very learned divine and philosopher. At a provincial council which he convened, reputedly in 1496, an ultimately abortive decree was passed for the establishment of a university in Dublin, with provision for an assessment for the lecturers' salaries on the clergy of 40 marks annually for seven years. Yet the archbishop had more success in advancing Dean Alen's project for a poorhouse for honest Catholics of the English nation, and he also recovered some of the lands detained from his see. He probably left his archiepiscopal finances in rather better state than he found them, despite later complaints about generous land leases and his acquiescence in Kildare's detention of lands around Castlekevin and Ballymore Eustace recovered from the Leinster Irish. He died at Finglas (Dublin) on 14 May 1511 and was buried on 16 May in the nave of St Patrick's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 9649


Fulk (I) fitz Warin (d. 1171) and his brother Roger were sons of Warin de Metz (died 'c'.1146). Fulk witnessed a charter of St Peter's Abbey, Shrewsbury, in 1145. He appears to have been a supporter of the Empress Matilda during the civil war of Stephen's reign, for in 1149 he received the manor of Alveston, Gloucestershire, from Henry Plantagenet and he may have been enfeoffed with land at Whittington, Shropshire, which was held by the Peverel family during Stephen's reign. In 1157 Fulk was witness to a royal charter for Malmesbury Abbey. He seems to have been a trusted follower of Henry II, who gave him 40 marks and pardoned a debt of 12died in 1158, pardoned another 2 marks in 1161, and pardoned an additional 11's'. in 1163. In addition the king gave him Whadborough, Leicestershire, in 1158. Henry entrusted Fulk with arming and provisioning Dover Castle in 1160. The children of Fulk (I) and his wife, Eva, included Fulk (II), Ralph, Richard, Warin, Alan, and William. 
Fulk fitz Warin's eldest son and heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 9650


Fulk (II) Fitzwarine (d. 1197), made a potentially advantageous marriage to Hawise de Dinan, daughter and coheir of Josce de Dinan, who had held Ludlow Castle under the Empress Matilda during Stephen's reign. This marriage may have taken place as early as 1167, certainly by 1178. Fulk (II) strove to gain control of Whittington and did win a favourable 'curia regis' judgment in 1195 but could not take possession of the manor. Whittington had been held by the Welshman Roger of Powys during the reign of Henry II, and then by Roger's son Meurig for his service as an interpreter and guide. The children of Fulk (II) included Fulk (III), William, Philip, John, Alan, and Richard; on Fulk (II)'s death in 1197, he was succeeded by 


@@@@@


doc= 9651


Fulk (III) Fitzwarine (d. 1258), who continued his father's quest for Whittington. He paid a fine of $100 for the manor, but King John gave it instead to Meurig and, after Meurig's death, to his sons 'Werennoc' and 'Wennoneo' (probably garbled versions of the Welsh names Goronwy and Gwenwynwyn). Exasperated, Fulk (III) waged a guerrilla rebellion against the king between 1200 and 1203. His fifty-two adherents included his brothers William, Philip, and John, some Fitzwarine family tenants, and many younger sons of prominent Shropshire families. The king sent Hubert de Burgh with 100 knights to respond to this threat, but finally pardoned Fulk and his followers on 11 November 1203. Fulk paid 200 marks and finally received Whittington Castle in October 1204. 
In 1207 Fulk (III) married Matilda, daughter of Robert le Vavasour and widow of Theobald Butler, who had been butler of Ireland and was brother to Archbishop Hubert Walter. Fulk assumed the fine of 1200 marks that Matilda's father had offered for royal permission for this marriage to take place. Between 1207 and 1223 Edlington in Yorkshire was the focus of a prolonged dispute between Fulk and Robert le Vavasour. Fulk accompanied the king to Ireland in 1210 and was frequently with him during the next few years, including the king's interlude in France during the summer of 1214. However, in 1215 Fulk joined the barons who were rebelling against the king, and although by February 1216 he was reconciled to the crown, mistrust of him lingered. In 1221 he was given permission to strengthen Whittington Castle, but only enough to resist the Welsh. Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1240), ruler of Gwynedd and the ascendant power in early thirteenth-century Wales, captured both Whittington and Fulk's castle at Alberbury in 1223 and held the latter until 1226. 
After 1228 Fulk enjoyed Henry III's favour and confidence. In 1229 with the bishop of Hereford he escorted Llywelyn's son Dafydd and his sister to Westminster and in 1230 and 1231 he was overseas on royal business. The king gave him 500 crossbow bolts in November 1233. In July 1236 Fulk and his brother William were two of seven 'dictatores' ('negotiators') appointed to mediate disputes about the truce with Llywelyn. In July 1245 the king had Fulk convey the royal order to Martin, the papal nuncio, to leave England and in November Fulk was ordered to arbitrate a dispute regarding the Welsh truce. Some time between 1221 and 1226 Fulk (III) founded Alberbury Priory and gave it first to the Augustinian canons of Lilleshall and later to the order of Grandmont. In 1252 he bequeathed that his body be buried there. Fulk was very advanced in age when he died, probably during the spring or summer of 1258, and may have been blind during the final seven years of his life. His second wife was Clarice d'Auberville. Fulk (III) had two sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 9652


Fulk (IV) Fitzwarine (d. 1264) and Fulk Glas of Alberbury, and four daughters: Hawise, who married William Pantulf, Joan, Eva, and Mabel. Fulk (III)'s attempt to marry Fulk (IV) to Angharad, daughter of Madog ap Gruffudd of south Wales, was foiled by Llywelyn and Henry III. 
Because of his father's great age Fulk (IV) handled the family affairs for several years before Fulk (III) died. In 1253 Fulk (IV) accompanied the king to Gascony. By now the Fitzwarines were significant marcher barons and Fulk (IV) was listed among those specifically enjoined to be intendant upon John de Gray, Hamon L'Estrange, and John (II) Fitzalan when these men were appointed to keep the Shropshire march in May, July, and August 1257 respectively. During this period Fulk (IV) had persistent disputes with Fitzalan of Oswestry and Thomas Corbet of Caus, both neighbouring Shropshire barons. Fulk (IV) supported Henry III in the barons' war and was drowned in a stream at the battle of Lewes on 14 May 1264. He left a widow, Constance, and a minor son and heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 9673


Flannan mac Toirrdelbaig (fl. 7th cent.), Killaloe's patron, whose cult was largely the creation of the O Briain kings, descendants of Brian Boruma. Flannan was not prominent enough to be mentioned in the early martyrologies and his feast day, 18 December, is recorded only in the martyrology of Donegal. His father, the king Toirrdelbach, was the ancestor of the O Briain rulers, the main branch of the Dal Cais royal dynasty. The development of Flannan's cult took place during the eleventh and twelfth centuries. The large hagiographical dossier built up on him at this time is the last example of the conscious cult building which had dominated Irish religious life since the seventh century. The twelfth-century Latin life of Flannan, of which there are two main recensions, was probably composed between 1163 and 1167 in Killaloe by an Irish cleric who was trained on the continent. He also seems to have been the author of the Latin life of Mo Chuille (Mochulleus) whose church of Tulla lay not far from Killaloe. 


@@@@@


doc= 9757


Florence of Worcester (d. 1118), a monk at Worcester, is praised for his skill and industry in an obituary under the annal for 1118 in John of Worcester's chronicle. The view of the early editors that he was the author of the Worcester chronicle to 1117 or 1118, and that this was later continued by others, is no longer held for three reasons. The chronicle shows no differences in style before and after 1118; in its annals before that year it used Eadmer's 'Historia novorum', which was not completed until 1122; and John clearly had a decisive role in the making of the chronicle in its later stages. The eulogistic obituary suggested, however, that Florence had a part in the compilation of the chronicle, a role that must probably remain undetermined. 


@@@@@


doc= 9789


Thomas [i] Foley (1617-1677), and Robert [i] ('bap'. 1626, died 1676) took over parts of the business as they reached maturity. By 1638 they had a warehouse in London adjoining Leadenhall and were competing with the London ironmasters and ironmongers, addressing a national market. 
Richard [ii] bought property in the neighbouring parish of Oldswinford and by 1631 had moved to a brick house in High Street, Stourbridge. Though of puritan sympathies he and his son Thomas [i] supplied iron ordnance, shot, pikeheads, and nails to the king's armies in 1642-5. He was active in Stourbridge local government and a feoffee of Stourbridge grammar school. Richard Foley died in July 1657 at the age of seventy-seven and was buried in St Mary's Church, Stourbridge. Four of his five sons continued in the development of the iron business, and his daughters and sons-in-law were also actively involved. Capital was raised by a series of interlocking partnerships between family members and close associates. Iron mills were added or disposed of according to their profitability and value as contributors to the whole enterprise. 
Richard [iii], the eldest son of Richard [ii] and his first wife, extended Foley interests to north Staffordshire. In 1651 he bought the manor of Longton, north Staffordshire, where there were coal and ironstone mines, and in 1661 he leased Meir Heath furnace in that manor. By 1666 there was an associated warehouse for slit rod at Normacote Grange. With Consall and Oakamore forges these formed a group known as the Moorland works, supplying rod and bar to north Staffordshire ironmongers. These were operated by Richard [iii] in partnership with his younger stepbrother Philip [i] (died 1670). He also brought together Lawton furnace and the forges of Cranage and Warmingham in Cheshire. Both the Moorland and the Cheshire works supplied rod and bar to north Staffordshire ironmongers. Henry Glover of Stourbridge was brother-in-law to the Foley sons and was their agent. From 2 June 1675 to 15 July 1676 more than 1000 tons of iron were cast at Meir Heath. Richard [iii] died in 1678, and the north Staffordshire works passed to his son Richard [iv] (died 1684). 
Meanwhile, Thomas [i] Foley, born on 3 December 1617 at Witley Court, Worcestershire, the second son of Richard [ii], worked with his father from an early age and married (before 1641) Anne Browne ('b'. 'c'.1619) of Spelmonden, Kent, whose father, John, was a gun-founder with iron furnaces in the Weald at Hawkhurst and Bedgebury. Of their four sons, Thomas [ii] ('c'.1641-1701), Paul Foley (1644/5-1699), Nathaniel (1647-1663), and 


@@@@@


doc= 9810


Alexander Forbes, first Lord Forbes (d. 1448), who appears on 20 November 1406 as witness to a charter given by Robert Stewart, duke of Albany and governor of Scotland. Wyntoun names Forbes as one of the participants in a knightly tournament held in England in 1408; as serving his feudal superior, Alexander Stewart, earl of Mar, on the latter's expeditions abroad between 1406 and 1408, when he fought in the army of the duke of Burgundy; and as joining with Mar at the battle of Harlaw in 1411 against the lord of the Isles. On 16 October 1423 Forbes had a charter from Murdoch, duke of Albany, for the lands and barony of Forbes, situated in the sheriffdom of Aberdeen, on the boundary of the provincial earldom of Mar, thereby enhancing and underlining his position in the north-eastern political community. That he was anxious to maintain his new privileges is shown by the undertaking he received from his brother-in-law, William Douglas, second earl of Angus, on 4 November 1423, in which Angus promised that he would not sell or alienate any of his lands or possessions to the prejudice of his sister, Elizabeth Douglas (Forbes's wife), or their heirs. 
Forbes's wider ambitions included royal service; in 1423 and 1424 he received letters of safe conduct from the English king to go to Durham to treat for the ransom of James I. Following the return of the king in 1424, Forbes served as a royal councillor, and when the king went north to Aberdeen in August 1426, he used Forbes, familiar with the politics of the area, as one of his advisers. Forbes's support was also courted by Robert Erskine, another influential member of the north-eastern nobility, who entertained aspirations to the earldom of Mar, while in May 1432 Forbes entered into an agreement with Alexander Lindsay, earl of Crawford, who, as sheriff of Aberdeen, was able to offer him the office of deputy sheriff. 
In 1435, following the death of the earl of Mar in that year, Forbes was made bailie of Mar by the king, thus acquiring an office which rendered his support vital for those who sought influence in Mar; it was for this reason that, on 17 November 1435, Forbes made an indenture with Erskine, offering the latter help in recovering the earldom of Mar and Garioch in return for 100 marks or lands in Mar, subject to Erskine's success. In the event, the king claimed the earldom himself. However, in 1438, following the death of James I, the consequent turmoil was exploited by the politically ambitious nobility of the north-east, with Forbes, as deputy sheriff of Aberdeen, backing Robert Erskine's continued claim to the earldom of Mar in defiance of the government. In doing so Forbes demonstrated the extent to which he was giving his local interests precedence over royal service, in consequence of the unpopularity created by the royal annexation of Mar. On 26 June 1439 Forbes received a charter from Erskine, styling himself earl of Mar, for half of the lordship of Strathdee. 
Recognition of Forbes's influence probably led to concerted efforts by the minority government to court his support, and the ultimate failure of Erskine to achieve his ambitions in Mar seems to have had no adverse affect on Forbes, who had been raised to the peerage as a lord of parliament by 1 July 1445, when he appears as Lord Forbes. On 4 July 1440 the house of Drumynour (in Strathbogie, Aberdeenshire) is first mentioned as the chief residence of the Forbes family, and the status afforded by its acquisition, and by the peerage title, argues that Forbes had come to enjoy the patronage of Chancellor William Crichton, seeking to advance a man whose local influence would facilitate the effective administration of the north-east during the royal minority. Before 1423, Forbes married Elizabeth, daughter of George Douglas, first earl of Angus, through whom their children were heirs of entail to the earldom of Angus. Forbes died in 1448 and was succeeded by his son, James. 



@@@@@


doc= 9811


Alexander Forbes, fourth Lord Forbes (d. 1491), succeeded his father and, on 5 July 1483, was ordered to pay 2000 marks to Margaret, Lady Dirleton, for failing to fulfil his agreement to marry her daughter. Instead, Forbes married Margaret Boyd, the daughter of Mary Stewart -- the king's sister -- and Thomas Boyd, earl of Arran ['see under 'Boyd, family]; this royal connection may have been a factor in making Forbes one of James III's staunchest and most consistent supporters. He was present with the king at Aberdeen in April 1488 during the crucial latter stages of the king's confrontations with the rebels in that year. He accompanied James to Blackness early in May, and remained with him in Edinburgh between the 18th and the 28th, but seems almost certainly to have accompanied John Ramsay, Lord Bothwell, and the bishop of Moray in early June on a commission to enlist support for James III from fugitive Scots in Northumberland. The effort came too late, and the king was defeated and killed at Sauchieburn on 11 June 1488. 
On 16 August 1488 Ross herald was sent north with a summons for treason to Lord Forbes. In the following spring, after he received further letters concerning the raising of a tax in the north-east, according to the sixteenth-century chronicler George Buchanan, Forbes rode through Aberdeen and the neighbouring towns carrying James III's bloodstained shirt on a spear, in an effort to incite revolt against the government. Forbes and the Earl Marischal had joined the leaders of the southern uprising against James IV in the castle of Dumbarton by September 1489, but after the defeat of the rebels in October, Forbes was pardoned. He took little further part in politics, and had died before 6 May 1491. He was succeeded by his brother Arthur, as fifth Lord Forbes. 


@@@@@


doc= 10098


Sir Alexander Fraser (d. 1332), son of Andrew Fraser and second cousin once removed of Sir Simon. Andrew Fraser was sheriff of Stirling, and was imprisoned by the English in 1296, probably taking his family with him into captivity. Whether or not Alexander Fraser met Robert Bruce during this period, he certainly espoused his cause, for which Edward I had Fraser's lands forfeited. In 1308 Fraser fought at the battle of Loch Awe for Robert I, who evidently held him in high regard, since he made him grants of land in Forfar, Kincardine, and Aboyne, Aberdeenshire. Fraser's loyalty was demonstrated further when he fought for the king at Bannockburn, and he had been knighted by 1316, when his rising status was underlined by his prestigious marriage to the king's sister, Mary Bruce. He attended parliament in 1318, when the order of succession to the crown was settled, and by 10 December 1319 had been appointed chamberlain, holding that office until at least 5 March 1327. His seal appears on the declaration of Arbroath of 1320, and he became sheriff of Kincardine in addition to holding the hereditary office of sheriff of Stirling. His lands of Touch-Fraser in Kincardine, and his barony of Cluny and keepership of the king's park in Cowie Forest, both in Aberdeenshire, in addition to other royal favours, made Fraser one of the most important nobles north of Forth. He was killed at the battle of Dupplin in 1332, fighting for David II, and was succeeded by his son John Fraser, whose heiress-daughter married Sir William Keith, into whose hands most of the Touch-Fraser lands passed. John's younger brother, William, was the ancestor of the Frasers of Philorth (Buchan), although these were not to achieve national prominence until the early seventeenth century. 
By the 1360s, another branch of the Fraser family, almost certainly related to the Touch-Fraser line, although the precise genealogy is unclear, was emerging in the north of Scotland. By September 1365 Hugh Fraser had acquired the lands of Lovat, Inverness-shire, probably by marriage, although no exact details survive. He died before March 1410 and was succeeded by his son, Alexander Fraser of Lovat, who had confirmation of his father's charter of the barony of Kinnell, in the sheriffdom of Forfar, from Robert Stewart, duke of Albany, the governor of Scotland. He seems to have died in 1416, as his brother 


@@@@@


doc= 10288


Robert Galbraith (d. 1544) was the son of David Galbraith ('fl'. 'c'.1480), of Kimmerghame in Berwickshire. Having graduated MA from the University of Paris in 1503 he lectured in logic at the College de Coqueret. In 1510 he published a book on logic, 'Quadrupertitum', which was reprinted in 1516. He also wrote works of poetry, though none appears to have survived. Before the end of 1515 Galbraith had returned to Scotland and was appearing as an advocate before the lords of council. He represented Margaret Tudor as queen's advocate, from her return to Scotland in June 1517 probably until her death in 1541. Designated as a chaplain in 1526, Galbraith became treasurer of the Chapel Royal in Stirling in 1528. Before 1526 Galbraith had been made a burgess of Edinburgh and as early as 1516 he had been one of a number of people asked to convene in the Tolbooth to advise the burgh council. During his career as an advocate Galbraith acted for more than 250 clients before taking office as a lord of session on 7 November 1537. By that time he had also become parson of Spott in Haddingtonshire. As well as holding lands in the vicinity of the Tolbooth in Edinburgh, from 1523 he began acquiring property in Haddingtonshire and Berwickshire, particularly the estate of East Windshiel. Galbraith was murdered by John Carkettle of Finglen and others in Greyfriars kirkyard, Edinburgh, on 27 January 1544; the motive for the killing remains unknown. The murderers were granted a remission on payment of assythment to Galbraith's kin; part of the money was spent employing a chaplain at St Giles's, Edinburgh, to say prayers for his soul. Galbraith left behind a manuscript of legal sources which was later used by James Balfour of Pittendreich in compiling his 'Practicks' and referred to by him as the 'Liber Galbraith'. 


@@@@@


doc= 10546


Garald (d. 732) of Mayo. Mayo had been founded by Colman, bishop of Northumbria from 661 to 664, and founder also of Inishbofin off the west coast of Connacht. Mayo was intended for Colman's English monks, who had followed him from Northumbria. It remained an English community, as indicated by its Irish name, Mag nEo na Saxan ('Mayo of the English'), by letters to the community written by Alcuin (died 804), and by its inclusion within the province of York for the purposes of the legatine synod of 786. Garald, however, was remembered more by the Irish than by the English: his feast day is given variously as 12 or 13 March in the martyrologies of Tallaght, Gorman, and Donegal; his life was included in a late medieval collection deriving from the Shannon borderlands of Connacht. Its highly confused chronology and anachronisms suggest a late date, but it helps to add to the evidence for the enduring importance of the church of Mayo after the viking period, an importance attested by the remains of a round tower. Moreover the English character of the early community was evidently remembered as late as the post-Norman period. 


@@@@@


doc= 10681


Ann Gilbert (1782-1866)], with whom she was later to collaborate, was born on 30 January 1782, also in Islington. In 1786, for financial reasons, the family left London and settled in Lavenham, Suffolk, when Ann and Jane were four and three, respectively. The parents devised an innovative, if strict, regimen of home instruction in which no time was wasted: during mealtimes the mother read aloud, and during picnics the father taught the children to draw picturesque landscapes. As very young girls, Jane and Ann began to collaborate in inventing and acting out little fictions; they frequently impersonated not only royal princesses, but also 'two poor women making a hard shift to live' (Gilbert, 29). In their make-believe poverty, they gathered little plants for their winter food and stored them, with cheeses, in the reclaimed pigsty they used as their playhouse. In a painting by their father, now in the National Portrait Gallery, the two girls are depicted holding hands in their Lavenham garden. From early childhood, Jane's disposition combined a pensive seriousness with a witty turn of mind. She was a lover of nature and solitude, but when she was lifted onto the kneading board at the house of the local baker, she showed a brilliant talent for entertaining the neighbours with her stories and songs. 


@@@@@


doc= 10863


Godfrey of Jumieges (d. c.1106). According to William, Godfrey had earlier been a monk of Jumieges, which would suggest that he was Norman. But the matter is complicated. The 'Liber Eliensis' describes him as a local monk who became proctor at Ely following the death of Abbot Theodwin 'c'.1075-6. This position he filled with ability for seven or eight years until 1082, obtaining from William I a confirmation of the abbey's liberties. The 'Liber' then has him transferred to Malmesbury at the end of this term. But Malmesbury records make it certain that he only became abbot there between 1087 and January 1091. It is therefore possible, either that he came to Ely from Jumieges, perhaps in the company of Theodwin who certainly was a monk of that place, or that he moved from Ely to Jumieges for a few years after 1082, moving on to Malmesbury from there. The former would be the more usual pattern. 


@@@@@


doc= 11010


Gabran (d. c.558), who reigned for about twenty years. Later stories seem to connect Gabran with the southern Pictish country and the River Forth, but all that can be learned from the annals is that he died in the same year ('c'.558) in which the Pictish king Brude mac Maelchon caused a flight, or withdrawal, of Scots. This event, unexplained, was clearly a Scottish disaster. It is unclear whether Gabran's death was connected with it, but the words used of his death do not suggest that he died in battle or by violence. 
Gabran was succeeded by his nephew 


@@@@@


doc= 11011


Sir Adam Gordon (d. c.1328), lord of Gordon, in the early fourteenth century. A leading Scottish supporter of Edward I and Edward II, he held the offices of warden of the east march and justiciar of Lothian for the English crown. He fought against Robert Bruce (Robert I) at Methven in 1306, and acted as the warden of Sir Thomas Randolph (Bruce's nephew, later earl of Moray) after Randolph's capture by the English in 1308. Sir Adam was a late defector to the Scottish cause, not joining King Robert until 1315, but his experience was utilized quickly, and in 1320 he travelled to Avignon as one of the bearers of the declaration of Arbroath to Pope John XXII ('r'. 1316-34). 
At an unknown date Sir Adam received from the king the extensive lordship of Strathbogie in Aberdeenshire, no doubt partly as a reward for his diplomatic services. The grant may also have been influenced by his former ward Sir Thomas Randolph who sought some measure of security on the borders of his great earldom of Moray, created for him by King Robert in 1312. A few years earlier, in 1315, Randolph had granted the lands of Stichill in Roxburghshire to Adam Gordon, and the two seem to have been reasonably close. Sir Adam's wife was named Amabilla; her family is unknown. With her Sir Adam had four sons and one daughter. He died in or about 1328 and his eldest son, Sir Adam Gordon, succeeded him, was involved in border raids in the 1320s, and fought at Halidon Hill in 1333. The first Sir Adam's second son, William, inherited the lands of Stichill, and was the ancestor of the Gordons of Lochinvar, viscounts Kenmure. 
The Gordons largely disappeared from national politics over the following half century, and the next family member of note was 


@@@@@


doc= 11012


Sir Adam Gordon (d. 1402) who again concentrated on the family's border interests. In October 1398 Adam Gordon was one of three men excepted from a free exchange of prisoners between the Scots and the English, and was cited as a common truce-breaker. He was ordered to appear at the next meeting of the border commissioners in order to answer for the 'unmesurit harmes' he had done, under pain of a fine of $1000. Gordon's activities may have been related to attempts to pay the debts incurred by financing the relief duty on Strathbogie, which had been set by Robert III at 700 merks. In 1399 Gordon was still in debt, and is found borrowing money from a border ally, William Barde, laird of Kirkwood. He fought at Homildon Hill on 14 September 1402, when he invaded England alongside the earl of Douglas. The occasion seems to have been the catalyst for the reconciliation of a long-term feud with Sir John Swinton, who knighted Sir Adam on the battlefield. The two men then led a charge against the English line but were overpowered and killed in the process. Adam Gordon was married to Elisabeth Keith, daughter of Sir William Keith (d. in or after 1407), marischal of Scotland ['see under 'Keith family]. With Elisabeth he had a son and heir, John Gordon, and a daughter, Elizabeth Gordon; the latter married Sir Alexander Seton, second son of Sir William Seton ['see 'Seton family], and inherited the Gordon lands on the death of her brother on or before 7 March 1408, thereby establishing the line of the Setons of Gordon. 


@@@@@


doc= 11121


Thomas Gosson (fl. 1577-1598), a London bookseller in St Paul's Churchyard and later in Cheapside, who was admitted to the Stationers' Company on 4 February 1577, and who may have been Stephen's younger brother, although there is no documentary evidence to support this. Thomas's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 11390


John Green (1801-1874) was an actor at the Old English Opera House, London, and at Covent Garden. He became manager of the Cider Cellars in Maiden Lane, the Strand, and took part as a singer in the entertainments there. In 1842 he became chairman and conductor of music at Evans's Hall, and in 1845 succeeded W. C. Evans (died 1855) as proprietor. In 1865 he sold the concern to a joint-stock company for $30,000. In 1866 he gave evidence before a parliamentary committee on theatrical licences. He died in London at 6 Farm Street, Mayfair, on 12 December 1874. His collection of theatrical portraits was sold at Christies on 22 July 1871. The Cider Cellars and Evans's Hall were the originals of W. M. Thackeray's 'Cave of Harmony'. 


@@@@@


doc= 11445


Samuel Greg (1804-1876), mill owner and philanthropist, was born on 6 September 1804 at Quarry Bank House, Styal. From 1811 to 1819 he attended the Unitarian school of the Revd J. J. Taylor of Nottingham, followed by two years at Dr Lant Carpenter's school in Bristol. His years at Bristol were to have a profound effect on him since it was during this time that his scientific and literary tastes were formed. Two years spent gaining experience in the family business were followed, in 1823, by a winter of study at the University of Edinburgh. He became a partner in Samuel Greg & Co. in 1827 and, like his brothers, travelled in Europe prior to starting full-time work. On his father's retirement in 1832 he became responsible for Lowerhouse Mill at Bollington. He married Mary Priscilla Needham of Lenton, near Nottingham, in June 1838 and they had six girls and two boys, one of whom died in infancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 11482


Grellan of Craeb Grellain (fl. 5th-6th cent.), whose feast day is 10 November and whose crozier was carried into battle before the army of the Ui Maini, were then as, or even more, important locally, as also was the cult of St Brigit, already entrenched in the area by the mid-seventh century. 


@@@@@


doc= 11603


Moses Griffith (b. 1723/4), son of Edward Griffith, collector of taxes, born at Laipdon, Shropshire. He attended Shrewsbury School before entering St John's College, Cambridge, in 1742. He afterwards studied medicine at Leiden, and graduated MD there in 1744. No further information about him has been found. 


@@@@@


doc= 11648


William Grisaunt (supp. fl. 1350) in the writings of the controversialist John Bale. Grisaunt was the name which Bale, in his 'Acta pontificum Romanorum' (1558), gave to the father of Pope Urban V ('r'. 1362-70) and he described him as a physician born in England. In the second edition of his 'Scriptorum illustrium maioris Brytanniae catalogus' (1557-9), Bale added that the pope's father had studied philosophy at Merton College, Oxford, and medicine at the University of Montpellier and he attributed to him the works which he had entered in his notebook ('Index'), without any date, under the name of William English. In fact Urban V's father, named Guillelmus, was lord of Grisac (hence the derivation 'Grisaunt'), near Mende in the southern Auvergne. He was not born in England, nor was he a physician. The confusion may have arisen from the fact of Pope Urban's brother having been named Anglic ('Anglicus'). While he was bishop of Avignon, and later of Albano, Anglic contributed to the papal foundation of colleges in Montpellier, among them the college of Mende (also called the 'college of the twelve physicians') for students of medicine. Modern authorities have rejected Bale's statements concerning the father of Urban V, but have continued to refer to a William Grisaunt ('fl'. 1350), a physician supposed to have studied at Oxford and Montpellier. This physician probably never existed. 


@@@@@


doc= 11649


Giuseppe Grisoni (1699-1769) was born at Mons on 24 October 1699. Of his parents nothing is known. He studied in Florence and Rome and came to England with John Talman in 1715, working as a draughtsman. He developed as a portraitist and history painter, decorating a ceiling at Canons for James Brydges, first duke of Chandos. His depiction of Colley Cibber as Lord Foppington in Vanbrugh's 'The Relapse' (Garrick Club, London; repr. Ashton no. 116) is a rare early theatrical portrait, while a painting showing one of the masquerades at the King's Theatre organized by John James Heidegger (V&A; exh. NPG, 1985, no. 105) may be by his hand. In 1724 Grisoni married an Englishwoman, Anne St John (died 1739?), to whom he had given drawing lessons, and returned to Italy in 1728, taking with him William Hoare as his pupil. He worked successfully in Florence until 1740 and subsequently in Rome, where he died in 1769, as a sculptor and history painter. Little is known of the career of Francesco Sleter ('c'.1685-1775), who called himself a Venetian, although undocumented in contemporary Venetian sources. He is first recorded in England as working for the duke of Chandos at Canons in 1719; he probably decorated the state rooms at Grimsthorpe Castle for Peregrine Bertie, second duke of Ancaster, after Vanbrugh completed the building in 1724; here his style is close to Bellucci's. Sleter is later documented in 1731, painting murals based on Spenser's 'Faerie Queene' for the Temple of Venus at Stowe, Buckinghamshire, while in 1732 he provided grisaille decoration for Benjamin Styles at Moor Park, Hertfordshire. In the mid- and late 1730s he was paid for ceiling decorations at Mereworth Castle (Kent) for John Fane, later seventh earl of Westmorland; he died at Mereworth in 1775. 
The most celebrated artist to arrive in these years was 


@@@@@


doc= 11831


Edward Abington (c.1553-1586) was the eldest son of John Abington, or Habington, of Hindlip, Worcestershire, and Catherine, daughter of John Wykes. John Abington was under-treasurer or cofferer to Queen Elizabeth. Edward was educated at Exeter College, Oxford, and took his BA in 1574. 


@@@@@


doc= 12078


James Hamilton, first Lord Hamilton (c.1410-1479), the eldest son, had been knighted by July 1439. Although his family had no known history of direct support for the earls of Douglas, major landowners in Lanarkshire, in 1441 he married Euphemia ('b'. in or after 1406, died 1468), daughter of Patrick Graham, earl of Strathearn, and widow of Archibald, fifth earl of Douglas (died 1439). (He had previously been affianced to a Janet Maxwell, a marriage perhaps never completed.) This union tied him firmly to the Douglases. His support for them brought further reward. On 3 July 1445 he was one of the first beneficiaries of moves by the greater barons in Scotland to adopt distinct titles: he was granted a hereditary lordship of parliament in a crown charter by which all his lands and baronies were erected into a lordship called Hamilton. 
Hamilton evidently continued to associate himself with the Douglases, most notably when he joined the eighth earl in a pilgrimage to Rome in 1450 for the jubilee year; but as the court was dominated by the Livingston interest to mid-1449, and then to 1454 by the Crichtons, he was seldom close to James II. This divided loyalty cast him into the political wilderness after the king killed the eighth earl of Douglas in Stirling in February 1452. In the following month Hamilton was with James, the ninth earl, when the latter ravaged Stirling, and when parliament met in June he and others fixed a letter on the parliament house door renouncing their allegiance to the king. Although an accord between James II and Douglas was reached in August and further sealed in January 1453, the two parties were not fully at ease. Hamilton briefly acted as the king's ambassador, but may have used his ambassadorial duties as the occasion for intrigue with the Yorkists in England. 
James II, probably planning a strike against the Douglases in any event, moved swiftly against Douglas and his allies in March 1455. Hamilton had been unable to obtain succour from England and when besieged in Abercorn Castle surrendered after observing that Douglas's courage was fading; he was imprisoned in Roslin Castle. He was not detained long, as the king (no doubt again seeking firm supporters at the climax of the defeat and disgrace of the Douglases) had him released and confirmed him in his tenure of his lands. In addition, he was granted the sheriffdom of Lanarkshire in July 1455 (previously held by the earl of Douglas) and in 1457 some land in Renfrewshire forfeited by the earl. In the following years Hamilton occasionally acted as a witness of crown charters and as ambassador. In 1457 he entered into a bond of manrent with George Douglas, earl of Angus, which obliged him to counsel and support Angus whenever required. The bond demonstrates how Angus's grant of the lordship of Douglas after the forfeiture of the ninth earl had led to his assertion of authority over former Douglas vassals; it also points to Hamilton's status among the nobility. 
On the death of James II in 1460 Hamilton briefly became a regular at court, but his star seems to have waned along with that of his uncle James, Lord Livingston (who had played a prominent role in securing his submission to James II in 1455). Hamilton's first wife died between 1 August and 1 November 1468. They had at least a daughter, Elizabeth, who married David, earl of Crawford (created duke of Montrose in 1488). 
About 1472 Hamilton began to appear as a witness of crown charters with great regularity. Although no more than a member of the king's daily council, a mark of his enhanced standing at court was his marriage about 1474 to Mary Stewart (1451-1488), the king's sister. She was the former spouse of Thomas Boyd, disgraced earl of Arran (died 'c'.1474). This significant alliance would secure for Hamilton's descendants an important role at court, on which they fully capitalized, not least because it made successive Hamiltons heirs presumptive to the throne. The couple had at least one son, James Hamilton, second Lord Hamilton and later earl of Arran, and a daughter, Elizabeth, who married Matthew Stewart, earl of Lennox. Mary Stewart is thought to have died in mid-1488. Hamilton died on 6 November 1479 and was probably buried in Hamilton kirk. He also had several illegitimate children, including at least four sons, three of them with one Janet Calderwood. 
By the mid-fifteenth century the Hamilton family held significant estates in Lanarkshire and Linlithgowshire, as well as land in Kirkcudbrightshire, Roxburghshire, and Renfrewshire. The first lord obtained the erection of Hamilton as a burgh of barony, possibly by 1465 and certainly by 1474, and began to feu out property there. Like many of his contemporaries, he undertook the erection of a collegiate church (at Hamilton), for which the pope's approval was obtained while he was in Rome in 1450. He also endowed a chapel and hospital in the parish of Shotts, because of its distance from Bothwell parish church. In January 1460 he made a grant of land in Glasgow to that city's newly founded university, on condition that the masters and students offered daily prayers for himself, his family, and even his unrequited benefactors. More unusual interests included reclaiming land from the sea, made at great cost near his lands at Kinneil, Linlithgowshire, and investigations into fining lead, both undertaken by the 1460s. 
By 1479 the Hamiltons had certainly found a niche at court, particularly through the marriage with the king's sister. As the second Lord Hamilton was only a few years old when he succeeded, there was no guarantee that his position on attaining his majority would be secure; but when he did, the father's uncertain loyalty before 1455 clearly counted for less than the son's being a cousin of King James IV. 


@@@@@


doc= 12507


Abraham Hartwell (1553/4-1606), who attended Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1568, graduated in 1572, and became a fellow in 1574. He then entered the service of John Whitgift, accompanying him to Worcester in 1577. By 1583 he was a notary public, by 1584 Whitgift's secretary. No doubt it was thanks to the archbishop that Hartwell became MP for East Looe in 1586 and Hindon in 1593. He had become a member of the Society of Antiquaries by 1600, when he described himself as 'in time the last that was admitted into this society' (Hearne, 1771, 2.375). In that year he contributed to the discussion of epitaphs, referring to one at Lambeth and another at Cambridge, and he is also recorded as presenting a paper on heraldic mottoes. 
Hartwell's most important contribution to scholarship was as a translator. Between 1595 and 1604 he published three translations from Italian and one from French, the former all dedicated to Whitgift. The first of these, 'The history of the warres betweene the Turkes and the Persians' (1595), is described as completed in 'houres... stollen from your Grace's graver businesses whereon I should have attended' (sig. A4). It was followed in 1597 by 'A report of the kingdome of Congo', an English version, amplified by woodcut plates and a map, of an Italian translation of the Portuguese original by Duarte Lopes. In his address to the reader Hartwell explains that he had been pressed by Richard Hakluyt to translate it, and presents as his primary motive a desire to advance missionary activity. Then in 1599 he published a translation from the French of a case of fraudulent demonic possession, with a dedication to Richard Bancroft, bishop of London, and finally, on 1 January 1604, in 'this my Quinquagenarian yere of Jubile', he produced a translation, 'The Ottoman of Lazaro Soranzo', describing how he had been prompted to 'thrust it forth' by a question put to him by Whitgift concerning the promotion of the grand vizier at the sultan's court. Hartwell made his will on 7 December 1606 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/109, fols. 47'v'-49). He named as his executor 'my derely beloved wiefe Elizabeth'. She was the daughter of Robert Garnet of Broxbourne, Hertfordshire, where she inherited lands. They had a son John, who was still a minor when his father died, and to whom Abraham bequeathed purchased estates in Thanet, Kent, and Cheshunt, near Broxbourne. His cousin Robert Wright, parson of Woodford, Essex, received many of his 'books of divinity, humanitie, polymathie or of any other profession whatsoever'. Hartwell had died by 17 December 1606, when he was buried at Lambeth. 
Few members of the Society of Antiquaries were heralds. Relations with the College of Arms cannot have been inherently unfriendly, since the Society met at Derby House, but the factious state of the college may have limited the membership of heralds, for fear they would bring their quarrels with them. Many members had heraldic interests, however. A good example is 


@@@@@


doc= 12740


Sir Gilbert Hay of Erroll (d. 1333), who had succeeded his father by June 1306 and received remittance from Edward I (to whom he had sworn fealty at Aberdeen on 16 July 1296) for the relief due for his lands, severely ravaged during the wars of independence. However, Hay joined the cause of Robert Bruce in March 1306, and in consequence Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke, received orders from Edward I to burn and destroy Hay's lands, presumably in Perthshire. Nevertheless Hay continued to serve Robert I loyally and consistently, for which he received a charter of the lands of Slains in Aberdeenshire, together with the office of constable of Scotland, positive evidence for his rise in political importance. 
Hay is described as constable in a letter from the nobles of Scotland to Philippe IV of France, dated 16 March 1309, although his tenure of the office was clearly provisional, as it was granted to David, earl of Strathbogie, in 1312. The latter's disgrace in 1314 led to the return and confirmation of the office to the Hays, but now in heredity, being given in a charter by Robert I, dated at Cambuskenneth on 12 November 1314, to Gilbert Hay and his heirs. The duties of the constable included presiding over the judicial court of the household and organizing the king's bodyguard and security wherever he happened to be residing, in addition to various ceremonial duties, some of which were apparently shared with the marischal. A safe conduct was issued to Hay by Edward II on 18 September 1314 as one of the Scottish ambassadors to go to England, and he was a signatory to the letter to Pope John XXII drawn up at Arbroath on 6 April 1320. He was named as one of the conservators of the truce in 1323, and he died in April 1333. 
Nicolas Hay was the eldest son of Sir Gilbert, but he appears to have predeceased his father, and may have been the Hay, mistakenly named William, said by Hector Boece to have fallen at the battle of Dupplin in 1332. Sir David Hay of Erroll, who witnessed a charter by David II on 17 June 1341, and who may have been Nicolas's son, was killed at the battle of Nevilles Cross on 17 October 1346. 



@@@@@


doc= 12925


Hengist (d. 488?) and 


@@@@@


doc= 12965


Prince Henry Maurice of Battenberg (1858-1896), born at Milan on 5 October 1858, was the third son of the morganatic marriage between Prince Alexander of Hesse (1823-1888) and Countess Julie von Haucke (1825-1895), who was granted, in 1858, the title of princess of Battenberg. Queen Victoria at first declared that the match 'would never do', but her main concern was to keep her daughter by her side and she did not share the general horror of continental royalty for a pedigree impaired by a morganatic marriage. She gave her consent on condition that Prince Henry ('Liko') resigned his commission in the Prussian army and that the couple made their home with her. The marriage took place at Whippingham church, near Osborne, on the Isle of Wight, on 23 July 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 13018


Arthur John Herbert (1834-1856), baptized on 28 June 1837, died on 18 September 1856, aged twenty-two after falling ill with typhoid fever at Mauriac, in the Auvergne. 


@@@@@


doc= 13022


Edward Herbert, third Baron Herbert of Cherbury and third Baron Herbert of Castle Island (1630-1678), was born in February or March 1630, the favourite grandchild of the first Baron Herbert of Cherbury. According to the latter's will, money in a trunk and plate in his house in London were to be used for his grandson's education at university or in overseas travel. He was also left the contents of Montgomery Castle with the instruction that he was not to sell, or even to lend, the books and furniture there, and only to allow his father use of them on his giving good surety for their return 'with safety and without diminution'. Like his father and uncle he supported the royalist side throughout the civil war and he was imprisoned for a short time after joining Sir George Booth, Lord Delamere, in declaring for Charles II in Cheshire in 1659. He married first Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas Middleton (who had captured Montgomery Castle from his grandfather), and then Elizabeth Brydges, daughter of Lord Chandos, a granddaughter of his grandfather's friend. There were no children from either marriage. After the Restoration he was appointed custos rotulorum for Montgomeryshire in 1660 and for Denbighshire in 1666. In 1663 he built a house near the site of the former Montgomery Castle. Richard Davies, a Quaker from Welshpool, often interceded with Edward Herbert on behalf of imprisoned Quakers and was treated with consideration. Edward himself complained that his great-uncle, Sir Henry Herbert, with whom he corresponded, did not respect him properly, although it should also be noted that when in 1665 Sir Henry published a collection of the first Lord Herbert of Cherbury's poems, he dedicated them to Edward. Edward Herbert died on 9 December 1678 and was buried in St Edmund's Chapel in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 13026


Herbert, George Augustus, eleventh earl of Pembroke and eighth earl of Montgomery (1759-1827), army officer and landowner, was born on 10 September 1759 at Wilton House, Wiltshire, and was baptized there on 29 October, the only son of Henry Herbert, tenth earl of Pembroke and seventh earl of Montgomery (1734-1794), an army officer, and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Spencer (1737-1831) ['see 'Herbert, Elizabeth, countess of Pembroke and Montgomery], a lady of the royal household and the daughter of Charles Spencer, third duke of Marlborough. Styled Lord Herbert, he was educated at home and at Harrow School from 1770 to 1775. He was appointed ensign in the 12th foot in 1775 and for the following five years undertook extensive travels to France, Austria, eastern Europe, Russia, and Italy with the Revd William Coxe, later archdeacon of Winchester, and Captain John Floyd. Having been promoted lieutenant in 1777 he became captain in the 75th foot in January 1778 and held the same rank in the 1st (Royal) Dragoons from December that year. He secured a majority in the 22nd light dragoons in 1781 and late the following year was made lieutenant-colonel in the 2nd dragoon guards. 
At the general election of 1780, having just come of age, Herbert was returned to parliament for the family borough of Wilton, and in the Commons he sided reluctantly and silently with the whig opposition. He held the seat until November 1784, when he was appointed vice-chamberlain of the household and was sworn of the privy council (17 November), and again from January 1788. On 8 April 1787 he married his first cousin Elizabeth (died 1793), the daughter of Topham Beauclerk and Lady Diana Spencer ['see 'Beauclerk, Lady Diana]. They had three sons and one daughter. At the start of the French revolutionary wars he showed considerable gallantry in skirmishing actions in Flanders, where he commanded the 2nd and 3rd dragoon guards and liaised with the Prussian and Austrian forces. He played an important part in the siege of Valenciennes in 1793, and at Dunkirk later that year he distinguished himself by capturing an enemy post at Hundssluyt. On his father's death on 26 January 1794 he inherited his titles, as well as Wilton House, the north and west fronts of which were later rebuilt by James Wyatt. His management of the Wilton estates saw the rent roll increase from $35,000 to over $100,000; he also possessed the electoral patronage of the borough. Having relinquished his household position, Pembroke succeeded his father as lord lieutenant of Wiltshire, where he exercised a steady and benign influence in local affairs for the rest of his life. He took his seat in the House of Lords on 20 February 1794, and thereafter was a staunch, but largely inactive, supporter of the ministry of William Pitt the younger and subsequent tory administrations. 
Pembroke was promoted major-general in 1795 and became colonel of the 6th (Inniskilling) dragoons in 1797, after which he held responsibility for the south-western district of England. Having obtained the rank of lieutenant-general in 1802, he was awarded the KG in 1805. In 1807, when he served as plenipotentiary on a special mission to Austria, he was appointed governor of Guernsey. On 25 January 1808 he married Catherine (1783-1856), the daughter of the long-serving Russian ambassador to London, Semyon Romanovich, Count Vorontsov. They had one son and five daughters, including Catherine Murray, promoter of the Harris tweed industry. An honourable and retiring man of amiable disposition, Pembroke, who was made a general in 1812, died at his London residence, Pembroke House, Privy Gardens, Whitehall, on 26 October 1827 and was buried at Wilton on 12 November. As he had quarrelled with Robert Henry, the sole surviving son of his first marriage, who succeeded to his titles, over an unfortunate marriage to an Italian princess, he left the bulk of his unentailed and personal estate, which included personalty sworn under $600,000, to his only son by his second wife, Sidney Herbert, later Lord Herbert of Lea. 


@@@@@


doc= 13027


Herbert, George Robert Charles, thirteenth earl of Pembroke and tenth earl of Montgomery (1850-1895), travel writer, the eldest son of Sidney Herbert, first Baron Herbert of Lea, and Elizabeth Herbert, daughter of Lieutenant-General Charles Ashe A Court Repington, was born in Carlton Gardens, London, on 6 July 1850, and succeeded his father as second Baron Herbert of Lea on 2 August 1861, and his uncle as earl of Pembroke and Montgomery on 25 April 1862. He was educated at Eton College, but because of poor health spent much time in Italy, Sicily, Spain, Egypt, and Palestine. He made two voyages to the south Pacific before the age of twenty-one, accompanied by Dr George Henry Kingsley. The second voyage ended in shipwreck and the loss of their yacht on a coral reef in the Ringgold Islands, Fiji, all on board making their escape to an uninhabited, uncharted island. After ten days the weather improved, the party set sail in three of the yacht's boats, and, while endeavouring to make the Nanuku passage, south of the Ringgold Islands, were picked up by a Swedish schooner. The voyages were described in Lord Pembroke and Dr Kingsley's 'South Sea Bubbles, by the Earl and the Doctor' (1872). 
Lord Pembroke married, at Westminster Abbey, on 19 August 1874, Lady Gertrude Frances Talbot (died 1906), the third daughter of Henry John Chetwynd Talbot, eighteenth earl of Shrewsbury. In 1874 Disraeli appointed him under-secretary for war (his father had earlier been war secretary), but ill health led him to resign his post in 1875. He never accepted office again, and rarely spoke in the House of Lords, although he was still interested in public affairs. He took an active part in the volunteer movement and commanded the South Wilts battalion until within a few months of his death. He built and endowed the Pembroke Technical School near Dublin, where children learned industrial crafts. He died childless at Bad Neuheim, Hesse, on 3 May 1895 and was buried at his seat, Wilton House, near Salisbury. He was succeeded by his brother Sidney Herbert. 


@@@@@


doc= 13028


Herbert, Henry, second earl of Pembroke (b. in or after 1538, d. 1601), nobleman and administrator, was the elder son of William Herbert, first earl of Pembroke (1506/7-1570), and his first wife, Anne Herbert (b. before 1514, d. 1552) ['see under 'Herbert, William (1506/-1570)], daughter of Sir Thomas Parr and sister of Queen Katherine Parr ['see 'Katherine (1512-1548)]. Lord Herbert, as he was known after his father's elevation to the earldom in 1551, first married, on 25 May 1553 when still a boy, Katherine Grey (1540-1568) ['see 'Seymour, Katherine]. This marriage was planned by John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, to gain Pembroke's support for the succession of his own daughter-in-law, Lady Jane Grey, Katherine's elder sister. After the failure of the plot and the accession of Mary, the marriage was annulled on the ground of non-consummation. Herbert in no way suffered as a result of his links with Dudley's plans. He was made a knight of the Bath at Mary's coronation on 29 September 1553 and later became a gentleman of the bedchamber to King Philip. When his father was appointed to lead the English forces to France in 1557, Herbert accompanied him and was present at the siege of St Quentin. In February 1563 he married for the second time; his new wife was Katherine (died 1576), daughter of George Talbot, sixth earl of Shrewsbury; they had no children. She died in May 1576. Eleven months later on 21 April 1577 he married Mary Herbert, nee Sidney (1561-1621), daughter of Sir Henry Sidney and sister to Sir Philip Sidney. They had three children who survived infancy: William Herbert (1580-1630), Philip Herbert (1584-1650), and Anne. 
In 1570 Herbert succeeded his father in the earldom and was appointed lord lieutenant of Wiltshire, intermittently to begin with and permanently from 1586. The first earl had been granted large estates in Wiltshire and Glamorgan as a reward for services to the crown under Edward VI, and the principal family home was at Wilton, near Salisbury. With the decline of the older Wiltshire peers, Stourton and Hungerford, and the temporary eclipse of the Seymours, Pembroke was very much the dominant figure in the county, striving successfully to build up influence over parliamentary elections, but mostly standing aloof from the faction-fighting in the shire. He played a larger part in the political contests in Glamorgan, where he could count upon the support of his numerous Herbert cousins. Here, too, he wielded considerable influence over the return of men to parliament: his brother-in-law Sir Robert Sidney was knight of the shire in 1584 and 1593. The vigorous feuds in the county often revolved around the hostility of the major gentry towards Pembroke himself and his Herbert allies. His dominance was confirmed and extended when Pembroke was appointed to succeed his father-in-law, Sir Henry Sidney, as lord president of the council in the marches of Wales in 1586. 
Pembroke had some advantages for the post over his predecessor. He could speak Welsh, had much experience of Wales, and was, indeed, described by a Welsh contemporary as 'llygad holl Cymru' ('the eye of all Wales'; 'DWB', 351). On the other hand he had already made enemies. One of them, William Mathew of Radur, Glamorgan, bitterly attacked the appointment: 'I never harde it thought agreeable with the law of this or of any country whatsoever... that such a one should hear... our capital causes of whom... all our lands, especially within Monmouth and Glamorgan shires are holden' (Williams, 'Council in the Marches', 276). Pembroke was quick to make more enemies yet. He rightly saw that many abuses had crept into the council during Sidney's last years and set out to remedy them. Within a short time he had united against himself almost all the officers of the council, who had until then been quarrelling among themselves for years. By the middle of the 1590s Pembroke had also alienated the judges on the council, who successfully reduced his authority. From about 1595 he engaged in a bitter feud with Robert Devereux, earl of Essex, who was building up a rival faction in Wales: Pembroke's tactlessness equalled or even exceeded that of Essex himself, and it was soon reported from court that he 'hath very few friends or none left here, himself so careless of them when he hath them' (Collins, 1.382). In the 1570s and 1580s Pembroke had been an influential figure at court, Leicester and he referring to one another as father and son. But by the end of his life he had antagonized most of his friends, while his attempts to reform the council had ended in failure. 
Pembroke's life at Wilton, however, was more positive, thanks largely to his wife. 'In her time', wrote Aubrey, 'Wilton House was like a college, there were so many and ingenious persons. She was the greatest patroness of wit and learning of any lady in her time' ('Brief Lives', 1.312-13). Principal among her guests was her brother Philip Sidney, who wrote much of the 'Old Arcadia' there. But Pembroke himself played a role as patron, appointing Fulke Greville as secretary to the council in the marches and Abraham France as queen's solicitor there. His chaplain, Gervase Babington, probably owed his preferment to the see of Llandaff to Pembroke. In the theatre he patronized Burbage's company, known as Pembroke's men. During the last five years of his life his health declined: 'I dream of nothing but death, I hear of little but death, and... I desire nothing but death,' he wrote to Sir Francis Hastings on Christmas eve 1595 (Brennan, 101). There were signs of dissension in the family. His son William asked Robert Cecil to secure for him the queen's permission to stay at Wilton with his father, otherwise the latter would give away all his money. Pembroke died at Wilton on 19 January 1601, 'leaving his lady as bare as he could and bestowing all on the young lord, even to her jewels', according to John Chamberlain ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.116). This is not, however, borne out by his will, in which he left the countess jewels and plate to the value of 3000 marks and substantial rents, both for her life or until she married again. He was buried in Salisbury Cathedral. 
Pembroke emerges as intelligent, forceful, perceptive, but disastrously lacking in tact. He once sent a letter to the queen which his secretary refused to deliver, thinking it dangerous to have 'so passionate a letter delivered unto the Queen' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 2.200). His persistent ill health seriously hampered his attempts to reform the council in the marches. 


@@@@@


doc= 13029


Herbert, Sir Henry (bap. 1594, d. 1673), master of the revels, was baptized on 7 July 1594 at St Nicholas's Church, Montgomery, the sixth of seven sons (and three daughters) of Richard Herbert (died 1596) and Magdalen or Magdalene, 'nee' Newport (died 1627), of Montgomery. The family were Anglo-Welsh gentry, connected to the Herbert earls of Pembroke. Herbert's mother was later patron of John Donne, and two of his brothers were notable poets: the eldest, Edward Herbert (later Lord Herbert of Cherbury), and George Herbert. His younger brother Thomas Herbert was a naval officer. 
Magdalene moved to Oxford in 1599 to supervise the education of her sons (there is no record of Henry attending school or university, and he was probably privately tutored), and to London in 1601, taking a house in Drury Lane. In 1609 she married the much younger Sir John Danvers, who took an interest in his stepchildren. 
By 1615 Herbert was in France, acquiring a command of the language and acting as a diplomatic courier. In April 1619 he was sent to Paris to prepare for his brother Edward's appointment as British ambassador, and was involved in important business, including abortive negotiations for the marriage of Prince Charles to the Princess Henrietta Maria. He began to be noticed at court and determined to make a separate career for himself; in March 1622 he became a gentleman of the privy chamber, a largely ceremonial post, but with some access to the king. When Edward returned to Paris, Henry did not go with him, but continued to act as his agent from London. In his autobiography Edward noted that the whole family was prone to be passionately angry and quarrelsome, 'infirmities to which all our Race is subject', and that Henry (who acted as second when Sir Robert Vaughan challenged Edward to a duel in 1619) 'gave several proofs of his courage in duels, and otherwise being no less dexterous in the ways of the court as having gotten much by it' ('Life', ed. Shuttleworth, 9). 
On 24 July 1623 Henry Herbert came to a business understanding with Sir John Astley, the master of the revels. Technically Astley appointed him as his deputy but for practical purposes he sold Herbert the post in return for $150 per annum. Herbert enjoyed the full dignity of the office from the outset, but had Astley died before Ben Jonson, who held the next reversion, he would have lost it. In fact Jonson died in 1637, and Astley in 1640; only then did Herbert's own reversion (acquired jointly with Simon Thelwall in 1629) become operative. The revels office was primarily responsible for overseeing theatrical entertainment at court, mainly hiring in the leading acting companies in the festive season between November and Lent and on other special occasions. It also attended to some practical aspects of court masques, especially the lighting. 
Earlier masters of the revels had also carried a special commission, which gave them wide-ranging powers over the acting community. In fact, Herbert never received this commission, presumably because of his arrangement with Astley, which may explain why he had such difficulty reasserting this authority after the Restoration. But prior to the civil war he behaved as if he had, controlling the major acting companies (usually four in number) privileged to perform in London and at court. He also licensed touring players, at least in principle throughout the country, and all manner of other entertainments -- exotic animals, puppet shows, 'monsters' (people with malformations, including Siamese twins, bearded ladies, children with multiple heads, or no arms), and so on. Most important, from the perspective of later ages, this involved him in the censorship and licensing of all plays, both for performance and for print. Since few records of his principal predecessors, Edmund Tilney and Sir George Buck, have survived, his office records comprise by far the most revealing documents we possess about the censorship of late Elizabethan and early Stuart plays. Neglected for many years after his death, they have now disappeared. But partial transcripts were made by Edmond Malone, George Chalmers, Rebecca Warner, and Craven Ord, and passed into print by various means. The tale of these documents and their transmission is best told in N. W. Bawcutt's authoritative edition of 1996. 
On 7 August 1623 King James knighted Herbert and 'was pleased likewise to bestow many good words upon me & to receive mee as M.r of his Revells' ('Control and Censorship', 4-5). This was at Wilton, home of William, earl of Pembroke, lord chamberlain and Herbert's kinsman and patron; Pembroke's involvement prompts speculation that the arrangement with Astley was not purely a commercial business, and may have been related to wider accommodations at court. But the evidence is inconclusive. Herbert certainly took up office, however, when the political situation was unusually fraught. The unprecedented influence of the duke of Buckingham and a proposed marriage between Prince Charles and the Spanish infanta were both highly contentious issues. Something of this doubtless affected his view, for example, of Thomas Drue's 'The Duchess of Suffolk', which 'being full of dangerous matter was much reformed' before he licensed it in January 1624 (ibid., 148). Conversely, he licensed Thomas Middleton's 'A Game at Chess' on 12 June despite its transparent discussion of the Spanish match, presumably because it accorded with official policy at the time; the privy council suggested that he should account for this, when the play was an unprecedented success and the Spanish ambassador protested to the king (ibid., 154). We do not know if Herbert was actually called to account, but Pembroke played a lord chamberlain's part in smoothing matters over, ensuring that the actors suffered no more than a brief suspension of business. The King's Men again exploited anti-Spanish sentiment in December with 'The Spanish Viceroy', circumventing Herbert's authority by failing to license the play at all. He was furious, and got the principal members of the company to admit their fault in writing. 
These were exceptional incidents in what was normally a cordial relationship of mutual self-interest between the actors and the masters of the revels. More typical was Herbert's decision to 'allow' 'The Winter's Tale' for the King's Men, without even a fee, on the word of the actor John Heminge 'that there was nothing profane added or reformed' even though the copy licensed by Buck was missing ('Control and Censorship', 142). They relied upon Herbert's licence to be allowed to perform and for a form of copyright over their plays; he relied upon their commercial success for quality drama at court and for a steady income. In the early years Herbert earned a pound for each play he licensed for the stage, and 10's'. for a licence to print; the sums later doubled. He also received fees for licensing the companies and their theatres, for waiving restrictions on playing in Lent, and at various times the proceeds of benefit performances, or flat rate payments in lieu of these, or presents such as books. From the court he was due an allowance for each day or night in attendance, and an annual allowance of $50 for rent and lodging, though some of this went to house the revels office. His office probably earned him overall at least twice what he was paying Astley every year. By the 1630s, moreover, he had shares in four of the theatres, and in the Restoration claimed these had brought him $400 per annum. The extensive property we know Herbert owned establishes that he was a wealthy man at the height of his career. 
In the summer of 1625 Herbert married Susan, 'nee' Slyford (died 1649/50), widow of Edmond Plumer, who had bequeathed her significant land and property, especially in Woodford, Essex, and $5000 in cash. They settled in Woodford, where their three children were born: William (May 1626) and the daughters Vere (August 1627) and Frances (1628). In 1627 they bought what was to be their principal property, Ribbesford, a country manor house in Worcestershire. Herbert carried a bannerol in the funeral procession of King James in 1625, and the following year was elected MP for Montgomery. His brother George was seriously ill at this time and lived for a year at Woodford, apparently on good terms. The brothers shared an interest in restoring churches, Henry making a number of gifts to Ribbesford and helping George with Leighton in Huntingdonshire. Another houseguest (1633) was Richard Baxter, later a noted preacher, then aged eighteen. Correspondence shows Herbert attached to a web of patronage and influence, including Philip, earl of Pembroke (who succeeded his brother as lord chamberlain in 1626) and John, Viscount Scudamore, to whom Herbert sent regular newsletters between 1624 and 1671. 
Isaac Walton observed that Herbert's place as master of the revels 'required a diligent wisdom with which God hath blessed him' (Walton, 262). This was tested to the full in the 1630s. He briefly experimented with licensing non-theatrical works, for one of which (Donne's, 'Paradoxes') he had to answer in November 1632 before the court of Star Chamber. At about that time Jonson's play 'The Magnetic Lady' was investigated by the court of high commission; the King's Men argued that they had only performed what Herbert allowed. The issue was not resolved until October 1633, when 'the players... did mee right in my care to purge their plays of all offence, my lords Grace of Canterbury [that is, Archbishop Laud] bestowed many words upon mee, and discharged mee of any blame' ('Control and Censorship', 184). In the same week Herbert had another altercation with that company over their revival of an old play, 'The Tamer Tamed'. Such revivals were normally permitted without hindrance if the 'allowed' text was unchanged. Here he stopped the performance at short notice, and insisted henceforth that old plays must be relicensed, for which he would charge a half-fee. This 'raysed some discourse in the players, thogh no disobedience' (ibid., 182). A number of his entries in his office-book from this time are unusually, perhaps prudentially, detailed. Two instances involved King Charles himself. In January 1634 Davenant objected that Herbert had dealt over-zealously with profanities in his play, 'The Wits', and the king was 'pleasd to take 'faith, death, slight', for asseverations, and no oaths, to which I doe humbly submit as my masters judgement'; but in June 1638 Charles ruled that a passage in a play by Massinger was 'too insolent, and to bee changed' (ibid., 186, 204). 
Herbert was a royalist, but not as uncritical as some accounts suggest; assertions that he fought for the king are based on misidentifications. In 1639 he joined the king's entourage at Berwick in the expedition against the Scots, but commented on the incompetence and over-confidence of his army. In 1640 he was elected MP for Bewdley in both the Short and Long parliaments, being involved in deliberations over several disputed elections, and coming to blows with the parliamentarian lawyer Serjeant (John) Wilde. In 1642 he was one of the royalists debarred from the Commons, and in August wrote in his office-book: 'Here ended my allowance of plaies, for the war began' ('Control and Censorship', 211). The following year he joined the king's parliament at Oxford. From the beginning, however, he was concerned about the consequences for his estates, which were sequestrated, and his plate, which was later seized. He took deep offence when his brother, Edward, refused to keep his horses safe in Montgomery Castle. By late 1645 he began negotiations to come to terms with parliament, taking the solemn league and covenant in February of the following year, and the negative oath that August. In March 1648 the Commons agreed to accept $1330 10's'. as a third of his property, to pardon his delinquency and remove the sequestration of his estate. 
By November Herbert's son William and daughter Frances were both dead; Lady Herbert died, and was buried at St Mary Bothaw in London on 5 January 1650. Relations with his surviving daughter, Vere, were soured by a chancery suit taken out against Herbert to recover money entrusted by his mother to Sir John Danvers for her dowry. A year after the death of his first wife, he married Elizabeth (died 1698), daughter of Sir Robert Offley of Dalby in Leicestershire, thereby linking with the family of the diarist John Evelyn. They had seven children, of whom only three survived their father. These included the elder son, Henry Herbert, who in 1694 was created Lord Herbert of Cherbury. 
During the interregnum Herbert lived quietly in London and on his estates. On the restoration of Charles II he resumed some of his former offices, being sworn in as a gentleman of the privy chamber on 31 May 1660 and master of the revels on 20 June. But he never re-established his old authority. Most critically Thomas Killigrew and William Davenant persuaded the king to give them a monopoly of London playing; that August Charles granted licences authorizing each to erect a theatre in London, create an acting company and license their own plays, without reference to Herbert. He went to law to assert his rights, and two years of litigation, negotiation, and arbitration ensued. He finally came to accommodations with both men, under which he was to license and censor plays but have no other influence in London theatrical affairs. His authority to license plays for the press also seems to have been curtailed. Even his authority outside London was not unchallenged. The mayor of Maidstone (9 October 1660) denied his right to license actors in the provinces, and officials in Norwich later also resisted his authority. Some travelling actors and other entertainers simply ignored his office, despite his efforts to prosecute them. As a result, when he deputized Edward Hayward in 1663 and the flamboyant John Poyntz joined the revels office under a pre-war agreement, there was insufficient income for either of them. They were dismissed in 1665. Yet Herbert himself retained considerable holdings in land and property, and remained active in business affairs. 
Herbert was returned to parliament for Bewdley in May 1661 and served for the remainder of his life. In 1665 he prepared his brother Edward's poems for the press. His own translation of two parts of Jean de Silhon's 'The Minister of State', a treatise on the principles of statesmanship, appeared in 1658 and 1663. Other works by Herbert, including two series of prose meditations, 'The Broken Heart' (1620/21, Bodl. Oxf., MS Don. fol. 26) and 'Herberts Golden Harpe' (1624, Bodl. Oxf., MS Don. fol. 27 and Huntingdon MS HM 85), and a verse play, 'The Emperor Otho' (NL Wales, MS 5302B), have never been printed but survive in manuscript. Herbert was still actively engaged in business affairs until a month or so before his death (probably at his home in James Street, Covent Garden) on 27 April 1673; he was buried in St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 6 May. Elizabeth survived her husband by twenty-five years, dying on 7 July 1698. 


@@@@@


doc= 13030


Herbert, Henry, fourth Baron Herbert of Cherbury and fourth Baron Herbert of Castle Island (c.1640-1691), politician, was one of the sons of Richard Herbert, second Baron Herbert of Cherbury and of Castle Island (1600?-1655) ['see under 'Herbert, Edward, first Baron Herbert of Cherbury], and his wife, Lady Mary Egerton (died 1659), daughter of John Egerton, first earl of Bridgewater (1579-1649), and his wife, Lady Frances Stanley, daughter and coheir of Ferdinando, fifth earl of Derby. He was probably born about 1640, though the age of thirty-eight given on his marriage licence in December 1681 (a not necessarily reliable source) would suggest a slightly later date of birth, probably in 1643. Henry was a prominent whig and a supporter of the campaign (1679-82) to exclude the Catholic duke of York from the succession, though the Herbert family had traditionally been very loyal supporters of the crown. The barony was created in 1629 to reward Henry's grandfather Edward Herbert (1582?-1648), traveller, scholar, and soldier, for his diplomatic services to James I; and Edward's six brothers included distinguished soldiers and politicians, as well as the poet George Herbert. Because of his advanced age Edward remained ostensibly neutral during the civil war, but his son Richard Herbert, second baron from 1648 to 1655, commanded a troop of horse in the Scottish war of 1639, raised a regiment of 12,000 foot for the king in 1642, and was heavily fined by parliament when he succeeded to the title in 1648. Richard's eldest son, Edward Herbert (1630-1678) ['see under 'Herbert, Edward, first Baron Herbert of Cherbury], succeeded as third baron in 1655, and four years later he in turn took part in Sir George Booth's unsuccessful royalist rising in Cheshire. 
Henry Herbert also joined the rebellion and then entered the army shortly after the Restoration, serving abroad under the duke of Monmouth with the French in 1672. He succeeded to the barony in 1678, on the death of his brother Edward, and next year followed his brother as 'custos rotulorum' for Montgomeryshire. This was, however, the limit of royal favour toward him, for in 1678, when he took his seat in the Lords, the Popish Plot alarm was near its height, and this, together perhaps with his acquaintance with the duke of Monmouth, drew him into opposition to the court. He voted in favour of putting the five Catholic lords allegedly implicated in the plot on trial, and voted too for the impeachment of the earl of Danby, Charles II's principal minister for many years. He was one of the half-dozen opposition peers who in November 1679 joined the earl of Shaftesbury in giving countenance to Titus Oates by attending the trial of two men accused of defaming him. Unsurprisingly the king now ordered Herbert to give up his army commission. Undeterred, Herbert was active in the petitioning campaign of 1679-80 to persuade Charles to meet the parliament elected in 1679 and repeatedly prorogued, and attended the public dinners given by exclusionists in the City. When the struggle shifted in 1681 to control of the government of the City of London, Herbert was one of three leading whigs (with Shaftesbury and Francis Charlton) to be given the freedom of a major London livery company. By November 1681 Herbert had become so identified with the duke of Monmouth's exclusionist faction as to join with the duke, and his close crony Ford, Lord Grey of Wark, in issuing a public declaration that, while the three avowed their intention to exclude the duke of York, they were nevertheless completely loyal to the king and had no intention of subverting the monarchy. When a copy of their declaration was torn down in Covent Garden, Herbert at once replaced it, swearing to fight with pistol and sword any who touched it again. In March 1682 his prominence among the exclusionists was shown once again when the king banned the City of London from entertaining in any way Monmouth, Shaftesbury, Grey, or Herbert. When Monmouth went on procession in the midlands in September of that year to raise popular support, Herbert was prominent among the notables who accompanied him. 
But while Herbert was undoubtedly close to Monmouth he also maintained good relations with Shaftesbury's wing of the whigs. Lord Howard of Escrick testified, during investigations into the Rye House plot in 1683, that in October of the previous year the earl of Shaftesbury (then desperate and trying to raise an insurrection) had told him that Herbert was one of those who would raise several thousand of the earl's 'brisk boys' in London. This link with treason was too slight for a prosecution, and the same was true too of the testimony of another plotter, James Holloway. Captured, tried, and executed in 1684, Holloway could swear to no more than having heard Herbert's name mentioned in connection with the Rye House plot. Nevertheless, after coming to town to support Algernon Sidney at his trial for treason in 1683 Herbert, like most other whigs, lived quietly, avoiding any public notice. Under James II, however, he once again moved into parliamentary opposition to the crown. In particular, Herbert's name appeared on a shortlist of opponents of the king throughout the country, men of 'real position and influence, who might countenance a movement against James II' (Browning, 3.158), and he was almost certainly involved in the secret contacts with William of Orange which preceded the prince's descent on England in 1688. He took arms for William, and with Sir Edward Harley raised his part of the Welsh marches in support of the revolution. William subsequently rewarded him, Herbert becoming cofferer of the royal household in 1689, and in the same year colonel of the 23rd regiment of foot, later the Royal Welch Fusiliers. He died on 21 April 1691, and was buried in St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, on 28 April, with no heir from his marriage by licence dated 14 December 1681 to Lady Catherine Newport ('c'.1653-1716), daughter of Francis Newport, first earl of Bradford. The barony died with him, but was recreated for Henry Herbert (1654-1709), another whig. 


@@@@@


doc= 13031


Herbert, Henry, first Baron Herbert of Cherbury (1654-1709), politician, was born on 24 July 1654 at the house of his uncle George Evelyn (brother of the diarist John Evelyn) in King Street, Covent Garden, London. He was the eldest son of Sir Henry Herbert (bap. 1594, d. 1673), politician and royal household official, and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1698), daughter of Sir Robert Offley of Dalby, Leicestershire. He was educated at Trinity College, Oxford, in 1670, at the Inner Temple in 1671 and Lincoln's Inn in 1672. On 12 February 1678 he married Anne ('c'.1661-1716), daughter of the London alderman John Ramsey, who brought him a dowry of $8000. In addition to inheriting estates at Ribbesford, Worcestershire, and Dowles (then in Shropshire) from his father, Herbert maintained a residence at Leicester Fields, in Soho, London. 
Obeying his father's dying wish Herbert contested the parliamentary seat for the borough of Bewdley, Worcestershire, left vacant by his father's death in April 1673, but lost the vote to Thomas Foley, the Stourbridge ironmaster. The defeat may well have reflected local resentment at an inexperienced nineteen-year-old presuming to sit in parliament as a matter of inheritance. He successfully petitioned parliament in March 1676 to have the result overturned, complaining that 'exceptions were taken to most of Mr. Foley's electors, but the Deputy Recorder being Mr. Foley's friend admitted them anyway' ('The Case of Henry Herbert'). Curiously, and despite the warnings from his London agent that 'some will make no good construction of your absence' (Warner, 'Epistolary Curiousities, Series the First', 112), he avoided attending parliament in October and November 1678 during the time that Titus Oates was 'revealing' the Popish Plot. Herbert was defeated by Philip Foley, Thomas's son, in the first general election of 1679 but obtained a seat for the city of Worcester in the third Exclusion Parliament of 1681. Later that year he sat on the Middlesex grand jury which indicted the earl of Danby for complicity in the Popish Plot. 
Herbert's differences with his political rivals at Bewdley seem at first to have been personal rather than ideological, but later took on the contours of a whig-tory struggle. Salwey Winnington, the heir to the Foley interest in Bewdley, became a protege of Robert Harley. Herbert, meanwhile, developed into a staunch whig whose 'actions and opinions', as his son put it, 'have always showed against passive obedience' (Warner, 'Epistolary Curiousities, Series the Second', 36). He participated actively in the revolution of 1688, going over to the Netherlands and returning with William's invasion force, and being appointed one of William's commissioners for managing the revenues while in Exeter. He was elected to the Convention and then again to parliament in 1690. As a member of the House of Commons and, after 1694, the House of Lords, Herbert rarely spoke but served as teller many times and chaired numerous committees, showing a particular interest in matters of naval preparedness and the prevention of commercial fraud. 
On constitutional matters Herbert was sufficiently committed to English liberties to support the 'Triennial Bill' with the pithy declaration, 'I would rather have a standing army than a standing parliament' (Grey, 10.301). On the other hand he obstructed 'country' efforts to extract from the king a more explicit promise to respect the constitution after his veto of the place bill in 1694 (Grey, 10.384). He further expressed his loyalty to the crown in an address of 11 October 1701 from the county of Worcester declaring that 'if their representatives do not comply with his [William's] just desires they will upon calling a new parliament elect such as shall' (Luttrell, 5.99). His unwavering support of William's government was the subject of an impassioned letter to Lord Chancellor Somers in 1700, wherein he described himself as having 'continued in the same warmth for this government as I brought over at the P[rince] of O[range's] landing, without any personal profit' (Warner, 'Epistolary Curiousities, Series the Second', 1-2). 
None the less Herbert felt his services were under appreciated; as he told William in 1691, 'I fear I've labored under some misrepresentations to your majesty' (Warner, 'Epistolary Curiousities, Series the First', 147). The letter to Somers was in fact a plea 'if Lord Montagu lays down the treasury to recommend me there', and Herbert made many such requests for office during the reigns of William and Anne. Although he was created Baron Herbert of Cherbury in 1694 (the title having fallen vacant upon the death of his cousin the fourth Baron Herbert of Cherbury in 1691), Herbert's place seeking was generally unsuccessful. Only in 1707 was he made one of the commissioners of trade and plantations. The post carried a salary of $1000 per annum and was desirable enough that Sidney Godolphin told the duke of Marlborough at Herbert's death, 'I could send you a list, I dare say, of about fifty people that have asked for the vacancy in the council of Trade' (Snyder, 3.1212). 
Despite his commitment to preserving the revolution of 1688 Herbert's career exemplifies the less democratic aspects of unreformed politics. He is best remembered for his cynical attempts to control Bewdley's parliamentary representation by manipulating the composition of its tiny electorate. Having complained in his petition of 1676 that Bewdley had too many voters, he complained to parliament in 1679 (after losing to Philip Foley) that Bewdley had too few; his about face had little to do with a newfound commitment to wider suffrage but to the hope of drowning out Foley's majority by the addition of new voters. In 1699 Herbert initiated a legal campaign to invalidate the charter that Bewdley had been given during Charles II's 1684-5 'quo warranto' campaign and (most controversially) to allow the crown to choose a new corporation (rather than recognize the tory dominated body already sitting). Herbert's efforts harnessed popular resentment of a narrow oligarchy, but also (as tory critics loudly made plain) represented an outrageous instance of ministerial tyranny, giving the crown in effect the right to pick an MP. Herbert won the fight in 1707, when Bewdley was given a new charter and in an election the same year the new corporation duly elected Herbert's son, Henry Herbert ['see below']; in 1710, however, that result was invalidated by a now tory dominated parliament. By that time Herbert was dead, having succumbed to a fever on 22 January 1709. He was buried on 25 January at St Paul's Church, Covent Garden. His wife survived him and died on 24 April 1716. 
Herbert's only child, 


@@@@@


doc= 13032


Henry Herbert, second Baron Herbert of Cherbury (d. 1738), nobleman, was educated at Westminster School in 1696 by Thomas Knipe, who was unimpressed by his 'insufferable negligence' ('Old Westminsters', 1.449). He was tutored by Abel Boyer in 1699, who also found him an unwilling student. In 1705 Herbert stood unsuccessfully for his father's seat at Bewdley but was returned at a by-election in May 1707, being again defeated at the 1708 elections. Having succeeded his father as Lord Herbert in January 1709, on 12 December 1709 Herbert married Mary (died 1770), daughter of John Wallop of Farley, Southampton, and sister of John Wallop, first earl of Portsmouth. They had no children. Herbert followed his father's whig politics, but was not appointed to any government office. He died, his debts greatly increased, at Ribbesford on 19 April 1738, possibly by suicide. His main property at Ribbesford was inherited by a cousin, Henry Morley. His widow became lady of the bedchamber to Princess Anne, daughter of George II, and died on 19 October 1770. 


@@@@@


doc= 13033


Herbert, Henry, ninth earl of Pembroke and sixth earl of Montgomery (c.1689-1750), architect and patron, was the eldest son of Thomas Herbert, eighth earl of Pembroke and fifth earl of Montgomery (1656/7-1733), and his first wife, Margaret (died 1706), daughter of Sir Robert Sawyer of Highclere, Hampshire. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1705, at the time when the dean, Henry Aldrich, was working on his 'Elementa architecturae' (printed 'c'.1708), and the precociously Palladian Peckwater quadrangle was being built. On his grand tour in 1712 he visited Venice, Rome (where he met William Kent), and Naples (where he met Lord Shaftesbury). With the accession of George I he was appointed lord of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales and, as first lord of the bedchamber and from 1735 groom of the stole, he remained a close associate of George II after he became king. 
Son of a famous antiquary and collector, Herbert shared these tastes but was most distinguished for his interest in architecture. This was acknowledged by Jonathan Swift, and George Vertue; according to Horace Walpole, 'no man had a purer taste in building' ('Works', 3.486), even if to a sour critic such as Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, Herbert's attention to architectural decorum was ridiculed as no more than a talent to 'imitate ill whatever was useless' (Scott Thomson, 54) in the buildings of Jones and Palladio. While still a bachelor, he built a house in Whitehall to the design of Colen Campbell. This was completed by 1724, when he began a long connection with that architect's junior associate Roger Morris. The connection is tantalizingly imprecise: Morris, whose own Palladian ideas were developing at this time, seems to have been content to act as the builder for an aristocrat who left few traces of professional involvement, although for one commission he demanded substantial payment for 'explanations of [Lord Herbert's] directions' to the workmen involved (BL, Add. MS. 61477, fol. 34). Architectural drawings by William Townsend for the Column of Victory at Blenheim Park, Oxfordshire, had to be submitted to Lord Herbert's examination in 1727. Horace Walpole recorded that the water tower on his father's estate at Houghton ('c'.1730) was designed by him. At this level, Herbert could be seen as typical of several dilettanti, but specific architectural details were left to his decision at Castle Hill, Devon (1729), and he played a part in the design of Wimbledon House, Surrey (1730-33). 
More significantly, Marble Hill, Twickenham, Middlesex (1724-9), and Westcombe House, Blackheath, Kent (1727-8), where Herbert was closely involved, mark important and widely imitated developments in the evolution of the English Palladian villa. Their facades are divided in three parts both horizontally and vertically; details of door and window proportions demonstrate the fastidious restraint which characterizes the English adoption of Palladian ideas; and their pyramidal roofs emphasize the handling of mass which makes these buildings more than mere two-dimensional patterns copied from engravings. At Marble Hill, Herbert acted the intermediary between the owner, Henrietta Howard, mistress of the prince of Wales, and Morris; at Westcombe he was himself patron. Their close partnership is also apparent at Wilton, Wiltshire where, after Herbert had succeeded his father as ninth earl in 1733, the Palladian bridge was built in the grounds of the house. George Vertue stated that it was 'the design of the present Earl and built by his direction' (Vertue, 'Note books', 5.130), but other sources suggest that the design was Morris's. In 1734 this ten-year architectural collaboration was marked by the gift of a silver cup, bearing the head of Inigo Jones, to Morris from his patron. 
Pembroke's most important architectural activity involved neither his own estates nor the houses of his friends, but a major transport artery, in London: here he acted not as architect, but as tireless promoter. Amid much pamphlet controversy, an act of parliament sanctioning the building of a bridge at Westminster was passed in 1738; Lord Pembroke laid the first stone in January 1739 and the last one (of the main structure) in 1747. The last of his 120 attendances at meetings of the bridge commissioners was on the morning of his death. He was the consistent supporter of the engineer Charles Labelye, whose original idea for construction by the use of caissons faced continuous opposition from other contestants for the arduous commission, as spiteful as they were inexpert. When a pier subsided in 1747, Pembroke was lampooned in 'The Downfall of Westminster Bridge, or, My Lord in the Suds'. Besides architecture, Pembroke put more of his famed energy into litigation than into politics. At court, although a long-standing and close servant, he was not particularly intimate with the king; he gained little from attempts to mediate in the bitter disputes between George II and Frederick, prince of Wales. Despite a powerful role in the parliamentary constituency of Wilton, his participation in wider politics was slight. In the great family house, he promoted the cataloguing, under the supervision of Sir Andrew Fountaine, of the extensive collections built up by his father, and redecorated some of the rooms of the south front. 
Lord Pembroke married Mary (1707-1769), eldest daughter of Richard, Viscount Fitzwilliam, in August 1733; their only child, Henry Herbert, later tenth earl of Pembroke and seventh earl of Montgomery, was born in July 1734. Constantly active, playing tennis daily and enjoying swimming, he is shown in the portrait bust by Roubiliac at Wilton to have been powerfully built and strong. But in the winter of 1743 he spent weeks at Bath and had experienced difficulty in breathing; Walpole mentions asthma in his detailed account of Pembroke's collapse and death on 9 January 1750 at Pembroke House, Privy Gardens, Whitehall. Another report suggests that the fatal seizure was occasioned by anger at disagreeable business at the bridge commission. Horace Walpole summed up Pembroke's contradictory character as 'public-spirited and inflexibly honest, though prejudice and passion were so predominant in him, that honesty had not fair play' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 20.108-9); Queen Caroline felt 'he wishes well, but he is as odd as his father was, not so tractable, and full as mad' (Hervey, 3.828). He was buried on 16 January 1750 at Wilton. 


@@@@@


doc= 13034


Herbert, Henry, tenth earl of Pembroke and seventh earl of Montgomery (1734-1794), army officer, was born on 3 July 1734 at Pembroke House, Privy Garden, Whitehall, London, the only child of Henry Herbert, ninth earl of Pembroke and sixth earl of Montgomery (c.1689-1750), and his wife, Mary Fitzwilliam (1707-1769), the daughter of Richard Fitzwilliam, fifth Viscount Fitzwilliam, and his wife, Frances Shelley. By 1743 he was boarding at a school in Wandsworth and by 1746 at Eton College, which he left after succeeding to his father's title in 1750. From late 1751 until December 1754 he travelled on the grand tour in France, Germany, Austria, and Italy. 
On 13 March 1756 Pembroke married Lady Elizabeth Spencer (1737-1831) ['see 'Herbert, Elizabeth, countess of Pembroke and Montgomery], the second daughter of Charles Spencer, third duke of Marlborough, and Elizabeth Trevor. Their son, George Augustus Herbert, Lord Herbert (later eleventh earl of Pembroke), was born on 10 September 1759; they also had a daughter, Charlotte (1773-1784). Pembroke first sat in the House of Lords on 13 November 1755. On 3 April 1756 he was appointed lord lieutenant of Wiltshire, where the family seat of Wilton House, near Salisbury, was situated. In November 1756 he became a lord of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales, a position he retained after the prince's accession as George III, but he resigned it in 1762 when he eloped abroad with Elizabeth Catherine (Kitty) Hunter (died 1795), the daughter of Thomas Orby Hunter MP. Society was scandalized. The affair resulted in a son, Augustus Retnuh Reebkomp (1762-1797), whose strange names reflected Hunter and Pembroke; later, as Augustus Montgomery, he became a captain in the Royal Navy. Lady Pembroke took her husband back in March 1763, although later in the marriage they lived much apart and he was often abroad. He had other affairs and certainly one illegitimate daughter. Pembroke's second, and final, appointment as lord of the bedchamber from 1769 to 1780 marked his restoration to favour. His unpredictable character remained. In 1784 his son Lord Herbert described him as 'perhaps... the most unaccountable of all human beings' ('Pembroke Papers', 2.260), while Horace Walpole was 'not surprised at any extravagance in his Lordship's morals' (Walpole, 25.497). 
Since youth Pembroke had been, in his own words, 'horse mad' (Pembroke to Newcastle, 23 Sept 1754) and he had attended riding academies during his grand tour. Service in the cavalry ensued naturally, and he was appointed a cornet in the 1st King's dragoon guards on 12 October 1752. Two years later he became a captain, but in 1756 he transferred to the 1st foot guards. He was made aide-de-camp to George II on 8 May 1758; the rank of colonel followed. Having been appointed lieutenant-colonel in the newly raised 15th light dragoons on 10 March 1759, he joined them in July 1760 in Germany, where they formed part of the British contingent during the Seven Years' War. He left regimental service the same month to command a cavalry brigade. He was promoted major-general on 10 March 1761 and put on the staff in Germany. This was rapid advancement, even for a rich aristocrat. Pembroke was present at the battles of Warburg (31 July 1760) and Vellinghausen (15-16 July 1761) and acquired a good reputation. 
In 1761 Pembroke published 'A Method of Breaking Horses, and Teaching Soldiers to Ride' (2nd edn 1762; 3rd and 4th edns 1778 and 1793 entitled 'Military Equitation'). This influential book provided sensible and much-needed advice. The author emphasized the need for officers to superintend the management of horses, advocated riding with a natural seat, and opposed the docking of horses' tails. On 9 May 1764 he was appointed colonel of the 1st (Royal) Dragoons, a position he described as 'the most pleasant & eligible object in the military of this country' ('Pembroke Papers', 2.227), and which he retained until his death. Although seldom present with his regiment, he was a good example of the conscientious colonel, then common, who carefully attended to regimental efficiency. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 30 April 1770 and general on 20 November 1782. Other appointments were as colonel of the Wiltshire militia from 1770 to 1778 and governor of Portsmouth from June 1782. 
In October 1778 Pembroke entertained George III and Queen Charlotte in splendour at Wilton, and in 1782 Lady Pembroke became a lady of the bedchamber to Queen Charlotte. Pembroke increasingly hated Lord North and his policies and voted on 8 February 1780 for a motion of inquiry into public expenditure and the granting of contracts. A consequence of opposition was deprivation of his lord lieutenancy; it was restored to him on 8 April 1782. His forthright ideas and argumentative character led to family quarrels over his son's army career and financial matters. He was devoted to horses, dogs, and beautiful women, enjoyed travelling and shooting, had some interest in music and the arts, rebuilt his London residence, Pembroke House, in 1754-6, and was a lively correspondent. His portraits show a plumpish but not unpleasing face, with a prominent nose. 
Pembroke died, after several months' illness, probably of a stroke, at Wilton on 26 January 1794 and was buried there on 3 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 13035


Herbert, Henry Howard Molyneux, fourth earl of Carnarvon (1831-1890), politician, was born in Grosvenor Square, London, on 24 June 1831, the eldest son of Henry John George Herbert, third earl of Carnarvon (1800-1849), and his wife, Henrietta Anne (1804-1876), eldest daughter of Lord Henry Molyneux Howard, a brother of Bernard Edward Howard, twelfth duke of Norfolk. Auberon Herbert (1838-1906) was his brother. Herbert, who bore the courtesy title Viscount Porchester until 1849, inherited many of his father's characteristics, being literary rather than practical, cultured, and with a remarkable facility for words. Both, too, shared a love of travel. From an early age, Porchester enjoyed family visits abroad. The last of these journeys, undertaken when he was eight years of age, was intended to include parts of Asia Minor; but at Constantinople, he was taken seriously ill with fever and the family was obliged to return urgently to England. At Athens on the homeward journey his sister contracted fever, and in Italy his governess and nurse both died. 
Academically very able from an early age, Porchester entered Eton College in April 1844 conversant with the works of many Latin and Greek authors. His four years at the school were followed by study at Oxford, where he matriculated from Christ Church on 17 October 1849. His father died on 10 December 1849 and he succeeded to the earldom. At Oxford, where Carnarvon was awarded a first class in 'literae humaniores' in 1852, Henry Mansel, later Waynflete professor of moral philosophy and dean of St Paul's, exercised a powerful intellectual influence on him. While at Oxford, Carnarvon formed a lifelong friendship with Lord Sandon, later third earl of Harrowby. Shortly after graduating, the two men made an adventurous journey to Asia Minor, reaching Babylon, then relatively little visited. From his observations in Damascus, Carnarvon later published 'Recollections of the Druses and Notes on their Religion' (1860). 
Carnarvon had become interested in politics during his time at Oxford and was early marked out for a political career. He was asked by Aberdeen, then head of a coalition government, to move the address in answer to the queen's speech in the Lords on 31 January 1854. In his maiden speech, Carnarvon expounded his belief in a strong British empire, with the colonies living in harmony with their mother country. The Crimean War had broken out and the colonies had made financial contributions to the conduct of the campaign. On 1 March 1855 Carnarvon suggested in the Lords that the government should move a vote of thanks in recognition of their help. Shortly after the end of the war, he toured the battlefields in the Crimea with his old friend, Admiral Lord Lyons. 
With the fall of the Palmerston government in February 1858, Lord Derby became prime minister. Carnarvon was offered, at the age of twenty-six, the office of under-secretary for the colonies. It was typical of his firm adherence to principles that he at first hesitated to accept because of the cabinet's refusal to continue with Palmerston's 'Conspiracy Bill'. He gained valuable experience under first Lord Stanley and then Sir Edward Bulwer-Lytton during the eighteen months of the Derby ministry, which fell in June 1859. 
Out of office, Carnarvon devoted his time to travel and closely observing the political scene. He strongly disliked the new reform bill which was threatened by the incoming Palmerston government and he expressed his concerns over imperial defence after a visit to Malta. As a country gentleman and landowner, he attended to the estate at Highclere, the family home in Hampshire, and carried out his duties in the county. Carnarvon's first efforts at penal reform with offenders had begun in 1854 and he became chairman of the judicial committee of the Hampshire quarter sessions in 1860. His paper 'Prison Discipline' (1864) formed the basis of a 'Prisons Bill' which was enacted by parliament the following year. He was appointed high steward of Oxford University in 1859 and created DCL. On 5 September 1861 Carnarvon married Lady Evelyn Stanhope (died 1875), only daughter of the sixth earl of Chesterfield, at Westminster Abbey. They had a son, George Edward Stanhope Molyneux Herbert, who succeeded as fifth earl, and three daughters. 
On the death of Palmerston, Lord Derby once more formed an administration, and Carnarvon was appointed colonial secretary in June 1866. One outstanding issue was the future of Canada. In 1858 Sir Edmund Head, governor-in-chief of British North America, had announced the policy of confederation to the Canadian parliament. No immediate action was taken though Carnarvon had followed developments in Canada while out of office. A formal meeting of North American delegates met in London in January 1867 under Carnarvon's chairmanship to discuss the 'British North America Bill' which had been drafted. The main object was to unite Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick in one federal dominion under the crown with its own parliament, divided into upper and lower houses, with a seat of government, ultimately agreed, at Ottawa. The dominion of Canada came into existence on 1 July following the royal assent to the 'British North America Bill'. 
Carnarvon had early in office favoured federation to annexation. He was later to attempt the same solution in South Africa and in Ireland with less success. He had previously expounded his philosophy in a speech at a banquet for delegates from Nova Scotia and New Brunswick in September 1867: 'Changes in the course of time may come, which may vary our relationship with our distant Colonies, but changes depend very much in their nature on the spirit in which they are conceived, and also the spirit in which they are met... Once in the history of England it so happened that we parted from some of our great Colonies with a bad spirit and in a misunderstanding, the evil effects of which were felt for many a long year... this has taught us a useful lesson, and we need not be ashamed to own it. It taught us that conciliation is better than coercion: that if we give our confidence, it will be repaid us a hundredfold. It taught us and it taught the Colonies also -- that their interests properly understood are not separate and distinct; but that the more prosperous the Colonies are, the greater will be the strength they confer on the Mother Country. (Hardinge, 1.300-01)' 

In February 1867, a few days before Carnarvon introduced the second reading of the bill in the Lords, Lord Derby again raised the household suffrage question in cabinet. At first there was hostility towards the proposals though Disraeli, in charge of the bill in the Commons, made concessions. Carnarvon disliked the notion of the working classes' predominating among the electorate. Lord Cranborne (later the third marquess of Salisbury), then secretary for India, agreed with Carnarvon's misgivings on Disraeli's action and they determined to act in concert. At a cabinet on 23 February the business was hurried through, with Carnarvon objecting to important changes' being proposed only two days before the scheme was to be put to Conservative supporters. At a further meeting on 25 February only Carnarvon, Cranborne, and General Jonathan Peel, secretary for war, were not prepared to accept the reform plan. All three resigned at the cabinet meeting on 2 March. Carnarvon wrote in his journal, 'Lord Derby closed a red box with a heavy sigh and said, 'The Party is ruined', and Disraeli added rather cynically, 'Poor Tory Party'' (BL, Add. MS 60899). Carnarvon made a personal explanation in the Lords on 4 March and handed in his seals of office to the queen four days later. The 'Representation of the People Bill' became law on 15 August. 
Although he was often characterized as a high-churchman, Carnarvon's early contact with the Puseys and the Tractarian movement made him an intermediary between the conflicting schools of evangelical and high-church opinion. 
When the relations between church and state in Ireland were being discussed in parliament in June 1868, Carnarvon told his friend Canon Liddon: 'I believe disestablishment to be inevitable, though I admit the conclusion possibly may not be so immediate as many suppose' (Hardinge, 2.2). In a speech in the Lords on the second reading of the 'Irish Church Bill' on 26 June 1868, much to the delight of the Liberals, Carnarvon refused to assist in rejecting Gladstone's bill to suspend the creation of fresh interests in the Irish church ('Hansard 3', 193, 1868, cols. 2-16). With the general election in November 1868 and the return of a Liberal ministry, led by Gladstone, an 'Irish Church Bill' was introduced in March 1869. Before the bill reached the Lords, a private meeting of Conservative peers was held at Lord Derby's house in St James's Square. Carnarvon, unlike the majority of the meeting, was unable to support opposition to the bill and once more expressed his personal views in a Lords debate on 14 June. 
Having resigned from the government two years previously and subsequently accepted the principle of Irish disestablishment, Carnarvon was for a time unpopular with both his fellow peers and churchmen. Nor did he oppose the 'Irish Land Bill' of 1870, believing that it would assist in the pacification of Ireland. However, the resignation of Lord Cairns as leader of the Conservatives in the Lords and the need to find a strong successor brought Carnarvon back into the picture. He acted as a negotiator with Salisbury and Stanley, neither of whom would accept the post while Disraeli led in the Commons. In a conversation with Gathorne Hardy, it was suggested that Carnarvon would be the best leader. He noted in his journal: 'I told him that the Party in the House of Lords had behaved to me with so much injustice and unkindness that though I had forgiven it I should not forget it and that... I was not inclined to take the lead. (journal, 22 Feb 1870, BL, Add. MS 60902)' Finally, the duke of Richmond was persuaded to take the post. 
A great personal blow to Carnarvon occurred shortly afterwards with the murder in Greece of his favourite cousin, Edward Herbert. Herbert, then secretary to the British legation in Athens, was captured by brigands, along with three companions, on an expedition to Marathon. The party were held to ransom for $25,000 with amnesty and on receiving the news on 14 April, Carnarvon raised the money and telegraphed it to the Greek government. Unfortunately, the call for amnesty was refused, and, although the brigands were captured, the four men had been murdered on 21 April. The news shocked the nation, and Carnarvon, who was overwhelmed at the loss, heavily criticized the Greek government in the Lords for their action. 
Early in 1872 Carnarvon suffered a serious breakdown and illness which was followed by a long convalescence. It was during this time that he wrote a book, published anonymously the following year, 'The Shadows of a Sick Room', which expressed his religious beliefs. A keen yachtsman, Carnarvon embarked on one of his frequent cruises with friends and colleagues and later toured the Franco-Prussian battlefields in January 1873. 
Carnarvon's responsibilities as a landowner had increased with the death of his brother-in-law, Lord Chesterfield. The extensive Bretby estate and collieries in Nottinghamshire -- over 13,000 acres -- were left to his mother and himself. Carnarvon had already inherited 22,000 acres in Somerset and Hampshire, the family seat at Highclere, and Pixton Hall, Somerset, on the death of his father in 1849. The total property amounted to 35,583 acres. Carnarvon was a conscientious steward of the properties, paying frequent visits, maintaining close contact with tenants and villagers, and staying at one of his three country houses on the estates. 
The political situation also caused Carnarvon some anxiety. Gladstone's ministry was becoming increasingly unpopular and the prospect of a government led by Disraeli was a real possibility. As Salisbury was, in this eventuality, unlikely to take office, Carnarvon felt bound to share his view. However, in July 1873 Disraeli and Carnarvon united to oppose Selborne's 'Judicature Bill', though in vain. In October, Disraeli visited Bretby and had a long and amicable conversation with Carnarvon. 'His mind has a much more 'classical' culture than I had supposed', Carnarvon noted (journal, 10 Oct 1873, BL, Add. MS 60905). On political matters, 'One of the most remarkable features of this remarkable man [Disraeli] is the apparently total absence of personal rancour. He seems to have no feeling against those who have shown the greatest feeling against him' (journal, 7 Oct 1873, BL, Add. MS 60905). With the Conservative victory at the general election in February 1874, Salisbury and Carnarvon were both publicly and privately urged to join Disraeli's government. After an interview with the prime minister on 19 February, Carnarvon once more accepted the post of secretary of state for the colonies. 
Disraeli was happy to leave matters of colonial policy largely to Carnarvon. One vexed problem facing the new colonial secretary was the future of South Africa. The situation there was a delicate one. The recent discovery and annexation of the diamond fields of Griqualand West had accentuated the rivalry between the English and Dutch settlers. Sir Richard Southey, the lieutenant-governor, failed to keep order in the colony: Carnarvon was obliged to telegraph for troops from Cape Town to quell a serious disturbance in April 1875. The governor at the Cape and high commissioner of South Africa, Sir Henry Barkly, gave little guidance to his ministers when difficult diplomatic dealings with the Orange Free State and the South African Republic were taking place. Further, the English colonies of Cape Colony, Natal, and Griqualand West were pursuing a policy of harshness towards the native peoples, as were the Dutch Boers. Carnarvon determined to pacify the natives, reversing a sentence of high treason on a chief, Langalibalele, and recalled the governor, Sir Benjamin Pine. 
Carnarvon believed that a South African federation, on the lines of his Canadian scheme, was necessary, especially in the eventuality of war with the native people. In 1874 he dispatched his friend, James Anthony Froude, the historian, to South Africa to urge federation; the mission was unsuccessful. Undeterred, Carnarvon received cabinet agreement in April 1875 to invite the Dutch states, Orange Free State and the Transvaal, to meet with the three English colonies to discuss the matter. The proposal, sent to Barkly for immediate publicity, was received by the Cape assembly with great hostility, not helped by a further visit by Froude in June. 
In the face of such opposition Carnarvon withdrew his scheme in October 1875, but suggested a conference in London. In negotiations with John Henry Brand, president of the Orange Free State, in July 1876, it was agreed that for a sum of $90,000 Griqualand West should be united with Cape Colony. This included the future city of Kimberley, with its diamond fields. The long-delayed South African Conference took place in London in August, with Carnarvon in the chair, but little progress was made. 
The defeat of the Boers in the Transvaal in 1876 convinced Carnarvon that the annexation of the state would be a suitable basis for progressing federation. Sir Theophilus Shepstone, secretary for native affairs in Natal, was dispatched to the Transvaal in September to effect annexation as soon as possible. In March 1877 Carnarvon sent Sir Bartle Frere as governor of Cape Colony and high commissioner for South Africa. With a view to filling the post of governor-general of a unified South Africa, Carnarvon introduced a 'South African Confederation Bill' in the Lords on 23 April, but, before it had proceeded far, he received a telegraph from Shepstone announcing that he had proclaimed the annexation of the Transvaal on 12 April. This step received Carnarvon's strong approval. 
The move proved to be precipitate. By August 1877 the Cape Frontier War had broken out: since the annexation of the Transvaal, the Zulu were now fighting the British rather than the Dutch. Frere firmly believed that an expansionist policy was essential if Britain were to secure South Africa. During 1878 the gap between Frere and the Colonial Office concerning objectives to be pursued widened, ultimately leading to the disastrous Anglo-Zulu War. Disraeli wrote in September to Lady Bradford, 'if anything annoys me more than another, it is our Cape affairs, where every day brings forth a new blunder of Twitters [Carnarvon's nickname]' ('The Letters of Disraeli to Lady Bradford and Lady Chesterfield', ed. marquess of Zetland, 1929, 2.189). 
Earlier, in January 1875, Carnarvon's wife had died, leaving four children, the eldest aged ten and one still a baby. On 5 November that year, Disraeli offered Carnarvon the post of viceroy of India in succession to Northbrook. While still contemplating this offer, Carnarvon was asked eleven days later to replace the incompetent Ward Hunt as first lord of the Admiralty. However, in a 'considerable talk' with Disraeli, Carnarvon stated that 'affairs at the Colonial Office were such and so critical that it would be unfortunate 'now' to remove me' (journal, 18 Nov 1875, BL, Add. MS 60907). 
While the problems of South Africa were still to be resolved, Russia declared war on Turkey on 24 April 1877. Carnarvon, who was deeply suspicious of Disraeli's Turcophilism, was an outspoken critic of the policy being pursued. Supporters in the cabinet were few. Salisbury, who agreed with Carnarvon, adopted a more cautious approach, placing the unity of the party first. Derby, the foreign secretary, meanwhile was revealing cabinet secrets to the Russian ambassador, Shuvalov, though disagreeing with Disraeli's policy, which would bring Britain into conflict with Russia. Disraeli, reporting to the queen on Carnarvon, stated that 'for his part the amelioration of the Xtian subjects of the Porte is the chief object that he presents to himself'. The queen minuted to Sir Henry Ponsonby, 'This is disgraceful' (Blake, 622). Disraeli's concern was that, while not wishing to see Russia defeat Turkey, nevertheless he did not want to be left out of a partition of European Turkey. 
Carnarvon supported a policy of strict neutrality: on 30 April 1877 he announced in the Lords that such a policy would be followed in eastern Europe. Towards the end of the year, as Russian advances continued, Russophobe feelings rose to a new height. Carnarvon made a speech to a deputation on 2 January 1878 which received widespread coverage in the national press. In it he declared, 'I apprehend that there are very few people now who look back upon that war [the Crimean War] with satisfaction, and I am confident that there is nobody insane enough in this country to desire a repetition of it.' 
Carnarvon was rebuked by Disraeli when the cabinet met the following day, and Carnarvon indicated that he might resign. Efforts were made to persuade him not to do so. Meanwhile he wrote to Salisbury: 'I not only do not wish you to leave with me -- if it comes to this -- but I doubt whether it is wise for you to do so. The point is quite sufficient for one person to stand upon; but perhaps not large enough for three. (3 Jan 1878, Hatfield House MS 3M/F)' On 7 January Carnarvon apologized at the cabinet meeting amid great relief from his colleagues. However, with the report on 23 January that the Russians were advancing on Gallipoli, Disraeli ordered the fleet to the Dardanelles. At the cabinet meeting that day, Carnarvon, along with Derby, resigned. In a detailed speech in the Lords on 25 January Carnarvon justified his conduct, at the same time publicly regretting leaving many issues relating to his office incomplete and unsettled. 
During the course of his public life that year Carnarvon travelled to Edinburgh to address the Edinburgh Philosophical Institute on imperial administration (5 November). On the way he revisited his mother's former home at Greystoke Castle, Cumberland. There he met his cousin, Elizabeth Catharine (died 1929), eldest daughter of Henry Howard; he married her six weeks later at Greystoke on 26 December 1878. The union, which produced two sons, one of whom was the diplomatist and traveller Aubrey Nigel Henry Molyneux Herbert, brought Carnarvon great happiness. 
To some extent, Carnarvon was now an isolated figure. In his journal at the end of 1879, he wrote, 'There has been extreme bitterness during the last two years towards me and many of the cabinet and their supporters. All intercourse has ceased and hardly a letter ever passes'. He considered his position if, as seemed likely, the Liberals took office. As for Gladstone: 'I have far more in common with him than most living statesmen' and socially and intellectually Carnarvon admitted to sharing many views with him. 'Morally I feel quite free to act, as I may think best; politically I believe there is a road open to me in either direction' (journal, 29 Dec 1879, BL, Add. MS 60913). Three years after Gladstone formed his second ministry, Edward Hamilton, then Gladstone's principal private secretary, reported a conversation with Lord Bath: 'He tells me he knows for certain that Lord Carnarvon was disappointed at not being asked to join the Government when it was formed... His disappointment, however, has subsequently turned into very open bitterness against the Government' (diary, 3 Feb 1883, BL, Add. MS 48633, fol. 43). 
For a time, less conspicuous in politics, Carnarvon was called on to be chairman of the secret royal commission for the defence of British possessions and commerce abroad (1878-81) which undertook a comprehensive review of imperial defence. Carnarvon was irritated at Gladstone's failure two years later to follow up its recommendations, observing in the Lords his suspicion that the report had been 'consigned to the pigeon-hole' ('Hansard 3', 278, 1883, cols. 1831-5). Reconciliation with Disraeli took place in May 1881, when Carnarvon returned to the front opposition bench. On the third reading of the 'Irish Land Bill' in August, Carnarvon expressed his reservations on the experiment which, if it failed, could lead to repressive measures or civil war ('Hansard 3', 264, 1881, cols. 1180-86). 
Carnarvon played a prominent role in Gladstone's 'Franchise Bill' of 1884 which would give the vote to 2 million more people. In a speech in the Lords on 8 July, Carnarvon opposed the bill, arguing that parliament would become 'less and less a true mirror and true representation of the people'. The bill was rejected by the Lords: Gladstone withdrew the bill on 10 July, promising to reintroduce it in the autumn session. Carnarvon, along with other Conservative leaders, organized mass meetings throughout the country which they addressed. The high point was at Nostell Priory, Yorkshire, where he and Northcote addressed an enthusiastic audience of 40,000-50,000 people. Salisbury's handling of the crisis drew criticisms from Carnarvon, demonstrating how far the two men had drifted apart. 'One thing is very clear to me', wrote Carnarvon in his journal: 'Salisbury has not the confidence of those who follow him or who are supposed to be his colleagues and advisers. The first he alarms by his supposed rashness. The latter he alienates by seeming to distrust them... Time will show but I am afraid that with all his great gifts he will be a failure and may even do mischief (18 July 1884, BL, Add. MS 60923)' At a meeting in October, Carnarvon suggested that the redistribution question be referred to three or four impartial men who had the confidence of both parties. Both Gladstone and the queen were favourable to this suggestion and Carnarvon was involved as the broker between the parties, despite Salisbury's initial opposition to compromise and conciliation. When it was announced on 17 November that the government was to make an announcement of its intentions on the matter, Carnarvon was one of twelve Conservative peers called by Salisbury to meet at his house the following day. Subsequently, Salisbury entered into direct negotiations with Gladstone: on 4 December the bill passed through the committee stage in the Lords with little discussion. A pleasing aspect of the outcome for Carnarvon was the recognition by the queen of his part in the proceedings in the form of an invitation to Windsor. 'It is evidence', he recorded in his journal, 'of a reconciliation on her part after nearly six years of absolute silence' (journal, 8 Dec 1884, BL, Add. MS 60923). 
One of the major decisions facing the minority Conservative government when it was returned, headed by Salisbury, in June 1885 was the future of the 'Crimes Act' in Ireland. The need to search for a compromise solution rather than the use of coercion in dealing with Parnell was paramount. On 15 June Salisbury offered Carnarvon the lord lieutenancy of Ireland with a seat in the cabinet: Carnarvon reluctantly accepted, stipulating that he would resign after the coming general election. Armed with the knowledge that the majority of his cabinet colleagues believed that Ireland could be ruled without coercion, Carnarvon visited that country in early July. On his return, he announced in a conciliatory speech in the Lords on 6 July that the 'Crimes Act' would not be renewed and that a land purchase bill would be introduced. Salisbury was aware of Carnarvon's advocacy of a federal solution to Anglo-Irish relations. 
That morning Carnarvon had a conversation with Justin McCarthy, the Parnellite leader, at the home of Howard Vincent, where it was suggested that Carnarvon might meet Parnell on Irish matters. Salisbury was informed of the proposal and, with his approval and that of Ashbourne, lord chancellor of Ireland, a secret meeting was arranged (Hardinge, 3.174-6). The interview took place, without witnesses, on 1 August in an empty house at 15 Hill Street, Mayfair. The exploratory discussion gave rise to optimism that agreement on a range of outstanding issues could be settled and Carnarvon drew up a memorandum of the meeting which he showed Salisbury the same day. As the lord lieutenant was acting on his own initiative, the cabinet was not informed of the meeting even though it was known to at least two of its members. 
Carnarvon's regime in Ireland was a pacific one. He made a tour of the west in August, visiting remote districts where he was well received. The proper and efficient organization of the police was considered as well as the creation of industrial schools, the promotion of technical education, and an expansion of higher education, though he complained of the reluctance of colleagues to devote expenditure to these causes. There was a decline in agrarian crime. Salisbury, whose attitude towards Ireland differed considerably from Carnarvon's, made only vague references to the question in his Newport speech of 7 October. Later that month, Carnarvon threatened Salisbury with resignation unless home rule was considered but at length withdrew the threat. With increasing dissatisfaction at Salisbury's attitude towards Ireland, however, at a meeting at Hatfield on 13 December Carnarvon expressed his wish to resign. At a cabinet the following day when Ireland was discussed -- 'the result of which was that the Cabinet would do nothing and announce no policy' (journal, 4 Jan 1886, BL, Add. MS 60926), the matter of Carnarvon's resignation was raised. He was persuaded to defer his decision until after a vote of confidence was disposed of. On returning from Ireland on 13 January 1886, however, he read in that day's 'Standard' the announcement of his retirement at the end of the month. Carnarvon attended his last cabinet meeting on 16 January, shortly before the Conservatives were defeated by Gladstone. 
It was only on 7 June 1886 that the meeting of the previous year between Carnarvon and Parnell was revealed during a Commons debate. Parnell claimed he had been promised that a tory majority would have granted home rule. In his reply in the Lords, Carnarvon emphatically denied having given such a pledge, making no reference to Salisbury's implication in setting up the meeting ('Hansard 3', 306, 1886, cols. 1256-60). Carnarvon also expressed his belief in a limited form of self-government for Ireland: this statement was badly received by his party and when the new ministry was formed in July 1886 Carnarvon was not offered a post and his political career came to an end. He had already contemplated whether to accept a post if it were offered him. Noting the coldness of his former colleagues, he wrote, 'To accept would cure the seeming differences of opinion for the time: but if a break were afterwards to come it would be impossible ever again to mend the broken china' (journal, 5 July 1886, BL, Add. MS 60927). 
Carnarvon visited South Africa and Australia (August 1887 to February 1888), still taking a close interest in many aspects of colonial affairs. His health, which was never strong, began to fail and he died at his London house, 43 Portman Square, on 28 June 1890. He was buried on 3 July in the chapel which he had erected at Highclere. 
Carnarvon was a man of great sensibility and gentleness, though handicapped by an oversensitive nature. As Lord George Hamilton wrote of him, 'Possessed as he was by a great charm of manner, of eloquence and industry, yet he had a microbe of incurable fidgetiness in his composition. Three times in twenty years did he resign from office' (G. Hamilton, 'Parliamentary Reminiscences and Reflections, 1886-1906', 1922, 10). He was more of an aristocratic whig than a party man, attracting enemies among his colleagues for his independence of thought. Carnarvon told Salisbury in 1878 at the height of the Turco-Russian crisis, 'You know me of old and that when once I have made up my mind on a question like this I am what my friends will call obstinate and my opponents perhaps something worse' (26 Jan 1878, Hatfield House MS 3M/E). His greatest accomplishment was the establishment of a federal constitution for Canada, though he was unsuccessful in South Africa and Ireland. Carnarvon's distrust of Disraeli was manifest at the time of the second 'Reform Act' in 1867 and the Russo-Turkish conflict in 1876-8. On both occasions, he preferred resignation to compromise. Carnarvon played a significant part in the negotiations leading to the passing of the 'Franchise Bill' in 1884. His period as lord lieutenant of Ireland roused suspicions that he was more eager for home rule than many of his colleagues. 
As a classical scholar, Carnarvon published a translation of Aeschylus's 'Agamemnon' (1879) and of the first twelve books of Homer's 'Odyssey' (1886); a posthumous work of his Oxford tutor, Dean Mansel, 'The Gnostic Heresies of the First and Second Centuries' (1881); the unpublished letters of Lord Chesterfield (1890); and 'The Herberts of Highclere' (1890). He was greatly interested in history and archaeology, writing a history of ancient Hampshire and on the archaeology of Berkshire. Carnarvon was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 15 March 1877 and was president from April 1878 to April 1885. His first action was to direct the society's protest against the destruction of parts of St Albans Abbey during its restoration. Carnarvon was also an active member of the Historical Manuscripts Commission from 1882 and a trustee of the British Museum. He was a firm believer in education based on the principles of the Church of England. At the same time, he held a true scientific education to be of the highest importance. Carnarvon gave many addresses on education to a variety of audiences, including the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science. He was also a prominent freemason. Carnarvon became lord lieutenant of Hampshire on 21 March 1887 and accepted a seat on the new county council after its formation on 20 November 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 13036


Herbert, Henry John George, third earl of Carnarvon (1800-1849), travel writer, born on 8 June 1800 in Grosvenor Square, London, was the eldest son of Henry George Herbert (1772-1833), the second earl, and Elizabeth Kitty (1772-1813), daughter of Colonel John Dyke Acland of Pixton, Somerset. He was at first known as Viscount Porchester, was educated at Eton College, and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 22 October 1817, but did not take a degree. A love of adventure led him from an early age to spend much time abroad. He travelled in north Africa, and subsequently for many years in Portugal and in Spain, where he was imprisoned by the Christinos for displaying active sympathy with the Carlists. An intelligent observer and an excellent linguist, he was attracted by Spanish history and literature, and in 1825 published 'The Moor', a poem in six cantos, and in 1828 'Don Pedro, King of Castile', a tragedy, which was successfully produced at Drury Lane during his absence abroad, on 10 March 1828, when Macready and Ellen Tree filled the chief parts. On returning home he published the results of his observations in 'The Last Days of the Portuguese Constitution' (1830), and in 'Portugal and Galicia' (1830). 
Portchester married, on 4 August 1830, Henrietta Anne (1804-1876), the eldest daughter of Lord Henry Molyneux Howard. They had five children: Henry Howard Molyneux Herbert, fourth earl (1831-1890); Alan Percy Harty Molyneux Herbert MD (1836-1907); Auberon Edward William Molyneux Herbert (1838-1906), Eveline (died 1906), who married Isaac Newton Wallop, fifth earl of Portsmouth; and Gwendoline Ondine. In 1831 he was elected MP for Wootton Basset, Wiltshire, and spoke eloquently against the 'Reform Bill' which abolished his constituency. On 16 April 1833 he succeeded his father as third earl and continued his opposition to Liberal measures, including municipal reform, in the House of Lords. 
In 1839 Carnarvon travelled through Greece, then suffering from the effects of war and civil disturbances -- his notes of the tour were published in 1869 by his son Henry under the title 'Reminiscences of Athens and the Morea'. Between 1839 and 1842 Carnarvon undertook restoration of the family seat, Highclere, Hampshire, on a very elaborate scale. He engaged Sir Charles Barry who encased the existing classical mansion in an Elizabethan facade, based loosely on Woollaton, but with Gothic influences. The exuberant style reflected Carnarvon's liking for the exotic, which he had indulged in his travels, and for the theatrical -- and his dislike for styles he thought whiggish. He was jealous of his rights and in 1844 established in the courts his claims to free-warren over the manors of Highclere and Burghclere, giving him the exclusive right to kill game on those estates; but in private life he was kind and unassuming. 
Carnarvon's health was never very good, and he died at Pusey House, Berkshire, the home of his brother-in-law, Philip Pusey MP, on 10 December 1849. His funeral chapel was by Thomas Allom, in Highclere Park, north of the house. 


@@@@@


doc= 13037


Herbert, Henry William (1807-1858), sportsman and writer, was born on 7 April 1807 at 10 Poland Street, London, the eldest son of the Revd William Herbert (1778-1847), dean of Manchester, and the Hon. Letitia Emily Dorothea, daughter of Joshua, fifth Viscount Allen. He was educated privately until 1819 and afterwards at a school in Rottingdean kept by the Revd Dr Hooker, and at Eton College from 1820 to 1825. It is likely that he was destined for a career in holy orders, and in 1830 he graduated BA from Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where, as a bon viveur and member of the Cambridge yeomanry cavalry, he early showed a taste for dissipation, scholarship, outdoor sports, and writing. Upon graduation, prompted perhaps by personal and financial indiscretions, he fled somewhat suddenly to France and, in 1831, to New York. None of his biographers satisfactorily explains the reasons for self-exile, but his family refused thereafter to acknowledge his existence. 
Having abandoned plans to settle in Canada, Herbert accepted employment in New York as a classics master at the Revd R. Townsend Huddart's Classical Institute. He remained there for eight years, during which his engagingly eccentric manner and outlandish dress brought him a social cachet among sportsmen, literary men, and educated merchant leaders. Since boyhood an ardent participant in country pursuits, nevertheless as a classical scholar he had few equals in North America, and his translations from Greek, Roman, and French originals received high praise. To his extensive knowledge of English history and literature he added a marked ability as a pen-and-ink artist. Finding his British citizenship was a barrier to a legal career, he was to become one of the first professional writers in the United States. The extent of his writings is revealed in William Van Winkle's 'Bibliography' (1936), covering 1832-58, supplemented by Stephen Meats in 'Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America' (67, 1973, 69-73). Herbert's North American literary debut coincided with a burgeoning mass-market magazine industry and initially he co-edited with James G. Bennett the 'Courier and Inquirer'. 
Stung by rebuffs from the 'Knickerbocker Magazine' and 'Parlour Journal', Herbert began publication in 1833 with A. D. Patterson of the 'American Monthly Magazine', whose prospectus promised poetry, biography, theatre reviews, and travel. In the belief that literature influenced public morality and mass education, symbolically the first issue began with an introduction on the value of periodical literature. In pursuit of this ideal, practical economic matters were ignored and with Patterson's resignation in 1834 the magazine collapsed in early 1835. Having become a truculent fop and roadhouse brawler by the mid-1830s, the floridly moustachioed author achieved modest recognition in leading contemporary periodicals, and some of his fugitive poetry was well received by Edgar Allan Poe. The same luminary, however, mightily trashed much of Herbert's other works. An attempt to edit 'The Era', the first American Sunday family-oriented journal, fell foul of both sabbath inhibitions and unauthorized reproduction of its contents by regional newspapers. The launch of a sports magazine also collapsed but the momentum this generated helped to identify Herbert 'as an important figure in the prehistory of general circulation sports magazines in the United States' (Riley, 182). 
Before a break-up with Charles Fenno Hoffman, co-editor of the 'Monthly', whom he suspected of political leanings, Herbert's first serial novel, 'The Brothers: a Tale of the Fronde', appeared anonymously in 1834 along with a series of sporting sketches for the 'Spirit of the Times'. Of his several romances, 'Marmaduke Wyvil' (1843) was foremost in popularity. The others were carefully written but prolix and unimaginative, more akin to historical recitals than romances. Although he retained his real name for the series of sentimental romances which he hoped would establish a 'literary' reputation, a readership beneath his perceived dignity prompted him to adopt the pseudonym Frank Forester, under which between 1839 and 1841 he wrote humorous sporting and wildlife articles for the 'American Turf Register and Sporting Magazine'. These were later collected as 'The Warwick Woodlands' (1845; rev. edn, 1851). Other works, on closely related themes in a sub-Surtees vein, were 'My Shooting Box' and 'The Deerstalkers' (1849) for 'Graham's American Monthly Magazine' (1846). With 'Field Sports in the United States' (1849), coupled with burlesque wearing of hunting attire, he took on the role of the father of American sporting and hunting literature. 
The publication in three volumes of 'Frank Forester and his Friends, or, Woodland Adventures in the Middle States of North America' by Richard Bentley in London (1849), featuring amusing characterization and vulgar dialect, prepared an overseas readership for similar genial treatment of British hunting scenes as depicted in 'The Quorndon Hounds, or, A Virginian at Melton Mowbray' (1852). A thread of poetic imagination runs through Herbert's rural literature, enhanced and enlivened by his drawings. The twin volumes of 'Frank Forester's Fish and Fishing in the United States and British Provinces of North America' (1849-50) and the similarly titled 'Horse and Horsemanship' (1857) head his non-humour category and are authoritative works to which devotees still turn. In later years he turned to purely historical writings such as 'The Captains of the Roman Republic' (1854), but his most profitable literary work was the translation of Eugene Sue and several of Alexandre Dumas's shorter novels. 
Buffeted by implacable and possibly dishonest creditors, Herbert relinquished his chosen 'image' of cavalier boots, spurs, and Scottish plaid shawl and preferred a semi-reclusive literary retreat at The Cedars on the Passaic River outside Newark, New Jersey. On 31 December 1839 he married Sarah, daughter of John Barker, mayor of Bangor, Maine, whom he met on a hunting excursion. She died in 1844, leaving a son, William George, who later went to England and stayed there. The failure of his second marriage in February 1858 to Adela R. Budlong of Providence, Rhode Island (the divorced wife of an actor), after only a few weeks' duration caused the emotionally mercurial and heart-broken author on 17 May 1858 to shoot himself in the Stevens House Hotel on Broadway, New York. He was buried in Mount Pleasant cemetery, Newark, where eighteen years later the Newark Herbert Association erected a simple gravestone bearing the word 'Infelicissimus'. In 1920 a memorial to him by the sportsmen of America was unveiled at Warwick, Orange county, New York, the background scenario to much of his most colourful and affectionate work. 


@@@@@


doc= 13038


Herbert, John Rogers (1810-1890), painter, was born on 23 January 1810 in Maldon, Essex, the son of a controller of customs. Little is known about his early life. In 1826 he went to London, sent by his family, to train as an artist in the Royal Academy Schools, which he entered on 15 December. But after nearly two years, in 1828, upon the death of his father, he abandoned his course of study and took up paid work, specifically portraiture and book illustration. While living at an address in York Place, near Portman Square, he first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1830 with 'Portrait of a Country Boy', presumably a 'fancy picture'. He exhibited further portraits at the academy over the next few years, and small-scale subject paintings at the British Institution. Herbert's first recorded portrait, of a Scottish family in 1831, indicates conventional beginnings in the manner of Sir Thomas Lawrence. In 1834 he drew Princess Victoria. On 19 March 1833, at St George's, Hanover Square, he married Kezia Mary Dedman (1809/10-1890), daughter of a shoemaker of Great Tey, Essex. Arthur John ['see below'], probably their first child, became an artist. 
In the late 1830s Herbert's illustrative work on a small scale gave him a penchant for illustrating Romantic literature, with exotic, Eastern, and Italian settings; two such works derived from the poetry of Byron. Italian subjects became his speciality, as in his landmark work, 'The Brides of Venice' (exh. RA, 1839, and at Liverpool, where it won a prize of $50). This large painting nearly 7 feet across (version, ex Sothebys, London, 17 June 1992), set in the early sixteenth century, caught the fashion for Italianate scenes, as did Herbert's vivid set of illustrations (mostly executed in 1840) for Thomas Roscoe's 'Legends of Venice' (1841). It is uncertain whether he travelled to Italy in the mid-1830s, but for a young husband and father this seems unlikely. Nevertheless, the imminent change in Herbert's style at this time suggests the influence of the Nazarenes, who worked in Rome. 
Herbert's personal life and career changed direction as he was drawn to Roman Catholicism; at the same time he developed a close friendship with Augustus Welby Pugin. The actual date of Herbert's conversion is not known; most sources indicate that it took place in 1836 when he was twenty-six. By 1838 he had already contributed to Pugin's decorative scheme for the chapel of St Mary's College, Oscott, near Birmingham, by painting the figures on the reredos. Herbert's obsession with religion is evident in his art from 1840 onwards when he exhibited 'The monastery in the fourteenth century: boar-hunters refreshed at St Augustine's monastery, Canterbury' (Forbes Magazine collection, New York). The painting evoked pre-Reformation England, still wholly Catholic, with the church as benevolent provider for all. The focus on St Augustine's monastery, a holy place of pilgrimage that had fallen into ruins, illustrates Herbert's adoption of the beliefs of his friend Pugin, whose book 'Contrasts' defends the beauty and nobility of medieval architecture. 
By November 1841 Herbert had been elected an associate member of the Royal Academy; his 'Pirates of Istria Bearing off the Brides of Venice' (exh. RA, 1841) marked the culmination of his interest in Italian subjects. He became master of the figure in the newly formed Government School of Design at Somerset House, where his students included Walter Howell Deverell, who later became a Pre-Raphaelite painter. Herbert set up home at 1 Gloucester Road, Old Brompton, London, with his growing family; he had at least five children by 1847. 
Herbert continued to paint religious subjects; 'The First Introduction of Christianity into Britain' (exh. RA, 1842; ex Sothebys, London, 29 March 1995) celebrates the conversion of native Britons against the backdrop of Stonehenge, a pagan site. With a new and more serious attitude, he wrote in 1845, 'thank God the age of splash and dash is nearly over' (Hamlyn, 47-8). The new style of his work, lighter in tone and clearer in outline, set Herbert apart from many of his artist contemporaries such as Benjamin Robert Haydon, who considered that his art was 'German and affected' ('Diary', ed. Pope, Nov 1845). He continued to depict religious themes in 'Sir Thomas More and his Daughter' (exh. RA, 1844; Tate collection), 'The Trial of the Seven Bishops' (exh. RA, 1844), and 'Our Saviour Subject to his Parents at Nazareth' (exh. RA, 1847; Guildhall Art Gallery, London). Such works attracted critical praise, and in February 1846 he was elected Royal Academician, submitting as his diploma work 'St. Gregory the Great Teaching the Roman Boys to Sing the Chant' (exh. RA, 1845; RA). Herbert's appearance in these years reinforced his serious view of himself and his art: C. R. Leslie noted his 'hair, red, long and very smoothly brushed straight down. [He had] a mediaeval look both in appearance and dress' (Leslie, 176). 
Herbert's impressive portrait of Cardinal Wiseman (exh. RA, 1842; St Mary's College, Oscott) indicates the high Catholic circles in which he moved, which also included Lady Herbert of Lea, wife of Sidney Herbert (no relation). He painted A. W. N. Pugin's portrait in a Holbeinesque style (1845; Palace of Westminster, London). With his family Herbert regularly visited Pugin's home, The Grange, Ramsgate, in Kent, during the creation and building of the designer's great work, the new Palace of Westminster. Pugin's early death in 1852 was a blow to Herbert. 
The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood looked to Herbert as an example. He supported its journal 'The Germ' when it was founded in 1849, but William Michael Rossetti did not feel that the younger artists could go much further in enlisting his approval since, as he wrote to F. G. Stephens, in effect they were trying to 'out-Herbert Herbert' ('Selected Letters', 6). Herbert advocated painting in the open air, a central tenet of Pre-Raphaelitism. Indeed the older artist's curious monogram, which incorporated a cross, may also indicate an influence on the Pre-Raphaelites' famous monogram PRB. A family connection seems to have existed, through marriage, with James Collinson, a Pre-Raphaelite painter. 
In 1846 Herbert was commissioned to paint frescoes in the new houses of parliament, even though he had submitted only one entry to the competitions in 1844 -- an entry which had been disqualified because too late for consideration. But Herbert's connection with William Dyce, head of the Government School of Design, and his friendship with Pugin ensured his participation in this important scheme. Originally commissioned to paint nine 'Old Testament' subjects illustrating Human Justice in the peers' robing room, he eventually produced a massive painting, 'Moses' Descent from Mount Sinai' (completed 1864; House of Lords), which took fourteen years to complete, and 'Lear Disinheriting Cordelia' (now fully restored), for the upper waiting hall, called the Poets' Hall. For all the artists involved fresco proved a difficult medium; Herbert eventually turned to the water-glass technique for 'Moses', for which he spent much time researching details of costume as well as technique. 
Herbert received $5000 for his houses of parliament work, thanks to his own hard bargaining. By this time he had left the School of Design, since he did not find favour with Henry Cole, director from 1857 of the South Kensington Schools of Art, the successor to the Government School of Design. Yet his fortunes improved, as indicated by a move to Church Row, Hampstead. In 1853 and/or 1854 he travelled to France, where he painted a portrait of the eminent artist Horace Vernet (exh. RA, 1855) and exhibited in Paris at the Universal Exhibition in 1855. He became a corresponding member of the Institut de France (Academie des Beaux Arts) in 1869. He 'developed the odd habit of speaking English with a strong French accent' ('The Times', 20 March 1890, 10), a report that reveals his distinctly eccentric personality. He was, however, a committed family man and painted a portrait of his two young daughters in 1851 (on loan to the Tate). After studying with his father and in the Royal Academy Schools, exhibiting two well-received historical scenes, his eldest son, 
During the 1850s Herbert became well acquainted with W. E. Gladstone, who greatly respected the artist for his strength of character, commenting, 'What a lofty spirit' on hearing how Herbert destroyed most of his fresco of 'Moses' in 1861 when the technique had failed (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 6.26). Herbert exhibited a portrait of Gladstone in 1883. His religious art also attracted the attention of the royal family; Queen Victoria visited his studio in 1858 and, impressed with his work on 'Moses', commissioned 'The Virgin's Flight into Hill Country' (exh. RA, 1860; later given to Princess Louise; ex Sothebys, 16 April 1986, lot 216), in which the landscape (as in his other religious works) was based on Herbert's alleged travels to Egypt and Mount Sinai in 1856 or 1857. 
Herbert moved to Grove End Place in St John's Wood in 1856 and remained there until 1869; here he formed a close friendship with Sir Edwin Landseer, his neighbour and billiards partner. 'Laborare est orare' (exh. RA, 1862; Tate collection) varied the pattern of his work with a splendid landscape of the area around St Bernard's Abbey, Leicestershire, the monastery for which it was painted, in which Herbert included himself in the foreground. C. R. Leslie noted that he was a confirmed smoker who 'stated that he could not work well without a cigar in his mouth' (Leslie, 176), so the Royal Academy council had to allow him to smoke on varnishing day, with the result that Herbert generally found himself positioned near a window for ventilation and therefore a good light for his paintings. His academic reputation withstood such eccentricity, and in 1865 he even received two votes in the ballot for the election of president of the Royal Academy. In 1869 he moved with his family to his newly built London residence, The Chimes, West End Lane, in Kilburn, designed by Pugin's son Edward. 
Herbert's later style hardened, and his subject matter proved unremittingly serious. By the 1860s he appeared old-fashioned to a younger generation; in testifying at the commission into the Royal Academy, in 1863, he denounced the use of the female nude model at the academy's life school. He also took advantage of his position as Royal Academician, always sending in the full complement of paintings, and insisting that they be exhibited 'on the line'. In his later years his distinctive appearance, 'his short, sturdy figure, with his olive complexion, white beard, and steely, piercing eyes' seemed to reflect his fierce religious convictions ('Magazine of Art', April 1890, xxviii). He staged his own exhibition at the Hanover Gallery in New Bond Street, London, in 1881 to mixed reactions. Of his other sons, Cyril Wiseman Herbert, a painter, died, aged thirty-four, in 1882, shortly after receiving an appointment as curator of sculpture at the Royal Academy; Wilfrid Vincent Herbert, also an artist, painted his father's portrait (exh. RA, 1881). By 1886 Herbert had retired as an active member of the Royal Academy, his poor eyesight having long adversely affected his art. He died at his home, The Chimes, on 17 March 1890, a month after his wife's death. Both were interred (Herbert on 22 March) in the upper catacombs of Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery, London. The lack of a substantial posthumous biography has hindered a full assessment of Herbert's career, leaving many gaps regarding his life and work. 


@@@@@


doc= 13039


Herbert, Lady Lucy (1669-1744), prioress of St Augustine, Bruges, and devotional writer, was born in Redcastle or Powis Castle in Montgomeryshire, the fourth daughter of William Herbert, first marquess and titular duke of Powis (c.1626-1696), politician, and his wife, Elizabeth Somerset ('c'.1634-1691), younger daughter of Edward Somerset, second marquess of Worcester, and governess to James II's children. 
Born into a Roman Catholic family, Lady Lucy decided that she wanted to become a nun, and she spent some time touring English convents on the continent. In February 1692 she visited the priory of the English canonesses of St Augustine at Bruges and, struck by their simplicity, she decided to enter their order. She was admitted the following month and was professed on 1 June 1693, taking the name in religion of Sister Teresa Joseph. 
Lady Lucy had a long and successful life in the convent. Having been elected prioress on 5 March 1709 she made many improvements, increasing convent membership, erecting a new chaplain's house, and rebuilding the convent church. In 1738 she also installed a fine marble altar imported from Rome. After the Jacobite rising in 1715 her sisters, Lady Montagu and Lady Nithsdale ['see 'Maxwell, Winifred, countess of Nithsdale], paid her a long visit at the convent. 
Lady Lucy published two devotional works, 'Several Excellent Methods of Hearing Mass' (1722) and 'Several Methods and Practises of Devotion' (1743), which were reprinted throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. She died in Bruges on 19 January 1744 and was buried, probably in the convent, on 23 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 13040


Herbert, Mary, countess of Pembroke (1561-1621), writer and literary patron, was born on 27 October 1561 at Tickenhall, near Bewdley, Worcestershire, the third daughter of Sir Henry Sidney (1529-1586) and Lady Mary Sidney (1530x35-1586), who was the daughter of John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, and his wife, Jane Dudley ['see under 'Dudley, John]. Her eldest brother was Philip Sidney (1554-1586); her two younger brothers were Robert Sidney, later earl of Leicester (1563-1626), and Thomas (1569-1595). She had three sisters: Mary (Margaret), who died in infancy at Penshurst in 1558; an elder sister, Elizabeth, who died at Dublin in 1567; and a younger sister, Ambrosia, who died at Ludlow in 1575. 
Sidney's father was lord president of the council in the marches of Wales (1559-86); he also served as lord deputy of Ireland from 1565 to 1571 and from 1575 to 1578. Because Henry Sidney's father had been chamberlain to young Edward, he himself had been educated with the prince, and Edward died in his arms. Her mother was a close friend of Queen Elizabeth and took an active role in court politics until she contracted smallpox after nursing the queen; she was badly scarred by the disease and thereafter rarely appeared at court. The Dudley connections established Mary Sidney's social position: she was the niece of Guildford Dudley, who was executed with his wife, Lady Jane Grey; of Henry Hastings and Katherine Dudley Hastings, earl and countess of Huntingdon; of Ambrose Dudley and Anne Russell Dudley, earl and countess of Warwick; and of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, Queen Elizabeth's favourite. 
At home Sidney received an education in the humanist curriculum analogous to that of Queen Elizabeth, the learned Cooke sisters, and her own mother. She was schooled in scripture and the classics, trained in rhetoric, and was fluent in French, Italian, and Latin; she may also have known some Greek and Hebrew. She was well trained in the conventional female skills of music (both as singer and as lute player), and in needlework, so that her name was later used as a celebratory endorsement for needlework patterns and for books of music. John Taylor, the water poet, for example, says that her needlework will make her fame live for ever, and puns: '
A Patterne, and a Patronesse she was 

Of vertuous industry, and studious learning. 
(J. Taylor, 'The Needles Excellency', 1634, sig. A3'v')' Similarly Thomas Morley says that she is famous for her singing ('Canzonets', BL, Add. MS 23625). Like other aristocratic women she was also trained in household medicine and administration. 
After the death of her sister Ambrosia, Sidney was invited to court by Elizabeth in 1575. That summer she was present at the magnificent entertainment for the queen at Kenilworth and was praised in a posy presented to her at Woodstock. Her uncle Leicester arranged her marriage, on 21 April 1577, to the recently widowed Henry Herbert, second earl of Pembroke (b. in or after 1538, d. 1601), one of the wealthiest landowners in Britain. Leicester arranged a dowry of $3000, a serious financial problem for the Sidneys. Henry Sidney asked Leicester to 'bear with my poverty for if I had it, lyttell would I regard any sum of money' to achieve this match for young Mary (De L'Isle MS U1475 C7/3). Mary Sidney was Pembroke's third wife. In 1553 his father and the duke of Northumberland had arranged his marriage to Lady Katherine Grey, as part of their effort to put Lady Jane on the throne; he harshly repudiated that marriage. In 1563 he had married Katherine Talbot, who died childless in 1576. 
Mary Herbert bore four recorded children between 1580 and 1584: William Herbert (1580), later third earl of Pembroke; Katherine (1581); Anne (1583); and Philip Herbert (1584), later earl of Montgomery and fourth earl of Pembroke. At William's birth Pembroke was so elated by finally having an heir that he put up a celebratory tablet in St Mary's Church in Wilton. Katherine died on the day that Philip was born; Anne died, unmarried, in her early twenties. In addition there was at least one child who was stillborn or died in infancy. 
The Pembrokes lived primarily at Wilton, their country estate near Salisbury, and at Baynards Castle, their London home; their other residences included the smaller estates of Ramsbury and Ivychurch, both in Wiltshire. When Mary was a young bride her parents, her brother Philip, and other family members frequently visited Wilton. Philip Sidney began to write 'The Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia' (1593) there, saying in his dedication that he wrote because 'you desired me to doo it' and that it was written 'in loose sheetes of paper, most of it in your presence' (sig. A3). His sonnet sequence 'Astrophil and Stella' was also circulated at Wilton, and he may have begun paraphrasing the 'Psalms' there as well. Sidney seems to have entrusted several of his manuscripts to his sister, including those of 'Certain Sonnets', 'Astrophil and Stella', and the 'Lady of May', which she later had printed in the 1598 edition of the 'Arcadia', which served almost as Sidney's collected secular works. 
Philip Sidney died on 17 October 1586, from wounds received in Zutphen, where he was fighting with the English forces that hoped to rescue the Netherlands from the rule of Catholic Spain. As a woman Mary was barred from participating in his elaborate funeral and from publishing in any of the volumes of elegies put out by the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, and Leiden. Her father (on 5 May) and her mother (on 9 August) had both died that same year. In her grief Mary retired to Wilton for two years of mourning. There, during the attack of the Spanish Armada, she provided a safe haven for her sister-in-law Barbara Sidney ('nee' Gamage) and her infant daughter Mary, later Mary Wroth. After the armada was dispersed Mary returned to London, in November 1588, for the accession day celebrations. That return marked the beginning of her public literary activities. 
Mary Herbert honoured her brother's memory by serving as a literary patron to those who honoured him, by supervising the 1593 and 1598 editions of his 'Arcadia', by translating works that he would have approved, by completing the metric paraphrase of the 'Psalms' that he had begun, and by writing poems to praise him. These efforts on his behalf also permitted her to achieve a literary career herself, despite cultural injunctions to female silence. Her self-description as 'Sister of Sir Philip Sidney' appears self-abnegating but it is part of an autograph postscript on a business letter that also asserts her own worth: 'it is the Sister of Sir Philip Sidney who yow ar to right and who will worthely deserve the same' (BL, Add. MS 12503, fol. 151). Similarly her deference to her brother in 'To the Angell Spirit of the most Excellent Sir Philip Sidney' needs to be placed in the context of other elegies of Sidney that praise him in extravagant terms. Sir Walter Ralegh, for example, called him the ''Scipio', 'Cicero', and 'Petrarch' of our time' (E. Spenser, 'Astrophel', 1595, sig. K2). All the poets, Edmund Spenser said: '
did weep and waile, and mone, 

And meanes deviz'd to shew his sorrow best. 
(ibid., F4)' Poets who had sought Philip Sidney's patronage now sought Mary's, making her the first non-royal woman in England to receive a significant number of dedications (F. Williams, 'The literary patronesses of Renaissance England', 'N&Q', 207, 1962, 364-6). She particularly encouraged writers in her own family and household. Not only did Philip Sidney dedicate his 'Arcadia' to her but also their younger brother Robert wrote a manuscript of poems and addressed it 'For the Countess of Pembroke' (BL, Add. MS 58435). Except for her husband, who provided the financial and political backing that constituted her patronage, most of the family wrote poetry: her son William; possibly her daughter Anne; and, most importantly, Mary Sidney, Lady Wroth, her niece, namesake, and goddaughter. But it seems that everyone at Wilton was writing, including her children's tutors, the secretaries, the family physician, and even old family retainers like Thomas Howell, so that Nicholas Breton can claim that she has more 'servants' writing poetry to her than did Elizabetta Gonzaga, celebrated in Castiglione's 'Courtier' (N. Breton, 'Pilgrimage to Paradise', 1592, sig. A2). Samuel Daniel credits her with encouraging his poetry, saying that he had received 'the first notion for the formall ordering of those compositions at Wilton, which I must ever acknowledge to have beene my best Schoole' (S. Daniel, 'A Panegyrike... with a Defence of Ryme', 1603, sig. G3). Thomas Churchyard, in 'A Pleasant Conceite', says that she 'sets to schoole, our Poets ev'ry where' (sig. B1'v') and John Aubrey later describes Wilton as a 'College' ('Brief Lives', 138). The inevitable squabbling among those who sought her patronage is evident in the works of Nicholas Breton, Thomas Nashe, and even Abraham Fraunce (M. Lamb, 'Gender and Authorship in the Sidney Circle', 1990, 28-71), who incorporated her name into the titles of several works that he presented to her, including 'The Countesse of Pembrodkes Emmanuel' (1591) and the three parts of 'The Countesse of Pembrokes Ivychurch' (1591-2). Nicholas Breton similarly entitled poems 'The Countesse of Penbrookes Love' and 'The Countess of Pembrokes Passion'. 
Mary Herbert seems to have participated in the exchange of poems at Wilton. An early draft of her 'Angell Spirit' was found among Daniel's papers, and Thomas Moffet mentions her Petrarch translation and her 'Psalmes' before they were complete. Learned aristocratic women had usually confined their work to the family circle but Mary's works also circulated outside the household, since she asks Edward Wotton to return a poem that she had sent him about 1594 ('Collected Works', 1.286-7), and Spenser, in 'The Ruines of Time', claims to have read an unpublished elegy that she had written, probably 'The Dolefull Lay of Clorinda', later published in his 'Astrophel' (1595). She achieved public recognition as a literary figure, demonstrated not only by the eagerness with which poets sought to be members of her literary coterie but also by the extent of the circulation of her works. Daniel, instead of promising his patron that he would immortalize her through his verse, prophesied that she would achieve fame through her own metric psalms: '
Those 'Hymnes' that thou doost consecrate to heaven... 

Unto thy voyce eternitie hath given. 
(S. Daniel, 'Delia & Cleopatra', 1594, sig. H6)' Mary Herbert's duties included assisting her husband with some political correspondence (in which she attempted to smooth over problems caused by his tactless remarks), supporting public works, seeking justice for her servants, and interceding for friends and family at court, particularly her brother Robert, in his repeated efforts to obtain leave to return home from his position in Flushing. Like other aristocratic women she oversaw household administration for the family estates; because of the scale of the Pembroke wealth she served primarily as hostess and as titular head of an organization of servants with its own hierarchical bureaucratic structure. After her husband succeeded her father as lord president of the council in the marches of Wales in 1586 she also performed the tasks that had been her mother's at Ludlow Castle and other official residences. Her duties also included encouraging the spiritual instruction of her family and retainers. Gervase Babington, chaplain at Wilton, praises her support of religious education even as he admonishes her to persevere in 'the studie of his worde, and all other good learning' (G. Babington, 'A brief conference betwixt Mans frailtie and faith', 1584, sig. A5). Nicholas Breton goes even farther when he asks her to turn from the classics to patronize only religious works: 'thinke not of the ruines of Troie, but helpe to builde up the walles of Jerusalem' (N. Breton, 'Pilgrimage', sig. A2). So identified had she become with devout learning that in an epitaph William Browne declares that there was 'so much divinity' in her that her loss would injure 'Our Age, too prone to Irreligion' (BL, Lansdowne MS 777, fol. 44). 
Such praise has led some scholars to portray Mary Herbert as a dour religious figure; however, her niece Mary Wroth shadows her in 'Urania' and 'Love's Victory' as a lover and as a writer of secular verse. Undoubtedly some of her writing has been lost but the works that have survived appear to fit approved categories for women -- elegy, encomium, and translation -- thereby allowing her to stretch the boundaries for women even while she appeared to remain within them. She never apologizes for, or even mentions, her role as a woman writer, unlike the many early modern women writers who strewed their work with apology. Her surviving works demonstrate not only her protestant faith but also her erudition, her skill with rhetorical figures, and her witty wordplay. Her primary literary debt is to the works of her brother Philip, including a similar choice of rhetorical devices (particularly alliteration, polyptoton, chiasmus, and compound epithets), numerous scattered allusions to his verse, and the recasting of sonnet 5 of 'Astrophil and Stella' in her paraphrase of 'Psalm 73'. She is also indebted to Spenser, as signalled by her diction and poetic style, her use of Spenserian characters in 'Astrea', and specific allusions to 'The Faerie Queene' in Psalms 77, 104, and 107. 
Mary Herbert's psalm paraphrases are based on extensive scholarship in the multiple versions and commentaries available to her in English, French, and Latin. She is so indebted to the phrasing of the 'Book of Common Prayer', the Geneva 'Bible' of 1560, the 'Psaumes' of Clement Marot and Theodore Beza, and the psalm translations and commentaries of John Calvin and of Beza (both in Latin and in English translation) that she must frequently have worked with them open before her. She consulted many additional sources, including the commentaries of Victorinus Strigelius, Franciscus Vatablus, George Buchanan, and Immanuel Tremellius. Where these sources differ she typically chooses the version closest to the Hebrew, so she may have had some access to the Hebrew text and scholarship (T. Steinberg, 'The Sidneys and the Psalms', 'Studies in Philology', 92, 1995, 1-17). She also occasionally echoes phrases from earlier English metric psalms, including those by Anne Lock, Matthew Parker, Robert Crowley, Thomas Sternhold and John Hopkins, and George Gascoigne. Her phrasing sometimes derives from her own experience, with expansions of metaphors that allude to life at court, to the experiences of an aristocratic wife, and to motherhood. She employed a dazzling array of some 126 different verse forms, including ottava rima, rime royal, terza rima, two sonnet forms, and some highly original stanzaic forms. Samuel Woodforde's transcription of her working papers (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. poet. 25) gives a glimpse of her process of poetic composition. She typically began with a paraphrase of the 'Book of Common Prayer' or the Geneva 'Bible', and then consulted other psalters and scholarly commentaries, expanded metaphors, added rhetorical flourishes, and improved the rhyme, metre, and phrasing. 
The 'Psalmes', Mary Herbert's most significant achievement, were widely circulated in manuscript; eighteen manuscripts are now known to be extant, only one of which includes her two dedicatory poems, 'To the Angell Spirit of the most Excellent Sir Philip Sidney' and 'Even now that care', addressed to Queen Elizabeth. Two manuscripts (BL, Add. MSS 12047 and 46372) were rubricated for morning and evening prayer, indicating that they were thought suitable for worship. Others of her psalms were set to music; two penitential psalms (51 and 130) were set for treble voice and lute (in the fragmentary BL, Add. MS 15117), and portions of 'Psalm 97' (ll. 10, 15, 32, 38) in 'All the French Psalm Tunes with English Words' (1632). Individual psalms also circulated in private correspondence, including three (51, 104, and 137) included with 'The Triumph of Death' in transcriptions that John Harington of Kelston sent to Lucy, countess of Bedford (Library of the Inner Temple, Petyt MS 538.43.14, fols. 284-6). 
Two of Mary Herbert's translations from French, 'A Discourse of Life and Death', dated 'The 13 of May 1590. At Wilton', and 'Antonius', dated 'At Ramsburie. 26. of November 1590', were published together by William Ponsonby in 1592. Both works include Senecan themes, emphasizing reason over emotion and public duty over private relationships. 'A Discourse of Life and Death', her translation from the French of Philippe de Mornay, attracted little attention in print but was widely read; it was reprinted three times and reissued once. An example of how the work was reshaped for individual use is seen in Elizabeth Richardson's early-seventeenth-century precis of, and meditation on, Mary Herbert's translation (Washington, Folger Shakespeare Library, MS V.a.511). 

'Antonius', Mary Herbert's translation of Robert Garnier's 'Marc Antoine', was far more influential. Such neo-Senecan drama, widely popular in France, deliberately emphasizes rhetoric and didacticism, and develops characters through soliloquy rather than dramatic action. The first dramatization of the story of Antony and Cleopatra in England, and one of the first English dramas in blank verse, it also helped to introduce the continental vogue for using historical drama to comment on contemporary politics. Daniel wrote 'Cleopatra' as a companion to her play, and Shakespeare borrows elements of her phrasing and characterization in 'Antony and Cleopatra'. 'Antonius' also seems to have inspired a vogue for drama primarily intended to be read or performed in private. 
Two other works printed in Mary Herbert's lifetime are her pastoral dialogue praising Elizabeth, 'A dialogue between two shepherds, 'Thenot' and 'Piers', in praise of 'Astrea'', evidently written for the queen's intended visit to Wilton in 1599 and printed in Francis Davison's 'Poetical Rapsody' (1602); and, almost certainly, 'A Dolefull Lay of Clorinda', an elegy for Sidney published with Spenser's 'Astrophel' (1595), although it is sometimes attributed to Spenser himself ('Collected Works', 1.119-32). 
Mary Herbert's husband died on 19 January 1601, after a long illness, leaving her some $3000 in plate, jewels, and household goods, and life interest in numerous properties so long as she remained 'solo and unmaryed'. She subsequently helped to arrange the marriages of her children, continued her literary patronage on a much reduced scale, travelled on the continent, brought lawsuits against jewel thieves, pirates, and murderers, and built a country home, Houghton House, in Bedfordshire. King James visited her there in July 1621. The letters of Dudley Carleton and John Chamberlain describe her life in Spa, where she conducted a literary salon, wrote, danced, played cards, took tobacco, shot pistols, and carried on a flirtation with her handsome and learned doctor, Matthew Lister. Correspondence printed as hers by John Donne the younger in 'A Collection of Letters Made by Sir Tobie Matthew, Knight' (1660) mentions additional writings and translations from this period but none written after 1600 are known to be extant. 
Mary Herbert died, of smallpox, at her home in Aldersgate Street, London, on 25 September 1621. After a magnificent torchlight procession and a funeral befitting her rank she was buried next to her husband under the choir steps of Salisbury Cathedral. She died without having made a will; her son Philip was given responsibility for her estate on 3 October 1621 (TNA: PRO, PROB 6/10, fol. 140'r'). 
Mary Herbert had a reputation for beauty and was said to resemble her brother Philip, particularly by those who wrote poems honouring him in order to attract her patronage and that of her wealthy husband. A miniature by Nicholas Hilliard is now at the National Portrait Gallery; two oil portraits, not yet fully verified, include one in private hands in Geneva and another in private hands, now on display in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. The most famous portrait is the 1618 engraving by Simon de Passe, which appears to be her self-presentation. Dressed in embroidered silk, lace, ermine, and extravagant ropes of pearls, she holds out to the viewer a volume clearly labelled 'Davids Psalms' -- that is, the Sidneian psalm paraphrase. The cartouche identifies her as 'Mary Sidney, Countess of Pembroke', asserts her rank by a coronet, includes the Sidney pheon, and establishes her position as a writer by a laurel wreath and a design of quill pens in ink wells. 
Mary Herbert was renowned as a writer in her own day. Contemporaries who celebrated her works and / or borrowed from them include Samuel Daniel, John Davies, John Donne, Michael Drayton, Gabriel Harvey, George Herbert, Aemilia Lanyer, Henry Parry, William Shakespeare, Edmund Spenser, and Mary Wroth. Although Sir Edward Denny praised her translation of 'the holly psalmes of David' in order to rebuke her niece for her secular works ('The Poems of Lady Mary Wroth', ed. J. A. Roberts, 1983; repr. 1992, 239), in the semi-autobiographical fiction of 'Urania' Wroth shadows Mary Herbert as the queen of Naples, who writes secular verse and is described 'as perfect in Poetry, and all other Princely vertues as any woman that ever liv'd, to bee esteemed excellent in any one, [but] shee was stor'd with all, and so the more admirable' (M. Wroth, 'Urania', 1621, sig. R3'v'). 
Mary Herbert was also praised by John Donne for her joint authorship of the Sidneian psalm paraphrases. Calling Philip and Mary Sidney 'this Moses and this Mariam' he says that, while once the 'Psalms' were 'So well attyr'd abroad, so ill at home', the Sidneys have equalled continental psalters such as that by Marot and Beza: '
They shew us Ilanders our joy, our King, 

They tell us 'why', and teach us 'how' to sing 

' thus providing a model for English religious verse. Now that God 'hath translated those translators', Donne says, 'We thy Sydnean Psalms shall celebrate' (J. Donne, 'Divine Poems', ed. H. Gardner, 1978, 34-5). Daniel had promised her that her 'Psalmes' would keep her 'fresh in fame' even after ''Wilton' lyes low levell'd with the ground', and that is exactly what happened (S. Daniel, 'Delia & Cleopatra', sig. H6'v'). Wilton burnt in 1647; only the east front and the Holbein porch survive from her time. 
Mary Herbert's most famous epitaph is William Browne's description of her as 'Sidneys sister, Pembroke's mother' (BL, Lansdowne MS 777, fol. 43'v') but Thomas Archer reverses that identification in 1760, calling Sidney 'Brother to the Countesse of Pembroke' (BL, MS Add. 5830, fol. 179'v'). The most notorious posthumous account is John Aubrey's entirely unsubstantiated statement, a century after Philip Sidney's death, that a royalist friend had told him that he had heard old men say that 'there was so great love' between Sir Philip Sidney and 'his fair sister that... they lay together, and it was thought the first Philip Earl of Pembroke was begot by him' ('Brief Lives', 139). Though Aubrey wrote in the middle of a political battle with the Herberts and though there is no evidence to support his assertion it has continued to intrigue readers, provoking several Freudian readings of Mary's works. Like most other early modern women writers her reputation was eclipsed in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries; relegated to the margins in accounts of Philip Sidney, she was accused of bowdlerizing his 'Arcadia' and of attacking the popular stage. Her own writing was largely ignored, yet large sections of 'Antony and Cleopatra' were improbably attributed to her (G. Slater, 'Seven Shakespeares', 1931). 
No longer in her brother's shadow, Mary Herbert is currently recognized as one of the first significant women writers in English. The influence of 'Antonius' on English drama and of 'Psalmes' on seventeenth-century religious verse is widely acknowledged. She is frequently portrayed as a role model for subsequent women writers, including Aemilia Lanyer, Elizabeth Cary, and, most notably, her niece Mary Wroth. The literary merit of her writings has gained increasing attention, so that she is now accepted as a canonical writer; her works have been collected in a modern edition and individual writings are routinely included in anthologies. 


@@@@@


doc= 13041


Herbert, Sir Percy Egerton (1822-1876), army officer and politician, was born at Powis Castle, near Welshpool, on 15 April 1822, the second son of Edward Herbert, second earl of Powis (1785-1848), and his wife, Lady Lucy Graham (died 1875), third daughter of James Graham, the third duke of Montrose. Herbert's father was the grandson of Robert Clive, first Baron Clive of Plassey. Herbert was educated at Eton and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. In January 1840 he was appointed ensign 43rd (Monmouthshire) light infantry, in which he became lieutenant on 7 September 1841 and captain on 19 June 1846. 
Herbert saw much hard service with his regiment in the war against the Xhosa of 1851-3, and was present with it in the expedition against the Orange River Boers and at the battle of Berea. He was promoted major on 27 May and lieutenant-colonel on 28 May 1853. 
In February 1854 Herbert entered parliament as Conservative MP for Ludlow, after an uncontested election. He sat as MP until September 1860. Soon after his election, he was appointed assistant quartermaster-general of Sir De Lacy Evans's division of the army of the East, with which he landed in the Crimea. He was dangerously wounded at the Alma, but was present with his division at Inkerman and at the siege and fall of Sevastopol (when he was again wounded). He was one of the most active and indefatigable staff officers in the whole army. After the return home of Sir Richard Airey, Herbert was quartermaster-general of the army up to the evacuation of the Crimea. For his Crimean services he was made aide-de-camp to the queen and CB, and received the brevet rank of colonel (28 November 1854), as well as French, Sardinian, and Turkish orders. 
On 19 February 1858 Herbert was appointed lieutenant-colonel 82nd (Prince of Wales's) foot. He joined the regiment at Cawnpore on 21 April 1858, and commanded the left wing in the campaign in Rohilkhand, including the capture of Bareilly and Shahjahanpur. He then commanded the Cawnpore and Fatehpur districts until the spring of 1859. In December 1858 he was sent in pursuit of Firuz Shah and a body of rebels on the banks of the Jumna. 
In September 1860 Herbert resigned his parliamentary seat and became deputy quartermaster-general at the Horse Guards. On 4 October the same year he married Lady Mary Caroline Louisa Petty-Fitzmaurice, daughter of the third marquess of Lansdowne; she survived him. They had two sons and two daughters: the elder son, George, became fourth earl of Powis. 
From April 1865 Herbert was Conservative MP for South Shropshire. He successfully contested elections in July 1865 and November 1868, and was returned unopposed in March 1867 and February 1874. He served as assistant quartermaster-general at Aldershot 1865-7 and treasurer of the queen's household 1867-8. He became a privy councillor in March 1867, major-general in January 1868, KCB in 1869, and lieutenant-general in September 1875. Herbert died at his residence, The Styche, Market Drayton, Shropshire, on 7 October 1876, aged fifty-four, and was buried at Moreton Say. 


@@@@@


doc= 13042


Herbert, Philip, first earl of Montgomery and fourth earl of Pembroke (1584-1650), courtier and politician, was born on 10 October 1584 at Wilton House, Wiltshire, the younger son of Henry Herbert, second earl of Pembroke (d. 1601), and his third wife, Mary Herbert, nee Sidney (1561-1621), and younger brother of William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke (1580-1630). He was named Philip after his mother's brother, Sir Philip Sidney. He matriculated at New College, Oxford, on 9 March 1593, but only stayed at the university for three or four months. He first visited court in April 1600; on 27 December 1604 he married Lady Susan De Vere (1587-1629), daughter of Edward De Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford. James I played a prominent part in the elaborate ceremony, and gave the bride $500 in land and the bridegroom lands to the value of $1000 a year. 
Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, later wrote that the young Philip Herbert: 'had the good fortune, by the comeliness of his person, his skill, and indefatigable industry in hunting, to be the first who drew the King's eyes towards him with affection... He pretended to no other qualifications than to understand horses and dogs very well, which his master loved him the better for. (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.74)' As John Aubrey later wrote, 'His Lordship's chiefe delight was in hunting and hawking, both of which he had to the greatest perfection of any peer in the realm' ('Brief Lives', 304). Honours followed in quick succession: gentleman of the privy chamber (May 1603), knight of the Bath (23 July 1603), gentleman of the bedchamber (1605), Baron Herbert of Shurland, and first earl of Montgomery (4 May 1605). He accompanied James to Oxford in August 1605 and was created MA. He was a prominent participant in court tournaments and masques, and was passionately interested in both hunting and gambling: the king's favour was evident in James's reported willingness in 1606-7 to pay Montgomery's extensive debts. 
This royal favour continued despite Montgomery's growing reputation for rough, foul-mouthed, and even violent behaviour. In 1607 at Croydon races he so provoked William Ramsay, a page of the king's bedchamber, that Ramsay hit 'him on the face'. In 1610 Montgomery had a quarrel with the earl of Southampton at a game of tennis, but the king mediated a reconciliation. While accompanying James on his journey to Scotland in 1617, Montgomery had a violent altercation with Lord Howard de Walden. Yet the king continued to bestow titles and offices upon him: knight of the Garter (23 April 1608), high steward of Oxford University (10 June 1615), keeper of Westminster Palace, Spring Gardens, and St James's Park (4 December 1617), lord lieutenant of Kent (17 March 1624), and privy councillor (December 1624). According to Clarendon, James recommended Montgomery to Charles 'as a man to be relied on in point of honesty and fidelity' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.74-5) and in 1625 the new king appointed him one of the embassy to accompany Henrietta Maria from Paris to England. He carried the spurs at Charles I's coronation on 2 February 1626, and the following August succeeded his elder brother as lord chamberlain of the king's household. In 1628 he was appointed lord lieutenant of Buckinghamshire. 
Montgomery was on friendly terms with Buckingham, who shared his interests in hunting and gambling, and their relationship was made easier by the fact that Montgomery lacked his elder brother's political interest and ambition. In September 1619 Buckingham became godfather to his son, Lord Charles Herbert (1619-1636). The marriage agreement of 3 August 1626, whereby this boy was betrothed to Buckingham's four-year-old daughter, Mary, cemented a rapprochement between the duke and the Pembroke interest which helps to explain why Pembroke and his allies took a relatively moderate line during the 1628 parliament. Montgomery was at Portsmouth in August 1628 when Buckingham was assassinated. 
Montgomery's first wife died in January 1629, and on 3 June 1630 he married Anne (1590-1676) ['see 'Clifford, Anne], widow of Richard Sackville, third earl of Dorset, and daughter of George Clifford, third earl of Cumberland. On 10 April 1630 Montgomery became fourth earl of Pembroke on the death of his elder brother. This led to a series of further official appointments in which he succeeded his brother: he became lord lieutenant of Wiltshire, an office which he held from 1630 until his death, and he also served as lord lieutenant of Somerset (1630-43) and Cornwall (1630-42). On 12 August 1630 he was appointed high steward of the duchy of Cornwall and lord warden of the Stanneries in succession to his brother. In addition, his inheritance of the earldom of Pembroke brought him an extra income of $14,000 a year, together with a further $6000 a year belonging to his brother's deranged widow during her lifetime (she lived on until early 1650, the year of Pembroke's own death). John Aubrey estimated that his total income was about $30,000 a year. 
Such revenue enabled Pembroke to live in lavish style, and he allegedly spent $18,000 a year on hunting. He maintained a household of eighty in London, and another twice as large at his country seat at Wilton House, where he entertained the king every summer during the personal rule. Charles took a great interest in the earl's building operations as well as in his burgeoning art collection. In Aubrey's words, Pembroke: 'did not delight in books, or poetry: but exceedingly loved painting and building, in which he had singular judgement, and had the best collection of any peer in England, and was the great patron to Sir Anthony Van Dyck: and had most of his painting. ('Brief Lives', 304)' When in January 1637 a consignment of pictures arrived in London as a present from the pope to the king, Pembroke was among a select group (also comprising Henrietta Maria, the earl of Holland, and Inigo Jones) whom Charles invited to join him in opening the cases. From the early 1630s Pembroke employed Solomon De Caus to design a new palace at Wilton on a grandiose scale, surrounded by a variety of formal and informal gardens planned by his brother Isaac De Caus. The king had initially recommended that Pembroke employ Inigo Jones, and although Jones was too busy at Greenwich to accept the commission, he did provide the De Caus brothers with many suggestions. In 1647 a disastrous fire destroyed most of the house, and shortly afterwards Inigo Jones and John Webb designed a new house, in the Palladian style: this building incorporated those portions that had survived the fire and was completed in 1654. 
Although not a man of books, Pembroke was active as a literary patron. During his lifetime he received the dedications of over forty separate publications, and of a further ten jointly with his elder brother. As early as 1619 he was the dedicatee of an English edition of the medieval romance 'The Ancient, Famous and Honourable History of Amadis de Gaule'. He and his elder brother were the 'incomparable pair of brethren' to whom the first folio of Shakespeare's works was dedicated in 1623. Three further examples, chosen almost at random, serve to indicate the remarkably wide range of works that were dedicated to him: Alice Sutcliffe's 'Meditations of Man's Mortalitie' (1634); Sir Thomas Herbert's 'A Relation of some Yeares Travaile, Begunne anno 1626. Into Afrique and the Greater Asia' (1634); and Alexander Read's 'A Treatise of the First Part of Chirurgerie' (1638). He was a patron of his kinsman, the poet and divine George Herbert, and in 1630 he requested Charles I to present Herbert to the rectory of Fugglestone with Bemerton in Wiltshire. Like his mother and brother he was also a loyal patron of Philip Massinger, and after the dramatist's death in 1640 he continued to provide a pension for his widow. That same year he paid for a translation of Gilbert Saulnier's 'The Love and Armes of the Greeke Princes'. 
Although they shared artistic and architectural interests, in other ways Charles and Pembroke were less in tune. Henrietta Maria disliked him, and in his religious beliefs the earl inclined towards godly protestantism. This was connected with his long-standing interest in colonial enterprises. A member of the council of the Virginia Company from 1612, he became one of the incorporators of the North-West Passage Company on 26 July 1612, and of the Guiana Company on 19 May 1626. He also became a member of the East India Company (1614), and later (February 1628) received a grant of the islands of Trinidad, Tobago, Barbados, and Fonseca. He was not well disposed towards Archbishop Laud, especially after the latter was elected in 1630, by a majority of only nine votes, to the third earl's old office of chancellor of Oxford University. Pembroke's position at court was further complicated by his incorrigibly rough manners: in February 1634, for example, he broke his staff over the back of Thomas May. 
Pembroke's ambivalent relationship with the court, together with his religious sympathies, helps to explain why he strongly favoured peace during the campaigns against the Scots in 1639-40. He was a commissioner for the negotiations at both Berwick and Ripon, and some of the Scottish covenanters, such as the earl of Rothes, regarded him as secretly sympathetic to them, a charge which he vigorously denied. Together with the earls of Holland and Salisbury, he urged Charles to accept the Scots' terms in October 1640, whereupon the king ordered him to return to London and to raise $200,000 towards the costs of the campaign. 
Thereafter Pembroke became rapidly more alienated from the court. By virtue of his many offices and his extensive estates, especially in Wiltshire and in central and southern Wales, he wielded considerable electoral influence. In the Short and Long parliaments the Commons probably contained about a dozen members who owed their seats directly to his patronage. Perhaps the most prominent member of the Pembroke interest was Sir Benjamin Rudyerd, and other notable figures included the earl's secretary, Michael Oldisworth, Samuel Turner, Sir Robert Pye, Thomas Pury, Sir Richard Wynne, and several of his own relatives. Politically the Pembroke network was rather disparate and never really formed a coherent group, although there is some evidence that in the Long Parliament elections Pembroke tended to support candidates known to be hostile to the exponents of 'Thorough'. He subsequently voted in favour of Strafford's attainder, and on 3 May 1641 he greatly offended Charles by telling the anti-Straffordian demonstrators milling outside Westminster Hall that 'His Majesty had promised they should have speedy execution of justice to their desires' ('A Perfect Journal of the Daily Proceedings and Transactions in that Memorable Parliament, Begun at Westminster, 3 November, 1640', 1641, 90). 
The queen recommended that Pembroke be dismissed as lord chamberlain, and an opportunity soon presented itself. On 19 July he became involved in one of his periodic quarrels, this time with Lord Maltravers in a committee of the Lords: there was a violent altercation which culminated in his striking Maltravers twice with his staff. This episode provided the king with an excuse to demand Pembroke's resignation from his post, and shortly afterwards the earl of Essex was appointed to succeed him. This marked Pembroke's final breach with the court, but at the same time he won growing support from among the king's critics in the Commons. In August 1641 the Commons recommended that he be appointed lord steward when the king departed for Scotland. However, on 29 November Pembroke assured Sir Edward Nicholas, newly appointed as secretary of state, that he would never accept any office 'but by his Ma[jes]t[ie]s grace and nominacion' (Christ Church Muniment Room, Oxford, Evelyn collection, Nicholas letters, unfoliated, Pembroke to Nicholas, 29 Nov 1641), and Charles refused the Commons' request the following month. 
Pembroke's subsequent allegiance to parliament was probably grounded on a mixture of personal alienation from the court and an underlying attachment to godly protestantism. Another consideration may well have been the fact that the Herbert family's ancient rivals for local dominance in Wiltshire, the Seymours, chose to become royalists. Clarendon also identified a further motive -- Pembroke's: 'fear, which was the passion always predominant in him above all his choler and rage, prevailed so far over him, that he gave himself up into the hands of the Lord Say to dispose of him as he thought fit. (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.540)' Pembroke was always a very moderate parliamentarian, and he was one of the peers most regularly involved as a messenger or negotiator between the houses and the king. On 9 March 1642 he and Holland met Charles at Royston where they presented him with a declaration from the houses detailing his misgovernment. In June he ignored the king's summons to York, yet he remained in touch with Edward Hyde and sent assurances of his loyalty to Charles. On 4 July he was one of five peers appointed to the committee of safety comprising members of both houses. Meanwhile, secret contacts between Hyde and Pembroke, with the latter's eldest son, Lord Herbert, acting as go-between, continued until early August. But on 8 August the houses appointed Pembroke governor of the Isle of Wight, and Clarendon later wrote that he 'kindly accepted it, as a testimony of their favour; and so got into actual rebellion, which he never intended to do' (ibid., 2.541). He was among the members of both houses who presented a petition to the king at Colnbrook on 11 November, and in January 1643 he was one of the commissioners sent to Charles at Oxford with peace propositions. He was present at the treaty of Uxbridge (January-February 1645), and one night had a conversation with Hyde in which he allegedly 'told him that there was never such a pack of knaves and villains as they who now governed in the Parliament' (ibid., 3.494). Hyde felt that his adherence to parliament was guided principally by fear of losing Wilton and a desire to be on the winning side. 
Certainly throughout the years of civil war Pembroke's political affiliations were highly changeable. He was intermittently associated with the Saye-Northumberland group in the Lords which also included peers such as the earls of Kent, Nottingham, and Salisbury, and Lord Howard of Escrick, Lord North, and Lord Wharton. Like them he supported the self-denying ordinance and the creation of the New Model Army in 1645. In March 1646, along with Saye, Northumberland, Wharton, and Salisbury, he was appointed to the committee of revenue, and thereafter this group wielded considerable influence over the exchequer. Yet from August 1646 he started to distance himself from the Saye-Northumberland group, and by May 1647 he had emerged as one of the army's most outspoken critics and a vigorous advocate of its speedy disbandment. On 3 May he delivered a speech to the common council of the City of London in which he allegedly asserted that the army was 'no longer the New Modle for there were 7000 Cavaliers in it' (DWL, MS 24.50, diary of Thomas Juxon, fol. 107), and that 'hee conceived it were high time they were disbanded' (C. H. Firth, ed., 'The Clarke Papers', 4 vols., CS, new ser., 49, 54, 61-2, 1891-1901, 1.26). 
Pembroke's speech to the London common council may well have helped to strengthen the growing hostility towards the army felt within the capital. When on 26 July rioters besieged the houses of parliament in support of the presbyterian leaders and their attempts to disband the army, Sir John Maynard alleged that Pembroke 'was all for the apprentices, and incouraged them' (Beinecke Library, Yale University, Osborn MS Fb 155, commonplace book of John Browne, fol. 239). Unlike other peers associated with the Saye-Northumberland group he did not flee to the army and instead continued to attend the house. But when, early in August, the army entered London and reinstated the members of both houses who had fled, Pembroke claimed that he had been acting under duress. He now once again insisted that he was a friend to the army and tried to identify himself with the proposed settlement promoted that summer by such peers as Saye, Northumberland, Wharton, and Salisbury. James Howell attributed this change of heart to Saye's continuing influence over the earl ('A Letter to the Earle of Pembrooke Concerning the Times, and the Sad Condition both of Prince and People', 1647, 12). Pembroke's manoeuvres prompted the royalist earl of Dorset, in a letter to his son-in-law, the parliamentarian earl of Middlesex, to observe with heavy sarcasm that: 'You cannott suffer, while you have soe sure and constant a man amongst you... Paraselsus himselfe cowld never have fixed the mercuriall spirit thatt predominates in his breast: if hee weere alive to practise on him' (Dorset to second earl of Middlesex, 1 Aug 1647, Centre for Kentish Studies, Sackville MS, U 269/C248, unfoliated). Likewise, a contemporary satire bitingly applied the phrase 'life of loyalty' to Pembroke (Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 357, political satires, fol. 37'r'). 
Pembroke's religious attitudes were similarly complex. He was clearly unsympathetic towards Laudianism and inclined towards godly protestantism. From 1643 he served as a member of the Westminster assembly. As the 1640s progressed, he emerged as a supporter of moderate episcopacy whose most consistent priority was an Erastian hostility to the more radical demands of both the high presbyterians and the Independents. In November 1644 he and the earl of Warwick went to the Westminster assembly and 'chide the Independ[en]ts for retardeinge the worke of Reformation[n]' (DWL, MS 24.50, fol. 27). He supported Laud's attainder in January 1645, but in March 1646 he voted to reject the high presbyterian petition submitted by the City of London. Evidence of his moderate episcopalianism may be found in his choice of the future bishop of Winchester, George Morley, as his domestic chaplain, as well as in the nature of his ecclesiastical patronage within the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, of which he was a resident. 
Notwithstanding his changeable political associations, Pembroke remained sufficiently trusted within the houses to be appointed to a range of further offices. In July 1644 he became lord lieutenant of Somerset, and on 1 December 1645 the houses voted him a dukedom. On 27 July 1648 the Lords sought the Commons' agreement to his appointment as constable of Windsor Castle and keeper of Windsor Great Park, although the consent of the lower house was not forthcoming until 19 December. Perhaps most notably, on 6 July 1641, following Laud's imprisonment, he had been elected to the chancellorship of Oxford University. It was indicative of his political alignments that Pembroke nominated Saye to succeed him as high steward of the university. When Oxford became the king's headquarters, the marquess of Hertford displaced Pembroke as chancellor, but on 3 August 1647 the houses issued an ordinance for his restoration. This followed an earlier ordinance (1 May 1647) 'for the visitation and reformation of the University of Oxford' and the 'due correction of offences, abuses, and disorders, especially of late times, committed there' (C. H. Firth and R. S. Rait, eds., 'Acts and Ordinances of the Interregnum, 1642-1660', 3 vols., 1911, 1.925-7). 
The visitors, led by Sir Nathaniel Brent, began work at Oxford in September 1647, directed by a committee of both houses in London under the chairmanship of Pembroke. Their instruction that all university officers should take the solemn league and covenant encountered so much resistance that the heads of houses were summoned before the committee in November, where Pembroke soundly berated them. In February 1648 he nominated a new vice-chancellor, Dr Reynolds, together with many new heads of houses. A parliamentary order of 8 March instructed him to take possession of his place as chancellor, and the following month he entered Oxford in person and presided in convocation. Thereafter the visitors encountered little resistance and harsh measures were imposed on the recalcitrant. No fewer than eight royalist satires were published in London and Oxford, mercilessly lampooning Pembroke's lack of scholarly pretensions. Among the most mordant was 'Newes from Pembroke and Mongomery, or, Oxford Manchester'd' (1648), attributed to Sir John Berkenhead, which presented a mock speech by Pembroke as chancellor containing such choice phrases as: 'I love the 'Bible', though I seldome use it; I say I love it... I can love it though I cannot read it'; and 'my name may be French, for I cannot spell English' (pp. 2, 5). Anthony Wood later wrote that Pembroke was 'so foul-mouthed and so eloquent in swearing that he was thought more fit to preside over a Bedlam than a learned academy' (Burrows, lxx). 
Events on the national scene were meanwhile moving ever more rapidly. In January 1648, believing the king to be indispensable to any settlement, Pembroke opposed the vote of no addresses and resolutely refused to leave Wilton in order to attend the Lords' debates upon it. The fire at Wilton in 1647, together with the depredations of civil war, eroded his finances, and his total income in 1648 was estimated at $20,203, a sum which exceeded his total expenses by only $1064 (Elmhirst MS, Pye deposit, EM 1356, EM 1359). In July 1648 he voted that the duke of Hamilton, who had led the recent Scottish intervention into England, be declared a traitor, and the following month he wished to see those English royalists who had assisted the Scottish invasion declared traitors: he entered his dissent when this proposal was defeated. In the autumn he was among the parliamentarian commissioners appointed to negotiate with the king at the treaty of Newport, and at the beginning of December he accepted the king's concessions as a basis for further talks. After Pride's Purge brought the treaty to an abrupt halt Pembroke, together with Denbigh, Mulgrave, and Lord Grey of Warke, formed a deputation to Fairfax on about 10 December, the main purpose of which appears to have been 'to assure him of their support of the Army's position with respect to the House of Lords' (I. Gentles, 'The New Model Army in England, Ireland and Scotland, 1645-1653', 1992, 298). Then, on 19 December, he joined Salisbury and Northumberland in the delegation which Denbigh led to the council of officers in an eleventh-hour attempt to secure a possible compromise by which Charles would abandon his negative voice, consent to the perpetual alienation of bishops' lands, and abjure the Scots. 
Although the Denbigh initiative failed, Cromwell and other leading army officers seem to have been keen to cultivate Pembroke's support. On that same day, 19 December, the earl's secretary, Michael Oldisworth, conveyed to the Lords the Commons' consent to an ordinance appointing Pembroke as constable of Windsor Castle, thus making him in effect the king's gaoler. Pembroke promptly appointed as his deputy Bulstrode Whitelocke, whom he appears to have regarded as an ally. On 2 January 1649 Pembroke was appointed to the high court of justice to try the king. However, he reportedly 'swore he loved not to meddle with businesses of life and death and (for his part) hee would neither speake against the ordinance nor consent to it' ('Mercurius Pragmaticus', nos. 40-41, 26 Dec 1648-9 Jan 1649, 2 Jan 1649). 
Despite such prevarication the Rump still wished to secure Pembroke's support, and on 14 February 1649 he was appointed a member of the newly established council of state. The fact that he was one of five peers so nominated, only a week after the abolition of the Lords, is indicative 'of the boundaries of the Rump's revolutionary zeal' (B. Worden, 'The Rump Parliament, 1648-1653', 1974, 178). When the Rump decided to permit the election of peers as commoners, Pembroke (like Salisbury and Howard of Escrick, but unlike Saye and Wharton) was among those who stood for election; he was returned on 16 April 1649 as member for Berkshire. However, he appears to have played little further part in public affairs, and the evidence of apothecaries' bills suggests that he began to suffer from his final illness during May. He died at his lodgings in The Cockpit, Westminster, on 23 January 1650. His body was embalmed at a cost of $118 17's'. 4died, and he was buried in Salisbury Cathedral on 9 February. The council of state ordered all members of parliament to accompany his cortege for 2 or 3 miles on the journey out of London. 
Pembroke's fourth, and eldest surviving, son from his first marriage, 
The fifth earl sat for Wiltshire in the Short Parliament, and for Glamorgan in the Long Parliament. Like his father he sided with the parliamentarians in the civil wars, and on his father's death he took over his seat for Berkshire in the Rump Parliament. His first wife had died by 1647 and in or before 1649 he married Katherine Villiers (died 1678), daughter of Sir William Villiers and Rebecca Roper. Pembroke was elected a member of the council of state on 1 December 1651, and briefly served as president of the council from 3 June to 13 July 1652. In 1655 he was appointed a militia commissioner for south Wales, and in 1659 the council of state accepted his offer to raise a regiment of horse at his own charge. 
At the Restoration, Pembroke made his peace with Charles II and was appointed a councillor for trade and navigation on 7 November 1660. He bore the spurs and acted as cupbearer at Charles II's coronation on 23 April 1661. According to Aubrey, the fifth earl 'had an admirable witt, and was contemplative but did not much care for reading. His chiefest diversion was Chymistrie, which his Lordship did understand very well and he made Medicines, that did great cures' ('Brief Lives', 304) ['see 'Society of Chemical Physicians]. He died on 11 December 1669 and was buried in Salisbury Cathedral on 24 December. 
The only son of his first marriage, William Herbert (1640-1674), succeeded him as sixth earl of Pembroke. He was granted a pass to travel overseas in September 1658. He was member for Glamorgan between 1661 and 1669, and he died unmarried on 8 July 1674. He was buried in Salisbury Cathedral on 1 August 1674. 
The eldest son of the fifth earl's second marriage, 
However, only a few days later, on 5 February 1678, Philip Rycaut complained to the Lords that Pembroke had assaulted him in the Strand on 2 February. The Lords responded by ordering the earl to give security by a recognizance of $2000 to keep the peace towards Rycaut and all the king's other subjects. Meanwhile, on 4 February Pembroke had killed Nathaniel Cony in a drunken scuffle in a Haymarket tavern; one week later the Middlesex grand jury convicted him of murder. He submitted another petition to the Lords, and was tried by his peers on 4 April: six found him guilty of murder, eighteen not guilty, and forty guilty of manslaughter. He then 'prayed that he might have his privilege of peerage': this was granted and he was discharged upon payment of his fees ('JHL', 13.200). 
The rake's progress continued thereafter, and on 18 August 1680 Pembroke killed an officer of the watch, William Smeeth, while returning from a drinking binge at Turnham Green. The Middlesex grand jury tried him on 21 June 1681 and found him guilty of murder. He could not claim privilege of peerage a second time, but on this occasion, following a petition on his behalf to the king signed by twenty-four peers, he was granted a royal pardon and discharged. He died on 29 August 1683, aged only thirty, and was buried in Salisbury Cathedral on 10 September. On 17 December 1674 he had married Henrietta de Keroualle (died 1728), sister of Charles II's mistress, Louise de Keroualle, duchess of Portsmouth. They had one daughter, Catherine, who married, first, John Jeffreys, second Baron Jeffreys of Wem, and second, Thomas Windsor, first Viscount Windsor. Pembroke was succeeded by his younger brother Thomas Herbert (1656/7-1733), who became eighth earl of Pembroke. 


@@@@@


doc= 13043


Philip Herbert (bap. 1621, d. 1669), succeeded him as fifth earl of Pembroke. He was baptized at Enfield on 21 February 1621 and educated at Westminster School and at Exeter College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 20 April 1632. From 1636 onwards he was styled Lord Herbert, and between 1635 and 1637 he travelled in France and Italy. On 28 March 1639 he married Sir Robert Naunton's daughter Penelope ('b'. 1620), the widow of Viscount Bayning. That year he also served with the king as a captain during the first bishops' war. 


@@@@@


doc= 13044


Philip Herbert (1653-1683), succeeded William Herbert as seventh earl of Pembroke. In character, he was in many ways a throwback to his paternal grandfather and namesake, only in a more extreme form. Aubrey observed in 1680 that Pembroke had 'at Wilton 52 mastives and 30 grey-hounds, some beares, and a lyon, and a matter of 60 fellowes more bestial then they' ('Brief Lives', 305). The earl quickly acquired an unenviable reputation for barbarous and violent behaviour. He nearly killed a man in a duel in November 1677. On 28 January 1678 the lord chancellor informed the House of Lords that the king had committed Pembroke to the Tower 'for uttering such horrid and blasphemous words, and other actions proved upon oath, as are not fit to be repeated in any Christian assembly'. Pembroke submitted a petition to his fellow peers, claiming to 'detest and abhor' the words of which he stood accused, and hoping that, as he was accused by only one witness, the peers 'will not believe the accusation, or your petitioner capable of so horrid a crime' ('JHL', 13.131-2). The house thereupon resolved (with seven bishops, Lord Berkeley, and the duke of York entering their dissents) to petition the king for Pembroke's release, which Charles granted on 30 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 13045


Richard Herbert, second Baron Herbert of Cherbury and second Baron Herbert of Castle Island (1600?-1655), the elder son of Edward Herbert, was a magistrate in Shrewsbury, Shropshire, in 1634 and was involved in relieving the poor there during an attack of the plague. He married Lady Mary, the daughter of John Egerton, the first earl of Bridgewater, in November 1627. They had four sons, Edward Herbert ['see below'], John (who died young), Henry Herbert, and Thomas, and four daughters, Frances, Florence (or Florentia), Arabella, and Alicia. Like his younger brother, Henry, Richard had somewhat extravagant tastes for his means. Correspondence from December 1635 and January 1636 concerns a quarrel with his father about his debts. In 1639 he commanded a troop of horse in the expedition against the Scots, while on the outbreak of the civil war he was commissioned in September 1642 to raise a regiment of foot and was appointed governor of Bridgnorth. In the following month he received a commission to be captain of a troop of horse; when the queen landed from Holland at Bridlington, Yorkshire, in 1643, he accompanied her to the court at Oxford. Later, in September, he was made governor of Ludlow. Attending the assembly of royalist members of the houses of parliament at Oxford in 1644, he signed the letter that was sent to the earl of Essex, the parliamentary general, seeking an end to the conflict. In that same year he was with Prince Rupert at Shrewsbury and was made governor of Aberystwyth Castle. On the death of his father in August 1648 he succeeded to the title and was bequeathed his father's horses while his wife received his father's viols and lutes. Having been active on the royalist side in the civil war, parliament imposed on Herbert a large fine. It also required him to demolish Montgomery Castle while permitting him to keep whatever he could realize from its materials. He died on 13 May 1655 and was buried in the church at Montgomery. His son 


@@@@@


doc= 13046


Herbert, St Leger Algernon (1850-1885), journalist, was the son of Frederick Charles Herbert (1819-1868), commander RN (grandson of Henry Herbert, first earl of Carnarvon), who married, at Glanmire, co. Cork, Bessie Newenham Stuart, daughter of Captain Henry Stuart of the 69th regiment. He was born at Kingston, Ontario, Canada, on 16 August 1850, and attended the Royal Naval School, New Cross, Kent. He was a scholar of Wadham College, Oxford, from 1869 to 1874, taking a first class in classical moderations (1872), and a third class in 'literae humaniores' (1874). From 1875 to 1878 he was in the Canadian civil service, and occasionally served as private secretary to Lord Dufferin, the governor-general. Herbert acted as private secretary to Sir Garnet Wolseley during the occupation of Cyprus in 1878, and when Wolseley was high commissioner in South Africa. He was attached to Ferreira's Horse at the storming of Sekokoeni's mountain, and was made a CMG (1880). While in Cyprus and South Africa he acted as correspondent for 'The Times', and on returning to England was employed during the autumn and winter of 1880 in writing leading articles for it. In February 1881 he went to Africa as secretary to Sir Frederick Roberts, and on the latter's immediate return he was appointed in the same capacity to the Transvaal commission. He wrote on a variety of subjects in papers and magazines. 
From September to December 1883, and from February to June 1884 Herbert served in Egypt as special correspondent of the 'Morning Post'. He was at the battles of al-Teb and Tamai, and was shot through the leg, above the knee, at Tamai. In September 1884 he returned to Egypt, and was attached to the staff of General Sir Herbert Stewart, on the Gordon relief expedition in the Sudan. He escaped, unwounded, at Abu Klea. At the battle of Gubat, near Metemmah, on 19 January 1885, Herbert was conspicuous in a soldier's red coat -- the troops themselves wore grey and khaki -- and drew enemy fire. Frederic Villiers told him to take off the coat, but Herbert was shot between the eyes and killed. Wolseley wrote in his journal that Herbert was 'as brave as a lion... and [was] admitted to the intimacy of the best in the Army... because he was socially their equal' (Preston, 202). According to Wolseley, Herbert was an unbeliever in revealed religion. A monument was placed in St Paul's Cathedral crypt to Herbert and the six other correspondents who died on the Sudan campaigns of 1883-5. 


@@@@@


doc= 13047


Herbert, Sidney, first Baron Herbert of Lea (1810-1861), politician, was born at Richmond, Surrey, on 16 September 1810; he was the only son of George Augustus Herbert, eleventh earl of Pembroke (1759-1827), and his second wife, Catherine (1783-1856), only daughter of Semyon, Count Vorontsov, formerly Russian ambassador at the court of St James, and long resident in England. He was educated at a preparatory school, Hall Place, Beaconsfield, and at Harrow School. He matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 17 May 1828. There he proved himself an elegant scholar, and was admired as a speaker at the Union Debating Society even by the side of W. E. Gladstone, Roundell Palmer, and others. In his final schools in November 1831 he went in for a pass degree. He was invited by the examiners after his first papers to seek honours, but declined, and received an honorary fourth class. 
As a youth Herbert was known for a marked grace of character and an elegant appearance which much impressed his contemporaries. His elder half-brother, Lord Pembroke, had married a Sicilian and lived abroad; so Sidney Herbert ran Wilton House, the family seat in Wiltshire, as if he was the earl, but was also able to stand for the Commons. In December 1832 he was elected for South Wiltshire as a tory and held the seat until ennobled in 1861 (he was twice opposed at general elections, in 1852 and 1857, leading the poll on both occasions). He confirmed his party credentials in his maiden speech on 20 June 1834 which opposed the removal of restrictions excluding dissenters from Oxford. He declined Sir Robert Peel's offer of becoming a government whip in December 1834, but accepted a secretaryship at the Board of Control in January 1835, holding the post until April 1835, when the government fell. In opposition between 1835 and 1841 Herbert established himself as an able speaker from the tory point of view, opposing, for example, the new system of penny postage. In 1841 Peel made him secretary to the Admiralty. Lord Haddington, the first lord, was in the Lords and Herbert was thus responsible for naval business in the Commons. He reformed the naval school at Greenwich and was preparing extensive changes -- including the retirement of 300 captains -- when Gladstone's resignation early in 1845 triggered a reshuffle. Herbert shrewdly declined the poisoned chalice of the Irish secretaryship and on 4 February was made secretary at war with a seat in the cabinet. Herbert was seen as a protectionist and when on 12 March 1845 Richard Cobden was making his motion for a select committee to inquire into the effect of protection upon the landed interest, Peel, who was sitting next to Herbert, said, 'You must answer this, for I cannot.' In his reply Herbert expressed dislike of members coming to parliament 'whining for protection'. Disraeli afterwards said that Peel had 'sent down his valet, a well-behaved person, to make it known that we are to have no whining here' (Morley, 1.318). When in November 1845 Peel first asked his cabinet to support suspension of the corn laws, Herbert was one of only three to support him. He did so believing that 'the fact is, the present law has failed' (Stanmore, 1.46). He was widely -- and inaccurately -- believed to have leaked news of the change of policy to the press through his close friend Caroline Norton. The calumny was repeated in George Meredith's 'Diana of the Crossways' (1884). He defended Peel's policy in the Commons in the early months of 1846 and voted for repeal in June 1846. At the War Office he began the educational reforms which he was able later to continue and instituted an inquiry into reforming the militia. When Peel's government resigned on 29 June 1846, Herbert was marked as the leader of the younger Peelites, more reliable if also less able than his close contemporary, W. E. Gladstone. 
Out of office, on 12 August 1846 Herbert married Mary Elizabeth (1822-1911) ['see 'Herbert, (Mary) Elizabeth], daughter of General Charles Ashe A Court (later A Court Repington) of Amington Hall, Warwickshire, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, 'nee' Gibbs. He had known his future wife as a child. When they married she was regarded as one of the most striking of society beauties. They had four sons and three daughters. At Wilton in the opposition years from 1846 to 1852 Herbert was an energetic reformer. He had already rebuilt the parish church (consecrated on 9 October 1845). He played a prominent role in the county, provided charitable assistance to the clergy and their families, and founded the Herbert Cottage Hospital at Charmouth (later moved to Bournemouth) under the care of a German protestant sisterhood. In this he and his wife were helped by Florence Nightingale, whose acquaintance they had made on a visit to Rome. The area of Donnybrook, on the outskirts of Dublin, was left him by Lord Fitzwilliam, and he expanded the estate, modernized the lease structure, and doubled the rent roll. Like Gladstone, with whom his friendship intensified in the 1840s, Herbert was much influenced by the Tractarian movement, and encouraged cathedral reform. He and his wife founded in 1849 the Female Emigration Fund, to promote assisted female emigration (Disraeli wrote of it: '35,000 needle-women to be deported at $5 a-piece'; Stanmore, 1.199). 
Herbert and other Peelites attempted to promote their views by purchasing in 1848 the 'Morning Chronicle'; it was expensive to run and was sold to William Glover in 1854. Herbert also played some part in the establishment of the 'Saturday Review' in 1855. 
After Peel's death in 1850, Herbert and Gladstone, more than other leading Peelites, showed some signs of a 'rapprochement' with the tory party, but this came to nothing. On the formation of the Peelite-led Aberdeen coalition in December 1852, Herbert again became secretary at war. The death of the duke of Wellington that year made army reform easier and Herbert anticipated continuing the moderately reforming pattern of his earlier tenure of the office. France, not Russia, was seen as Britain's most likely enemy. While in 1853 Britain drifted towards war with Russia in defence of the Ottoman empire, Herbert, with the other Peelites, urged caution. His semi-Russian parentage led to accusations of lack of patriotism. 
The Crimean War, which began in March 1854, placed Herbert in a very difficult position. The secretary at war was subordinate to the secretary of state for war and the colonies (the duke of Newcastle) and was chiefly responsible for military finance. Herbert and others had enlarged these responsibilities in an 'ad hoc' way to promote reform, and the absorption of the secretary of state in colonial duties meant that in peacetime the secretary at war often stood in for him. Herbert and Newcastle were both in the cabinet. Neither was a dominating politician, but Herbert was more so than Newcastle. The war quickly exposed the falsity of this arrangement. In the prolonged wrangle over the character of a new structure, Herbert defended the usefulness of his secretaryship but, eventually, proposed to the cabinet on 21 January 1855 a board (similar to the Admiralty board) to be presided over by the secretary of state. This was accepted by the cabinet but the government fell before any action was taken. Herbert's post was not filled when he left it and from that time was subsumed into the secretaryship for war, until its abolition in 1863. 
Herbert had, therefore, little formal executive responsibility for the military conduct of the war, but, with Newcastle in the Lords, he was 'de facto' spokesman for the army in the Commons and he was to an extent responsible for the supply of food, clothing, and shelter, and of medical services: precisely those areas most notorious for failure. Though Herbert ordered materials, the commissariat which supplied them was controlled by the Treasury, whose priority was the prevention of waste. An important reform achieved in part by Herbert was the transfer of the commissariat to the War Office, but this came too late. Herbert was aware of the defects of the medical support for the army and from the start of the war made strenuous and in part effective efforts to improve it. His boldest move was to send female nurses to assist in what were traditionally all-male hospitals. 
On 15 October 1854 Herbert wrote to Florence Nightingale (already preparing an unofficial initiative) to ask her to take charge of a small group of female nurses sent to Scutari. She agreed and a legendary expedition was launched, Herbert exhorting the party in a farewell speech in his dining-room. In December he sent out a second party, led by Mary Stanley. This provoked a furious reaction from Florence Nightingale, and she offered her resignation. Herbert's cool and subtle handling of Miss Nightingale led to a satisfactory agreement, and both parties of nurses worked in the hospitals. Herbert was one of the few people Florence Nightingale respected; she kept his death day annually until her own. 
Criticism of the government's handling of the war, and consequently of Herbert, came to a head in J. A. Roebuck's motion for a committee of inquiry into the state of the army before Sevastopol. Newcastle intended resignation and Aberdeen intended to replace him with Herbert, when Lord John Russell's resignation precipitated a crisis only ended by the passing of Roebuck's motion and the resignation of the cabinet on 30 January 1855. In Palmerston's succeeding government, Herbert was briefly, for a few days in February, colonial secretary (in the new arrangements of secretaryships); he resigned with Gladstone and Sir James Graham when Palmerston failed in his assurance that he would prevent the Roebuck inquiry. Herbert gave evidence to the inquiry on 9 May 1855 and favourably impressed it, later being exempted by Roebuck from its severest censures. Herbert's qualities of even-handed fairness and a determination that was quiet rather than dramatic equipped him well for peacetime office, but, as he himself sometimes sensed, equipped him insufficiently for the administrative complexities of the Crimean War. 
Herbert now considered himself 'a member of the liberal party' (Stanmore, 2.81) and favoured, much more than Gladstone, accommodation between the Peelites and the whig-Liberals. While in opposition, from 1855 to 1859, he wrote quite frequent public letters, and a signed article on army reform for the 'Westminster Review' (January 1859). When Palmerston formed his second government in June 1859, Herbert became secretary of state for war, with the task of consolidating that new office, of transferring the Indian army to the crown, of developing the volunteer movement, and of introducing rifled ordnance. A war with France was thought likely by some and, doubtless mindful of his experience in 1853-4, Herbert planned not merely army reform but military expansion, with increased estimates and a programme of fortifications along the south coast of England and elsewhere. Though supported by Palmerston, he quickly found himself in sharp confrontation with Gladstone, now chancellor of the exchequer and intent on a reduction of government expenditure. The balance in cabinet swung away from Herbert, who offered his resignation in April 1860, and then away from Gladstone, who considered offering his. A compromise was found by financing through a loan. In addition to these disputes, Herbert organized the highly contentious war against China in 1859-60. 
By the autumn of 1860 Herbert's health had begun to break down; he was suffering from Bright's disease and diabetes, and perhaps renal disease. On 1 January 1861 he resigned his seat in the Commons (but not his secretaryship) and went to the Lords as Baron Herbert of Lea. Suffering also from pleurisy, he went with his family to Spa, resigning office on 16 July. He returned to Wilton House and died there on 2 August 1861 and was buried at Wilton. He was succeeded by his son George Robert Charles Herbert, who in 1862 also succeeded as earl of Pembroke, the title of Herbert of Lea thus ceasing to be used. Herbert's widow converted to Roman Catholicism, to the consternation of her husband's Peelite friends. 
Unusually, the whole of Herbert's official career had been spent in military offices. His policy in them had been that of common sense rather than systematic reform and in the confused politics of his time he had some success. He was sometimes regarded as a possible prime minister but it is unlikely that his gentlemanly nature equipped him for success in that office. Lord Houghton's view of his qualities -- 'that birth, wealth, grace, tact, and not too much principle' equipped him 'to rule England' (Reid, 2.72) -- attributed to Herbert just that tough cunning which he in fact lacked. 


@@@@@


doc= 13048


Herbert, Thomas (b. 1597, d. before 1643), naval officer, was born at Montgomery on 15 May 1597, the seventh and posthumous son of Richard Herbert ('c'.1557-1596) of Montgomery Castle and his wife, Magdalen (died 1627), daughter of Sir Richard and Dame Margaret Newport of High Ercall, Shropshire. In 1608 Magdalen Herbert made a second and happy marriage to Sir John Danvers, the regicide, who was half her age. Thomas's brothers included Edward Herbert, first Baron Herbert of Cherbury (1582?-1648), the poet George Herbert (1593-1633), and Sir Henry Herbert (bap. 1594, d. 1673), master of the revels. 
Thomas must have accompanied his mother when she went to live in Oxford in 1599-1600 while her son Edward was studying there after his marriage. When he left school Thomas became page to Sir Edward Cecil in Germany, distinguished himself at the siege of Juliers in 1610, and took service with Benjamin Joseph, commander of an East India Company voyage in 1616. Sir Thomas Smyth, governor of the company, told Edward Herbert that after Joseph was killed in battle with a Portuguese ship Thomas rallied the men and renewed the fight. Edward Terry, chaplain, tells a different story. According to him, Thomas was sent to the east because of his unruliness at home and although engaged as a companion to Joseph, was soon sent before the mast with the common men. Terry asserts that the master took charge after Joseph was killed, and makes no mention of Herbert's role in the fight. He also says that once in India, Herbert beat and shot at a native servant and was 'the most hasty and cholerick young man that ever I knew' (Terry, 177). Terry was prejudiced but other, admittedly brief, accounts of the battle do not mention Herbert, although he may well have distinguished himself. Once attached to Sir Thomas Roe, the English ambassador to the Mughal emperor, Herbert behaved creditably, although Roe had had reservations beforehand. 
Herbert soon returned to England and did well as captain of the 'Marmaduke' in the Algiers expedition of 1620-21 and of the 'Seven Stars' in the fleet which brought home Prince Charles and the duke of Buckingham from their escapade to Spain in pursuit of a bride for Charles. Edward Herbert asserts that Thomas Herbert tried to save the ship in which he was conducting Count Mansfelt to the Low Countries, when she was cast away. The shipwreck, however, occurred in November 1624 when Mansfelt was on his way to England, and the captain of the ship, the 'Speedwell', makes no mention of Herbert. On 25 September 1625 Buckingham appointed Herbert as captain of the 'Dreadnought', with orders to serve against the Dunkirkers. The 'Dreadnought' was, however, assigned to the Cadiz expedition under another captain, though Herbert commanded the 'Assurance' from December 1625 until June 1626. There is no further mention of him, apart from his being listed as a possible captain in 1627 and 1629. 
Some trifles which were published in the early 1640s have been attributed to Herbert, implausibly, since the pamphleteer states that he was Kentish born, whereas Herbert's birthplace was Montgomery. Herbert probably was, however, the author of a poem, 'The Storm'. Edward Herbert, writing about 1643, states that disappointment of promotion had led Thomas Herbert to withdraw into a private and melancholy life until his death and burial in St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. There is no entry in the parish register. 


@@@@@


doc= 13049


Herbert, Sir Thomas, first baronet (1606-1682), traveller and government official, was born in The Pavement, York, and baptized at the parish church of St Crux on 4 November 1606. He was the son and heir of Christopher Herbert (1583-1625) of York and Jane, the daughter of Henry Akroyd of Foggathorpe, East Riding, Yorkshire. His family had settled in York before 1550, making their living as merchants; several Herberts served as aldermen and mayors. Christopher Herbert, in contrast, was a failure and died prematurely leaving his family impoverished, although the young Thomas Herbert possessed a generous bequest from his grandfather. Prior to his father's death he decided to seek a career in the law. He began his studies in 1621 at Trinity College, Cambridge, where his uncle Dr Ambrose Akroyd was a fellow, then migrated to Jesus College, Oxford, to study with another relative, Jenkin Lloyd. From there he proceeded to the inns of court but without leaving an official record of his presence at any of these places. 
As a young man seeking to start his career, the young Herbert sought the help of relatives in London. Eventually his father's younger brothers William and James Herbert managed to introduce him to a distant relation, William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke (1580-1630). About 1626 Pembroke secured him a place in Sir Dodmore Cotton's impending diplomatic mission to Shah Abbas of Persia. After several delays Cotton's party finally sailed from England on 23 March 1627. The mission turned out to be a diplomatic disaster. Both of its leaders, Sir Robert Shirley and Cotton, sickened and died during July 1628, while the shah's enthusiasm for Englishmen cooled. Herbert, along with the other survivors, then made the slow return to England, arriving at Gravesend on 12 January 1630. In the course of his travels he visited the notable Persian cities of Gombroon, Shiraz, Esfahan, Ashraf, Qazvin, and Qom as well as other Asian and African locales such as Surat, Mauritius, the Cape of Good Hope, and St Helena. Unfortunately for Herbert, his patron the earl of Pembroke died a few months after his return on 10 April 1630. Disappointed, Herbert made a three-month trip to France but was back at the court by the summer of 1631. There he became friends with Sir Walter Alexander, a gentleman usher to the king. It was a valuable contact and on 16 April 1632, Herbert married Sir Walter's twenty-year-old daughter, Lucy (died 1671). He also managed to meet and to secure the help of the new earl of Pembroke, Philip Herbert (1584-1650), a well-connected courtier and privy councillor. Pembroke introduced him to Charles I and quickly Herbert was sworn as an esquire of the body, an office which he could only assume if one of the four existing esquires died or resigned. Whether he ever actually served as such is uncertain but this circumstance may help to explain why he later became one of the attendants of the captive Charles I. All of these prestigious connections also allowed Herbert to convince the College of Arms to allow him to resume using the Herbert coat of arms, a right lost by his wastrel father. 
During his period of waiting for a position as esquire of the body, Herbert and his new bride lived with her parents in Petty France, Westminster. He used this leisure to good advantage. In 1634 he published the first edition of his book of travels, entitled 'A description of the Persian monarchy now beinge: the orientall Indyes Iles and other parts of greater Asia and Africk'. The book appeared in an expanded second edition in 1638 under the title 'Some Yeares Travels into Divers Parts of Asia and Afrique'. Beginning with the first edition Herbert inserted materials into his narrative about places he had not visited although he sometimes implied that he had, and in each succeeding edition the amount of this second-hand material increased significantly. One particularly famous digression appearing in the first edition onward was his speculation about the medieval Welsh Prince Madoc's discovering and colonizing America. This segment was apparently included to please the earl of Pembroke's own Welsh nationalist fancies. It also continued to help fuel various theories about Madoc's colonies and Welsh Indians in North America until the early years of the nineteenth century. 'Some Yeares Travels' proved sufficiently popular to encourage a Dutch translation in 1658, and a French in 1663. During his years of retirement after the Restoration, Herbert produced expanded third, fourth, and fifth editions in 1665, 1675, and 1677 respectively, and the book continued to be reprinted after his death. 
When the English civil war broke out in 1642, Herbert followed his patron, Pembroke, into the parliamentarian camp. He stayed unquestionably loyal to parliament, the Commonwealth, or the protectorate throughout the entire civil war and interregnum. On 26 March 1644 parliament appointed him a commissioner to the earl of Essex's army and later to the New Model Army, where Sir Thomas Fairfax valued his services highly. When Oxford surrendered in May 1646, Herbert served as a commissioner. 
The beginning of 1647 saw Herbert begin his service as an attendant to the captive Charles I, an episode that only ended with the execution on 30 January 1649 and the burial of the king. Herbert was one of the few parliamentarians whom Charles I was willing to have wait on him. During those two years Herbert successfully walked the tightrope of keeping both the parliament and the army on the one hand and Charles I on the other satisfied with how he did his job. His loyalty to parliament never came under question in spite of an incident when one of his servants smuggled a forbidden letter in to the king. Nor did the captive monarch find Herbert anything but courteous and even kindly: the two had a private joke about Herbert's needing an alarm clock so that he could rise at the proper time to wake the king; a clock was ordered for Herbert from a London craftsman, but it failed to arrive before Charles's execution. That may have been what prompted the king to make his own pocket watch a farewell gift to Herbert. Apparently Charles also wrote out a testimonial praising Herbert's conduct during this period, although the original has not survived. Modern scholarship, however, suggests that Herbert, ever the loyal parliamentarian, may have distanced himself from the king at his execution and instead let the duties of comforting him fall on Bishop William Juxon. It also appears that Herbert helped himself to other royal possessions. 
In the summer of 1649 Herbert began new duties as parliamentary commissioner serving with the army in Ireland. Other offices in Ireland followed, including from December 1653 that of secretary to the governing commission for Ireland, which became in August 1654 the governing council, with Herbert serving as its clerk until 1659. During these years he met his future son-in-law the regicide Colonel Robert Phaire of Cork, who married his daughter Elizabeth on 16 August 1658. Henry Cromwell considered Herbert's services of sufficient merit to reward him with a knighthood in July 1658. He was still living in Dublin at the restoration of Charles II in 1660, but when a general pardon was announced Herbert travelled to London to accept it. On 3 July 1660 Charles II created him a baronet to reward him for his attendance on his father and to compensate him for the loss of his protectorate knighthood. 
Herbert lived quietly in Restoration England. When the plague swept London in 1665 he returned to York, where he remained for the rest of his life. His first wife, Lucy, died on 19 December 1671. The couple had had four sons and six daughters but only the eldest son and heir, Henry, second baronet (died 1687), and three of the daughters, Elizabeth, Lucie, and Anne, survived their father. Within a year of Lucy's death Herbert married, on 11 November 1672, his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1696), daughter of Gervase Cutler of Stainbrough, Yorkshire, and niece of the earl of Bridgewater. During these years, besides working on the three expanded editions of 'Some Yeares Travels', he engaged in antiquarian scholarship mostly relating to Yorkshire and helped William Dugdale with the research for his 'Monasticon Anglicanum'. Toward the end of his life former royalists persuaded him to write a narrative of his experiences during Charles I's captivity, which appeared in 1678 as 'Threnodia Carolina'. After Herbert's death Anthony Wood published an extensive extract of the account in his 'Athenae Oxoniensis' (1691). Herbert's complete narrative was published in 1702 with other original documents relating to Charles I's captivity as 'Memoirs of the last two years of the reign of the unparalleled prince of very blessed memory, King Charles I'. It has been republished in whole or in part and in translation many times since. While Herbert's work has been used extensively by people studying the last days of Charles I, modern scholars have questioned its reliability as an accurate record. Throughout his life Herbert showed himself to be hardworking and efficient as well as having a keen eye for self-advancement and survival. He died at Petergate, York, on 1 March 1682 and was buried on 3 March at St Crux. In his will, dated 20 December 1679, he left to his grandson George Herbert 'the great silver clock my gracious Mr King Charles the first gave mee in testimony of his Royall favour' (Borth. Inst., will). Herbert's widow married on 20 October 1684 Henry Edmunds of Yorkshire, and died in 1696. 


@@@@@


doc= 13050


Herbert, Thomas, eighth earl of Pembroke and fifth earl of Montgomery (1656/7-1733), politician and government official, was probably born at Castle Baynard, London. He was the third surviving son of Philip Herbert, fifth earl of Pembroke (bap. 1621, d. 1669), MP for Wiltshire (1640) and Glamorgan (1640-49), councillor and president of the council of state (1651-2) ['see under 'Herbert, Philip, first earl of Montgomery and fourth earl of Pembroke], and his second wife, Katherine Villiers (died 1678), daughter of Sir William Villiers, bt, of Brooksby, Leicester. Thomas was the brother and heir of Philip Herbert, seventh earl of Pembroke (1653-1683) ['see under 'Herbert, Philip, first earl of Montgomery and fourth earl of Pembroke], a notorious rake 'chiefly known for deeds of drunkenness and manslaughter' (GEC, 'Peerage', 10.422), who had himself succeeded his elder brother, William Herbert, sixth earl (1640-1674), MP for Glamorgan (1661-9). 
Thomas Herbert matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 18 March 1673 at the age of sixteen. In 1676 he undertook a three-year tour of France and Italy, upon which he met and befriended John Locke. He is also supposed to have studied the law. He was elected on his own interest as a moderate tory MP for Wilton (1679-81). He sat on no committees, made no speeches, and was absent from the division on the 'Exclusion Bill'. Following his accession to the peerage on 29 August 1683 he was named lord lieutenant of Wiltshire, serving almost continuously until his death in 1733. He was also JP and 'custos rotulorum' of Glamorgan (1683-1728) and of Pembroke (1683-1715). 
Pembroke married, first, on 26 July 1684, Margaret Sawyer, who was the daughter and heir of Sir Robert Sawyer of Highclere, Hampshire, attorney-general (1681-7), and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Ralph Suckeley of Canonbury, Islington, Middlesex. This union produced seven sons and five daughters. The countess died on 27 November 1706 and was buried on 9 December in Salisbury Cathedral. Pembroke married, second, on 21 September 1708 at St James's, Westminster, Barbara, the widow of John Arundell, Lord Arundell of Trerice, and, previously, of Sir Richard Mauleverer. She was the daughter of Sir Thomas Slingsby, bt, of Scriven, Yorkshire, and Dorothy, daughter and coheir of George Cradock of Caverswall Castle, Staffordshire. The countess gave birth to a daughter. She died on 1 August 1721 and was buried in Salisbury Cathedral on the 9th. Pembroke married, third, on 14 June 1725, Mary, daughter of Scrope Howe, first Viscount Howe of Ireland, and Juliana, daughter of William, third Baron Alington of Killard, Ireland. She was a maid of honour to Caroline as princess of Wales and a lady of the bedchamber to her as queen. Their marriage apparently caused 'much pleasantry' at court (GEC, 'Peerage', 10.424). 
Pembroke bore the third sword at the coronation of James II and was to bear swords at those of every subsequent monarch crowned in his lifetime. In June 1685 he commanded the Wiltshire and Hampshire trained bands raised to oppose Monmouth's rebellion. In September of that year he was appointed commander of the British regiments in the Netherlands. However, in 1687, upon his refusal to put the three questions on repeal of the test and penal laws or to assist in regulating municipal corporations, he was deprived of his lieutenancy. 
During the revolution of 1688-9 Pembroke played the ambiguous role of a moderate tory: though in correspondence with the prince of Orange, he offered his services to King James upon the Dutch landing. While he was one of four peers who conveyed to the prince the invitation of 11 December to summon a free parliament and suggested the expedient of a Convention on the 24th, in debate he raised the issue of the prince of Wales's claims; argued against the demise of the crown to Mary and for a regency; and finally voted against declaring William and Mary king and queen. However, when his position on the disposition of the crown was defeated he demonstrated characteristic thoughtfulness and practicality, counselling Clarendon against seceding from the Convention on the grounds that 'the government must be supported, or else we should all be ruined' (Western, 315). 
Pembroke began a distinguished administrative and diplomatic career under William III by being restored to the lieutenancy of Wiltshire and by serving as ambassador to the Dutch states general from April to October 1689. In the same year he was named a privy councillor and a lord of trade and plantations. In January 1690 he became first lord of the Admiralty. He rose from the Admiralty to be lord privy seal in March 1692, then lord president of the council in May 1699. He combined the latter duty with his previous post at the Admiralty from March 1701 to January 1702, when he became lord high admiral. Pembroke was an active naval administrator and his contemporaries thought him more than competent. He was also named lord lieutenant of south Wales and Monmouth from 1694 to 1715. More substantial indications of the king's regard for him include his appointment as a lord justice during each of William's absences from England; his position as first plenipotentiary at the treaty of Ryswick in 1697; and his nomination as a knight of the Garter and grant of $1000, in addition to his official salaries, in 1700. Mary, on the other hand, thought him a 'man of honour, but not very steady' (Van der Zee and Van der Zee, 326). 
At the accession of Queen Anne, Pembroke ceased to be lord high admiral in favour of Prince George, but was reappointed lord president of the council and was awarded a pension which rose by 1704 to $2500 per annum. His position as a reliable court tory who supported the War of the Spanish Succession allowed Anne to appoint him in preference to insistent Junto candidates for the lord lieutenancy of Ireland in 1707 and, at the death of Prince George, lord high admiral on 25 November 1708. Anne finally gave way to the Junto in November 1709 by asking for Pembroke's resignation, but not before raising his pension to $3000 per annum some two months previously. Apart from his appointment as a commissioner of claims for the coronation in 1714, this marked his virtual retirement from active government service. 
In office, Pembroke was the very soul of moderate court toryism. According to Geoffrey Holmes, 'No Tory could object to him, and no Whig could consider his presence there in any way threatening' (Holmes, 253-4). In cabinet, he supported Marlborough and Godolphin's war strategy against his high-tory colleagues; and he was one of the few tory negotiators for the Union. He continued to defend the duumvirs during the ministerial crisis of 1708, when he followed Somerset in refusing to sit in cabinet without them. In parliament his voting record tended to be more independent. Thus, he voted for the 'Occasional Conformity Bill' in 1703 and for Henry Sacheverell's innocence in 1710, but against the resumption bill in 1701 and in favour of the voting rights of Scottish peers of Great Britain in 1709. A Hanoverian tory, he opposed the Oxford ministry on the Hamilton peerage and No Peace Without Spain in 1711, the commercial treaty in 1713, and the 'Schism Bill' in 1714. He was anything but doctrinaire or vindictive: in 1717 he voted against the impeachment of Oxford, an act which eventually cost him his pension, which had been reduced previously by George I to $2000. Similarly, he opposed Fenwick's attainder in 1697, though he was willing to use the bill as a threat in order to exact full disclosure from the accused. 
Pembroke had a reputation as a patron of the arts and sciences, a collector, and a virtuoso. Gilbert Burnet described him as a man 'of great and profound learning, particularly in the mathematics' (Burnet, 4.361). He was elected FRS on 13 May 1685, admitted on 26 January 1687, and served as president of the society in 1689-90: initially a fairly active member, he attended not a single meeting during his presidency. He patronized Locke, who dedicated the 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding' to him. He purchased most of the collection at Wilton, including the Arundel marbles. William III thought so highly of his Van Dycks that he insisted that his secretary Constantijn Huygens, who had bypassed Wilton, go back to see them during his progress to London in December 1688. Macky described Pembroke as 'a good judge in all the several sciences', but Hearne thought him 'not a man of that deep Penetration nor of that profound Learning he is taken to be' (GEC, 'Peerage', 10.424). There seems to be a similar disagreement over Pembroke's character and private life. While Macky commended him for his simplicity of life and unaffected manners, and Marlborough thought him 'a very honest man... of an extreordinary good temper' (Snyder, 1.86-7), it would appear that he possessed some of his family's hot-headedness when in drink. This may help to explain Halifax's equivocal estimation of him: 'as mad as most of his family tho' very good natured' (Western, 329). 
Pembroke died at his house in St James's Square, London, on 22 January 1733. He was buried on 31 January in Salisbury Cathedral. He was survived by his third wife, who married, second, the Hon. John Mordaunt in 1735. The earl's first son and heir, Henry Herbert, ninth earl of Pembroke and sixth earl of Montgomery (c.1689-1750), was a gentleman of the bedchamber to George II as prince of Wales (1714-27) and as king (1728-35), and groom of the stole from 1735 until his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 13051


Herbert, Sir Thomas (1793-1861), naval officer, second son of Richard Townsand Herbert of Cahirnane, co. Kerry (MP for County Kerry, 1783-90), and his second wife, Jane, daughter of Anthony Stoughton of Ballyhorgan, was born at Cahirnane in February 1793, 'a collateral member of the noble house of Pembroke' ('Annual Register', 1861). In July 1803 he entered the navy on the 'Excellent' with Captain Sotheron, in which he went out to the Mediterranean, and was present at the operations on the coast of Italy and in the Bay of Naples in 1806. He was afterwards moved into the frigate 'Blonde' with Captain Volant Vashon Ballard. In her he was present, in December 1807, at the capture of the Danish West Indian islands, and on Ballard's recommendation was made lieutenant by Sir Alexander Cochrane on 1 August 1809 (confirmed by the Admiralty on 10 October). For the following four years he was lieutenant of the 'Pompee' with Sir James Athol Wood on the West Indian, home, and Mediterranean stations; and in 1814 was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Euryalus', with Captain Charles Napier, and took part in the operations in the Potomac, after which he was promoted commander on 19 October 1814. 
In September 1821 Herbert commissioned the 'Icarus' for the West Indies, where in the following May he was transferred to the 'Carnation' (18 guns), and on 25 November 1822 was posted to the 'Tamar' (26 guns). After destroying three pirate vessels on the coasts of Cuba and Yucatan, she was brought home by him and paid off in August 1823. In 1829 he was high sheriff for co. Kerry. 
Herbert had no further naval service until November 1837, when he was appointed to the frigate 'Calliope' (26 guns), and was sent to the coast of Brazil. After acting as senior officer there and at the River Plate, in January 1840 he was ordered round to Valparaiso, and thence on to China which he reached in October. For a couple of months, pending the arrival of Rear-Admiral George Elliot, he was senior officer in the Canton River, and after the admiral's arrival had command of the operations against Chuenpe (Chuanbi) and the Bogue (Humen) Forts, in the steamer 'Nemesis', opening a way through creeks behind Anunghoy (Yaniangxie), and destroying a twenty-gun battery which guarded the rear of that island. Continuing in command of the advanced squadron he captured the fort in Whampoa (Huangpu) reach, and silenced the batteries commanding the approach to Canton. In June and July he was again senior officer in the Canton River, and on the arrival of Sir William Parker he was moved into the 'Blenheim' (72 guns), in which he played a distinguished part in the capture of Amoy (Xiamen) and Chusan (Zhoushan), and commanded the naval brigade at the capture of Chinghae (Qinghai). He was made a CB on 29 January, and a KCB on 14 October 1841; peace having been concluded at Nanking (Nanjing) in October 1842, he returned to England in the 'Blenheim' which he paid off in March 1843. 
From 1847 to 1849 Herbert was commodore on the east coast of South America, with a broad pennant in the 'Raleigh' (50 guns). From February to December 1852 he was a junior lord of the Admiralty under the duke of Northumberland, and on 26 October 1852 he became a rear-admiral. From July 1852 to 1857 he was MP for Dartmouth: a Conservative, he opposed 'any further concession to the Roman Catholics' ('DrodPC', 1857). He died at his home, Cadogan Place, Chelsea, London, on 4 August 1861. 


@@@@@


doc= 13052


Herbert, William (d. 1333/1337?), Franciscan theologian, was probably a native of Herefordshire. In 1290, according to the Lanercost chronicle, he was studying in Paris, and he probably remained there until at least 1303, when a list of Franciscans at university in Paris mentions him as one of two Englishmen (the other was Duns Scotus). Between 'c'.1315 and 1320 he was lecturing in Oxford. By 1314 he was a bachelor of theology, and by 'c'.1320 had gained his doctorate. About 1317 he became the forty-third regent master of the Franciscans at Oxford. He later retired to the Franciscan convent in Hereford, as attested by a marginal inscription in a manuscript of Roger Bacon's works belonging to him. He donated this book (BL, Royal MS 7 F. viii) to the convent, and also a copy of Bede's 'De temporum ratione' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. C.308). 
Herbert's death has been placed in both 1333 and 1337, but neither of these can be verified. He was buried in Hereford. Leland attributed to Herbert quodlibets and commentaries on 'Deuteronomy' and the 'Apocalypse'. These have not survived. In addition he is known to have written sermons while in Oxford, one for the feast of the translation of St Edmund of Canterbury (9 June), another on the text 'Dixit mater Ihesu ad eum, vinum non habent'. The latter sermon was given in the church of the Blessed Virgin, and is noteworthy in that the privilege of preaching the university sermon on Sundays was usually reserved for Dominicans. Herbert also translated Latin hymns into English, including 'Vexilla regis prodeunt', 'Gloria, laus, et honor', and hymns to the Blessed Virgin. His translations (which survive in BL, Add. MS 46919) may have greater linguistic than literary value; nevertheless, the attempt of the Franciscans to use the vernacular to introduce Latin hymnography to an English audience is important evidence of the order's pastoral work. The translations were probably designed as preaching aids rather than as texts for a choir. 
Herbert's interest in the history of the Franciscan English province is attested by his annotations to a copy of the 'De adventu Fratrum Minorum in Angliam' of Thomas Eccleston, which include the names of Franciscan lectors at Oxford missed by Thomas, and to a copy of a chronicle 'De Britannia et Britonum rebus gestis a primis ad annum 1278'. William Herbert should be distinguished from the late thirteenth-century Dominican William of Hereford. 


@@@@@


doc= 13053


Herbert, William, first earl of Pembroke (c.1423-1469), soldier and administrator, was from Raglan in the marcher lordship of Usk; his attachment to Richard, duke of York, and Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, the Kingmaker, enabled him to become Edward IV's Welsh 'master-lock' ('Gwaith Lewys Glyn Cothi', no. 112) and to be the first full-blooded Welshman to enter the English peerage. 
The son of Sir William ap Thomas (died 1445) and Gwladus (died 1454), daughter of the Brecon knight Dafydd Gam (d. 1415), and widow of Roger Vaughan (Fychan) of Bredwardine (died 1415), William was brought up at Raglan Castle in York's lordship of Usk ['see also 'Vaughan family (per. c.1400-c.1504)]. He took the name of Herbert (pedigrees claiming descent from a companion of William I are fanciful), and secured advancement by serving York, Gloucester, the Beauchamps, and the crown in the marches. His father was in York's retinue in France (1441), and the son was there in the last years of English occupation: he witnessed the surrender of Le Mans (1448) and at the battle of Formigny (April 1450) was captured and held for ransom. At home he became steward of York's lordships of Usk and Caerleon, and when York raised the siege of Taunton and suppressed lawlessness between the earl of Devon and Sir William Bonville (in September 1451), Herbert was with him. By 1453 he was the earl of Warwick's sheriff of Glamorgan. Along with other esquires, including Henry VI's half-brothers, Edmund and Jasper Tudor, Herbert was knighted at Christmas 1452, and Edmund granted him a $10 annuity (October 1453). Thus before the Wars of the Roses, Herbert inherited his father's influence in south-east Wales; but the growing tension between York and the Lancastrians, and between Warwick and the duke of Somerset in south Wales, strained his loyalties. 
York was assured in May 1454 that Herbert 'saith he is noo monis mon but only youres' (Pugh, 'The magnates', 92). Already noble rivalries were disturbing the peace in south Wales. The dispute between Warwick and Somerset over Glamorgan led to a summons for Herbert and his kinsmen to appear before the king's council in 1453. Following the battle of St Albans in May 1455 more serious trouble occurred, and there is little doubt that Herbert, Sir Walter Devereux (whose daughter Anne he married in 1449), and their affinities acted in York's interest as well as their own to dominate Herefordshire and its environs. Their most spectacular acts reasserted the duke's authority in west Wales. Herbert, Devereux, and the Vaughans led about 2000 men from Herefordshire and neighbouring lordships to seize Carmarthen Castle, of which York was officially constable; they captured and imprisoned Edmund Tudor, and then took Aberystwyth, another castle under York's constableship. Attempts to bring the culprits to book had only temporary success; though briefly consigned to the Tower of London, by October Herbert was marauding in Glamorgan, Abergavenny, Usk, and Caerleon, and a price of 500 marks was put on his head. In late March 1457 Henry VI and Queen Margaret travelled to Hereford to oversee the trial of Herbert and others. An effort may have been made to detach him from other rebels, for his punishment was comparatively light: in June he was pardoned and restored to his possessions. 
Herbert was not present when York's forces were dispersed at Ludford Bridge (October 1459). Perhaps because of this he was allowed to retain the shrievalty of Glamorgan and the constableship of Usk Castle (February 1460), following Warwick's and York's attainders. But once Henry VI had been captured at Northampton in July 1460, the Yorkists employed Herbert and Walter Devereux junior to preserve order in Wales; both also represented Herefordshire in the parliament of 1460-61. Herbert's loyalties were clear when he and a force from York's estates joined Edward, earl of March, at the battle of Mortimer's Cross (2 or 3 February 1461). A month later (3 March) he was at Baynard's Castle to acclaim Edward as king. 
Herbert's position after 1461 reflects his energy, loyalty, and ambition, as well as the young king's heavy reliance on a dependable tenant with a powerful affinity. He became a king's knight and Edward's intimate, and his rewards and commissions in Wales and the marches were unprecedented. In the spring and summer he and Walter Devereux were commissioned to array men in south Wales and the marches to defeat the Lancastrians and impose the new king's authority, and a fleet was put at his disposal. On 8 May he was appointed justiciar and chamberlain of the royal counties of Carmarthen and Cardigan for life. In September he and Devereux received custody of the Stafford lands in south Wales during the duke of Buckingham's minority, Herbert acting as steward of Brecon, Hay, and Huntington, and in control of Newport. Meanwhile in July Edward IV summoned him to his first parliament as one of seven new barons. 
An immediate objective was the capture of Pembroke Castle. On 30 September 1461 Herbert secured its surrender, taking custody of Henry Tudor, earl of Richmond, whom he put in the care of his wife, Anne, at Raglan; he paid $1000 for the boy's wardship and marriage. Moving north he defeated a Lancastrian force near Caernarfon in October. In February 1462 he was granted the lordship of Pembroke, along with other estates of Jasper Tudor, the attainted earl. A few days later the Welsh estates of the Mowbrays -- notably Gower -- were placed in his hands. By the spring Herbert and his kinsmen controlled much of southern Wales and the borderland (including Goodrich and Archenfield); and after his brother Richard captured Carreg Cennen Castle, Carmarthenshire, in May, only Harlech was unsubdued. 
The king's reliance on Herbert and his affinity in Wales gave him political hegemony and huge wealth: by the mid-1460s his landed income and fees amounted to $3200-$3300 per annum. His authority in Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire was made permanent when in September 1466 his offices were extended to his male heirs. Moreover, partly in preparation for the assault on Harlech, his power was extended to north Wales: in June 1463 as justiciar of Merioneth, and in August 1467 as justiciar of the entire principality of north Wales. He already had custody (June) of the lands of Richard Grey, lord of Powys. By 1468 there were few lordships or counties in Wales and the marches (except Glamorgan) of which he was not either lord or chief official -- King Edward's 'master-lock' indeed. The prize, Harlech, fell to him in August 1468. His last notable coup came in the following month, when the duke of Norfolk transferred Chepstow and Gower to him in exchange for East Anglian manors. 
Marks of the king's personal favour multiplied. In 1462 Herbert was elected a knight of the Garter; in 1463 Crickhowell and Tretower were made into a separate lordship for him, and in 1465, in recognition of his valour, Edward made Raglan a lordship in its own right, the last time a Welsh marcher lordship was created; on 8 September 1468 Herbert was created earl of Pembroke. The price was Warwick's resentment. According to T. B. Pugh, the 'original cause for [Warwick's] dissatisfaction with Edward IV' (Pugh, 'Glamorgan County History', 3.198) was the placing of the Stafford lands in Herbert's hands in 1461. Herbert's gradual mastery of Wales may have made the lord of Glamorgan more uneasy, for it coincided with Warwick's disenchantment with Edward's foreign policy and his reliance on the Woodvilles. Warwick resented the grant of the Luttrell estate of Dunster, Somerset, to Herbert's eldest son, William ['see below'], who took the title of Lord Dunster before his marriage to the queen's sister, Mary, in September 1466. Three weeks later (26 September) the queen's father, Lord Rivers, arranged that Herbert's earlier lease (1462) of Haverford and other lands be converted into a grant to him and his male heirs. And it was Herbert who accompanied Edward IV when he deprived Archbishop Neville of the great seal in June 1467. 
In July 1469 the king faced Robin of Redesdale's rebellion and the arrival of Warwick and the duke of Clarence from France, proclaiming Pembroke as one of the king's wicked advisers. Pembroke raised an army for the king largely in Wales; he and his brother, Sir Richard, were to join Humphrey Stafford, earl of Devon, at Banbury, Oxfordshire; a skirmish with some rebels and a quarrel with Devon over billeting weakened Pembroke's position. In the desperate fight at Edgcote on 26 July, the Welsh were overwhelmed, and Pembroke and his brother were captured and taken to Northampton, where next day Warwick ordered their execution. Welsh poets lamented the deaths of such famous Welsh nobles. Contrary to his will of July 1469, the earl was buried in Tintern Abbey rather than Abergavenny Priory, where Sir Richard's body was interred. He instructed his widow to betroth Henry Tudor, earl of Richmond (afterwards Henry VII), to their daughter Maud, which would link his family to Edward III's line. 
Pembroke's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 13054


William Herbert, second earl of Pembroke (1455-1490), magnate, inherited the earldom of Pembroke but not the ability and flair that made the first earl virtual viceroy of Wales for Edward IV. The son's youth, as well as limited abilities (or ill health), precluded his inheriting his father's position. After the battle of Barnet on 14 April 1471 Edward IV entered London with the young earl, who was welcome at court. But he received only partial exemption from the 'Act of Resumption' of 1473, and this may have led to disturbances by the Herbert family in 1473-4. He went with the king, his brother-in-law, to France in 1475 and on their return Herbert was allowed to enter his inheritance. The establishment of the prince of Wales's council in the marches was at the earl's expense, culminating in 1479 in the enforced exchange of the earldom of Pembroke (which was transferred to the prince) for the less valuable earldom of Huntingdon. He was closer to Richard III, whose bastard, Katherine, he agreed to marry in February 1484; he may have been chamberlain of Richard's son, Prince Edward. Yet he did not resist Henry Tudor, with whom he had been brought up. He soon made his peace with the new king, and on 22 September 1486 was formally pardoned. When he died on 16 July 1490, he left no male heir and the Herbert ascendancy in Wales had already disintegrated. 


@@@@@


doc= 13055


Herbert, William, first earl of Pembroke (1506/7-1570), soldier and magnate, was the second son of Richard Herbert (died 1510) of Ewyas, a gentleman usher to Henry VII, and his second wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir Matthew Cradock of Swansea. His paternal grandfather was William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, who was executed in 1469 on the orders of the earl of Warwick for his loyalty to Edward IV. 
Little can be said for certain of William Herbert's early life and upbringing. His father died in 1510, and his childhood was probably spent in the household of his mother's third husband, William Bawdrip, at Splott near Cardiff. At some point he entered the service of Charles Somerset, from 1514 earl of Worcester, who was related to the Herberts through his marriage to the daughter of William's half-uncle and namesake, William Herbert, earl of Huntingdon. John Aubrey, whose account of Herbert is a better guide to the latter's reputation than to the facts of his life, records that he was known as 'Black Will Herbert', and states that he could neither read nor write. The charge of illiteracy is baseless, but there is record evidence to support Aubrey's claim that Herbert killed a man in Bristol, for he was named in a coroner's report of 1527, and there is nothing that contradicts his story that the killer then fled to France, where he joined the army and won the favour of Francois I, beyond the fact that in 1555 he was reported by the Venetian ambassador to have been recalled from negotiations at Calais 'as he neither speaks nor understands any other language than the English' (Nightingale, 33). But Herbert hardly needed the French king's recommendation to draw him to the attention of Henry VIII, for in January 1526 he was already numbered among the latter's spears, or gentlemen pensioners. Probably it was Worcester who had secured his entree at court. 
Herbert's activities in the years after 1526 are unclear, and he may have left court for a while. He was referred to as a member of the royal household in 1531, but as a late gentleman of the household in 1534. In 1535, however, he became an esquire of the body, and in 1539 he was named one of the fifty new gentlemen spears. A year later he appeared in a list of the gentlemen of the king's privy chamber with a salary of $50. But Herbert's career took off after his sister-in-law Katherine Parr married Henry VIII on 12 July 1543. By 3 January 1544 he had been knighted, and other grants and honours followed. Early in 1544 the lands of Wilton Abbey were granted to Herbert and his wife, and later that year he led 100 light horse on the campaign which captured Boulogne. In 1545 he was returned to parliament as one of the knights of the shire for Wiltshire, and on 21 February 1546 he was made steward for life of the duchy of Lancaster estates in that county. In October that year he was promoted to share with Sir Anthony Denny the position of chief gentleman of the privy chamber, and was consequently in a position to gain substantially, in terms of both influence and wealth, from his closeness to the centre of power in Henry VIII's last days. He was in attendance on 30 December 1546 when the king had his last will and testament stamped, witnessed, and sealed, and was named both an executor and one of the council of regency for Edward VI. He was also a beneficiary under the will, with a legacy of lands worth $200, later raised to 400 marks; in fact the estates he received were worth far more, including, for instance, the house in Hackney once owned by the sixth earl of Northumberland, which Herbert was able to sell for $1000. 
Herbert's first marriage was clearly crucial to his promotion at court. 
Herbert continued to prosper during the protectorate of Edward Seymour, successively earl of Hertford and (from 16 February 1547) duke of Somerset. The two men became rivals for pre-eminence in Wiltshire, but at the beginning of Edward's reign Herbert was a strong supporter of Seymour. In spiritual matters he does not appear to have shared the protector's evangelicalism, but throughout his life took an essentially Erastian position, whereby the English crown assumed responsibility for the direction of the nation's religious observance. Thus he reaped material benefits from the dissolution of the monasteries (he was granted the lease of Abergavenny Priory on 16 May 1537), and even carried out the work of dissolution himself in Wales. In 1538 he was employed by Thomas Cromwell to destroy the famous shrine of the Virgin at Pen-rhys, in the Rhondda valley. Such a stance made it easier for him to adapt to changed circumstances than for some of his contemporaries. 
Herbert was returned to parliament for Wiltshire in 1547, and in May 1548 crossed to Boulogne to muster its garrison. He was clearly a skilful and energetic soldier and commander, as he showed in the following year. When rebellions broke out in several parts of England, Herbert first took vigorous action against insurgents in Wiltshire, where Edward VI recorded in his journal how 'Sir William Herbert did put them down, overrun, and slay them' (Jordan, 12). By this time the men of Devon and Cornwall were also up, and around 10 July the council ordered Herbert to be ready to proceed thither. On the 24th he was instructed to march west with all his power, on the 28th to take two or three thousand men from Wales and two thousand from Gloucestershire and Wiltshire. He had not yet arrived when the royal army defeated the insurgents at Honiton and relieved Exeter, but on 18 August he was given command of the vanguard for the battle of Sampford Courtenay in which the western men were defeated again, and shortly afterwards destroyed a rebel force near Tiverton. The commander of the king's army, John, Baron Russell, described Herbert as having 'served notably' (Sil, 116). 
The widespread disturbances of summer 1549 did much to undermine Somerset's authority, and led to a political campaign to remove him from office. In this context it was of crucial importance that Herbert and Russell commanded the largest field army in the country, one, moreover, that they were leading back towards London. Somerset himself, feeling the ground insecure under his feet, appreciated the potential significance of this force and tried to ensure its support, appealing three or four times to its leaders from 25 September onwards. But Herbert and Russell, having by 8 October marched as far as Andover, finally turned against the protector and withdrew to Wilton. In a letter sent to Somerset on that day they told him of their fears that if civil war broke out, 'the querell once begonne will never ende tyll the realme by dyssendyd to that wofull Calamytie that all our posterytie shall lament the chaunce', and of their perception that 'this great extremytie procedeth only upon pryvate causes' (Sil, 118). Their defection ruined the protector, who resigned his office and was sent to the Tower. 
Herbert was swift to ally himself with John Dudley, earl of Warwick and later duke of Northumberland, who on 2 February 1550 became lord president of the council and effective head of the government. His rewards were substantial. As compensation for his expenditure in 1549 he was licensed on 28 October to have 2000 pounds of fine silver turned into coin of the realm, an operation which brought him a profit of just over $6700. On 2 December 1549 he was made master of the king's horse, and on 8 April 1550 he was appointed lord president of the council in the marches of Wales. To support himself in this new dignity he was granted lands worth 500 marks in Glamorgan and Monmouthshire. He was indeed indefatigable in building up his estates, and bought properties (notably those of dissolved chantries) in many counties, and particularly in south Wales and Wiltshire. In his largest purchase, in co-operation with William Clerk of Punsborn, an outlay of $10,000 in 1553 brought him estates in Wales and the English counties of Somerset, Dorset, and Wiltshire worth $782 11's'. 6died per annum. Eventually the revenues from his lands, together with those from a number of valuable wardships and from the fees of his various offices, brought him an estimated annual income of between $4000 and $5000. 
Office and lands made Herbert a man of power in Wales, the grants of 1550-51 causing him to be described (by way of an arcane reference to a late eleventh-century ruler) as 'the greatest lord that ever owned lands in Glamorgan either before or after Iestyn ap Gwagan's time' (Williams, 'Glamorgan', 31). In 1551 he was made lord lieutenant for all the Welsh counties, and it was far from inappropriate that having been ennobled as Baron Herbert of Cardiff on 10 October that year, he should have been further promoted to become earl of Pembroke on the following day. But probably even more important to him were his estates, and his position, in Wiltshire. There he faced competition for pre-eminence both from successive barons Stourton, heads of a long-established county family, and from the Seymours. But the Stourtons increasingly lacked the means to compete, and the fall of Somerset left Herbert without an effective rival; his superiority was confirmed after the duke's execution in 1552, when Herbert received a large grant of Seymour lands in north Wiltshire. Men formerly in Somerset's affinity now acknowledged Herbert's superiority, and he acted as an arbitrator in local disputes, including one involving the bishop of Salisbury. Herbert's power-base in the county lay at Wilton, in the south of the county, where he gave visible expression to his power in a splendid house. According to tradition he consulted Holbein before starting to build, but the fact that Holbein died in 1543, whereas Herbert only acquired the freehold of Wilton in 1544, rules against the story. Herbert clearly took a close personal interest in the process of construction, for John Knox rebuked him for spending his time with masons and architects, instead of listening to sermons. The detail of the original house at Wilton is almost entirely lost (except perhaps for the arms of Henry VIII reset in the north front), but the overall shape of Herbert's house, quadrangled with two forecourts, has survived. 
The earl of Pembroke was not a man to hide his light under a bushel, indeed his obvious liking for display seems to have been both an accompaniment to and a manifestation of a personal charisma which made men willing to follow him. From the early 1550s there are frequent references to the scale and splendour of his retinues and way of life. When the Scottish queen-dowager Mary of Guise visited London in November 1551, among her escort rode the earl of Pembroke with 100 horsemen, their 'cotes gardy[d] with velvet, and chynes, hats and whyt fethers, and every [man] havyng a new gayffelins [javelin] in ther hands, and a bage [badge]' ('Diary of Henry Machyn', 11-12). Nearly a year later the young king was entertained by Pembroke at Wilton. The imperial ambassador was greatly impressed by the magnificence of the reception, the king being served off pure gold, the council and privy chamber off silver gilt, and the rest of the royal household off silver. When Edward left, his host presented him with 'a very rich camp-bed, decorated with pearls and precious stones' ('CSP Spain', '1550-52', 565-6). The ceremonies marking the death of his wife, who died at Baynard's Castle on 20 February 1552 and was buried in St Paul's on the 28th, probably also reflect her husband's penchant for magnificence. Machyn records the funeral of 'the good lade contes of Penbroke', attended by 100 poor men and women, by 'mornars boyth lordes and knyghts', and by the heralds responsible for all the panoply of aristocratic exequies. She was interred beside John of Gaunt's tomb, 'and after her banars wher sett up over her [and her] arnes sett on dyvers pelers' ('Diary of Henry Machyn', 15-16). In 1554 Pembroke was reported to have 1000 men wearing his livery, and when he greeted Philip of Spain at Southampton that year, he was attended by a body of archers wearing the livery of the house of Aragon, and by 200 mounted gentlemen dressed in black velvet and wearing heavy gold chains. 
Following Somerset's fall Herbert was closely involved in the earl of Warwick's government. In autumn 1549 he inventoried the royal chattels, and in April 1550 he was among the privy councillors trusted by Warwick to keep order in the provinces. He was later one of a group of noblemen paid $2000 per annum each to maintain 100 horsemen to that same end. In September 1551 he was also a member of an informal committee dealing with the currency and the king's debts, and presumably in that capacity helped to uncover the shortcomings of Sir Martin Bowes, the under-treasurer of the Tower mint, in January 1551. Herbert and Warwick became earl and duke respectively on the same day, and it is a measure of the closeness of the two men that when Northumberland struck at the duke of Somerset in autumn 1551, Somerset's ally the twelfth earl of Arundel confessed that there had indeed been a plot to arrest both Pembroke and Northumberland, as well as the marquess of Northampton. Pembroke sat on the jury which condemned Somerset, despite the latter's objections. The rumours of a rift between Pembroke and Northumberland which in autumn 1552 circulated as far as Ireland seem to have been groundless, and in the following year Pembroke concurred in the plans made by Edward VI and Northumberland to divert the succession to the throne from Princess Mary to Lady Jane Grey; on 21 May 1553 Jane married the duke's son Guildford, and on the same day her sister Katherine married Henry Herbert (b. in or after 1538, d. 1601), Pembroke's son and heir. Pembroke subsequently signed both Edward's 'device' for the limitation of the succession and the subsequent 'engagement' undertaking to uphold it. 
Northumberland is later said to have accused Pembroke of having thought up the scheme to make Jane queen. That is highly unlikely, but it seems clear that he went along with the plan as long as he reckoned it had any chance of success. He was a signatory of the letter to Mary of 9 July ordering her to cease resistance, and had Jane proclaimed queen at Beaumaris and Denbigh. He even stood godfather, with Jane and her father, the duke of Suffolk, to the daughter of the ardent protestant Edward Underhill. But as support for Mary grew, Pembroke began to have second thoughts. After Northumberland had left London to confront Mary on 13 July, Arundel and Pembroke headed the party of defection. Their headquarters was Pembroke's house at Baynard's Castle, and there, after Arundel had made a lengthy oration on Mary's behalf, Pembroke made a much briefer one, concluding: 'If my Lord of Arundell's perswasions cannot prevaile with you, eyther this sword shall make Mary Qwene, or Ile lose my life' (Nichols, 120). He and his supporters then proclaimed Mary in Cheapside. 
At first Mary took more account of Pembroke's slowness to support her than of his eventual rallying to her cause. He was briefly placed under house arrest and lost his Welsh presidency, but was admitted to the privy council on 13 August 1553. He had his son's marriage annulled, but lost ground with the new queen for favouring her marriage to Edward Courtenay, rather than to Philip of Spain. His opportunity to win Mary's favour came on 1 February 1554, when he was appointed her 'cheyfe capten and generall agauynst ser Thomas Wyatt and ys felous' (Sil, 140-41). Notwithstanding the cowardice and treachery of others, Pembroke kept his nerve and blocked the approaches to London, confident that Wyatt's men would lose heart and melt away -- as they did. The earl was duly earmarked for rewards, but gave offence in the spring when he supported Baron Paget (another favourer of Courtenay over Philip) in opposing the heresy bill, out of fear of the consequences for lay holders of former ecclesiastical lands. Pembroke had already clashed with Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, on this issue. But he showed himself sufficiently confident of his position to come to parliament in November with all his old flamboyance, followed by 200 horsemen 'in velvet cottes and cheynes, the cotes with iij lasses of gold, and lx reseduw in bluw cotes gardyd with velvet, and badge a gren dragon' ('Diary of Henry Machyn', 74). 
Pembroke's wealth, power, and experience probably made him indispensable to Mary's government. Early in 1555 he was once more made president of the council in the marches of Wales, and although he was pursued for debt in the exchequer chamber, he was ultimately pardoned his obligations. He also managed to gain the confidence of King Philip, albeit not without some difficulty, and was one of the noblemen who received a Spanish pension. He advocated the king's involvement in government, and may have favoured his coronation. In September 1555 he accompanied Philip to Brussels for a meeting with the latter's father, Charles V, and shortly afterwards was made governor of Calais. In religious matters he acted in accordance with his habitual Erastianism, defending Sir Edward Hastings when the latter spoke up for the government's bill against religious exiles, and alienating many of his own retainers in the process. Presumably they had expected him to act otherwise, but in fact the earl was following his long-held principles. Aubrey's story of Pembroke's restoring the nuns to Wilton is without foundation, but he did make at least a gesture towards Catholic restoration, when in January 1557 one Thomas Bowes made over to him the site of the former house of Observant Franciscans in Southampton, so that Pembroke could restore it to its former use; the friars returned briefly in 1558, but there is no evidence for Pembroke's involvement in this. 
Pembroke's principal services to Mary's regime were military. In 1557 he was appointed to lead an English army of just over 7000 men to assist Philip's forces in northern France. His forces arrived too late to take part in the battle of St Quentin on 10 August, but distinguished themselves in the capture of that town on the 27th. In the military emergency of 1558 that followed the loss of Calais, Pembroke was lieutenant for Wiltshire and Somerset. It was probably these commitments that made it impossible for him to attend to his responsibilities in Wales, for in August he wrote to the queen offering to resign as president of the council there, in response to her letters 'stating that the Marches of Wales are in disorder for want of a president residing there' ('CSP dom.', '1547-80', 106). He was nevertheless sufficiently trusted by Mary to be named one of the executors of her will. 
When Mary died on 17 November 1558 Pembroke proceeded to Hatfield, and there took part in what was in effect the first privy council meeting of Elizabeth's reign. Then when the new queen entered London on the 28th he bore the sword before her. He clearly had Elizabeth's trust and respect. He entertained her at Baynard's Castle in 1559 and 1562, and substituted for her at the St George's day feast of 1560. A few days later he was one of the judges at a court joust, and risked injury when pieces of a shattered stave flew up and hit him. Politically he supported Sir William Cecil, the queen's secretary, at this time, both in favouring English intervention in Scotland in 1560, and in opposing suggestions that Elizabeth should marry Lord Robert Dudley in the following year. When the queen nearly died of smallpox in 1562, the Spanish ambassador reported that Pembroke supported the claims of the protestant earl of Huntingdon to the succession, which if true would suggest that the earl had adapted loyally to the new religious settlement. He also strengthened his links with the Talbot family. About May 1552 he married Anne (1524-1588), widow of Peter Compton and daughter of George Talbot, fourth earl of Shrewsbury. In 1563 his eldest son married Katherine, daughter of the sixth earl of Shrewsbury, while his daughter Anne married Lord Francis Talbot. 
Pembroke's health deteriorated in the 1560s, and he was reported to be seriously ill in June 1560 and September 1564. But this did not stop his continuing pursuit of wealth, or his engagement in court politics. He was prepared to take risks for money. In 1552 he bought shares in the expedition led by Sir Hugh Willoughby which set off in pursuit of the north-east passage to China, and three years later was among the merchant adventurers of England for the discovery of lands unknown. In 1563 he invested in the 'Jesus' of Lubeck, sailing to Africa and America, and shortly afterwards did the same for a slaving expedition led by John Hawkins. Closer to home, in 1568 he was a shareholder in the mines royal and mineral and battery companies, and may have been responsible for the establishment of carpet-weaving at Wilton, perhaps by fugitives from the Netherlands. 
At court Pembroke moved increasingly into the camp of Robert Dudley, created earl of Leicester in 1564, and with him risked burning his fingers by involving himself in Anglo-Scottish politics. Made lord high steward of the royal household in 1568, in the same year Pembroke gave his support to proposals that the fugitive Mary, queen of Scots, should marry Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, and then be restored to her throne with a husband acceptable to English interests. But when Elizabeth learned of the scheme in 1569 she would have nothing to do with it or its backers. Pembroke was briefly detained at court, but successfully pleaded his innocence and good intentions, and was soon allowed to retire to Wilton. But he was further embarrassed when the earls of Northumberland and Westmorland rose in revolt. They had their own reasons for favouring Mary's marriage to Norfolk, and now they claimed Pembroke as one of their backers. The earl protested his loyalty -- 'For God forbid I shoulde lieve the Howre, nowe in myne olde Age, to staine my former Lief with one Spott of Disloyaltie' (Sil, 175) -- and Elizabeth was convinced, for he was named general of a large force levied to defend her at Windsor. But he was not required to take the field, and died at Hampton Court, aged 63, on 17 March 1570. The queen wrote a letter of condolence to his widow. 
Pembroke had drawn up his will on 28 December 1567. He left $200 for distribution to the poor in London, Salisbury, Wilton, and Hendon. His daughter Anne was to have money and jewels worth 500 marks, his second son Edward 500 marks in plate and household stuff and $500 in cash. His eldest son Henry was sole executor and residuary legatee. The four overseers of the will, who were to receive $50 each, included Leicester and Sir Walter Mildmay. On the night before he died Pembroke added Sir James Croft and Sir William Cecil to the overseers, and made some further bequests: his wife was to have clothes, jewels, and $500; the queen 'his best jewell which he names his greate ballace and his newe faireste and richeste bedd'. The earl's best and second-best gold swords were to go to Leicester and the marquess of Northampton respectively. Later still Pembroke made further provision for his wife, and remembered some of his servants, also advising his son to 'entertaigne his householde and kepe them together' (Sil, 223). In 1567 he had required 'such funerall solemnitie about my said burial as to myne estate and callinge apperteynethe and I will some honorable tome and monumente shalbe upon my bodie' (ibid., 220). If he died in London he asked for burial beside his first wife in St Paul's, and there he was interred on 18 April. His exequies were of a piece with his life. The dean, Alexander Nowell, preached, his eldest son was chief mourner, and among those present were Cecil, Leicester, Mildmay, Sir Nicholas Bacon, and Bishop Edmund Grindal. His household turned out in force, including two chaplains, two secretaries, and his steward, treasurer, and comptroller. His monument, destroyed in 1666, commemorated both Pembroke and his first wife. Her virtues were said to have included religious devotion as well as conjugal fidelity, but her husband's epitaph listed only his secular honours and achievements, his services to four monarchs and above all his martial valour, at home and abroad. 


@@@@@


doc= 13056


Herbert, Sir William (c.1553-1593), colonist in Ireland and author, was born about 1553 at St Julians, Monmouthshire, the only child of William Herbert (died 1567), landowner, of St Julians, and his first wife, Jane (died 'c'.1554), daughter and heir of Edward Griffith of Penrhyn, Caernarvonshire. He was the great-grandson of Sir George Herbert, third son of William Herbert, first earl of Pembroke ('c'.1423-1469), a pedigree upon which he placed considerable emphasis. Herbert was, in fact, the earl's only surviving legitimate male heir. Between about 1568 and 1573 he attended Oxford, where he received private instruction from Laurence Humphrey, president of Magdalen College and an ardent protestant, quickly earning himself a reputation as a poet and intellectual. The poet Thomas Churchyard dedicated 'Churchyard's Dream', the ninth labour of 'the first part of Churchyard's Chippes', to Herbert in 1575 while the astrologer and mathematician John Dee gladly accepted the young man's notes on his astrological and alchemical work 'Monos hieroglyphica' in May 1577. About this time Herbert married Florence (died in or after 1596), daughter of William Morgan of Llantornan, Monmouthshire, and his wife, Elizabeth. They had two sons who died young -- reputedly from consuming poison left in Herbert's library to protect his precious books from rats. In 1578 Florence gave birth to their only surviving child, Mary Herbert (1578-1634). 
Herbert first entered political life as sheriff of Glamorgan from 1577 to 1578 and, in an effort to consolidate his position further, leased Newport Castle and then Liswerry and Lebenith manors. He was knighted by Elizabeth I at Richmond Palace on 21 December 1578 and was appointed deputy constable of Conwy Castle, Caernarvonshire, in 1579. In 1579 or 1580 he was named JP for Monmouthshire; he served as sheriff of the county from 1579 to 1580 and was, in 1583, appointed chief steward of Rhymni manor in south Wales. He was appointed 'custos rotulorum' of Monmouthshire by 1583. Yet political advancement did not diminish Herbert's intellectual pursuits. He regularly visited Dee, who was his neighbour at Mortlake, Surrey, and undoubtedly availed himself of the large library Dee kept there. Herbert maintained an interest in astrology and alchemy and in early 1582 Dee's alchemical assistant requested to live with him. This seamless combination of the disparate roles of intellectual, country gentleman, and political servant distinguished him from many other Welsh MPs when he sat for Monmouthshire in the parliaments of 1584 and 1586. In the former, Herbert was on nine committees dealing with a wide range of political matters; in the latter he introduced a bill concerning orphans in Monmouthshire and delivered what was the first recorded speech by a Welsh MP. It concerned Mary, queen of Scots, and he was consequently chosen, with forty-five others, to present Elizabeth with a petition calling for her cousin's execution. Shortly afterwards, however, in a dramatic departure from his hitherto Welsh-based endeavours, Herbert embarked on a colonization venture in Ireland. 
In May 1586 Herbert undertook, with a consortium, to plant areas of Munster which had come into the crown's hands following the attainder of Gerald Fitzjames Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond. The catalyst for the undertaking may have been Sir James Croft, Herbert's distant relation and former lord deputy of Ireland, but he was certainly alive to the opportunities available across the Irish Sea. In addition to the possibility of financial gain, Ireland presented an intellectual and a religious challenge to which he could devote himself. In June 1586 Herbert applied for three 'seignories' in co. Kerry, amounting to roughly 24,000 acres, but their allotment was delayed for nearly a year while the lands were surveyed. During this time he displayed his protestant convictions by composing 'A letter written by a true Christian catholike to a Romaine pretended catholike, upon occasion of a controversie touching the catholike churche' (1586). This was followed in 1587 by a work, no longer extant, in praise of Sir Philip Sidney entitled 'Sidney, or, Baripenthes: briefely shadowing out the rare and never ending landes of that most honourable and praiseworthy gent. Sir Philip Sidney'. Herbert finally arrived in Cork in April 1587, but received just 13,276 acres at Castleisland, co. Kerry. 
On paper, the colonization scheme was promising: the plantations were to represent English islands of stability and civility inhabited and inexpensively defended by settlers drawn from those English counties where the colonists wielded influence. However, they inherited a myriad of rents and exactions previously due to Desmond, which were now due, in part, to the crown. These rents had been levied without any regularity and the land on which they were due was depopulated and wasted. Herbert identified the problem, noting a: 'continual vexation and disquietness between the undertakers and the natural inhabitants of the country, upon whom these things must be levied, but cannot be had, because they have not wherewith to pay it; the other an incumbrance to the gentleman whose lands both in England and Ireland shall stand charged in the Exchequer for these sums, which they shall never be able to levy. (TNA: PRO, SP 63/135/58)' Dissension quickly arose among the colonists as they quarrelled over the boundaries of their lands and the retention of tenants. Herbert became embroiled in a particularly bitter dispute with Sir Edward Denny, who alleged that he had lured away some of his tenants. 
The settlers had a proclivity to drift towards better land in co. Limerick and Herbert became increasingly reliant on enticing neighbouring settlers onto his lands and utilizing the existing Irish population. This latter development, coupled with his knowledge of the success of Tudor reform in Wales, had a profound influence on his treatment of the Irish and contrasted sharply with that of his colleagues. He found the Irish to be tractable enough, lacking only the 'sweet taste of civility'. He insisted that prayers be said in Gaelic and that the Lord's prayer and the ten commandments be translated for their benefit. Herbert's principal goal was doubtless their conversion to protestantism, but his unexpected and unpopular effort to procure the release from Dublin Castle in March 1588 of the noted rebel Patrick Fitzmaurice -- a member of the Old English contingent long settled in Munster -- reflected his willingness to put native concerns ahead of New English interests to achieve 'stability and civility'. In doing so, however, he alienated many of his colleagues and was accused of being contaminated by the Irish, to which he responded: 'though I have ever more esteemed of the nobility of virtue, yet have I little cause to think myself blemished by my blood being the heir male of that Earl [Pembroke] that hath this day living nine earls and barons descended out of his body. (TNA: PRO, SP 63/135/81(i))' The dispute with Denny and his fellow undertakers worsened and by December 1588 quarter sessions were being disrupted. Herbert positioned himself to return home, but this was delayed while he acted as vice-president in Munster during Sir Thomas Norris's absence. Though his departure was imminent, he still held out the hope of making 'Kerry and Desmond a little England beyond Ireland' just as 'some worthy gentlemen in times past [had] made Pembrokeshire a little England beyond Wales' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/140/11). He wrote copiously on the state of Munster with prescriptions for its reform. Having served successively as JP and sheriff in co. Kerry and also as a member of the provincial council, Herbert returned to Wales in early summer 1589 with commendatory letters from leading Irish officials. 
In the months following his return Herbert spoke at length with Croft about his experiences in Ireland. Croft died on 4 September 1590, but their conversations formed the basis for Herbert's lengthy treatise 'Croftus, sive, De Hibernia liber'. Completed in early 1591, the work represents a collection of views formed by Croft during his deputyship, but modified and updated by Herbert's recent firsthand colonial experience in Ireland. The main thrust of 'Croftus' is its belief that the colonization of Munster would succeed in introducing 'English civility' to the natives. Support was found for this argument among classical texts -- Cicero in particular -- or the scriptures; passages were highlighted which advocated colonization schemes to 'civilize' 'primitive' peoples. 'Civilizing' the natives, however, could not be achieved without the abolition of native customs, which 'Croftus' held to be the greatest threat to the colonists: 'colonies degenerate assuredly when the colonists imitate and embrace the habits, customs and practices of the natives. There is no better way to remedy this evil than to do away with and destroy completely the habits and practices of the natives. ('Croftus', 81)' The introduction of protestantism and of education -- the latter facilitated by the establishment of universities at Dublin and Limerick -- would combine to draw the natives from their customs and ensure their Anglicization. Yet 'Croftus', while offering a window into the intellectual arguments concerning Tudor plantation schemes in Ireland, also served as a detailed piece of propaganda justifying the settlement of Ireland by New English officials. It set the tone for writings on the subject and was followed by works from two other colonists, Richard Beacon and Sir Edmund Spenser respectively, advocating similar colonization, although it reflected the more reasonable colonial mindset more fully than Spenser's work did. 
In the years following his return to Wales, Herbert's energies and writings were not confined to the subject of Ireland. He attempted unsuccessfully to secure a seat on the queen's council in the marches of Wales, but was returned for parliament, again for Monmouthshire, in January 1593. Perhaps his experiences in Ireland explain his appointment as deputy lieutenant of Monmouthshire by 1593, but he was more than qualified for office by his local consequence. He wrote a love poem first published in the 'Phoenix Nest' in 1593 (Park, vol. 2) and replied to Edmund Campion's 'Decem rationes' (1587) in a work entitled 'Sir William Herbert's confutation of Campion the Jesuit's ten reasons dedicated to Queen Elizabeth'. He also penned an aggressive letter to one Morgan who foolishly issued him a challenge. Herbert died on 4 March 1593, at St Julians, Monmouthshire, and was buried in Monmouth; he was survived by his wife and daughter. In his will (dated 12 April 1587) he bequeathed all his estates, including lands in Ireland, to his daughter, Mary. In an effort to ensure that his descendants would share both his blood and surname he inserted a clause requiring her to marry someone surnamed Herbert. If, however, the clause was ignored she would inherit a meagre living from a small portion of his lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire. In February 1599 she fulfilled this condition, marrying Edward Herbert, later first Baron Herbert of Cherbury (1582?-1648). At the instigation of Sir William Herbert's widow and daughter a new survey of his Irish lands was conducted, and the rent was reduced in 1596. Throughout his career he was convinced of the benefits of Tudor government and worked tirelessly towards its implementation in Wales. His efforts to put Tudor theories of government into practice in Ireland, however, were less successful and his house and possessions were ultimately swept away by rebellion in 1598. 'Croftus', his greatest legacy, which continued to influence English colonial thought about Ireland for a decade, was in many ways an intellectual attempt to achieve Tudor reform in Ireland where his plantation had failed. 


@@@@@


doc= 13057


Herbert, William (1583?-1628), poet and adventurer, was born in Glamorgan, the son of Nicholas Herbert (1543-1601), writer, pirate, merchant, and public official, and either his first wife, Mary Morgan, or his second wife, Catherine or Jennett Herbert ('nee' Edward). He attended Eton College as a servitor during 1598-1600 and he matriculated ''arm. fil.'' (that is, esquire's son) at Christ Church, Oxford, on 17 October 1600, though he was in residence from March onward, and remained for most of 1601. Following a prenuptial settlement in 1601 Herbert married Blanche Morgan, the daughter of Catherine Morgan of Llanrumney, a widow, in April 1602. In 1603 he was placed in attendance upon Prince Henry as groom of the privy chamber extraordinary, apparently for a period of twelve months. In that same year, upon reaching legal age, he inherited the administration of his estates. Throughout his adulthood he was an apparent conformist in religion, as attested by extant signed oaths. 
The first of Herbert's two major publications, both of them extended mytho-historical poems, was 'A Prophesie of Cadwallader, Last King of the Britaines' (1604), which has won critical favour over the years. Written in part to celebrate James I's accession, 'Cadwallader' traces his lineage to ancient times, relying heavily (though without acknowledgement) on George Owen Harry's 'Genealogy of the High and Mighty Monarch, James' (1604). In 1605 either he or his uncle William Herbert (died 1609) wrote the commendatory poem 'In Laudem Authoris' as a preface to 'The French Garden' by Peter Erondell (Pierre Erondelle), a friend of the young poet's father and uncle. In 1606 appeared Herbert's second major work, 'Englands Sorrowe, or, A Farewell to Essex', which had been entered in the Stationers' register on 30 April 1605 as 'Honors epitaphes, or, The lamentation of Brittaine, for the untimely loss of many worthy late personages', and the abbreviated headline, Honors Epitaphs, appears at the top of each page. 
Verse that is plausibly attributable to Herbert includes two poems in 'England's Helicon' (1600, 1614), 'Wodenfrides Song in Praise of Amargana' and 'Another of the Same'; the bawdy 'To the Uncapable Reader' that prefaces Robert Anton's 'Moriomachia' (1613); and two commendatory poems written for William Browne's 'Brittania Pastorals' (1625). Herbert is clearly a Spenserian, yet he also demonstrates (and acknowledges) indebtedness to Drayton, Daniel, and Chapman. In 1613 his friend William Gamage published a laudatory epigram on Herbert and 'Cadwallader' in 'Linsi-Woolsie'; this also contains an epigram on Herbert's father that provides the otherwise vanished information that Nicholas Herbert was the author of 'Lle y Kymero', now presumably lost. During his period as a poet Herbert lived with his wife at Llanrumney; they moved from there to his seat at St Fagans where they lived until 1616. (Herbert's other principal seat was Cogan Pill; both these properties came down to him from his father.) In 1607 he was under sheriff for Monmouthshire. A son, William, was born in 1609 (died 1638). 
In 1616 Herbert sold St Fagans to raise investment cash for Ralegh's doomed expedition to Guiana in search of goldmines. (He knew Ralegh through the Gamages of Coety, including the epigrammatist William.) Herbert financed a quarter of this venture, in the amount of $1200, much of the rest being an investment by Lady Ralegh herself, and Herbert apparently contributed several hundred pounds more upon Ralegh's subsequent request. In 1617, after also investing in a voyage to America by the 'Flying Harte', he left with Ralegh for Guiana, where, among other misadventures, he nearly lost his life in a gunfight during the final, failed assault on the supposed mine site. Ralegh wrote of 'my cosen Herbert' that he was 'a very valiant and honest gentleman' and 'of singular courage' ('Letters of Sir Walter Ralegh', ed. A. Latham and J. Youings, 1999, 349, 352). Herbert and Ralegh sailed back separately in 1618, with Herbert commanding a shipload of dissident Guiana veterans, whom Ralegh termed 'scumme' (ibid., 352), at his despairing commander's behest. 
Upon his return Ralegh was placed under a sort of house arrest in the custody of Sir Lewis Stucley. Knowing he was headed for the block, he made a feebly conceived attempt to escape on 19 August. Herbert betrayed Ralegh in this attempt, and in fact he and two others had apparently conspired with Stucley to lead Ralegh into the escape, in order to give James yet another pretext for executing the popular old hero. On 17 September Herbert betrayed Ralegh yet again by turning king's evidence in his testimony, contradicting and discrediting Ralegh on key points (BL, Harleian MS 6846, fol. 16). On 4 October Ralegh insisted as a matter of honour that Lady Ralegh pay Herbert what was properly owed him on his investment in the Guiana voyage from her own returns ('Letters of Sir Walter Ralegh' ed. A. Latham and J. Youings, 1999, 371-2), but following the execution she baulked at doing so -- most likely because she knew of Herbert's betrayals. She got most of her own money back from the government (which had confiscated the ship 'Destiny'), but Herbert was given a minimal $700 award that was detained in the exchequer owing to a claim against it, and it is unclear whether he was ever repaid. In 1619-20 he invested in an elaborate scheme to export Welsh butter by sea, and in 1620 he purchased a house in Gosfield, Essex, where his family later moved from Cogan Pill to join him. A 1624 document reports him as involved in 'outlawry' (NL Wales, Bute L2/57) and he was in Newgate prison in 1625. Three years later he was lodged in king's bench, Southwark, apparently for debt, and he died either there or in Cardiff on 20 November 1628. 
Care must be taken in order to distinguish this William Herbert from his several contemporaries who bore the same name, most of them his kinsmen, some of them also writers, and with all of whom he has been understandably confused in one way or another by researchers. Among these are his uncle Sir William Herbert of Swansea (died 1609); his first cousin William Herbert of White Friars (died 1645); William Herbert, first Baron Powis, sometimes styled 'of the Red Castle', his second cousin once removed; William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke (1580-1630), another second cousin once removed; Sir William Herbert of St Julian's (died 1593), his third cousin once removed; William Herbert of Coldbrook, his distant cousin but near-contemporary; his own son William Herbert (1609-1638); the William Herbert ('fl'. 1634-1662) who wrote various religious and 'self-help' manuals; and the W. Har. who published the funeral poem 'Epicedium' (1594). 


@@@@@


doc= 13058


Herbert, William, third earl of Pembroke (1580-1630), courtier and patron of the arts, was the son of Henry Herbert, second earl of Pembroke (b. in or after 1538, d. 1601), and his third wife, Mary Sidney (1561-1621) ['see 'Herbert, Mary, countess of Pembroke], sister of Sir Philip Sidney and of Robert Sidney, earl of Leicester. A tablet erected by his grateful father in St Mary's Church, Wilton, Wiltshire, noted William's birth before noon on 8 April 1580. The baby was baptized there on 28 April. Queen Elizabeth and his mother's influential uncles Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, and Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick, stood as his godparents, testifying to the importance of the infant heir to the Pembroke title. 
Following the tradition of his mother's family, Lord Herbert received a careful education. Herself an accomplished writer and poet, the countess educated her son at home, employing Hugh Sanford, and later Samuel Daniel, a poet of some renown, as his tutors. Their influence, as well as the example of his mother and Sidney uncles, bred a lifelong appreciation for literature and the arts in the young man. Herbert composed poetry -- which remained unpublished until after his death -- but more importantly he was the best-known patron of his generation. Ultimately his education would make him the 'greatest Maecenas to learned men of any peer of his time, or since' (Brennan, 150). He received his first dedication, a theological work by William Thorne, when he was twelve, in 1592. In the same year he and his father travelled to Oxford, where in the queen's presence they banqueted at Magdalen College -- the beginning of an association with the university which would continue for the rest of his life. On 9 March 1593 he matriculated at New College, where he was tutored by John Lloyd and garnered more dedications. One, Thomas Moffet's 'Nobilis, or, A view of the life and death of a Sidney' ('c'.1594), began what would become a consistent theme in Herbert's life: comparisons with his uncle Sir Philip Sidney. In 1595 he left Oxford without a degree (though he was in 1605 awarded an MA), but retained an affection for the institution which would endure. 
With his heir approaching manhood, Pembroke embarked upon the first of several abortive negotiations for his son's marriage -- to Elizabeth, daughter of Sir George Carey. This alliance, along with proposals for women of the Cecil, Vere, and Howard families, all failed thanks to the earl's steep terms and Herbert's reluctance. More important for Herbert at this stage of his life was the acquisition of military glory. Some scholars have placed him in Essex's Cadiz expedition (1596), though there is no hard evidence to prove this. In 1597 he planned a trip to the continent, and two years later asked his uncle Robert Sidney for the loan of horses and weapons so that he could 'follow the camp' (Sydney and others, 2.113). In 1598 his military interests prompted yet another dedication, this time to Robert Barret's 'Theory and Practice of Modern Wars'. On the whole, however, it is unlikely that Herbert did much, if any, soldiering. His proposed campaign in 1599 was unhinged by his father's fragile health. 
In any event, Herbert's real interests lay neither in the university nor on the battlefield, but at court. Polite education however deep -- as it undoubtedly was in his case -- and a martial veneer were means to an end: a successful career as a courtier. His first brief visit to court was in 1595, and the experience whetted his appetite for more. He was again at court in the summer of 1597, and a sustained campaign eventually won his father's permission for longer-term residence in London, but not until the spring of 1598. Increasingly feeble, and unable to travel to court, the earl hoped that his son might represent his extensive political interests there. 
Once in London, Herbert lost no time establishing himself. He courted Robert Devereux, earl of Essex, and Sir Robert Cecil, rivals for the queen's favours, and ingratiated himself with both. By the autumn of 1599 he had made remarkable progress: 'My lord Herbert is exceedingly beloved at court of all men', wrote his uncle's man Rowland Whyte in November (Sydney and others, 2.143). On 29 November the queen granted him an hour-long private audience before he returned to Wilton for the holidays. Back at court by the spring of 1600, he again turned heads: 'he will prove a great man', wrote Whyte. His father's illness soon forced a reluctant Herbert back to Wilton. He told Cecil that he hated the rustic life, but that Pembroke's weakness demanded constant attendance. Moreover, to his son's horror, the earl's approaching end spurred unwelcome generosity in him: the old man gave away $1000 on a single day during Herbert's absence. But though the earl's illness lasted far too long to suit his ambitious son, death finally released Pembroke early in the morning of 19 January 1601. 
William Herbert was now third earl of Pembroke, lord of vast estates, especially in Wales and the marches. The second earl had been a knight of the Garter and lord president of the council in the marches of Wales, and his son had every hope that his successful debut at court would ensure an easy succession to those honours. Unfortunately the young earl's plans fell foul of his own passions and the queen's defence of female virtue. On 14 June 1600, during his last stay at court before inheriting his title, he attended the wedding of his cousin Henry, Lord Herbert (the earl of Worcester's heir). Prominent among the performers in a masque celebrating the occasion was Mary Fitton (bap. 1578, d. 1641). Daughter of Sir Edward Fitton, a prominent Cheshire gentleman, Mary had been at court since about 1597. Some have speculated that she was Shakespeare's 'dark lady'; whatever the truth of this, it is clear that she was a captivating young woman. Courtiers took much surreptitious amusement in the infatuation with her of the fifty-year-old treasurer of the household, Sir William Knollys -- attentions which she rejected. Apparently, however, she welcomed Herbert's approach, and they began an affair, probably shortly after the wedding. Rumour alleged that Mary, disguised in men's clothing, visited his lodgings. In August, Whyte noticed William's lack of attention to family business -- he seemed depressed and distracted. For this he had good reason; by this time Mary was pregnant. Under the circumstances, his trip to his father's deathbed might have come as a relief from his troubles at court. On the day the old earl died he wrote to Cecil complaining of the scandalous stories circulating about him. By the end of January 1601 Fitton's predicament was common knowledge. The queen ordered Pembroke to the Fleet prison by 25 March, where he remained until 26 April, after which he was banished to Wilton. His son was born in late March and died almost immediately. Throughout his ordeal Pembroke showed no concern for his lover and adamantly refused to marry her. This behaviour incensed the queen, who thereafter declined to name him to his father's offices. Pembroke's career at Elizabeth's court was finished. 
But though the Fitton affair was a personal disaster, Pembroke was fortunate in its timing. Caught in the toils of his own scandal, he escaped any taint in the catastrophe that overwhelmed Essex at the same time. Essex counted Pembroke as a friend and expected his support in his rising, but Pembroke's political sense, even in the midst of his troubles, kept him out of danger. Though he lost the queen's favour, he at least kept his head. In October 1601, still denied access to court, Pembroke discovered a role for himself as one of the most assiduous members of the House of Lords. This period in the wilderness taught Pembroke the value of a parliamentary power base, and he began the process of building a following there important enough to oblige even kings to respect him. 
For the remainder of Elizabeth's life Pembroke laboured in obscurity; 1602 passed by with virtually no mention of the earl or his whereabouts. But he was by no means prepared to abandon his hopes and to retire. The queen's death on 24 March 1603 gave Pembroke a second chance, and he wasted no time in seizing it. He and his brother, Philip Herbert joined the rush of courtiers northward to escort the new king to London. James showed both brothers particular favour from the start. After his exclusion under Elizabeth, the Stuart accession marked a dramatic turn in Pembroke's fortunes. James, open-handed by nature, did not stint the avid courtier. The king visited Wilton twice in 1603, and clearly enjoyed Pembroke's company. In May Pembroke became a gentleman of the privy chamber and keeper of Clarendon Forest -- the latter a source of income and patronage. On 9 July he succeeded in his father's place as knight of the Garter. 
For all his cultural interests, Pembroke was well suited for the boisterousness of the Jacobean court. He participated enthusiastically in every accession day tilt until 1615, and performed in many masques celebrating courtly milestones. His personal relationship with James drew comment from the Venetian ambassador, who recounted a scene from the coronation: 'The earl of Pembroke, a handsome youth, who is always with the king and always joking with him, actually kissed His Majesty's face, whereupon the king laughed and gave him a little cuff' (Brennan, 105). On one of his many stays at Wilton, James, aware that Pembroke detested frogs, put one down his favourite's neck to general hilarity. Nothing abashed, Pembroke later took his revenge by sneaking a live pig into the king's close stool. 
Pembroke's relationship with James continued to flourish, and he was equally popular with Queen Anne. His new year's gift to the king in 1604 was a jewel allegedly worth $40,000. Finding the wherewithal for such extravagances became easier in the same year. On 18 January James made him high steward of the duchy of Cornwall and lord warden of the stannaries; a few months later he became lord lieutenant of Cornwall -- a major expansion of Herbert influence as well as sources of considerable income. On 4 November he further advanced his fortunes with his marriage to Lady Mary Talbot (died 1650), daughter of Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury. The match was a natural one between two important families -- Pembroke's father and grandfather had both married Talbot women, and he received an impressive dowry with his new wife. Not everyone approved of the bargain, however. Years later Clarendon -- who began his parliamentary career as a Pembroke client -- said that the earl 'paid much too dear for his wife's fortune by taking her person into the bargain' (Brennan, 106). Their union produced only one child, a boy who died at less than a month old. 
Pembroke's success at court attracted increasing attention from those searching for a patron. During the early years of James's reign an extraordinary range of books were dedicated to Pembroke: works of theology, military affairs, history, diplomacy, law, and poetry were all offered to him; no one outside the royal family gathered as many dedications in the early seventeenth century. Pembroke obviously enjoyed his reputation as a patron of arts and letters, which appealed to his love of scholarship as well as enhancing his lustre at court. John Burton wrote that 'his vigorous and restless mind ranged over the whole life of his age' (Brennan, 148-9) and the list of his clients reads like a biographical dictionary of the Jacobean arts. In 1603 Ben Jonson dedicated his 'Sejanus' to the earl, beginning a long association between the two men. Pembroke gave Jonson $20 a year to buy books, and in 1605 came to the playwright's rescue when his 'Eastward Ho!' landed him in gaol for its tactless assault on the Scots. George Chapman, the famous translator of Homer, benefited from the earl's attentions. Shakespeare's sonnets, published by Thomas Thorpe in 1609, bore a dedication to W. H., and some scholars have suggested that this was Pembroke. In any case it is certain that he and his brother Philip were the dedicatees of the first folio in 1623. Pembroke's personal relationship with Shakespeare is a murky subject, but he certainly knew and patronized some of the bard's associates, such as Richard Burbage and Edward Alleyn. The earl may also have protected Thomas Middleton when in 1624 his anti-Spanish play 'A Game at Chess' appeared. George Herbert, the poet and a kinsman, received a living in the church and a seat in the House of Commons thanks to the earl. Nor did Pembroke confine his patronage to literature alone; he befriended Inigo Jones -- thereby walking a tightrope between the architect and his enemy Jonson. Some time before 1605 Jones apparently toured Italy at Pembroke's expense. The earl also commissioned portraits by Nicholas Hilliard, Marcus Gheeraerts the younger, and Daniel Mytens. Among his many other clients were Thomas Tompkins and John Dowland, two of the best-known composers of the day. 
While his broad popularity among writers and artists reflected Pembroke's cultural interests, it was built upon the foundation of his success at court. He steadily accumulated favours from the king, increasing his attractions as a patron. In January 1608 he became constable of St Briavel's Castle and warden of the Forest of Dean; in October 1609, captain of the Tower and Isle of Portsmouth and constable of Portchester Castle. On 29 September 1611 he joined the privy council. But Pembroke could never count on James's unalloyed favour; there were always potential rivals at court. Henry Howard, earl of Northampton, for instance, detested Pembroke as a 'Welsh juggler' who threatened the Howard family's position (O'Farrell, 73-4). But a more significant bar to Pembroke's progress was Robert Carr. James's infatuation with Carr left Pembroke angry and frustrated, as he saw more and more of the rewards of favour diverted from himself and his brother. Carr's dominance at court further inflamed Pembroke's dislike of Scottish courtiers: '... the Scots and he were ever separate' (Lloyd, 917) and in 1610 he quarrelled over a matter of precedence with the earl of Argyll. Pembroke's difficulties mounted between 1611 and 1614 as the deaths of Prince Henry, and the earls of Salisbury and Northampton promised an extensive reordering of power and patronage at court. Were it not for Carr, Pembroke believed himself well placed to fill the vacuum created by these deaths. On his deathbed, vindictive to the last, Northampton warned Carr, now earl of Somerset, to prevent Pembroke's succession to any of his offices. Pembroke's attempts to secure the offices of master of the horse, lord chamberlain, and, less importantly, the keepership of Waltham Forest, all failed during this period. 
The public antagonism with Somerset led to Pembroke's identification as the leader of a faction determined to reduce the favourite's influence. In 1611 Jonson dedicated his 'Catiline' to Pembroke. A story of the decline of the Roman republic, the unstated -- but unmistakable -- contrast was between Pembroke, the noble Roman, and Somerset, the corrupt politician. Nevertheless, Pembroke's aims were more practical: the extension of his power and patronage. By the autumn of 1612 Sir Robert Naunton was writing that Pembroke sought a truce with Somerset, whose influence seemed to grow daily. In the spring of 1613 he played a small role in the downfall of Somerset's erstwhile friend Sir Thomas Overbury when, along with the lord chancellor, Thomas Egerton, Lord Ellesmere, he told the hapless knight of his commission as ambassador to Russia. In November 1613 he assisted in the creation ceremony for Somerset's earldom, and performed at his wedding masque a month later. Amicable relations with the favourite, wary though they were, continued until July 1614, when Somerset became lord chamberlain, an office Pembroke had long coveted. 
Smarting over this setback, Pembroke was a willing participant in a plan to undermine Somerset. In April 1615 he hosted a meeting at his London home, Baynard's Castle, where he and several of the favourite's enemies, including Archbishop George Abbot, agreed to promote the career of George Villiers, a handsome -- but poverty-stricken -- young man who had recently caught James's eye. Pembroke lent Villiers clothing for his appearances at court, and worked with Abbot to gain the queen's favour for the young man. They succeeded, on 23 April, in arranging Villiers's knighthood, a ceremony carried out in the queen's chamber. Anne's prophetic remark to Abbot at the time was: 'My lord, you and the rest of your friends know not what you do: I know your master better than you all; for if this young man be once brought in, the first persons that he will plague must be you that labour to him. (Rushworth, 1.456)' Pembroke would soon come to realize the truth of the queen's prediction. Nevertheless, in the short term his scheme was remarkably successful. Somerset's influence waned and ended with his dramatic fall from grace in the Overbury murder scandal. 
Somerset's eclipse resulted in Pembroke's achieving one of his long-standing ambitions: on 23 December 1615 he received his wand of office as lord chamberlain. This office, one of the three most important at court, greatly expanded Pembroke's authority. The lord chamberlain had an important role to play in the life of the court. He presided over the household above stairs, and supervised some 600 officers. He arranged entertainment -- masques, plays, and musical performances. He supervised the office of works and licensed theatres. Additionally he gained more patronage in the church. As important as the patronage attached to the office were its very considerable profits: over $4800 annually. Pembroke must have organized the Christmas revels of 1615 well pleased by the events of the year, but the threat to his position represented by his erstwhile client Villiers grew far more quickly than the new lord chamberlain could have expected. James gave the young man a handsome new year's gift on 4 January 1616, making Villiers master of the horse. When, that summer, James visited Wilton, it was with Villiers in tow. Pembroke's appointment as a commissioner to execute the office of earl marshal in September was hardly adequate compensation for the prominence of the newly ennobled Viscount Villiers. 
These political troubles might explain why at about this time Pembroke embarked upon an affair with his widowed cousin, Lady Mary Wroth (1587?-1651/1653), who over the next several years gave birth to two children, William and Katherine. Although their existence was not widely known, Pembroke, and later his brother, helped establish his offspring as adults. At the same time Pembroke became a particularly active freemason -- in 1617 as grand warden and in the next year grand master. His masonic associations might have been due to his connection with Inigo Jones, but they could also represent an attempt to broaden his power base as conflict with the new favourite loomed. A particularly galling moment for Pembroke must have been in 1618, when a new edition of Sir John Harrington's epigrams appeared on London's bookstalls. Its 1615 dedication to Pembroke had been replaced by a fulsome tribute to Villiers, now marquess of Buckingham. 
But Buckingham's rise did not completely overshadow Pembroke. On 29 January 1617 Pembroke's long-standing relationship with Oxford University reached its apogee when he was elected chancellor. He took his office there seriously, intervening on the university's behalf in disputes with the town, settling squabbles among the faculty, and siding against the more strident Arminians there. Not surprisingly his role as chancellor prompted a flood of dedications and pleas for patronage. He secured fellowships for clients, and was a generous benefactor to the Bodleian Library, donating $100 towards its construction. More importantly, in 1629 he donated a collection of 250 Greek manuscripts he had purchased for $700. The rest of his Greek manuscripts made their way into the Bodleian in 1654. In 1624 Broadgates Hall honoured him by changing its name to Pembroke College. As he had no legitimate heir, the shrewd academics of the college expected, in the fullness of time, a handsome bequest. In the end they were forced to make do with (depending upon the story) a single piece of plate or a napkin for their pains. Pembroke's relationship with Oxford is commemorated in the bronze statue of him by Hubert Le Sueur which now stands in the quadrangle of the Bodleian; originally placed at Wilton, it was presented to the university by Thomas Herbert, eighth earl of Pembroke, in 1723. 
Buckingham's enemies at court expected Pembroke to lead them, and their hopes increased following Queen Anne's death on 13 May 1619. Pembroke had always been close to the queen and without her influence at court Buckingham's influence burgeoned. In September he and Buckingham clashed openly over the appointment of the groom porter and a gentleman usher, both positions within the earl's purview as chamberlain. Buckingham's attempted seizure of some of Pembroke's patronage touched the earl in a particularly sensitive place. Yet the hopes of Buckingham's enemies for outright warfare with Pembroke took some time to be realized. As early as December 1617 Archbishop Abbot, bitter at the disastrous consequences of pushing Buckingham forward, turned on his ally. Writing to Dudley Carleton, he said that 'Pembroke looketh only to his own ends, and whatsoever leagues, promises, and confederations are made within one hour they come to nothing' (Cogswell, 131). After his experience with Somerset, however, it seems likely that Pembroke preferred compromise with Buckingham to an open breach. 
Friendship with Buckingham brought its rewards; James paid another summer visit to Wilton in 1620, and in 1621 appointed Pembroke lord lieutenant of Somerset and Wiltshire, further consolidating his already significant power in the west. Additionally, from May to July 1621 he acted as a commissioner for the great seal. Yet Buckingham and Pembroke could not stay allies for long. This was in part due to the increasing monopoly Buckingham exercised over the king's favour, but also over matters of policy. Pembroke had long been associated with the anti-Spanish 'protestant' faction at court; it was a matter of pride to him that his famous uncle Sir Philip had died fighting the Spaniard. Northampton's pro-Spanish attitude had reinforced Pembroke's natural predilections. He consistently sought ways to challenge Spanish interests, at home and abroad. An early investor in colonial enterprises -- Pembroke was the Virginia Company's second-largest investor -- he put money into many other schemes that would curb Spanish power. These included investments in the Guiana Company, the Somers Islands Company, the discovery of the north-west passage, and the East India Company. In 1618 he had argued on Sir Walter Ralegh's behalf after his abortive incursion into Spanish America. Buckingham's support for a Spanish marriage for Prince Charles increased tension between the two men. Pembroke's opposition to the match was no secret. Thomas Scott, an anti-Spanish polemicist, was one of his chaplains. 
Pembroke's anti-Spanish views coincided with those of many members of parliament, and although he always supported the crown's parliamentary agenda, he was, unlike Buckingham, a popular figure there. In fact the earl welcomed sessions of parliament, for he commanded a formidable interest in both houses. In December 1621 he argued against a dissolution in council, opposing both Prince Charles and Buckingham. Ever since his exclusion from Queen Elizabeth's presence, he had recognized the value of parliamentary patronage, and could plausibly claim by 1621 to be the kingdom's foremost patron after the crown itself. The number of members identified with him varied from parliament to parliament but in the Commons it was never less than a dozen, rising to over thirty at times. Pembroke's extensive properties gave him control over several seats in the Commons, as in Cardiff and Wilton, and his many offices -- his lieutenancies, the wardenry of the stannaries, the chancellorship of Oxford -- further extended his reach. He sponsored the selection of old friends, such as Sir Benjamin Rudyerd, relatives like George Herbert, and dependants, such as his secretaries, for seats in the Commons. Moreover, he systematically collected proxies in the House of Lords; rarely did he have fewer than five, and at key moments he could deploy as many as ten. This parliamentary faction gave Pembroke an important advantage in his struggle with Buckingham, for though the latter (who had been elevated to duke in 1623) might have the king's heart, Pembroke could, when necessary, defend his position at court through his influence at Westminster. By 1624 the tension between the two peers was especially high, sparking yet another clash over patronage when Buckingham attempted to intervene in the appointment of court musicians. 
That Pembroke could use his extensive parliamentary influence to threaten Buckingham was clear to at least one shrewd observer. Francis Bacon advised Buckingham to come to some arrangement with Pembroke, despite the low opinion he had of the earl: 'For his person, not effectual; but some dependences he hath which are drawn with him' (Ruigh, 263). The duke seems to have taken this advice to heart, if only briefly. Pembroke and his following refrained from challenging the favourite in the parliament of 1624, aided no doubt by Buckingham's conversion to the anti-Spanish cause. Friendship with the duke encouraged James to name Pembroke warden of the New Forest, a place he had wanted for some time, on 30 December 1624. A superficial amity characterized the earl's relationship with Buckingham until James's death on 25 March 1625. Pembroke was present at the royal deathbed, and James asked him to testify that he died a good protestant. Given Pembroke's popular reputation as the most prominent protestant at court, the king's last request was politically wise. 
Charles I's accession presented new challenges. Buckingham was as firmly entrenched as ever, and Pembroke did not enjoy the same easy friendship with the king as with his father -- there would be no practical jokes between master and servant in this reign. But Charles understood the importance of the man whom Lucy Russell, countess of Bedford, described as 'the only honest harted man imployed that I know now left to God and his countrie' (Cogswell, 317). John Chamberlain reported rumours that Pembroke would be a member of Charles's cabinet council, and on his part the earl obliged Charles by denouncing the doctrine of predestination at the York House conference. The king named him to his council of war but the constant tension with Buckingham resulted in yet more quarrelling in August 1625. In October Charles visited Wilton in an effort to heal the breach. The king's stay resulted in rumours of significant changes at court, the outlines of which were not, in the end, fanciful. 
The royally inspired truce lasted up to Charles's coronation on 2 February 1626, at which Pembroke bore the crown. But the earl launched his most effective assault on his rival in the new session of parliament. There Dr Samuel Turner, a Pembroke client in the Commons, raised questions about Buckingham that would lead to formal charges against him. Pembroke's parliamentary influence was at its peak -- with as many as thirty-eight friends, relatives, and clients in the Commons and no fewer than ten proxies, including that of the disgraced John Digby, earl of Bristol, from his peers. He took care to support Charles's war, speaking on 10 March to a joint session of the need for supply. But he did nothing to rein in the pursuit of the duke. In June Pembroke joined three other privy councillors in a petition to the king, urging against parliament's dissolution. 
By early summer 1626 it was clear that Pembroke had to be mollified, and once again Charles brokered a treaty -- this time a lasting one. The arrangement contained two key provisions: a marriage alliance and an exchange of offices at court. Buckingham betrothed his daughter Mary to Pembroke's nephew Charles, son and heir of his brother Philip, earl of Montgomery. Charles would, in the course of time, inherit the Pembroke earldom as well as his father's title. Pembroke promised the couple land worth $4000 a year, rising to $10,000 after their marriage, which would not take place for some time owing to the children's ages -- Mary was four and Charles seven. Buckingham promised a $20,000 dowry. The wedding finally took place in January 1635, by which time both principals were long dead. More important than the marriage from Pembroke's perspective was the king's contribution to the peace. Charles appointed Pembroke lord steward of the household, and allowed the earl to pass his chamberlain's wand to his brother Montgomery. In early August there were reports that Pembroke was having second thoughts about the arrangement, but nevertheless the exchange of offices was complete by 18 August. Now the Herbert family, as lord steward and lord chamberlain, controlled the royal household both above and below stairs. Only Buckingham, as master of the horse, could rival Pembroke. Pembroke's income was estimated at $22,000 a year, his patronage network was the most extensive in the kingdom, and his popularity higher than ever. The earl's long career as a courtier at last brought him -- and his family -- the position he had sought since his first introduction at Queen Elizabeth's court over thirty years before. 
Charles made another visit to Wilton in October 1626, reflecting the newly established understanding between the king and his servants. Pembroke withdrew his favour from some of Buckingham's most strident opponents, such as William Coryton and Sir Robert Phelips. He even allowed Buckingham to poach in his Cornish patronage preserve, appointing a ducal client vice-warden of the stannaries. He dutifully -- if unenthusiastically -- supported the forced loan. But events showed that Pembroke still found it difficult to work harmoniously with Buckingham. On 23 November, in Charles's presence, he fiercely attacked Buckingham's leadership of the disastrous Ile de Re expedition. Buckingham's failure encouraged Pembroke to press his advantage, and he argued for a new parliament and peace with France. Charles's reluctant agreement to call a parliament seems at least in part to have been based upon an understanding that Pembroke's following would not support an attack on Buckingham. He kept his side of the bargain, allowing Buckingham's friends to dominate elections in Cornwall and Somerset, to the dismay of many of his clients such as Coryton. Yet Pembroke remained, at best, only a grudging friend of the duke -- only Buckingham's assassination in August 1628 would put an end to their rivalry. 
Many observers saw Pembroke as the most important figure at court after the duke's passing, and he continued to receive marks of royal favour: in September 1628 he was appointed to the admiralty commission, and on 8 September 1629 Charles named him chief justice in eyre south of Trent and vice-admiral of Wales. But Pembroke's long enmity with Buckingham, his advocacy of moderation and compromise as a privy councillor, and, not least, his willingness to pressure the king with his parliamentary influence, could hardly ingratiate him with Charles. The king was now determined to pursue a more vigorous line with his opponents, and Pembroke would not be sympathetic. He would no longer be at the centre of Charles's counsel. Additionally Pembroke's health was, by 1629, failing. He had been subject to occasional sharp attacks of the stone since 1623, and of gout since 1625. Throughout most of 1627 and 1628 his health was poor. On 9 April 1630 he dined cheerfully with his old friend Catherine, countess of Bedford, in London. Pembroke turned fifty the day before, and an amusing subject of their conversation was a fortune teller's prophecy that he would not live to see his fifty-first birthday. At eight o'clock the following morning he collapsed and died of apoplexy at Baynard's Castle. He was buried in Salisbury Cathedral on 7 May. He was succeeded by his brother, who became fourth earl of Pembroke. 
Pembroke was 'the very picture of nobility: his person rather majestick than elegant, his presence whether quiet or in motion, full of stately gravity, his mood generous, and purely heroick' (Lloyd, 918). His generosity was well known, as countless writers and artists from Ben Jonson and Inigo Jones down could testify, and his love of scholarship was unquestionable. But while he supported the protestant cause in Europe and moderate courses at home, he never lost sight of his own, and his family's, interests. Pembroke's career was remarkable. The son and grandson of nobles adept at accumulating power through royal favour, he surpassed them both, holding his own against the two great favourites of the Stuart court -- the earl of Somerset and the duke of Buckingham. If his Herbert inheritance was an appreciation of power and its use, the legacy of his Sidney mother was a lifelong passion for literature and the arts. The combination made William Herbert the greatest patron of his generation and one of the most durable, and successful, courtiers of his age. 


@@@@@


doc= 13059


Herbert, William (fl. c.1606-1662), translator and author of religious tracts, was born at 'Margis in Flanders', the son of Andrew Herbert the younger (Parl. Arch., naturalization of William Herbert, 1620/21). His great-grandfather James Herbert had settled in Calais where his son Andrew the elder became an alderman and justice of the peace. With the fall of Calais in 1558, the family fled to Flanders, where his father was later executed for his protestant beliefs when William was still young. Herbert returned to England and about 1606 joined the Dutch congregation in London, being listed with the merchant members in 1617. However, in 1640 he was employed as tutor to the two sons of Montague Bertie, second earl of Lindsey. 
On 27 April 1635, Herbert married Frances Sedgwicke, at Poyntington, Somerset, where they lived; they had three children, John (buried 1637), Elizabeth ('bap'. 1639), and Benjamin ('b'. 1645). His religious writings were initially intended for his family and underlined his Reformed beliefs: 'Herberts Beleefe and Confession of Faith made... for the Instruction of his Wife and Children' (1646); 'Herberts Careful Father and Pious Child' (1648) to instruct his daughter in the catechism; and for his wife a devotional work for women in childbirth, 'Herberts Child-Bearing Woman', which was published after her death. He seems to have returned to London a couple of years after his wife's death in March 1645. He maintained his links with the exile churches, dedicating 'Herberts Quadripartit Devotion' (1648) to the pastors, elders, and deacons of the French and Dutch churches, presenting a copy to the Dutch church for which he received 20's'. He attacked the rival French church at Westminster in his 'Response aux Questions de Mr. Despagne' (1657) and defended the exile communities in his 'Considerations in the Behalf of Foreiners' (1662). 
Herbert translated religious manuals; 'La malette de David' by Daniel Featley was published in Geneva in 1650. He also published French language works such as the fourth edition, 'exactly corrected, much amplifi'd and better ordered', of Paul Cogneau's 'A Sure Guide to the French Tongue' in 1658 and in 1660 'Herberts French and English Dialogues'. His publishing was delayed by illness in 1660; the last reference to him is the dedication in 'Considerations in the Behalf of Foreiners' dated 18 June 1662 at the Charterhouse, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 13060


Herbert, William, styled first marquess of Powis and Jacobite first duke of Powis (c.1626-1696), Jacobite courtier, was the only son and heir of Percy Herbert, second Baron Powis (1598-1667), and his wife, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1600, died 1662), daughter of Sir William Craven (c.1545-1618), sometime lord mayor of London. He was educated privately in his youth, possibly at home at Powis Castle. The Herbert family were Roman Catholics who espoused the royalist cause during the civil war; some of their estates were subsequently confiscated and others were sold to pay parliamentary fines levied against them. Lord Powis received scant reward for his services following the Restoration, but his son eventually gained the favour of Charles II. He succeeded to his father's title on 19 January 1667 and on 4 April 1674 received an earldom. His religion, however, debarred him from a very active place in politics. Although he owned large estates in Wales and the marches, for example, he held no office -- even that of justice of the peace -- during Charles II's reign. As one of a handful of Roman Catholic peers, and among the highest-ranking, Powis was from the beginning a target of the manufacturers of the Popish Plot. According to Titus Oates, the pope intended Powis to be lord treasurer of the government that would seize power after the king's assassination. He was also accused of planning to restore the monasteries and to subject England to papal domination. Parliament impeached him and four other Catholic lords, and on 25 October 1678 all five went to the Tower, where Powis would remain until February 1684, although his confinement did not prevent him from attacking his opponents. In May 1679 an armed mob invaded his London home at midnight, searching for Roman Catholic traitors. 
Powis seems to have been the author of 'Some Reflections upon the Earl of Danby, in Relation to the Murther of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey'. Danby, he argued, wanted Godfrey dead because he feared that his own role in the Popish Plot might be revealed. The theory was far fetched, but no more so than the one peddled by Oates. Printed by a London Catholic bookseller in 1679 and distributed clandestinely, the pamphlet accused Danby of orchestrating the murder. Powis's wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1633-1691), daughter of Edward Somerset, second marquess of Worcester (d. 1667), whom he had married in July 1654, joined in her husband's defence. She too was Catholic, and she published a ballad denouncing the plot: '
The Presbyter has bin so active of late 

To twist himself into the Mysteries of State, 

Giving birth to a Plot to amuse the dark world. 
(E. Herbert, 1)' More significantly, she inflamed popular opinion against her husband and his co-religionists even further with an ill-advised attempt to invent a rival 'Presbyterian Plot'. The so-called Meal-Tub Plot, hatched in conjunction with a Catholic midwife named Elizabeth Cellier, backfired. The two women approached Thomas Dangerfield, hoping he would accuse Shaftesbury and his allies of an assassination conspiracy against Charles II and the duke of York. But while the kingdom was perfectly prepared to believe in a popish plot, a presbyterian one was a different matter. When Dangerfield realized that his 'evidence' against Shaftesbury was going nowhere, he turned upon his erstwhile employers. He accused them of plotting Shaftesbury's murder, as well as of concocting their fictional 'plot'. The countess joined her husband in the Tower on 4 November 1679. Charged with treason, she remained in prison until granted bail on 12 February 1680. In May, sceptical of the evidence presented against her, the Middlesex grand jury refused to indict and she was released. Although parliamentary proceedings against her husband petered out in the same year, not until February 1684 was Powis granted bail, with the dukes of Norfolk and Beaufort, and the earls of Pembroke and Peterborough as sureties. A few months later in October, his troubles increased when his Lincoln's Inn Fields house burnt down. He and his family barely escaped the conflagration, although two page boys were said to have died. 
James II's accession reversed Powis's fortunes. In May 1685 parliament formally withdrew his impeachment, and in June 1685 the king assented to a private bill allowing him to rebuild Powis House. More concrete rewards followed. In March 1686 the king granted him a dispensation from the provisions of the 'Test Act', and in July named him to the privy council. In March 1687 he advanced a step in the peerage, becoming marquess of Powis. James also gave him command of a regiment of foot. Though inexperienced in government, the king gave Powis a great deal of responsibility. He became lord lieutenant of Cheshire and the city of Chester, and deputy lieutenant of Sussex in February 1687. He played an important part in the campaign to regulate the corporations, both as steward and recorder of Denbigh and steward of Shrewsbury, and as a member of the commission which oversaw the wider purge of local government. In June 1688 James made the marchioness his son's governess. 
Powis exercised a moderating influence in James's counsels. He had already gained a reputation for tolerance, acting as a patron to Quakers in trouble with the law. He hoped to limit the enthusiasm of the more headstrong Catholics around the king such as Father Petre and the earl of Tyrconnell, but had little success. When regulating the corporations, he spoke out against the bullying tactics of some of his fellow commissioners. The earl of Ailesbury said that he urged James to name Powis lord lieutenant of Ireland instead of Tyrconnell, a suggestion the king rejected, alleging that Powis had 'a very weak head' ('Memoirs of... Ailesbury', 1.148). Weak-headed or not, Powis remained conspicuously loyal to James. His prominence insured that in the revolution he would again be the target of the mob, and in December 1688 Powis House narrowly escaped demolition thanks to the intervention of the militia. 
Powis accompanied his master to St Germain in late 1688, and on 12 January 1689 OS James granted him a dukedom, which was never recognized in England. He headed the list of Jacobites whom parliament planned to attaint for treason in the summer of 1689. Although this bill never passed, in February 1690 he was outlawed and his lands seized. Some of these went to William III's Dutch favourite, the earl of Rochford, including the family seat Powis Castle. Powis House went to Lord Somers. The marquess's son William Herbert, Viscount Montgomery (later second marquess of Powis and Jacobite second duke of Powis) (1657x61-1745), was gaoled in the Tower as a Jacobite and fought a long battle in the courts to retain some of his property, resulting in the restoration of his family's estates and the marquessate in 1722. 
In 1690 Powis landed in Ireland with James, where he acted as one of his principal advisers. James appointed him to his Irish privy council and made him lord chamberlain. He remained in Ireland until the king's flight back to France after the battle of the Boyne, and settled again at St Germain. Powis was a prominent figure in the Jacobite court, serving as lord steward and lord chamberlain of the household, but he seems to have been rather marginal in the king's counsels. The marchioness continued as royal governess until her death on 11 March 1691 OS, and James made Powis knight of the Garter in April 1692. Nevertheless others exercised more influence at court as Powis struggled to maintain the dignity of a royal household on an insufficient income. Having lost estates valued at $10,000 a year, he had given up more than most for the Jacobite cause. He died, aged about seventy, on 12 July 1696 NS, after a riding accident in St Germain, and was buried there the next day. His son William succeeded to his titles. His daughter, Lady Lucy Herbert followed her parents' religious bent and became the prioress of St Augustine, Bruges. 


@@@@@


doc= 13061


Herbert, William, second marquess of Powis and Jacobite second duke of Powis (1657x61-1745), Jacobite sympathizer, was the only son of William Herbert, styled first marquess of Powis and Jacobite first duke of Powis (c.1626-1696), and Lady Elizabeth (died 1691), younger daughter of Edward Somerset, second marquess of Worcester. He was known as Lord Herbert from 1674 to 1687, and as Viscount Montgomery from 1687 to 1690, and afterwards, informally. He was a trainbearer to James II at his coronation. In May 1685 he married Mary (died 1724), elder daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Preston, bt, of Furness, Lancashire; six of the couple's children, two sons and four daughters, reached adulthood. Having gained experience at the siege of Buda, Montgomery was appointed on 8 May 1687 colonel of an infantry regiment taken from his protestant cousin Charles, marquess of Worcester. He was a deputy lieutenant of the twelve Welsh counties and Monmouthshire from 26 February until December 1688. At the revolution of 1688 his regiment garrisoned Hull; but on the night of 3 December the protestant officers seized the fortress and him. Soon released, Montgomery crossed with William's pass of 25 December to France, but returned before war was declared, largely to defend the family estates at law against government confiscation -- unsuccessfully. 
Montgomery's Jacobite activity was concentrated in London rather than Wales. He was imprisoned in the Tower from 6 May to 7 November 1689. Named in a proclamation of 14 July 1690, he escaped capture. That autumn James appointed a committee to manage his affairs, the Select Number (BL, Add. MS 47608, fols. 120, 165'v'), comprising four Anglican tories and two moderate Catholic peers' sons, Montgomery and Lord Brudenell. Montgomery's main correspondent was Mary of Modena; his codenames included Mr Thompson, Mr Mun, and William Sibson. In March 1692 James appointed him colonel of a cavalry regiment for the rising to accompany the invasion from La Hogue, which he secretly recruited. From 1693, in Jacobite disputes over policy, the Select Number were the leaders of the 'non-compounders', who opposed major constitutional concessions by James and called for a French invasion. Montgomery's draft survives for their memorial of 21 February 1694 declaring that 20,000 troops would suffice, and he lukewarmly supported Robert Charnock's 1695 mission to France. For the latter treason, a proclamation of 23 March 1696 offered $500 rewards for him and Sir John Fenwick, both then in hiding, and on 27 May he was indicted. Succeeding his attainted father in July, he remained legally a commoner until 1722. He ignored advice to escape overseas, conscious that if he were outlawed the 1695 grant of the family estates to the earl of Rochford would become virtually irreversible. On 15 December 1696 Montgomery surrendered and was committed to Newgate. Some Williamites, who claimed that he already was outlawed, found that the sheriffs of London had omitted necessary formalities. According to Thomas, earl of Ailesbury, William pressed the sheriffs to falsify the record. Montgomery was bailed on 17 June 1697, only because gaol fever made Newgate unsafe. 
Refused a licence to remain in England under the act 9 Wm III c. 1, Montgomery crossed in February 1698 to Flanders. The Holy Roman emperor interceded for him as head of the English lay Catholics, but Rochford's influence prevailed. He settled at Ghent and avoided visiting France (except Paris in 1701, while the Jacobite court was at Bourbon), though educating his sons there under aliases. Rochford, still unable to obtain full possession, finally sold back the estates. Powis (as he was generally known) returned to England in May 1703. He immediately resumed his father's alterations at Powis Castle and constructed its terrace gardens. Having sold old Powis House to the duke of Newcastle in 1705 for $7000, he built a new Powis House in Great Ormond Street, London. Leased in 1712 to the French ambassador, the duc d'Aumont, it mysteriously burned down on 26 January 1713, but Louis XIV paid for an even more palatial rebuilding. From 1705 onwards Powis petitioned the government to reverse his father's outlawry. He therefore avoided Jacobite activity, though his female relatives later became slightly involved. Nevertheless, during the rising of 1715 he was imprisoned in the Tower from September 1715 to May 1716. A Francophile, he spent the next decade largely in France. 
Powis's eldest child, Lady Mary Herbert (1686-1775), a pioneer female international speculator and entrepreneur, dominated him, and brought their semi-princely family to ruin in Europe's uncharted new financial markets. In 1718 Lord Panmure (and, obliquely, she herself) suggested her as a possible bride for the Pretender. During 1719 her speculations in French Mississippi Company shares made her a 'millionaire' on paper. She rejected the future duc de Bouillon's proposal, though the regent and, it seems, Powis supported it -- apparently determined to wed either a reigning prince, as Pope's 'Epistle to Bathurst' implies, or her fellow 'millionaire' Joseph Gage. In 1720 she undertook, and drew her father and brothers into, even vaster speculations on borrowed money. The collapse of John Law's system left them liable for most of her French and English debts of over $170,000. Powis was briefly imprisoned for debt in Paris, and his elder son, William, then Lord Montgomery (1688-1748), in London. They were never again free, despite a 1726 estates settlement, from bailiffs, lawsuits, and the need for financial trickery. Only the rich lead mines which Powis had since 1705 developed at Llangynog, Montgomeryshire, and now exploited oppressively to exhaustion, averted total ruin. The family split apart: his sons denounced Powis's continuing trust in Lady Mary's incorrigible overoptimism. He largely financed her and Gage in their unscrupulous and varied counter-suits against their main creditor, Richard Cantillon, and in their mining operations in Spain. 
In 1722 Powis finally had his father's outlawry reversed, recovering the marquessate and, formally, his estates. Jacobites styled him duke of Powis, and he prepared but did not press a legal statement claiming that title. He was summoned to parliament on 8 October 1722 but, as a Catholic, never sat. Although he briefly considered a protestant match for Lord Montgomery he did not convert to Anglicanism, as several Catholic general histories assumed. Yet he took little part in Catholic national affairs or Welsh tory politics. He died between 20 and 22 October 1745 at his house in Frith Street, Soho, and was buried on 28 October at Hendon, the family's Middlesex estate. His will and trusts bequeathed $4000 to Catholic charities and missions, partly to honour belatedly his father's will. 
Powis's estranged elder son, William, third marquess, died unmarried. He unexpectedly left his estates to his cousin Henry Arthur, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, a protestant and aggressive whig, immediately created earl of Powis: one motive was to preserve Powis Castle. The bequest greatly damaged Montgomeryshire Catholicism. The younger son, Lord Edward Herbert (died 1734), had married Henrietta, daughter of his formerly Catholic schoolfellow James, first Earl Waldegrave, and left a posthumous daughter, Barbara. To forestall her possible rival claim, the earl of Powis gained custody with Lady Mary's bribed assistance, and married her in 1751. 


@@@@@


doc= 13062


Herbert, William (1718-1795), bibliographer and printseller, was born on 29 November 1718, the second of five children of Thomas Herbert ('c'.1691-1721), a dyer and hosier of Gravel Lane, Southwark, and his wife, Sarah (died 1748). His parents were Londoners and Presbyterians. What is known of his first thirty years derives from Richard Gough's obituary of him in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', namely that he was educated at Hitchin, went to India in 1738 with a cargo of pepper, as purser's clerk to three of the East India Company's ships; was stranded at Tellicherry, and, after a series of misadventures, returned to London about 1745; that, on his return, the East India Company paid him $300 for his drawings of 'plans of the several settlements' ('GM', 65/1, 262) which he had seen on his Indian travels, which were later published. While in India he adopted Indian costume and grew his beard. He was 'in person, rather below the middle stature; stout, and inclined to corpulency. His complexion was fair... his physiognomy remarkable for an expression of sweetness and benevolence' (Dibdin, 1.87). Among his small eccentricities was that of always using lower case 'i' when writing in the first person. 
Herbert was freed by patrimony at Drapers' Hall as a dyer on 16 November 1748. Gough states that he abandoned his trade of hosiery and dyeing, and learned the art of painting on glass. There was a tradition of print engraving and selling in the Drapers' Company, and, combining his alleged experience as traveller, draughtsman, and glass painter, and with contacts in the trade and among nautical men, Herbert set up in one of ten newly built houses on London Bridge in 1749 as a seller and publisher of prints, maps, and charts. He bound and later freed two apprentices at Drapers' Hall -- John Pace (bound 3 August 1751) and Thomas Wright (bound 20 July 1756). Having witnessed a number of fires on the banks of the Thames, Herbert suggested to Captain Hill of the Royal Exchange Assurance that there should be a floating fire-engine, and published a proposal in 'The Gazetteer'; his plan was later adopted. When London Bridge caught fire in 1758 Herbert had the initiative to publish 'A chronological and historical account from the first building a bridge across the River Thames, from London to Southwark, till the late conflagration of the temporary bridge' (1758). 
Herbert moved from the bridge in 1759 (the bridge houses were pulled down between 1758 and 1762), first to Leadenhall Street. In 1765 he took a house at 27 Goulston Square, Whitechapel, where he continued to publish and issue lists of books, maps, and charts for sale. In 1773 he bought a country residence in Albury Lane, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, and added a library wing, where he used to sit, wearing a white hat, 'under a circular skylight, in the intervening period between each meal' (Dibdin, 1.75). Being then fifty-eight years old, having succeeded in business and made three lucrative marriages, he retired from trade, still keeping the Goulston Square address until 1776 when he sold off his stock and his chart and printselling business to Henry Gregory for 1000 guineas. He continued to reissue his publications and at the end of his life he sold part of his library through his nephew Isaac. 
While he was still living on the bridge Herbert published the first edition of William Nichelson's 'Sundry Remarks and Observations Made in a Voyage to the East Indies' (1758) and Nichelson's 'A New Directory of the East-Indies with General and Particular Charts for the Navigation of those Seas' (1758). He reissued the latter in 1759, 'with additions, corrections, and explanatory notes... printed for the editor' which started him on a method of publishing which combined business acumen with his love of research and book collecting. He would acquire the stock, copyright, and blocks of a work, then, incorporating new material, publish a greatly improved edition. Thus he annotated an interleaved copy of the 1765 edition of the 'New Directory' (which was sold in 1798 after his death) and his writing and editorial career began to take off. The 'New Directory' and 'Sundry Remarks' published as one work went into a further four editions between 1759 and 1780. In 1765 he bought up the remaining stock and plates of Sir Robert Atkyns's history of Gloucestershire (1712), most of which had been destroyed in a fire at William Bowyer's printing office. 
Herbert married three times; nothing is known of his first marriage, said to have taken place while he lived on London Bridge, nor of the second, allegedly to a niece of Thomas Newman, a dissenting minister in the City, 'a woman of weak intellect' ('DNB') who brought him a good jointure. His last wife was Philippa Croshold (died 1808) who came from a prosperous Norfolk family with connections among the antiquarian circle who included several of Herbert's friends. She, too, brought him a useful fortune. 
Herbert began to be active in the Drapers' Company after he was admitted to the livery in 1763; he was elected to the court of assistants and made junior warden on 26 September 1781 and progressed up the court until he became master warden on 7 October 1792. He was punctual in his court attendances until six weeks before he died, shortly before being due to be elected master. His thriving trade and City connections took him to Stationers' Hall, where he bound his nephew Isaac, son of his deceased brother Thomas, apprentice to the bookseller Samuel Hayes on 4 September 1787 with the very large premium of 100 guineas. 
A heraldic book-plate, dated 1745 and engraved by John June, marks the start of Herbert's book collecting, and probably his return from India. He rarely used it, however, preferring to write his name or initials in his books. In 1760 he bought Joseph Ames's interleaved and annotated copy of the 'Typographical Antiquities, being an Historical Account of the Origin and Progress of Printing in Great Britain' (1749) from Sir Peter Thompson who had acquired it at Ames's posthumous sale for $9, together with the copyright, plates, and blocks. Herbert seems to have intended the kind of revision that had been so successful and satisfying with the 'New Directory'; he thought to present 'the lovers of science' with a republication of Ames 'with the author's own improvements' in the interleaved copy 'and what further could be collected from my own observations, and those of my learned friends' (Herbert, 'Preface', 1.vi). In the event, the purchase revolutionized his life. 
With Ames's work as a guide Herbert set systematically to work to fill the gaps in his collection of bibles and black-letter books. His livery company and East India Company connections, and the print and chart dealing, brought him into the centre of a bibliophilic and bibliographical coterie. Surviving correspondence shows that after 1760 he increasingly mixed business with pleasure, book hunting for friends who were also customers or fellow dealers, borrowing books, and, after 1774, offering hospitality at Cheshunt to other learned gentlemen with whom he corresponded. He was given free access to libraries which included that of the king, George III, and the great public collections at Oxford, Cambridge, and Lambeth. Whereas Joseph Ames had failed to gain entrance to the Stationers' Company, Herbert dined in their hall and through the good offices of his friend, the bookseller Lockyer Davis, was permitted not only to see, but to borrow, the three earliest volumes of their jealously guarded entry books and apprentice registers which he meticulously copied out. His transcriptions, which are now in the muniment room at Stationers' Hall, provided key material for his revision of Ames's 'Typographical Antiquities', which transformed it into the first history of the sixteenth-century English book trade and a major, even seminal work on English book provenance. 
Herbert was an enthusiastic scholar: 'it was his custom to come to town' from Cheshunt 'for a week or ten days during moonlight nights' to take 'extracts from Caxtonian volumes in His Majesty's library' (Dibdin, 1.88), then to attend Drapers' Company courts, and the posthumous sales of those volumes whose 'owners had given me free access during their lives' (Herbert, 'Preface', 1.vi). In 1780 Herbert printed proposals for a two-volume edition of Ames but five years passed before the first volume of this edition appeared in 1785; volume two came in 1786 and three in 1790. Herbert was still at work at the time of his death and his own interleaved and annotated copy in six volumes eventually came into T. F. Dibdin's hand and is now in the British Library. Dibdin's typographically imposing reissue of Ames's work, with a memoir of Herbert and a few biographical notes, has robbed Herbert of the acclaim that should be his. Having expanded Ames's original single volume into three published volumes, Herbert continued to make manuscript additions which expanded his three volumes to six, making his arguably the most valuable of the three editions for study of the sixteenth- and seventeenth-century book trade. 
Herbert's collection of some thousands of books ranging from manuscripts and incunabula to contemporary works, which he admitted had 'employed no inconsiderable part of my life and, i may add, my fortune in forming it' (Herbert, 'Preface', 1.vi), rivalled many of the libraries he had used. It was sold by his nephew in three sales during 1796 to 1798, and volumes with his signature or, occasionally, book-plate are to be found in many libraries on both sides of the Atlantic. 
Herbert died at his house in Cheshunt on 18 March 1795 and was buried in Cheshunt churchyard. His widow survived him and was bequeathed his house and all contents, except for his books, together with his South Sea stock and annuities. 


@@@@@


doc= 13063


Herbert, William (1778-1847), classical scholar and Church of England clergyman, was born at Highclere Castle, Hampshire, on 12 January 1778, the third son and fifth child of Henry Herbert, first earl of Carnarvon (1741-1811), and Lady Elizabeth Alicia Maria (1752-1826), eldest daughter of Charles Wyndham, earl of Egremont. He was educated at Eton College (1790-95), where he edited a volume of poems entitled 'Musae Etonenses' in 1795. On leaving Eton he obtained a prize for a Latin poem entitled 'Rhenus' which was published; a translation appeared in 'Translations of Oxford Prize Poems' (1831). In 1795 Herbert matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, but soon migrated to Exeter College, where he graduated BA in 1798. Subsequently moving to Merton, he proceeded MA in 1802, BCL in 1808, DCL in 1808, and BD in 1840. Inclining to a political career, he served as MP for Hampshire in 1806-7, after a very expensive campaign, and for Cricklade in 1811-12; he also practised at the bar as a member of Doctors' Commons. On 17 May 1806 he married the Hon. Letitia Emily Dorothea, second daughter of Joshua, fifth Viscount Allen; they had a son, Henry William Herbert, and three other children. 
Soon after retiring from parliament in 1812 Herbert changed course. In 1814 he was ordained, and was nominated to the valuable rectory of Spofforth in the West Riding of Yorkshire. He left Spofforth in 1840 on his promotion to the deanery of Manchester. He died suddenly at his house in Hereford Street, Park Lane, London, on 28 May 1847. 
As a classical scholar, a linguist, and a naturalist, Herbert acquired a high reputation. In 1801 he brought out 'Ossiani darthula', a small volume of Greek and Latin poetry. In 1804 he published part 1 of his 'Select Icelandic Poetry, Translated from the Originals with Notes'. Part 2 followed in 1806. Both are noteworthy for containing the first adequate illustration of ancient Scandinavian literature to appear in England. Herbert's efforts secured sufficient attention to induce Byron to mention him in his 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers' (1809): '
Herbert shall wield Thor's hammer, and sometimes 

In gratitude thou'lt praise his rugged rhymes. 

' Other translations from German, Danish, and Portuguese poems, with some miscellaneous English poems (1804), attest Herbert's exceptional command of foreign languages. He continued his literary career with articles of a non-political character in the 'Edinburgh Review'. He also wrote a number of narrative poems, including 'Helga' (1815); 'Hedin, or, The Spectre of the Tomb', a tale in verse from Danish history (1820); 'Pia della pietra' (1820); 'Iris', a Latin ode (1820); and the 'Wizard Wanderer of Jutland' (1820-22). 'Attila, or, The Triumph of Christianity', an epic poem in twelve books with a historical preface, came out in 1838, the fruit of many years' labour, and was followed by a final volume of poems, 'The Christian', in 1846. 
Early attached to the study of natural history, and a good shot, Herbert helped J. Rennie to edit White's 'Selborne' in 1833, and E. T. Bennett's edition of the work in 1837 was also indebted to him for many notes, particularly on ornithology. For many years he contributed articles to the 'Botanical Register' and the 'Botanical Magazine', particularly on the subject of bulbous plants. He cultivated a large number of these plants at Spofforth, Yorkshire, and at Mitcham, Surrey; many have since been lost to cultivation. His standard volume on this group of plants, 'Amaryllidaceae', was issued in 1837, and reprinted in 1966. This important work also provides examples of Herbert's skill as an artist. His 'Crocorum synopsis' appeared in the miscellaneous portion of the 'Botanical Register' for 1843-4-5. Extremely valuable contributions on hybridization made by him to the 'Journal of the Horticultural Society' in 1846 and 1847 were the outcome of close observation and experiment. He considered hybridization a factor in evolution and his acquaintance with Charles Darwin led to numerous references to his findings in Darwin's 'Natural Selection'. His 'History of the Species of Crocus', edited by J. Lindley in 1847, was reprinted separately from the journal just after his death. The genus 'Herbertia' of Sweet appropriately commemorates his name. His chief works, including his sermons, reviews, and scientific memoirs, besides his early poetical volumes, appeared in two volumes in 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 13064


Herbert, William (1772-1851), antiquary and librarian, was born William Herbert Wilderspin on 18 May 1772 at Worship Street, Curtain Road, Shoreditch, London, the only son of John Wilderspin ('c'.1717-1781), clockmaker and smith, and his third wife, Elizabeth (Kirby?), who died 'c'.1800. They had six children: William's two elder sisters died in childhood. Samuel Wilderspin (1791-1866), the promoter of the infant school system, was the son of his stepbrother. The name Herbert came from a godfather; and by the time of his marriage William had ceased to use his father's surname. His memoirs give a vivid description of his early life and work in the theatre. His father died in an accident in 1781, leaving the family in poverty. William earned money by working in the households of such men as the Revd John Newton, a leading evangelical minister and friend of Cowper, and especially by reading to them. He attended briefly a school run by a Baptist clergyman, Thomas Mabbott, and was taught languages, literature, and religious studies by his patrons and associates. He studied palaeography, law Latin, and Norman French while apprenticed to a law stationer, worked for several London solicitors, and developed an interest in London history. 
Herbert married Sarah Youens, a professional singer, on 14 July 1795 and they were both engaged to perform at the Bermondsey Spa Gardens in that year. Between 1795 and 1801 they were employed at the Royal Circus, St George's Fields, London, William as an actor of melodrama and singer of popular ballads. From 1796 they lived at numerous addresses in Lambeth, the longest stay being probably at Globe Place, Westminster Bridge Road, near the Marsh Gate ('c'.1805-1810). They are known to have had two daughters and three sons between 1796 and 1812. In 1801 William became a reader at the Lyceum for the unsuccessful spectacle 'Egyptiana', and then gave up the theatre except for part-time work as a prompter at the New Royal Circus between 1806 and 1812. His wife carried on as a singer with greater success. 
After 1801 Herbert concentrated on researching and writing London history and, until about 1815, selling books and prints. His earliest published work was a contribution to Longman's 'Annual Review' (1802). Between 1803 and 1805 he worked for the publishers Vernor and Hood compiling a miscellany with Edward Wedlake Brayley, 'Syr Reginalde, or, The Black Tower' (1803), editing Thomas Thornton's 'Sporting Tour through the North Part of England' (1804), and writing his first substantial book -- 'Antiquities of the Inns of Court and Chancery' (1804) -- and the descriptions to accompany Storer and Grieg's 'Select Views of London and its Environs' (1804-5). He collaborated again with Brayley to publish 'A Concise Account... of Lambeth Palace' (1806), which John Britton said was written mostly by Brayley. Aiming at the vogue for prints to extra-illustrate popular topographical works, in 1808 Herbert launched the first number of his own publication, a series of engraved copies of old illustrations of London under the title 'Londina illustrata'. The next five numbers were published with Robert Wilkinson, who continued the series alone, adding contemporary views. In 1817-18 Herbert returned to his original scheme with a grandiose and unsuccessful series of prints, 'London before the Great Fire', which failed after the second number. 
Herbert gave up his bookselling business to concentrate on historical research and writing, sometimes for others who failed to acknowledge his work. He claimed that he wrote most of John Parton's 'Some Account of the Hospital and Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, Middlesex' (1822), and Charles Dawson said that he wrote the text of 'History... of Hastings' (1824), credited to the book's illustrator, William George Moss. Through the bookseller Thomas Thorpe, Herbert was employed to study Lord Chichester's archives relating to his land at Hastings (1821-3); he conducted excavations of Hastings Castle in 1824 and compiled an illustrated account which was extensively used by Dawson for his 'History of Hastings Castle' (1909). 
In 1828, at the age of fifty-six, Herbert acquired a salaried post to which he was admirably suited, on the recommendation of the antiquary William Upcott. He was appointed first librarian of the City of London's Guildhall Library. Primarily concerned with building up the collections on London, he increased the library's stock from about 1700 books to over 10,000, adding numerous prints and drawings, some miscellaneous antiquities, and manuscripts including one of the most notable purchases, the deed signed by William Shakespeare. While librarian, Herbert compiled the catalogue of 1840 and its 1842 supplement, wrote 'The Illustrations of the Site and Neighbourhood of the New Post Office' (1830), 'The History... of St. Michael Crooked Lane' (1832), and his best-known work, 'History of the Twelve Great Livery Companies of London' (1836-7). His memories of the Paternoster Row booksellers were published in W. Pinnock's 'Guide to Knowledge' (1834). He resigned through ill health in 1845. 
Herbert died of a strangulated hernia on 18 November 1851 at 40 Brunswick Street, Haggerston, Middlesex. His death was reported by his granddaughter Eliza, and he was buried at Nunhead cemetery on 23 November. His 'School Education, or, The Young Academical Orator' was published posthumously in 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 13065


Herbison, David (1800-1880), poet, was born on 14 October 1800 at Mill Street, Ballymena, co. Antrim, the fourth child of William Herbison (died 1825), an innkeeper, and his wife, Elizabeth Wilson. At the age of three, following an attack of smallpox, he lost his sight. For four years he remained totally blind, but regained the sight in one eye after medical treatment. His education was adversely affected by his weak eyesight and poor health. He attended school for barely two years, and considered himself to be self-educated. In 1810 his father gave up his inn and moved to a small farm at Laymore, Ballymena. At the age of fourteen David Herbison was apprenticed to the loom, and began a lifelong association with linen weaving. 
Herbison's father died in 1825. Seeking to improve their prospects, he and an elder brother decided to emigrate to Canada, and sailed from Belfast on 5 April 1827. However, the vessel foundered and sank in the St Lawrence. Although they were rescued, his brother's wife was among the many who drowned. The shock of this experience, together with an unfamiliar climate, made it difficult for him to settle in Quebec. After a few weeks he decided to return to Ballymena, and resumed his occupation as a weaver. In 1830 he married Margaret Archbold (1805-1881), the daughter of a neighbouring farmer, and he and his family lived in their weaver's cottage at Dunclug, near Ballymena, until his death. 
From an early age Herbison had a love of books and an affinity for poetry. With his first wages he walked to Belfast to buy a copy of Ramsay's poems, and the next year repeated the journey to acquire the works of Burns. Like many Ulster Presbyterians he looked to Scotland for cultural and literary models, since the two regions shared a similar religious and linguistic heritage. His first published poem appeared in the 'Northern Whig' in 1830, and he became a regular contributor to local newspapers and periodicals. His first collection, 'The Fate of M'Quillan and O'Neill's Daughter', appeared in 1841 and was favourably reviewed. He published four more volumes during his lifetime: 'Midnight Musings' (1848), 'Woodland Wanderings' (1858), 'The Snow-Wreath' (1869), and 'The Children of the Year' (1876). A posthumous collected edition of his works was published in 1883. 
Herbison wrote in his vernacular Ulster Scots as well as in standard English. Prejudice against dialect increasingly constrained him to abandon Ulster Scots, and this deprived him of his most distinctive voice. He was one of the last of a group of rural bards known as the Rhyming Weavers, and exchanged poetical epistles with Thomas Beggs of Ballyclare, James McKowen of Lambeg, and Robert Huddleston of Moneyreagh. Herbison was acclaimed by his fellow poets as the Bard of Dunclug. His work provides a valuable commentary on the decline of hand-loom weaving and its transformation from rural craft to factory-based industry, with the consequent emigration and urbanization. Poems such as 'The Auld Wife's Lament for her Teapot' (Herbison, 'Select Works', 45) and 'My Ain Native Toun' (ibid., 305-8) record this social and cultural change. Of all the rural bards, Herbison came closest to establishing a wider literary reputation. As the Bard of Dunclug, he became a minor literary celebrity. He corresponded with Sir Samuel Ferguson, contributed to periodicals in Dublin, Edinburgh, and London, as well as Belfast, and had a considerable readership in Canada and South Carolina. His literary success enabled him to survive the effects of the Irish potato famine and industrialization. He became an agent for a firm of Belfast linen merchants. Yet he retained an attachment to radical causes, supporting electoral reform and tenant rights. 
Herbison died on 26 May 1880 at Dunclug, and was buried on 28 May in the new cemetery, Cushendall Road, Ballymena, where in 1881 a monument was erected to his memory by public subscription. 


@@@@@


doc= 13066


Herd, David (bap. 1732, d. 1810), song collector and editor, was born at Balmakelly in the parish of Marykirk in Kincardineshire, and baptized there on 23 October 1732, the son of John Herd, a farmer, and his wife, Margaret Low (1691-1751). Little is known of his education. He spent much of his career as a law clerk with David Russell, an Edinburgh accountant, and was described in later life as a 'writer' (or solicitor). He was unmarried, but was reputed to have had a natural son, a Captain John Dickson of the King's Own Scottish Borderers who was the principal legatee of Herd's estate. 
Herd's classic collection 'Ancient and Modern Scots Songs, Heroic Ballads &c' was published in Edinburgh in 1769 and later reissued in expanded two-volume form (1776). Containing nearly 60 'heroic ballads' and more than 300 miscellaneous songs, it appeared at a time of spectacular literary discovery and realignment. James Macpherson's publication of the poems of Ossian (1761-5), claiming to represent a line of heroic Gaelic poetry dating from the third century AD, not only appeared to demonstrate the superior antiquity of Scottish poetry, but also that contemporary 'British liberties' were descended from Celtic rather than Anglo-Saxon roots. Urged on by Samuel Johnson, Thomas Percy responded with 'Reliques of Ancient English Poetry' (1765). With lavish editorial apparatus and carefully 'antiqued' orthography, Percy asserted that English constituted the dominant strand in British literature and that its roots were firmly Teutonic. Percy was happy to include Scottish material within a context of Anglo-Saxon hegemony and had received much material from correspondents in Scotland. But relations quickly cooled, and in 1769 David Herd and his coadjutor and printer John Wotherspoon published 'Ancient and Modern Scots Songs', with the implication that Scottish tradition ran truer than the English, featuring songs and ballads that were older, better, and more 'authentic' than anything Percy could show. 
Herd and Wotherspoon insisted on the antiquity of some at least of their material -- the collection was the first of its kind published in Scotland to include the word 'ancient' in its title (Crawford, 'Society', 217-18) -- and they presented the heroic ballads as the 'epic tales' of the lowlands, although the inclusion of songs from the recent Jacobite risings suggested that the heroic mode was very much an ongoing concern. Hitherto collections of popular songs had typically contained a heterogeneous mixture of Scots, English, and Irish material, but Herd and Wotherspoon's concentration on songs deriving from the Scottish popular tradition -- with lyrics in the vernacular or, where English verses were unavoidable, at least written by Scottish writers -- anticipated the rising tide of cultural nationalism that was to mark the early Romantic revival in Europe. Song, they thought, was not merely a uniquely accurate indicator of 'the character, genius, taste and pursuits of a people' but enjoyed a dynamically formative role in collective self-definition; it was the very substance of national distinctiveness. Every ancient and 'unmixed' nation (an allusion to the traditional view of the English as a mongrel race): 'hath its peculiar style of musical expression, its peculiar mode of melody; modulated by the joint influence of climate and government, character and situation... Thus each of the states of ancient Greece had its characteristic style of music... and thus the moderns have their distinct national styles, the Italian, the Spanish, the Irish, and the Scottish. (D. Herd, 'Preface' to 'Ancient and Modern Scots Songs', 1769)' Herd and Wotherspoon stressed the high quality of the music, and their insistence on songs as things to be sung, rather than merely as verses intended to be read, contrasted strongly with Percy. They did not publish the airs, probably on grounds of expense and their already wide diffusion, and when this was done by James Johnson and Robert Burns in 'The Scots Musical Museum' (1787-1803), the latter superseded 'Ancient and Modern Scots Songs' as the standard edition. Hailed as a classic by Sir Walter Scott and by Joseph Ritson, who praised its scrupulousness and fidelity to tradition, 'Ancient and Modern Scots Songs' was reissued in revised form in 1791 and again in 1869, 1870, and 1973. A selection of songs from Herd's manuscripts was published by Hans Hecht in 1904 with extensive scholarly apparatus and this remains the best single source on Herd's life and work. 
Herd arrived at a unitary text for each song by collating multiple variants from a range of published and manuscript sources, correspondents and oral tradition. The social organization of contemporary Edinburgh helped him to build a network of informants. He was a leading light in the Cape Club, one of many quaintly named convivial societies where much of the cultural production of Edinburgh in its golden age was conceived. He was the third sovereign (president) of the Cape and many of its records are in his hand. Members included the poet Robert Fergusson; painters Alexander Nasmyth, Henry Raeburn, and Alexander Runciman (who was Herd's closest friend); John Wotherspoon, his printer; musicians such as F. G. C. Schetky and Stephen Clarke (Burns's friend and the arranger of the music for 'The Scots Musical Museum'); leading representatives of the Edinburgh stage; and people from many different trades and professions, including the notorious Deacon William Brodie. The club met nightly in James Mann's howff (tavern) in Craig's Close for good ale and conversation, stories, and songs. Herd also frequented John Dowie's tavern in Liberton's Wynd, near to his office in Gosford's Close, where he will have met Robert Burns, whose own club, the Crochallan Fencibles, gathered there. Burns certainly seems to have enjoyed access to Herd's manuscripts, which provided the sources of several of his songs. Herd was also friendly with Walter Scott, the publisher Archibald Constable, and the antiquary and book collector George Paton. 
David Herd was austere in appearance with hawk-like features and, in later life, a profusion of grey hair. In character he was affable and unpretentious, generous with time and scholarly advice, and held in affectionate esteem by those who knew him. He died in his lodgings in Potterrow, Edinburgh, on 10 June 1810 and was buried in the nearby Buccleuch parish kirkyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 13067


Herd, John (1511-1584), doctor and Church of England clergyman, was born in February 1511 in Southwark, Surrey. He was educated at Eton College and at King's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted a scholar in 1529 and elected a fellow in 1532; he graduated BA in 1534. He left Cambridge in 1536, and in 1540 moved to Rochester. But he retained links with Cambridge, proceeding MA probably in 1546, and contributing verses to the volume marking the death of Martin Bucer in 1551. By that time he had trained as a doctor and become physician to Archbishop Thomas Cranmer -- in July 1551 he nearly died of sweating sickness at Croydon Palace. He attended the archbishop in Oxford until August 1555, and also took possession of some of Cranmer's books. This did not prevent his conforming in religion under Mary, for though not in orders he was installed as prebendary of Lafford in Lincoln Cathedral on 19 October 1557, and in 1558 was presented to two Welsh benefices. He proceeded MD at Cambridge in the latter year. 
Herd conformed under Elizabeth as well, and in April 1559 was installed in the prebend of South Newbald in York Minster. He then demonstrated both his versatility and his ambitions by writing a verse history of England between 1461 and 1509, with a fulsome dedication to Sir William Cecil dated 1 October 1562. Heavily dependent on the histories of Edward Hall and Polydore Virgil, and probably also using at least one London chronicle, Herd's work survives in two full texts (one of them published by the Roxburghe Club in 1868) and a heavily revised account of the reign of Henry VII. Historically its value is slight, and Herd himself suggested that its principal value lay in its being written in verse, and therefore more pleasing to the ear than a work in prose. A passing allusion to storm damage to St Paul's Cathedral late in Henry VII's reign prompted a reference to the disastrous fire of 1561, leading to a eulogy of Queen Elizabeth as the defender of true religion and liberty against Roman tyranny. But the trumpet Herd was most anxious to hear blown was probably his own, for his text is prefaced by a number of verses in praise of himself by former Cambridge colleagues. 
No preferment resulted from his approach to Cecil, though it may have served to remind the queen's secretary of Herd's existence, for on 14 April 1563 he wrote requiring him to deliver up 'certain collections and common place notes made by the late Archbishop Cranmer' ('CSP dom.', '1547-80', 222); five or six volumes were accordingly surrendered. Thereafter Herd pursued an ecclesiastical career. Ordained priest by the bishop of Lincoln on 1 June 1564, on 13 September 1565 he was instituted rector of Waddington, where he was recorded in 1576 as a conscientious resident clergyman. He also continued to act as a medical practitioner. No doubt it was for his parishioners that he prepared treatments to draw out thorns, heal people bitten by mad dogs, and cure murrain in 'beastes'. He also moved in more exalted circles, presumably in Lincoln Cathedral close, where he retained his prebend. He attended a number of cathedral dignitaries -- in May 1582 the precentor and the chancellor both received purges -- together with lay eminences such as Lord Sheffield, Sir Edmund Peckham, and Lady Wingfield. He also borrowed recipes for medicines, including an eye-water provided by Mrs Aylmer, wife of the future bishop of London. 
Herd died in December 1584, probably at Waddington and most likely on the 21st. He was buried at Waddington and was commemorated in his church by a brass inscribed with verses showing every sign of having been written by their dedicatee. They acclaimed him as doctor, minister, historian, and author of a verse catechism to teach Christian doctrine to the young, and declared that Herd's achievements would bring him an enduring fame. The catechism has not survived, while both church and brass were destroyed in the Second World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 13068


Herdman, John (1762?-1842), physician, born in Scotland, became a member of the Medical Society of Edinburgh on 14 December 1793 and a member of the Royal College of Surgeons of the City of Edinburgh on 26 December 1797, of which he was subsequently elected a fellow. Herdman practised for twelve years at Leith and was a supporter of the Brunonian system (albeit in a modified form) of John Brown (1735-1788). On 12 July 1800 he took the degree of MD at Aberdeen, and on 31 March 1806 he was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians. After moving to London he was made physician to the City Dispensary and physician to the duke of Sussex. 
Herdman withdrew from practice upon entering Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1809; he migrated to Trinity College in 1811, where he graduated BA in 1814 and MA in 1817. He was ordained deacon in the Church of England in 1816, and he preached occasionally at Alnwick, Howick, and other towns in Northumberland. His marriage to the daughter of C. Hay of Lesbury brought him considerable wealth, a large portion of which he spent on charitable causes. 
In 1795 Herdman published 'An Essay on the Causes and Phenomena of Animal Life', in which he examined the physical properties of animal life: the senses, the nervous system and the structure of the body, and the external means required to sustain life. A second edition was published in 1806. He also wrote 'Dissertations on White swelling of the Joints and the Doctrine of Inflammation' (1802); 'Discourse on the Epidemic Disease Termed Influenza' (1803); 'Discourses on the Management of Infants and the Treatment of their Diseases' (1804); and 'A Letter proposing a Plan for the Improvement of Dispensaries and the Medical Treatment of the Diseased Poor' (1809). Herdman died at Lesbury House, near Alnwick, Northumberland, on 26 February 1842, aged eighty. 


@@@@@


doc= 13069


Herdman, Robert (1828-1888), painter, was born at Rattray, Perthshire, on 17 September 1828, the fourth and youngest son of the Revd William Herdman, minister of that parish, and his wife, Sophia Walker. Herdman attended Rattray parish school until his father died in 1838. The family then moved to St Andrews where he studied for five sessions at Madras College. In 1843 he entered the University of St Andrews, taking the full arts curriculum, and he was a promising Greek scholar. At this time he spent the summer vacations back in Rattray where he enjoyed sketching and painting. This became Herdman's true vocation although he retained a deep belief in the importance of scholarship for the rest of his life. In June 1847 Herdman moved to Edinburgh and entered the Trustees' Academy. He studied first under Robert Ballantyne and later under the inspirational teaching of Robert Scott Lauder. He was one of a group of particularly gifted students which included William McTaggart, George Paul Chalmers, and John Pettie, and he was successful himself, winning prizes in 1848, 1850, 1851, and 1852. He attended the Royal Scottish Academy life school between 1852 and 1855 under the tuition of James Drummond. In 1854 Herdman won the academy's newly established Keith prize for the best historical picture in the Royal Scottish Academy's annual exhibition by a student and in 1855 he won the academy's bronze medal. 
In the mid-1850s the Royal Scottish Academy was expanding its collection of copies of old masters for use as teaching aids. At Herdman's request Robert Scott Lauder recommended him to the academy's council to undertake the task of making old master copies. Herdman was duly commissioned to travel to Florence to copy one of Masaccio's frescoes in the Brancacci Chapel, Santa Maria del Carmine. On his return to Edinburgh further watercolours after Masaccio, Perugino, Raphael, and others were shown to the council who duly purchased a total of nine paintings including 'The Agony in the Garden, after Perugino' ('c'.1855-1856; Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh). The impact of Herdman's months in Italy was profound. Not only did his study of early and high Renaissance art have a deep impact on his own work but the light, colours, and exoticism of everyday Italian life inspired a lengthy series of paintings over the next few years. As well as painting the street life of itinerant musicians or 'pifferari', he painted more general subjects such as 'The Mandolin Player' (1856; Perth Museum and Art Gallery) in which a woman instrumentalist is seated in a window before a distant landscape reminiscent of Italy. 
Robert Herdman first exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy annual exhibitions in 1850 and remained a regular contributor for the rest of his life. On 17 September 1857 he married Emma Catherine Abbott (1835-1890) in Edinburgh. He rapidly became an established figure in the Edinburgh art world and was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1858 and an academician in 1863 when he was only thirty-four. His diploma work, 'La culla' (1864; Royal Scottish Academy), shows the continuing influence of Italy in its title and treatment of a Madonna-like mother and child set amid the suggestion of Roman ruins. Painted in a broad, direct manner it is characteristic of his style. During this period Robert Herdman also built up a successful portrait painting practice in Edinburgh. Among his sitters were Lady Shand (1867; NG Scot.) and Thomas Carlyle (1875; Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh) as well as many artists and their families. 
Robert Herdman was profoundly interested in Scottish history and he painted many works on such subjects as the life of Mary, queen of Scots, and the covenanters. 'The Conference between Queen Mary and John Knox at Holyrood Palace, 1561' (1875; Perth Museum and Art Gallery) presents a dramatic rendering of a moment in Scottish history that also underlines the issue of historical religious divisions within the country; his covenanting subjects such as 'After the Battle: a Scene in Covenanting Times' (1870; NG Scot.) deal with the hardships and human loss suffered in the name of religion. These Scottish subject paintings were very popular, indeed 'After the Battle' was commissioned by the Royal Association for the Promotion of the Fine Arts in Scotland (RAPFAS) to be engraved and disseminated to a wide audience. Between 1863 and 1878 Herdman contributed to twelve RAPFAS volumes of engravings, mostly subjects based on the novels of Sir Walter Scott. Another area of interest was Celtic legend and religion, particularly the life of St Columba, for example 'St Columba Rescuing a Captive' (1883; Perth Museum and Art Gallery). 
Unlike many of his contemporaries, Herdman did not settle in London although he did exhibit at the Royal Academy between 1863 and 1878. He remained in Edinburgh but also spent time on Arran, painting landscapes, and also visited Mull. He spent the winter of 1868-9 in Italy and made many watercolour studies of Venice. His continuing interest in watercolours led him to become a founder member of the Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour in 1878. 
Robert Herdman died suddenly on 10 January 1888 at his home at St Bernard's, 12 Bruntsfield Crescent, Edinburgh, and was buried in Grange cemetery, Edinburgh, on 14 January. He was survived by his wife and children among whom were the painter Robert Duddingstone Herdman and the marine zoologist Sir William Abbott Herdman. In the last few days of his life he had been preparing an address to the art students of the board of manufactures' school in Edinburgh (the Trustees' Academy). Published posthumously, for distribution to the students, it summarizes Herdman's belief in the importance not only of mastering the technical and aesthetic aspects of fine art but also of developing a wider cultural awareness and understanding. 


@@@@@


doc= 13070


Herdman, William Gawin (1805-1882), landscape painter and writer, was born on 13 March 1805 at Liverpool (probably in Stanley Street), where his father was a corn merchant. He was active in the Liverpool Academy, being admitted as a student in 1824 and serving as secretary from 1845 to 1848, but in December 1857 he was expelled, nominally for protesting against the academy's award of its annual prize to J. E. Millais for his painting 'The Blind Girl'. He continued to oppose Pre-Raphaelitism through letters to the press in Liverpool and London, and helped to start a rival establishment to the Liverpool Academy, the short-lived Liverpool Society of Fine Arts. In 1859 he was involved in setting up the country's first shilling art union in Liverpool, as an alternative to the more exclusive art unions with guinea subscriptions. He was an art teacher for many years in his native town. 
Herdman exhibited several landscapes in London at the Royal Academy and the Suffolk Street Gallery between 1834 and 1861, and numerous works at the Liverpool Academy from 1822, chiefly landscapes and views of architectural subjects in various parts of the British Isles and northern Europe. Most of his known works are watercolours; his oils are relatively rare. His outstanding achievement was as a topographical artist, recording the changing streets of his native town and copying earlier pictures of its vanished buildings. He began producing such works at the age of about thirteen and published them in the form of lithographs as 'Pictorial Relics of Ancient Liverpool' in 1843 and 1856; two further volumes appeared in 1878. Many of these watercolours are now in the Central Library, Liverpool, some having been transferred there from the Walker Art Gallery in the same city. He also published a selection of continental views under the title 'Studies from the Folio of William Herdman' (1838), and 'Views of Fleetwood-on-Wyre' (1838), and wrote on such diverse subjects as perspective, cosmology, and skating, as well as composing hymns and poetry. 
Herdman was married to Elizabeth Darley Innes, and they had eleven sons and five daughters. Four sons -- William, W. Patrick, J. Innes, and Stanley -- worked as topographical artists and assisted their father with some of his publications. The younger William published a volume 'Views of Modern Liverpool' in 1864. Herdman died at 41 St Domingo Vale, Everton, Liverpool, on 29 March 1882 and was buried on 3 April in Anfield cemetery, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 13071


Herdson, Henry (b. c.1611), writer on mnemonics and memory, matriculated as a sizar from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1626 and graduated BA in 1629-30. According to Venn he may have been rector of Harkstead, Suffolk, in 1632. As self-styled professor of the art of memory (at least 'by Publick Authority', if not according to any more conventional body), he taught in London, at or near to the Green Dragon by St Antholin Church (just east of St Paul's). Shortly before his books appeared (though possibly as early as 1647) he made an appearance at the church of St Dunstan-in-the-East, where he accosted Dr Thomas Fuller as the latter was leaving the pulpit. Fuller, describing the event some ten years later, wrote: 'when I came out of the pulpit of St Dunstan's East, one (who since wrote a book thereof) told me in the vestry, before credible people, that he in Sydney College had taught me the art of memory'. Fuller denied this, saying that he did not remember ever having seen Herdson before -- 'which, I conceive, was a real refutation!' In his 'Life of Thomas Fuller' (1874) Bailey describes Herdson (perhaps uncharitably but hardly inaccurately) as 'the Memory-mountebank'. 
Herdson's books both appeared in 1651; the two are generally found bound together. The first, whose dedication is dated 21 October 1651, is the Latin 'Ars mnemonica, sive, Herdsonus Bruxiatus, vel, Bruxus Herdsoniatus'; this is in fact no more than a republication of part of Adam Brux's 'Simonides redivivus' (1610). The second (this one in English), is 'Ars Memoriae; the Art of Memory Made Plaine', a summary of the principles of the art of mnemonics. According to Herdson, his is an art based on simple precepts; but he is insistent that it should not be less esteemed on these grounds -- he considers that 'he must needs be malicious and unworthy, that will contemne this Art of Memory for the meanness of the Fundaments thereof'. This second book was reprinted in full in the second edition (1813) of Gregor von Feinaigle's 'Art of Memory'. Though considered (by Herdson himself at least) his greatest work, it has not been much thought of by posterity; even Feinaigle described it as 'in small compass'. 


@@@@@


doc= 13072


Hereberht (d. 687), hermit, resided on the island in Derwent Water which still bears his name. He was a disciple and close friend of St Cuthbert, to whom he paid an annual visit for spiritual advice. The two friends both died on 20 March 687. In 1374 Thomas Appleby, bishop of Carlisle, directed the vicar of Crossthwaite to hold a yearly mass on St Herbert's Isle on his feast day (20 March), and granted forty days' indulgence to those who visited it then. The ruins of a circular stone building on the island may be associated with Hereberht. 


