@@@@@


doc= 952


Ayscough, George Edward (d. 1779), soldier and author, was the son of Francis Ayscough (1701-1763), dean of Bristol and sometime preceptor to Prince George, and his wife, Anne (1714-1776), daughter of Sir Thomas Lyttelton and sister of George, first Baron Lyttelton. Ayscough was commissioned in the 1st regiment of foot guards, from which he obtained leave in September 1769, perhaps on grounds of ill health, to tour the continent. An anonymous account of his travels entitled 'Letters from an officer in the guards to his friend in England: containing some accounts of France and Italy' was published in 1778. Ayscough journeyed through France and Italy with 'a curiosity to see mankind in all situations' (Ayscough, 54). His itinerary took him to Lyons, Avignon, Provence, and Marseilles, from where he took ship for Genoa and went on to Pisa. In Italy he also visited Florence, Rome, and Venice (which greatly disappointed him), Padua, Verona, Milan, and Turin before crossing the Alps. 
Ayscough's admission in his memoir that his 'way is always to speak [his] mind, right or wrong' signals a judgemental, bullish personality, whose outbursts appear comic to the modern reader. Of the French he writes: 'During this and several former expeditions to the Continent, I have studied the manners of the French nation, and I have found them volatile, even to a degree of childishness. To all 'rules' there are, doubtless, exceptions; but a Frenchman is, in general, an unlettered prejudiced fop. (Ayscough, 23)' Reflecting on his experiences in Rome he writes: 'I felt a kind of enthusiastic delight at the first sight of Rome, but this was dampened by the recollection that this city, which was once inhabited by a nation of heroes and patriots, was now in the hands of the most effeminate and superstitious people in the universe. (ibid., 140)' Nevertheless he records, with evident satisfaction, having met Pope Clement XIV in Rome, and having received his benediction. 
By June 1772 Ayscough seems to have been resident in St Anne's parish, Westminster. He was promoted to the Order of the Bath and made an application to the College of Arms to confirm his right to bear the arms of Ayscoughs, which can be traced to a branch of the family resident in Yorkshire in the fourteenth century. On 4 January 1774 he sold the manuscripts of his late uncle, Lord Lyttelton, and publishing rights, to James Dodsley for a down payment of $250 plus $150 payable within six months. Dodsley agreed to pay a further $200 if the miscellaneous 'Works' of Lord Lyttelton, edited and published by Ayscough in the same year, were produced by him as a second edition. The surviving portion of a letter from James Bate to his sister dated 5 March 1774, put into a commonplace book kept by members of the Ayscough family during the eighteenth century, seems to indicate that Ayscough married -- his wife's maiden name may have been Cockburn -- and had a son. Bate refers to Ayscough having become 'unfortunate' which, in view of his transactions with Dodsley, may refer to financial difficulties. 
In December 1776 Ayscough's version of Voltaire's tragedy 'Semiramis' (1748) was staged at Drury Lane. The play, dedicated to Ayscough's brother-in-law Sir James Cockburn and published by J. Dodsley, incorporated an epilogue by Richard Sheridan. The editor of the 'London Review' dismissed the piece as 'not worth quarrelling about' (Kendrick and others, 466). Nevertheless, Ayscough's tragedy was performed eleven times, earning the author three crowded benefit nights. It appears that Ayscough recruited his brother officers to attend the first night of the play and he addressed them directly in his prologue, promising them ''(this great bus'ness ended) / He'll gladly re-assume the' Sash 'once more''. Ayscough died on 14 October 1779. 


@@@@@


doc= 953


Ayscough, Samuel (1745-1804), librarian and antiquary, was born in Nottingham and baptized at St Peter's, Nottingham, on 29 November 1745, the only son of George Ayscough (1721/2-1783), printer, and his second wife, Edith Wigley. His grandfather, William Ayscough, was a stationer and printer in Nottingham, and when he died on 2 March 1719 the business was run by his widow until George Ayscough was old enough to take it over. George continued the printing business until the year 1762, some thirty years after his mother's death. Although he enjoyed the esteem of his neighbours, he was not a good business man. He speculated unwisely, even to the extent of the alchemical folly of attempting to extract gold from the dross of coal. In 1762, having lost almost all his money, he took over a large farm at Great Wigston in Leicestershire, managing ultimately to lose the rest of his money and the patrimony of his children. 
Samuel Ayscough was educated at the grammar school in Nottingham under Richard Johnson, author of 'Noctes Nottinghamiae'. He helped his father in his various attempts to achieve some measure of business success, and when these failed took over the running of a mill. But even this was a failure, and it was owing to the timely help of an old schoolfellow and friend, John Eamer (later to be knighted and lord mayor of London), that he migrated to London about 1770 at Eamer's suggestion. There, newly clothed at Eamer's expense, he became overseer of street paviours, a position he also owed to Eamer's help. Before long, however, he found employment in some capacity with John Rivington, a prominent bookseller and publisher of London. Doubtless because of the experience he gained as an employee of Rivington, he progressed to a position as assistant to the principal librarian of the British Museum in the cataloguing department. Henceforth, his life was to revolve around that institution, one of his chief pleasures being to act as a guide to its treasures. 
With his salary from the British Museum, plus some income from arranging private libraries, and financial help from Eamer, Ayscough was in a position to send for and support his father until the latter's death on 18 November 1783. In 1782, with permission of the trustees of the museum, he published privately his catalogue of the undescribed manuscripts in the museum, a labour which took him some two years. He used 20,000 slips of paper in making the catalogue, having examined every manuscript, and employed two indexes for ease of reference. The first gives the manuscript numbers and the pages on which they are described; the second, all the names in the two volumes. The catalogue describes 5000 volumes and is still indispensable. He was not at that time a member of the permanent staff of the museum. When he did become a member about 1785 he had unsuccessfully applied for five earlier vacancies over a period of fifteen years. His first appointment was in the department of natural history, but in February 1791 he succeeded to the department of printed books. In 1787, with the help of Samuel Harper and Dr Paul Henry Maty, he produced a catalogue of the printed books in the museum entitled 'Librorum impressorium qui in museo Britannico adservantur catalogus', not entirely free from faults but of great immediate and subsequent value. 
In addition to the catalogues of British Museum holdings, Ayscough earned his fame as the prince of index makers by compiling the index for the first seventy volumes of Ralph Griffiths's 'Monthly Review' in 1786, with a continuation to volume 81 in 1796. His two-volume index to the first fifty-six volumes of the 'Gentleman's Magazine' appeared in 1789. The index was divided into five parts: 'Essays', 'Poetry', 'Names', 'Books', and 'Plates and cuts', with the addition of an index to nine numbers of 'Miscellaneous correspondence'. In an unsigned two-page preface, Ayscough, adopting an editorial stance, wrote 'The Utility of a GENERAL INDEX, to so mixt a Work as the 'GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE', when by the Indulgence of the Publick it has increased to above Twenty Volumes, is too evident to be questioned; and we therefore hope that we are now making some return to our Friends, however unequal, for the Favours which we have received; for not to be able to find what we know to be in our possession, is a more vexatious circumstance than the mere want of what we have neglected to procure.' The index to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' is not, however, without its limitations: the name Smith, for example, occurs in hundreds of entries bare of forenames. To accompany the third volume of an edition of Shakespeare's plays, Ayscough in 1790 published what is described on the title-page as an index to 'the remarkable words and passages made use of by Shakespeare', but is actually the first concordance of Shakespeare's plays. The publisher John Stockdale paid Ayscough 200 guineas for his index. Other indexes compiled by Ayscough were of the first twenty volumes of the 'British Critic', published in 1804; of John Bridges' 'History and Antiquities of Northamptonshire' (1791); and of the first volume of Owen Manning's 'History and Antiquities of the County of Surrey' (1804), the second and third volumes being published in 1809 and 1814, well after Ayscough's death. There is no evidence that he compiled the index to the 'Annual Register' (1758-80) which has been ascribed to him. John Nichols, who knew him, ascribes to him the indexes to Dr Paul Henry Maty's 'New Review' (1782-86). In 1802 he provided the indexes for, but did not edit, 'Calendarium rotulorum patentium in Turri Londinensis'. The title-page names T. Astle as the editor; John Caley was the co-editor of this and other volumes of records. Ayscough is said to have claimed to have earned $1300 by his indexing. 
Ayscough's single most extended literary effort was his 'Remarks on the letters from an American farmer, or, A detection of the errors of Mr. J. Hector St. John, pointing out the pernicious tendency of those letters to Great Britain', published in 1783, occasioned by the publication one year earlier of de Crevecoeur's 'Letters of an American Farmer'. Ayscough claimed that the author was neither an American nor a farmer, and that his sole purpose was to urge Englishmen to migrate to America. The pamphlet was praised in reviews in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and in the 'Monthly Review'. Ayscough contributed some forty pieces to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', the earliest in February 1781. His letters cover a number of topics -- medical, agricultural, topographical, and architectural -- and address miscellaneous matters such as impostures and the mortality of cats. His historical contributions include anecdotes of Cardinal Wolsey, Alexander Oldys, James Ralph, Bishop Wickham, and Archbishop Matthews, and a reprint of four letters by Ben Jonson. John Nichols was of the opinion that the pieces written by Ayscough for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' were 'in a style which would not have discredited talents of which the world has a higher opinion' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 9.56). 
At some time between 1781 and 1785, but probably at the later date, Ayscough was ordained, something he had long desired. He was presented to the curacy of Normanton-on-Soar in Nottinghamshire, and afterwards was appointed assistant curate of the none too decorous parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields under the Revd Richard Southgate, a colleague at the British Museum. He so comported himself as to win the friendship of a number of eminent persons, including John Buckner, later bishop of Chichester. He was elected to the Society of Antiquaries on 12 March 1789. Eight years later, to the month and almost to the day, he communicated two items to 'Archaeologia' (13, 1797): 'Copies of two manuscripts on the proper method of defence against invasion', and on 9 March 'Copy of a manuscript in the British Museum Harl. MSS. 6844, 'fol'. 49'. 
Ayscough delivered fifteen Fairchild lectures from 1790 to 1804. Thomas Fairchild, gardener, of Shoreditch, bequeathed a sum of money for a sermon each Whit Tuesday on the 'Wonderful works of God in the creation'. The sermons, intended for publication after Ayscough's death, never appeared. He had hoped unsuccessfully to find some 200 subscribers at about 2 guineas each to enable him to edit a collection of historical letters in the British Museum bequeathed by Thomas Birch. Another ambitious work remains in manuscript, a catalogue of the ancient rolls and charters in the British Museum, a work which occupied him for some five years from 1787 to 1792. His last effort in the museum was in arranging the books in classes and cataloguing the king's tracts. 
About 1803 Ayscough was presented to the small vicarage of Cudham in Kent by Lord Chancellor Eldon. The vicarage was some 17 miles from London, but Ayscough travelled the distance every Saturday to fulfil his pastoral duties, returning on Monday. In a two-part letter to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (74, 1804, 830-33, 901-3), he gave a detailed account of his parish. He died in his apartments in the museum of what has been termed dropsy in the chest on 30 October 1804, and was buried in the cemetery of St George's, Bloomsbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 954


Aiscough, William (c.1395-1450), administrator and bishop of Salisbury, was the son of Robert Aiscough, of Potgrange, near Masham, Yorkshire, and brother of Robert, who became dean of the Chapel Royal. Ordained in 1415, he was master of arts by 1423 and doctor of theology by 1432, both probably of Cambridge. From 1429, as the court of Henry VI was increasingly the focus of his activities, he was presented to a number of benefices, including prebends of Lincoln Cathedral, the king's free chapel of Bridgworth, and St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster. His post of royal chaplain must have assisted him in his elevation, by papal provision, to the bishopric of Salisbury on 12 February 1438. He was consecrated on 20 July at Windsor. He subsequently became the king's confessor, an unprecedented post for one who was already a bishop: frequently in the royal presence, he may have been a principal source of edifying information for John Blacman's life of Henry VI. During the 1440s he loaned the king $1602 and was active in making arrangements for the twin royal foundations of Eton and King's College -- he was one of the compilers of the latter's statutes. He provided prebends in his diocese for several servants of the royal household and made Adam Moleyns (died 1450), another leading royal councillor, an archdeacon and canon at Salisbury in 1439. His unpublished register shows him to have concerned himself regularly with diocesan affairs and the maintenance of orthodoxy, a different picture from the one often painted of the courtier-bishop. 
As a regular member of the royal council he was inevitably associated with some of the government's most sensitive policies: in 1441 he was involved in the arraignment of the duchess of Gloucester and her associates for witchcraft. He accompanied Suffolk on an embassy to France in 1444 'in the mater of pees', and the following year he officiated at the marriage of Henry VI and Margaret of Anjou at Titchfield Abbey, Hampshire. In 1447 he was implicated in the arrest of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was one of those blamed by the people for the duke's suspicious death. His membership of the inner circle of royal advisers made him dangerously unpopular. In 1447 it was alleged that he had endangered the succession to the throne, by discouraging the king from having 'his sport' with Queen Margaret, and in January 1450 he was one of those whom a yeoman of Westminster had plotted to behead. He was threatened in a gloating poem on the death of Suffolk; ''Heu mei', saith Salisbury 'this gothe to ferre forthe'' (Wright, 2.232), and in several of Cade's manifestos was among those roundly condemned as the king's evil councillors. This climate of hatred seems to have persuaded him to leave London for the apparent safety of his castle in Sherborne. On his way there his baggage was plundered and then, on 29 June, he was captured by a large group of local men while celebrating mass at the church of the Bonshommes, Edington, Wiltshire. He was dragged out onto a hill, hacked to death, and despoiled. In the following days his palace at Salisbury and several episcopal manors were ransacked. The goods taken were valued at 10,000 marks, 'as thay saide that knewe it' ('An English Chronicle', 64). His death can be seen less as a manifestation of anti-clericalism or a protest against absenteeism than as a major incident in a series of provincial revolts that followed the Kentish rising of Cade. He also appears to have had, like his predecessors, an uneasy relationship with the civic authorities of Salisbury, who resented his assertion of ecclesiastical property rights. Leland records that he was buried at the Bonshommes but no memorial survives, nor does a will, but he gave two manuscripts to Eton and owned a copy of the 'Sermones' of Richard Fitzralph. 


@@@@@


doc= 955


Sir Edward Ayscu (1596-1654?) of South Kelsey, who was the great-great-grandson of his namesake's grandfather. The confusion probably stems from this second Edward Ayscu's antiquarian associations, above all with Sir Robert Cotton, with whom, and with Sir Henry Spelman, he served on a number of commissions between 1627 and 1630, for instance inquiring into the exactions of fees by crown officials since 1569. He was sheriff of Lincoln in 1632, having represented the city in parliament in 1628, and in 1640 he was a knight of the shire for Lincolnshire. Indicted for high treason at Grantham in 1643, he survived to draw up his will in November 1648, and probably lived longer, since it was not proved until 1 July 1654. Ayscu had married Frances Clifford while he was still a child, about 1606; she outlived her husband, dying in 1658 or 1659. 


@@@@@


doc= 956


Ayscue, Sir George (c.1615-1672), naval officer, was the eldest son of William Ayscue (died 'c'.1632), originally of Lincoln, gentleman of the privy chamber to Charles I. The identity of his mother is uncertain. Ayscue was also a godson of George Abbot, archbishop of Canterbury, who bequeathed to him $10 and 'one of the summer nags I have running amongst my horses' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/164, fol. 211). He leased Hamm Court, Weybridge, in 1634, and was knighted on 9 August 1641, perhaps one of the last to be elevated under the distraint of knighthood policy. He married, at some time between 1645 and 1651, Mary, daughter of Martin Fotherby, bishop of Salisbury, and widow of John Boys (died 1641). 
There is no record of Ayscue serving in the navy before 1646 when he commanded the 'Expedition' at the siege of Pendennis Castle, and he subsequently served as governor of the Isles of Scilly until January 1647. He was captain of the 'Antelope' in 1647 and of the 'Lion' in 1648. He was one of the leading opponents of the naval revolt in the latter year, when a substantial part of the fleet mutinied against Vice-Admiral Rainborough and joined the royalists, and served as rear-admiral of the force which went to Helvoetsluys to try to force the defectors to surrender. He was appointed admiral of the Irish seas in 1649, perhaps because of the influence of his kinsman by marriage, the leading politician Sir Henry Vane. He was thanked by parliament on 23 July 1649 for his part in keeping open the sea route to Dublin, then under siege by the marquess of Ormond. In 1650 he was appointed governor of Barbados and commander of the squadron intended to recapture that island, but before he could set out he was diverted to serve as Blake's second-in-command in the attack on the royalist garrison in Scilly (April to May 1651). Ayscue finally sailed for Barbados on 5 August 1651. Despite stiff resistance from the royalist governor, Lord Willoughby of Parham, which ruled out a direct assault, Ayscue eventually obtained the island's surrender on 11 January 1652. 
Ayscue's fleet returned to Plymouth on 25 May 1652 to find the First Anglo-Dutch War had begun. On 12 June he engaged an outward-bound Dutch fleet off the Lizard, but this got away with only five losses. Early in July, acting on intelligence that a Dutch convoy of about forty ships was attempting to sail home up the channel, Ayscue intercepted them near Calais with nine ships, including his flagship the 'Rainbow', and drove most of them ashore. However, on 8 July he learned that Tromp's Dutch fleet was approaching the Downs, and resolved to fight despite having only twenty ships against Tromp's sixty. Shore batteries were prepared at Deal and fireships fitted out at Dover to support Ayscue's precarious position. The Dutch moved towards him on 11 July but were hampered by light winds; when the wind freshened from the south-west, the Dutch moved away to pursue Blake's main fleet, which had gone north. As commander of the channel squadron with his flag now in the 'George', Ayscue escorted the homecoming East India ships into Plymouth at the end of July, where he learned that another Dutch fleet under De Ruyter was approaching. Ayscue caught up with him between Plymouth and Guernsey on 16 August. Each side overestimated the strength of the other, and the fighting was confused; Ayscue seems to have attacked the Dutch centre but was not supported by all the armed merchantmen in his fleet, and his remaining ships were badly damaged in close-quarter fighting. Despite losing no ships outright, the English withdrew to Plymouth hotly pursued by De Ruyter, who intended to attack them in their anchorage, but a change of wind forced him to withdraw. Nevertheless, he got his convoy through and kept the seas. 
Shortly afterwards Ayscue retired from his command, receiving a pension of $800 p.a. from parliament ($300 of it in the form of lands in Ireland). Although there had been criticism of his conduct of the action, it was also true that he had been unwell in the summer, possibly of a fever contracted in the West Indies, and he was deeply concerned about his private affairs, especially the damage to his Hamm Court estate caused by projectors attempting to make the River Wey navigable. It is also possible that he was ideologically opposed to the war; the republican preacher Hugh Peters wrote to him at this time, decrying a war between two such kindred nations. Despite regular rumours that he would be re-employed, Ayscue lived in retirement at Hamm Court, entertaining the Swedish ambassador there in August 1656; the house was said to be: 'environed with ponds, moats and water, like a ship at sea: a fancy the fitter for the master's humour, who is himself so great a seaman. There, he said, he had cast anchor and intended to spend the rest of his life in a private retirement. ('Diary of Bulstrode Whitelocke', 13 Aug 1656)' The Swedish connection led to Ayscue offering his services to Carl X in 1658, and on 26 August he was granted a commission as admiral, with a salary of 4000 riksdalers a year. Flying his flag in the 'Victoria', he sailed from Landstrom on 30 June 1659 to meet Edward Montagu's English fleet, which had been sent to support the Swedes, and the two admirals dined together on 8 July. It seems likely that by this time Ayscue had become a covert royalist -- he was married to a member of one of the leading royalist families in Kent -- but he seems to have taken no active part in the royalist attempts to win over Montagu and his fleet. Ayscue subsequently returned to Landstrom, staying there until 6 November, when he sailed to intercept a Dutch convoy; however, the target was too well protected. He returned to England in the summer of 1660, shortly before the expiry of his Swedish commission on 8 September. Over the next few years he renewed his contacts in the English navy, attending Trinity House dinners and visiting Chatham with Sir William Penn. He became captain of the 'Henry' in October 1664, serving as vice-admiral to Montagu, now earl of Sandwich, throughout 1665, including at the battle of Lowestoft. Sandwich was implicated in the plundering of Dutch East Indiamen in September 1665, but Ayscue refused to have anything to do with it and openly attacked his conduct. Originally appointed admiral of the blue for the 1666 campaign, he became admiral of the white, flying his flag in the 92-gun 'Prince', when Prince Rupert's squadron was detached from the main fleet at the end of May. On the third day of the Four Days' Battle (3 June 1666) the 'Prince' ran aground on the Galloper Sand. Cut off from any support from her own side and with Dutch fireships approaching, members of her crew panicked and struck her flag. Ayscue was paraded through The Hague -- although stories of his being painted and having a tail pinned on him were propaganda -- and interrogated by the Dutch (who were unable to comprehend his Lincolnshire accent) before being imprisoned in Loevestein Castle. He remained a prisoner until October 1667, well after the peace had been signed, and was received graciously by Charles II on 12 November, the blame for the 'Prince's' loss being assigned to the crew rather than their commander. Ayscue commanded the 'Triumph' briefly in May and June 1668, and in 1669 visited his Irish estates, which had been the source of protracted legal disputes with the bishop of Ossory in the preceding years. When the Third Anglo-Dutch War began, it was intended that Ayscue would be vice-admiral of the red, flying his flag in the 'Saint Andrew' (to which he was appointed in January 1672). However, he died at his house in Westminster on 5 April 1672, and was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster, eight days later. He left his estate to his stepdaughter, Margaret Boys, his wife, Mary, and at least one son, George, having predeceased him. 
Opinions of Ayscue varied. Clarendon called him 'a gentleman, but had kept ill company too long, which had blunted his understanding, if it had ever been sharp: he was of few words, yet spake to the purpose and to be easily understood' ('Life of... Clarendon', 2.355). Pepys believed he did not have 'much of a seaman in him... by his discourse I find that he hath not minded anything in [his ship] at all' (Pepys, 5.317), but then Ayscue had just criticized the lack of organization of the Navy Board which Pepys served. On the other hand, Sir William Coventry found him 'a very honest, gallant man... he does not serve mercenarily, for he lives handsomely and honourably in the fleet, beyond his pay' (Coventry to Arlington, 22 April 1665, 'CSP dom.', '1664-5', 324). 


@@@@@


doc= 957


Ayton, Richard (bap. 1786, d. 1823), playwright and writer, was baptized at St Stephen, Coleman Street, London, on 8 February 1786, the son of William Ayton (died 1799) and his wife, Mary. His father, a son of William Ayton, banker in Lombard Street, moved some time afterwards to Macclesfield, Cheshire, and at the grammar school of that town young Ayton obtained a good elementary knowledge of Latin and Greek. In accordance with the wish of his father, that Ayton should be educated for the bar, he was sent to study law at Manchester and at the end of a year he became the pupil of a barrister in London; but, disliking the profession from the start, he never set himself seriously to prepare for it. 
As soon as Ayton came of age, he retired to the coast of Sussex, resolved to limit his expenses to his comparatively small income, and there he amused himself with desultory reading and active outdoor exercise, boating being his special delight. In 1811 he returned to London and accepted a situation in a public office, but he relinquished it in 1813 to accompany William Daniell ARA in a voyage around Great Britain. An account of the voyage, with views drawn and engraved by Daniell, appeared in eight volumes between 1814 and 1825, but the letterpress of only the first two volumes is by Ayton. Disagreeing with Daniell about his plans for the future volumes, Ayton declined to proceed further with the account and began to write plays. Two of his farces, acted at Covent Garden, were total failures, but he adapted from the French several pieces for the English Opera House with some success. 
During a voyage between Scarborough and London, Ayton was nearly shipwrecked and he received an injury to his ankle that confined him to bed for more than a year. In the spring of 1821 he was sufficiently recovered to go to the coast of Sussex, but his health continued to be uncertain and precarious. In July 1823 his illness assumed so serious a form that he went for medical advice to London, where he died shortly afterwards. During the last eighteen months of his life Ayton occupied himself in the composition of a number of essays, chiefly on pastimes and similar subjects, written in a genial and playful spirit and displaying considerable sprightliness and humour. These, with a short memoir prefixed, were published in 1825. 


@@@@@


doc= 958


Ayton, Sir Robert (1570-1638), poet and courtier, was born at the castle of Kinaldie, near St Andrews, Fife, the second of four sons, to Andrew Ayton (died 1589), landowner, and his wife, Mariona London or Lundie, daughter of the laird of Balgonie. Through his father's mother, Marjorie Stewart, he could claim descent on the wrong side of the blanket from James II. A branch of the family of Ayton, originally established at Ayton ('the town on the river') in the Merse, Berwickshire, had been settled in Fife since the fifteenth century, when Andrew Ayton, '2d sone to the Laird of Aytone in the Merss', settled in Fife as sheriff-depute (17 October 1496), and was granted letters of take, or lease, to the west half of the lands of the town of Dunmure. In 1501 he was appointed keeper of Stirling Castle and sheriff of Stirlingshire, and further grants of lands followed. This Andrew Ayton, Robert Ayton's great-grandfather, was clearly a man of wealth and power, and he and his wife, Isobel Kincragy, produced three sons to divide the lands he had accumulated, and seven daughters who all married into well-known and landed Fife families. 
Like his father, Ayton matriculated at St Leonard's College, St Andrews University, together with his elder brother, John, on 1 March 1584. He is listed in December that year as one of those who had subscribed the articles of religion, and he graduated BA in 1588 and MA probably in 1589, the year of his father's death. Ayton inherited $1000, but little is known of his life between leaving St Andrews and his appearance in London in 1603 after spending some years studying in Paris. Thomas Dempster, historiographer royal to James VI and I ('Historia ecclesiastica gentis Scotorum', 1627), records that 'diu in Galliis bonas artes excoluit', but what form of fine arts he studied is not known, and Dempster is an unreliable historian (though more reliable on his contemporaries). He also records that Ayton wrote poems in Latin, Greek, French, and Scots; no Greek or French specimens have survived. It was probably during this period that he wrote his earliest-known English poems, including 'Diophantus and Charidora', notable for being much more Scottish in orthography and grammar than most of his work. 
That Ayton was established in London and close to the court by the end of 1603 is indicated by his poem 'To Queen Anne on a New Year's Day 1604'. Before leaving Paris he had written a long Latin panegyric to King James ('De foelici, et semper augusto, Jacobi VI, Scotiae insularumque adiacentium regis, imperio nunc recens florentissimis Angliae et Hiberniae sceptris amplificato', 1603) for presentation on his return, and the frequent poems addressed to the king thereafter were no doubt designed to secure royal favour ['see also 'Castalian band]. In 1608 he was appointed a groom of the privy chamber, a highly desirable post at $20 p.a. with generous livery. There were also Christmas and new year gifts ($100 was divided among the grooms and pages of the privy chamber at Christmas, and grooms got 40's'. each at new year), immunity from prosecution, and other rich pickings. 
In 1609 Ayton was one of the envoys appointed to deliver James's 'Premonition to All Most Mighty Monarchs, Kings, Free Princes and States of Christendom', his answer to the pope's response to his 'Apologie for the Oath of Allegiance' (1607). Ayton's journey took him to Heidelberg, Wurtemberg, Hesse, Brunswick, Saxony, and Brandenburg, and his good offices were rewarded in 1611 with a life pension of $140 p.a. and a knighthood conferred at Rycot on 30 August 1612. Some time between this date and Prince Henry's funeral on 8 November 1612 he succeeded Sir William Fowler as secretary to Queen Anne, a post of power and privilege which ranked him fourth in order of precedence in the queen's household, which at this time also included Samuel Daniel and John Florio. On 26 February 1615 Ayton obtained a grant of denization (TNA: PRO, patent rolls, C66/1909/28) which made him a naturalized English citizen. 
Queen Anne's death in 1619 did little to depress Ayton's career. In 1619 he secured the reversion of the mastership of the royal hospital and collegiate church of St Katharine by the Tower, though he was not to enjoy this until the death of the incumbent, Sir Julius Caesar, in 1636; also in 1619 he was granted a pension of $500, presumably in recognition of his services to the queen. In 1623, on the death of Thomas Murray of Tullibardine, provost of Eton, Ayton applied to succeed him, though, by his own account, his application was motivated by a desire to provide for Murray's widow and children as much as by personal ambition. There was keen competition for the post, which eventually went to Sir Henry Wotton. On the succession of Charles I in 1625 Ayton resumed his old post of secretary to the queen, which he retained until his death on 25 February 1638. He was buried three days later in the south aisle of the choir in Westminster Abbey. 
Only Ayton's Latin poems were published in his lifetime, in Arthur Johnston's 'Delitiae poetarum Scotorum' (1637). His English poems were collected by his nephew and executor, Sir John Ayton, second son of his elder brother, who helped himself to one or two for his own purposes in the process. In the introduction to this manuscript collection he explained that 'The author of these ensueing Poems did not affect the name of a Poet having neither publish't in print nor kept coppyes of anything he writ, either in lattin or English and which makes this small collection the more difficult and in many things imperfyte and uncorrect especially in the old Scotts peeces which were don in his younger days. (BL, Add. MS 10308)' The early poems are indeed the least rewarding of his output. Heavily influenced by the poets of the French 'Pleiade', whom he had encountered in Paris, and too often written in the uninspiring poulter's measure associated with 'diers' or laments, these pastoral love complaints make tedious reading today, as do his poems of compliment to James and his queen. 
It was not until Ayton was settled in London that he found a lighter, more epigrammatic vein, and a gift for songwriting second to few among his contemporaries. Settings (mostly anonymous) of many of his poems have survived, and it is fairly clear that pieces such as 'Wrong not, sweete empress of my heart' (less plausibly attributed to Ralegh), 'Thou sent to mee a heart was crown'd', and 'There is none, noe none but I' were written to be sung. Elsewhere, in contrast to his earlier, passionate laments, he affected a light sententiousness and an amiably cynical approach to love, as befitted a middle-aged, cavalier poet in comfortable circumstances who never married: '
Yet have I been a lover by report, 

Yea, I have dyed for love as others doe, 

But, prais'd be God, it was in such a sort 

That I revived within an houre or two. 
('On Love')' His authorship of 'I do confess thou'rt smooth and fair' has been challenged on behalf of a number of other poets, including Ralegh. The correct attribution of this and other poems is unlikely ever to be firmly established, but the style, the musicality, and the content are certainly close to Ayton's known work, and the possibility that it is indeed his cannot be lightly dismissed. Watson's failure to credit it explicitly to him in his 'Choice Collection' means little, given the slapdash way in which the collection was compiled, and no other serious evidence has been adduced. His authorship of the very similar 'I lov'd the once, I'le love noe more' is unchallenged, and compares well with it. 


@@@@@


doc= 959


Aytoun, William Edmonstoune (1813-1865), poet, was born on 21 June 1813 in Edinburgh, the only son and youngest of the three children of Roger Aytoun (died 1843), writer to the signet, and of Joan Keir (died 1861). Through both father and mother he belonged to old Scottish families, his progenitors on the father's side being the Aytouns of Inchdairnie in Fife, and the Edmonstounes, formerly of Edmonstoune and Ednam, and afterwards of Corehouse in Lanarkshire, and on the mother's side the Keirs of Kinmouth and West Rhynd in Perthshire. He was also a descendant of the poet Sir Robert Ayton, member of the court of James VI, who had been friendly with Ben Jonson and Thomas Hobbes, and was the reputed author of the lines upon which Burns based 'Auld Lang Syne'. Both of Aytoun's parents were leading figures in Edinburgh society: his father was one of the founders of the Edinburgh Academy, where Aytoun studied between 1824 and 1828, and his mother was a good friend of Sir Walter Scott. Owing to his mother's encouragement, Aytoun early on in life acquired an interest in writing ballad poetry, an interest which was to flourish in later years in his work for 'Blackwood's Magazine'. 
Aytoun studied law at Edinburgh University between 1828 and 1833, dabbling in verse poetry at the same time; his first publication was a small volume of poetry in 1832 entitled 'Poland, Homer, and other Poems', in which the qualities of his later style were already apparent. He thought of going to the English bar, but after a winter in London attending the courts of law he abandoned this intention. On graduating in 1833, Aytoun spent a year travelling and studying German literature. He returned to Edinburgh, and became a writer to the signet in 1835, but dedicated much time to literary work. The discipline of his legal practice was of great use in giving him a power of mastering the details of political and other questions which was of distinct service to him at a later period. In 1840 he was called to the Scottish bar, which had more attraction for him than the irksome monotony of a solicitor's practice, and made a fair position for himself there during the years in which he remained in active practice. 
In 1836 Aytoun became a contributor to 'Blackwood's Magazine', a connection that was to last until his death in 1865. During this almost thirty-year connection he wrote over 200 poems, reviews, satires and short stories. Between 1836 and 1844 he worked together with Theodore Martin in the production of what are known as the 'Bon Gaultier Ballads', a series of parodies of contemporary verse, which acquired such great popularity that thirteen editions were published between 1855 and 1877. They were also associated at this time in writing many prose magazine articles of a humorous character, as well as a series of translations of Goethe's ballads and minor poems, which, after appearing in 'Blackwood's Magazine', were some years afterwards collected and published in a volume entitled 'Poems and Ballads of Goethe' (1858). It was during this period that Aytoun began to write the series of ballads known as the 'Lays of the Scottish Cavaliers', eventually published in 1849. These ballad romances, originally featured in 'Blackwood's Magazine', were modelled on the works of Sir Walter Scott and Thomas Babington Macaulay, and were concerned with Scottish historical subjects and heroes. They became important texts in the romantic revival in mid-Victorian Scotland. 
In 1844 Aytoun became one of the staff of 'Blackwood's Magazine', to which he continued until his death to contribute political and other articles on a great variety of subjects, including humorous tales such as 'My First Spec in the Biggleswades', and 'How We Got Up the Glenmutchkin Railway, and How We Got Out of It'. 
In 1845 Aytoun was appointed professor of rhetoric and 'belles-lettres' in the University of Edinburgh. Here he was in his element, and he made his lectures so attractive that he raised the number of students from 30 in 1846 to more than 1850 in 1864. On 11 April 1849 Aytoun married Jane Emily (died 1859), daughter of the writer John Wilson (Christopher North) (1785-1854). His professorial duties did not interfere with his position at the bar, and in 1852 when the tory party of Lord Derby came into power he was appointed the sheriff of Orkney and Shetland. In the following year Oxford conferred on him the honorary degree of DCL. 
The duties of Aytoun's sheriffship and his work as professor, both conscientiously discharged, still left him leisure for literary work. In 1854 he produced the dramatic poem 'Firmilian', perhaps the most brilliant of his works, an extremely cutting parody of the so-called Spasmodic school of poetry, exemplified by Alexander Smith, J. W. Marston, and Sydney Dobell. Aytoun had been opposed to the aesthetic creed and productions of this group, who modelled themselves on the Romantic poets, but whose works he viewed as derivative and markedly inferior, characterized by verbosity, obscurity, and self-absorption. His parody began in May 1854 with a review for 'Blackwood's Magazine' of the unpublished poetry of a fictitious young Spasmodic, T. Percy Jones. It was so effective as to lead to calls for the publication of Jones's work, and Aytoun, relishing the thought of further extending the burlesque, came out with 'Firmilian, or, The Student of Badajoz: a Spasmodic Tragedy' in July 1854. The print run of 1048 copies sold out, and although its comic intelligence was generally recognized, it was still accepted by some as serious poetry, giving force to the remarks of reviewers such as that of 'The Times', who regarded 'Firmilian' as 'the most perfect, as it is the most elaborate and the most legitimate, parody that has ever been written' (Weinstein, 151). The poem was influential in ending the vogue for the productions of the Spasmodic school, against whom the critical tide of opinion quickly turned. 
Aytoun also produced serious poetry. In 1856 he published 'Bothwell', a poetical monologue, dealing with the relations between the hero and Mary, queen of Scots. It contained many fine passages, and three editions of it were published. In 1858 he published a collection, in two volumes, of the 'Ballads of Scotland' carefully collated and annotated, of which four editions were published. In 1861 his novel 'Norman Sinclair' appeared; it had already been serialized in 'Blackwood's Magazine', and is interesting for its pictures of society in early nineteenth-century Scotland, and for many passages which are, in fact, autobiographical. About this time Aytoun's health began to fail, and his spirits had sustained a shock from which he never wholly recovered in the death (15 April 1859) of his wife, to whom he had been devotedly attached. He sought relief in hard work, but life had thenceforth lost much of its zest for him. Being childless, his loneliness became intolerable, and on 24 December 1863 he married Fearne Jemima (died 1904), daughter of James Kinnear. But by this time his health had seriously declined, and on 4 August 1865 he died at Blackhills, near Elgin where he had been living; he was buried at Edinburgh. A memoir of his life was published by Theodore Martin in 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 960


Ballon, John de (d. 1235), baron, came of a family that took its name from Ballon, Maine, France, and was established in Herefordshire, as lords of Much Marcle, during the reign of William II. John succeeded his father, Reginald de Ballon, when the latter died in 1203. Reginald had succeeded his brother William, and this seems to have given rise to litigation, since John is recorded in 1207 as owing 100 marks and a palfrey so that a fine made by his father over the family lands should be observed. John is also recorded as engaged in litigation concerning property in Wiltshire, where he held the manor of Great Cheverell, and Herefordshire between 1206 and 1212. Although he went to Ireland with King John in 1210, he later joined the baronial revolt against that ruler, with the result that in July 1216 his lands were given to Peter de Bosco; there is no obvious motive for Ballon's rebellion, but the fact that the Herefordshire antiquary W. H. Cooke names his wife as Joanna, daughter of William de Brouse, raises the possibility of a connection with William (III) de Briouze, ruined by the king in 1210. 
However, by 22 June 1217 Ballon had come into Henry III's allegiance, and his estates were restored to him. He was in the king's army at the siege of Newark in 1218, and served on the Welsh march in 1223. On 11 February 1225 his name occurs as the last witness to the reissue of the charters, and four days later he was appointed to assess that year's fifteenth in Gloucestershire. Later in 1225 he was appointed one of the justices to hear assizes of novel disseisin and to deliver gaols in the same county. In 1228 he was summoned to serve on the Montgomery campaign; it is not known if he went, but in 1230 he paid 40 marks for scutage and for exemption from the expedition to Brittany. John de Ballon died in 1235, and was succeeded by the eldest of his three sons, another John, whose payment of a relief of $100 for succession to his father's lands shows that they were regarded as constituting a barony, notwithstanding their relatively insignificant extent. The elder John de Ballon, in an early instance of a practice that was later commonplace, had previously safeguarded the descent of some of his Herefordshire lands by conveying them to trustees, who subsequently reconveyed them to the heir. The Ballon family afterwards fell into obscurity, and its manor of Much Marcle was acquired by the Mortimers later in the thirteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 961


Ballon, Sir Roger de (d. 1225), landowner, was probably connected to the minor Herefordshire baronial family of Ballon, but the exact nature of the relationship is obscure. He appears to have been a minor landowner in Hampshire; if, as seems likely, he was related to the William de Ballon who occurs several times in the mid-thirteenth century as a witness to grants to Selborne Priory, then his interests may have lain in the north-east of that county. He is often recorded as active in Hampshire in a legal context -- first, in 1200, as an attorney in a lawsuit over property at South Fontley, later several times as a knight of the grand assize. He became one of the county's coroners, and in 1220 headed a commission to try a homicide case at Winchester. In 1225 he was appointed in February to be an assessor of the fifteenth in Hampshire, in June to be one of the justices who were to take assizes and deliver gaols in that county. He was dead, apparently very recently, by 27 December 1225. 


@@@@@


doc= 962


Babbage, Charles (1791-1871), mathematician and computer pioneer, was the first son born to Benjamin Babbage (died 1827), a well-to-do London banker, and Elizabeth (Betsy, Betty) Plumleigh Teape (died 1844). Confusion has surrounded both the year and place of Babbage's birth. This confusion is not an invention of modern historiography but dates back to the last century since when Babbage is variously cited as having been born in Totnes, Teignmouth, or London, in either 1791 or 1792. The date of birth has been consistently recorded as 26 December, and as the records of St Mary's Newington in London date his baptism as 6 January 1792, his year of birth was evidently 1791. The location of the church makes it likely that Charles was born at his father's house in Crosby Row, on what was to become Walworth Road in Southwark, London. Both parents were natives of Totnes and from well-known Devon families. Charles was one of four children: two brothers, born in 1794 and 1796, did not survive infancy; his sister, Mary Anne, was born in 1798 and outlived him. 
Babbage's schooling was unsystematic and fractured by illness. After a violent fever at the age of about ten he was sent from London to Devon to recuperate. He was placed at a school in Alphington in the care of a clergyman who had instructions to administer a programme of tuition that would not tax the feeble boy, a mission, Babbage wryly recalled, which the clergyman 'faithfully accomplished' (Babbage, 'Passages', 1864, 10). When sufficiently recovered he was placed in a small school in Enfield for about three years. He was especially struck by a treatise on algebra, 'Ward's Young Mathematician's Guide', which he found in the school library. His interest in mathematics was already evident and he went so far as to institute early morning self-study sessions with a schoolfellow before formal classes began. He later passed into the care of a clergyman near Cambridge for a few years and finally, before going to Cambridge University, spent some time in Totnes, where he was instructed in classics by an Oxford tutor. 'Being passionately fond of algebra' (Babbage, 'Passages', 1864, 26) he spent his leisure reading what mathematical works came to hand. By the time he went to Cambridge he was already a moderately accomplished mathematician having studied Woodhouse's 'Principles of Analytical Calculation' (1803), Lagrange's 'Theorie des fonctions analytiques' (1797), 'Analytical Institutions' (1748) by the Italian mathematician Marie Agnesi, and other works on fluxions. 
Babbage entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in April 1810 and migrated to Peterhouse in 1812. He was a spirited undergraduate and relished the company of his friends. He played chess, participated in all-night sixpenny whist sessions, and missed lectures and chapel to go sailing on the river with his friends. He formed a close and enduring friendship with John Herschel, son of the astronomer William Herschel, who had entered St John's College in 1809. Babbage espoused and advocated radical views: he admired Napoleonic France (with which Britain was still at war), decried the unquestioned acceptance of doctrine exemplified by the inflexible religious context of university life, and lamented the lack of receptivity to continental theories in mathematics. From his pre-university reading he was already conversant with the different notations used in differential calculus by Newton, Leibniz, and Lagrange, and looked forward, as a new undergraduate, to having his curiosity and mathematical puzzlements illuminated by his tutors. In this he was disappointed. Disaffected with the set curriculum he preferred instead a programme of study of his own which favoured the works of foreign mathematicians. 
As a spoof on the dogmatism of 'Bible' societies he produced rough proposals for a society for translating a work on calculus by the French mathematician Lacroix. The hypothetical society would promulgate the use of Leibniz's d-notation in preference to the orthodoxy of Newton's dot-notation favoured by the Cambridge dons. Edward Bromhead was shown an outline of the parodic scheme and this was converted into a serious proposal for the formation of a society for the promotion of analysis and the reform of mathematics. The Analytical Society was formed in 1811 and survived until 1817. Prominent among its leaders were Babbage, John Herschel, and George Peacock. The society published a mathematical work in 1813, 'Memoirs of the Analytical Society'. The preface and first paper 'On continued products' were written by Babbage, and were followed by two papers by Herschel. The role of the Analytical Society in the incipient movement to reform Cambridge mathematics by ending its isolation from continental mathematics is undeniable, but success was not immediate and the extent of the society's impact on the analytical movement is still debated. 
Babbage was Peterhouse's 'crack man' and he was expected to excel in the final Senate House mathematics examinations. However, he graduated without honours, receiving a 'poll' degree in 1814 and his MA in 1817. In the public disputations that were a part of the procedure to pre-classify candidates according to ability he attempted to defend the proposition that God was a material agent. The moderator regarded this thesis as blasphemous and dismissed Babbage out of hand. It is unclear whether this was the cause of Babbage not sitting the final examinations or whether he chose not to. Either way his failure to win honours put paid to any immediate hopes he may have had of a Cambridge fellowship and he left Cambridge in 1814. In later life Babbage recalled his student years with warmth devoid of rancour. 
Babbage married Georgiana Whitmore on 2 July 1814 in Teignmouth, Devon. After several temporary residences the couple made their home in London at 5 Devonshire Street, Portland Place, towards the end of 1815. Georgiana bore at least eight children of whom four survived childhood: Benjamin Herschel (named after Babbage's father and Babbage's friend John Herschel); Dugald Bromhead (named after Dugald Stewart, professor of moral philosophy at Edinburgh, and Edward Bromhead); Henry Prevost Babbage ['see below']; and Georgiana (died 1834). Babbage had no paying post and the couple lived for the most part on a modest but comfortable annual income of $450 of which $300 was an allowance from his father. In 1827 Babbage suffered a series of personal tragedies: his wife (in her mid-thirties), his father, and two of his children (his second son Charles and a newborn son) all died. Taking Richard Wright, one of his workmen, as a travelling companion, Babbage embarked on a recuperative tour of the continent which lasted from October 1827 to November 1828. He travelled extensively, met prominent scientists, and visited workshops and craftsmen as part of his study of the techniques and machinery of manufacture. During this time the two younger children, Dugald and Henry, were cared for in the household of their late mother's sister, Harriet Isaac, near Worcester, while Herschel and Georgiana stayed in the family home in Devonshire Street cared for by Babbage's mother. Once returned to London, Babbage moved to 1 Dorset Street, Manchester Square, which remained his home until his death. His mother maintained a family base in nearby Devonshire Street and relieved him of the care of the children. His only daughter, Georgiana, died in 1834 in her teens. His mother, whom he adored, was a source of practical and moral support; his relationship with his father, whom on occasion he described as stern, intemperate, and critical, was less happy. On his father's death in February 1827 Babbage inherited a sizeable estate worth about $100,000. He did not remarry. His mother died on 5 December 1844 in her eighties. 
Once settled in London, Babbage rapidly established himself on the scientific scene. He was energetic, polymathic, and inventive. He delivered a series of twelve general lectures on astronomy at the Royal Institution in 1815 and became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1816. He participated in the foundation of the Astronomical Society in 1820 serving as one of its first secretaries (1820-24), vice president (1824 and 1825), foreign secretary (1827-9), and member of council (1820-28 and 1830-33); he was presented with the society's gold medal in 1824 for his work on his calculating engine. Babbage was active in the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS) and served as one of its trustees (1832-8). He successfully instituted a committee for statistical activities at the association's annual meeting in Cambridge in 1833. This was formalized into the statistical section of the BAAS in 1835 and also led to the foundation of the Statistical Society of London in 1834. His participation in the activities of scientific societies declined as the analytical engine increasingly dominated his attention from the mid-1830s. He was elected as Lucasian professor of mathematics at Cambridge in 1828 and occupied this coveted chair until 1839 though he gave no lectures and was rarely resident. In his seventies he wrote of the deep gratitude he still felt for the honour conferred on him by Cambridge, commenting, perhaps not without bitterness, that the Lucasian chair was the only honour he received in his own country. Babbage stood as a Liberal candidate for the two-member seat of Finsbury in the general election of 1832 and again in the by-election of 1834. He was defeated on both occasions -- though doing well in 1832 -- and surrendered further political ambition. 
Babbage's first publication ('On continued products', 1813) was the first of some dozen mathematical papers which dominated his published output until 1822. His writings on mathematics show a preoccupation with iterative procedures and the importance of appropriate notational representation to generalizing solutions. His major work was 'An essay towards the calculus of functions', which appeared in two parts in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' in 1815 and 1816. Despite its originality this work was not pursued by others and he appears to have left no direct lasting mathematical legacy. In all Babbage was the author of at least eighty-three published papers and six full-length monographs between 1813 and 1868. His published scientific work is wide-ranging and includes writings on chess, barometric observation, calculating engines, the distribution of births between the two sexes, notation, geology, ciphers, machine tools, solar eclipses, lighthouses, submarines, occulting telegraphs, and statistics. Many of his miscellaneous scientific papers were short and sometimes insubstantial. However, the diversity of the topics is impressive even in an age in which polymathy was not unusual. Mathematical tables were a special interest. He was a connoisseur and collector of printed mathematical tables and a fastidious analyst of tabular errors. His own 'Table of Logarithms' (1827) involved nine separate stages of checking and was generally considered the most reliable of his day. Babbage was an inveterate inventor and experimenter and delighted in instruments and mechanical contrivances. He constructed the first known ophthalmoscope in 1847 for examining the interior of the eye. He showed it to a well-known ophthalmic surgeon, Thomas Wharton Jones, who regarded it indifferently, an act subsequently regarded by a historian as a 'monumental folly'. Credit for the invention went to Hermann von Helmholtz four years later. In the late 1860s Babbage pioneered pressure die-casting techniques in the quest for a cheap means of producing repeatable parts for his calculating engines. Some of his cast parts date from at least as early as 1868, some twenty years before any other authenticated production. 
Babbage's full-length works reflect his broader preoccupations with scientific and industrial life, political economy, and philosophy. His most successful work was 'On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures' first published in 1832. The book ran to four editions between 1832 and 1835 and was translated into six European languages. 'Economy' was a product of a conscientious and detailed survey of factories and workshops in England and on the continent prompted by the demands for precision in the construction of his first calculating engine. The work is not a thesis on macroeconomic theory but an encyclopaedic record of craft, manufacturing, and industrial processes, as well as an analysis of the domestic organization of factories. He advocated the decimalization of currency, foresaw the role of tidal power as an energy source, and predicted the exhaustion of coal reserves, later commenting that if posterity failed to find a substitute for coal then it deserved to be frostbitten. 'Economy' was a turning point in economic writing and firmly established Babbage as a leading authority of the industrial movement. 
Babbage was a vociferous critic of the scientific establishment. His 'Reflections on the Decline of Science in England' (1830) was a scathing and sarcastic attack on the Royal Society and on the conduct of its officers, whose personal and professional probity he pointedly impugned. It was a broadside of outrage and insult and he argued more to protest than to persuade. Babbage's declinist views were shared by others though he was alone in the vehemence of their public expression. His friend Herschel, to whom he showed a draft, wrote that if he (Herschel) could do so with impunity he would give Babbage 'a good slap in the face' (Morrell and Thackray, 48). 'Decline' gave a decisive boost to the movement to reform organized science though the nature and vigour of the assault was viewed by many of Babbage's contemporaries as ill considered. It also soured his relationship with the scientific establishment. He wrote to the duke of Somerset in 1835 flatly informing him that since its publication he had 'never attended the Royal Society nor even indirectly taken any part in its affairs' (Babbage to the seventh duke of Somerset, 3 Dec 1835, Bulstrode MSS, CBS). 

'The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise' (1837), though fragmentary in parts, is Babbage's most philosophically rewarding work. Eight 'Bridgewater Treatises' were officially commissioned under the terms of the will of the eighth earl of Bridgewater. The purpose of the essays was to close the widening rift between rational science and natural theology. Babbage's 'Ninth' was a supernumerary offering, not an official commission. In it he argued against William Whewell's assertion that scientific and religious modes of thought were incompatible and that mathematicians and mechanists were therefore disqualified from theological debate. This was anathema to Babbage, who set out to reconcile rational science with deism. One of Babbage's more intriguing arguments involved an explanation of miracles. He argued that just as programmed discontinuities in a sequence of numbers generated by his calculating engine were not a violation of computational rule, so, by analogy, miracles in nature were not a violation of natural law but a manifestation of a higher law -- God's law, as yet undiscovered. In the pre-Darwinian decades there was major scientific opposition between uniformitarians who held that geological changes and by implication natural law were essentially gradual, and catastrophists who posited that extreme and comparatively sudden phenomena were responsible for geological discontinuities. Babbage visited the Temple of Serapis at Pozzuoli in 1828 and the geological speculations in his 'Treatise' were based on observations he made there. His position was essentially allied to the views of the geologist Charles Lyell, a leading advocate of the uniformitarian doctrine. 
The Great Exhibition of 1851 was the largest industrial manufacturing spectacular yet staged. Babbage's exclusion from the organization of the event was for him an incomprehensible affront to his self-perception as an elder statesman of the industrial movement. In 'The Exposition of 1851, or, Views of the Industry, the Science and the Government of England' (1851) he vented his grievances by alleging weakness and incompetence on the part of the exhibition's commissioners. The book includes pitiful passages on solitude, and the despair to which his efforts, personal sacrifices, and lack of recognition had at times reduced him. The work is ungracious in its treatment of others. But it does provide a rare insight into the darker moments of Babbage's struggles and is, despite its title, emotionally more revealing than his overtly autobiographical work, 'Passages from the Life of a Philosopher' (1864). 'Passages' is a rambling, colourful, anecdotal account of Babbage's life and work. It is unusual by the conventions of autobiography in that it contains little introspection and few details of its author's personal life. Babbage's wife, Georgiana, is not mentioned and Babbage refers once and only obliquely to the blackest single year of his life, 1827, during which four members of his immediate family died. The chapter on the 'abominable nuisance' of street musicians is often cited in evidence of Babbage's reputation for eccentricity. He despaired at repeated interruption of his work by street disturbance and campaigned tirelessly for legal reforms, attracting, on occasions, public ridicule. His autopsy report, which came to light in 1983, raises the intriguing possibility that Babbage's acute sensitivity to noise was due to a medical condition involving cochlear degeneration caused by arterial disease. 'Passages' remains a rewarding and entertaining volume, rich in mischief, self-parody, and false modesty. Babbage was offered the position of director and actuary of the fledgeling Protector Life Assurance Company with the prospect of an annual income of $2500, a substantial improvement on his father's grudging allowance. He spent several months studying the life assurance business and computed a new set of life tables. The venture was abandoned the day before its scheduled launch on 1 July 1824. Babbage used his actuarial knowledge as the basis for a small popular work, 'A Comparative View of the Various Institutions for the Assurance of Lives' (1826). The book was not intended for the professional actuary but for the general populace unwary of the pitfalls of conveniently misrepresented benefits. It was, at least in part, a work of consumer protection with Babbage self-cast as champion of the expose. 
It is on the invention of automatic calculating engines that Babbage's posthumous fame largely rests. For all his other interests it is the engines, their design and construction, that dominated his working life. In later years he was reminded by a friend of the occasion of the first dawning of the idea to calculate mathematical tables by machine. The event supposedly occurred in 1812 or 1813 while Babbage was an undergraduate at Cambridge. The account is probably apocryphal. A more credible account of the genesis episode is that given closer to the event by Babbage himself. The occasion was a meeting in 1821 with Herschel during which they set about checking some newly computed astronomical tables. Dismayed by the errors Babbage exclaimed 'I wish to God these calculations had been executed by steam' (Buxton, 46). By May 1822 Babbage had completed a small experimental version of his difference engine, so called because of the mathematical principle on which it was based, the method of calculating finite differences. Following the favourable recommendation of the Royal Society in May 1823, and the advocacy of influential supporters, Babbage secured government financial backing for his proposal to construct a larger, fully engineered machine, Difference Engine no. 1. In June 1823 in a private interview with the chancellor, F. J. Robinson, he was granted $1500 from the Civil Contingency Fund to prosecute the venture. No written record appears to have been made of the meeting and the nature and extent of the government's commitment is obscure. For his part Babbage consistently maintained that he had been officially commissioned 'to complete and to bring to perfection an engine for the construction of numerical tables' (TNA: PRO, T 52/111, fol. 1) with the full expectation that requisite funds would be forthcoming. 
Babbage engaged the engineer Joseph Clement and a period of concentrated work ensued. During Babbage's extended travels between 1827 and 1828 the project was entrusted to John Herschel. On his return the project was hindered by fitful funding difficulties. Repeated applications were made to the Treasury and the advice of the Royal Society was sought on two further occasions. Royal Society reports delivered in 1829 and 1831 were both favourable and the Treasury advanced further tranches of money. Babbage had Clement assemble a small section of the engine as a demonstration piece. The assembly, which worked impeccably, represented about one-seventh of the whole machine and was ready towards the end of 1832. This section of Difference Engine no. 1, transferred to the Science Museum, London, in 1862, is the first known automatic calculator and ranks among the most celebrated icons in the prehistory of computing. In March 1833 Clement halted work following an argument with Babbage over compensation for transferring the project from Clement's works near the Elephant and Castle to specially built fireproof workshops adjacent to Babbage's house. The physical construction of the engine was never resumed. At the time that Clement downed tools almost all the parts (about 12,000) for the calculating section of the engine were complete but unassembled. Some of these were later cut up or melted down by Babbage for reuse in the analytical engine, some were used by Henry Prevost, Babbage's youngest son, after his father's death, and the rest were consigned to the melting pot. An estimated 12,000 parts for automatically printing and stereotyping results remained unmade. After the last payment to Clement in August 1834 the government's outlay had totalled $17,478. The collapse of the project after a decade of design and development was the central trauma in Babbage's scientific life. He was never fully reconciled to the dismal outcome. 
A desultory and unsatisfactory correspondence between Babbage and successive governments ensued. In 1842 he pressed for an interview with the politically beleaguered prime minister, Sir Robert Peel. By that time Babbage had invented the more sophisticated analytical engine and had conceived of a simpler difference engine. He had planned to propose to Peel a new financial basis for funding the construction of his new engine designs. The proposals were intended to allow the government to fulfil what Babbage regarded as its binding commitment to fund an engine to completion and at the same time relieve the Treasury of the full burden of so doing. The meeting with Peel, which took place on 11 November 1842, was unfortunate. They argued and Babbage stormed out ('if those are your views, I wish you good morning'; 11 Nov 1842, BL, Add. MS 37192, fol. 189), his new proposals undisclosed. Between 1847 and 1849 Babbage designed Difference Engine no. 2, an elegant and more efficient version of its predecessor. Plans were offered to the government in 1852 but with no result. (In a twentieth-century sequel, the calculating section of Difference Engine no. 2 was completed at the Science Museum, London, in 1991, the bicentennial anniversary of Babbage's birth.) Despite Babbage's impassioned advocacy for his engines, experts disagreed about the utility and cost benefits of producing mathematical tables by mechanical means. George Biddell Airy, astronomer royal from 1835 to 1881, 'de facto' scientific adviser to government, and official arbiter of the utility of calculating engines, when consulted by the Treasury in 1842, pronounced Babbage's difference engine to be 'useless' (CUL, RGO 6/427, fol. 65). 
Babbage's standing as the first pioneer of computing relies less on his difference engines than on his conception and design of the analytical engine. The most creatively active period of development occurred between 1834 and summer 1836, by which time the essential principles of the analytical engine had been established. He continued to work on improved designs until 1846 and then intermittently from the mid-1850s until his death. Unlike the difference engine, which was a fixed-function calculator, the analytical engine was conceived as a general-purpose machine capable of calculating virtually any mathematical function. It had a repertory of the four basic arithmetical functions (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) and was programmable -- that is, it could be instructed to perform any of these operations in any sequence. The machine was to be programmed using punched cards, a technique borrowed from the Jacquard loom, where it was used to control the patterns of woven thread. The analytical engine could be instructed to repeat the same sequence of operations a specifiable number of times (a process later called looping or iteration) and was capable of choosing alternative actions depending on the value of a result (conditional branching). A landmark in the development of the design was the internal organization of the machine: Babbage separated the section which stored numbers (the 'store') from the section which processed numbers (the 'mill'). He made no serious attempt to construct a full-scale analytical engine until 1857 and his efforts were sporadic and inconclusive. Apart from a few small test assemblies, all that survived in mechanical form is an experimental section of the mill under construction at the time of his death. 
Babbage published little on the conception and design of either of his engines. However, others did -- notably Dionysius Lardner, who published in 1834 a long and sometimes bumptious article on Difference Engine no. 1, and Ada Augusta, countess of Lovelace, daughter of Lord Byron. Lovelace translated a paper on the analytical engine by the Italian engineer Luigi Menabrea (later prime minister of Italy) following a visit by Babbage to Turin in 1840. Working in close collaboration with Babbage she added copious notes of her own and her 'Sketch of the analytical engine' was published in 1843. While the originality of Lovelace's technical contribution to the 'Sketch' has been questioned it remains the most penetrating and articulate contemporary account of Babbage's most celebrated invention. Babbage, indebted to her for her expository role, addressed her in correspondence as 'my dear and much admired interpreter' (Babbage to Lovelace, 9 Sept 1843, transcript and facsimile in B. A. Toole, 'Ada: the Enchantress of Numbers', 1992, 236). The major record of Babbage's work on calculating engines was deposited in a substantial manuscript archive at the Science Museum, London. The archive includes some 500 large design drawings and twenty 'Scribbling books' which record, with little concessionary explanation, the evolution of his ideas. 
Babbage died on 18 October 1871 at his house, 1 Dorset Street, Manchester Square, London, and was buried six days later in Kensal Green cemetery, London. His last days were disturbed by the din of organ grinders and street nuisances outside his house. A post-mortem examination conducted seventeen hours after death cited the evident cause of death as 'suppuration of the kidney'. The first published biography of Babbage referred to him in its title as the 'Irascible genius' (Moseley). The sharpness of this image remains unsoftened by subsequent scholarship. 
Babbage bequeathed his workshop, drawings, and remaining engine parts to his youngest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 963


Babell, William (1689/90-1723), musical arranger and harpsichordist, was the son of a bassoonist in the Drury Lane Theatre orchestra, and was taught by his father, by John Christopher Pepusch, and possibly by Handel. A proficient violinist, harpsichordist, and organist, he was active in London's professional musical circles and apparently played in the private band of George I. For some years until his death he was organist at All Hallows, Bread Street. 
Babell's fame as a harpsichordist derived from his arrangements of popular operatic arias for the instrument, a practice he originated and which won him an international reputation. Charles Burney criticized him for converting the music of Handel (among others) into: '
'showy' and brilliant lessons, which by mere rapidity of finger in playing single sounds, without the assistance of taste, expression, harmony, or modulation, enabled the performer to astonish ignorance, and acquire the reputation of a great player at a small expence.' Others regarded him more favourably; his published harpsichord works are considered to provide 'a valuable insight into early 18th-century practices of ornamentation and extemporization' ('New Grove'). He also wrote concertos for the violin and small flute. 
Babell died at Canonbury, Islington, on 23 September 1723 at the age of thirty-three, his early death being attributed to his 'intemperate habits'. He was buried in All Hallows Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 964


Baber, Edward Colborne (1843-1890), orientalist and traveller, the son of Edward Baber and a great-nephew of Henry Hervey Baber, was born at Dulwich on 30 April 1843. He was educated at Rossall junior school where his father was headmaster, and from 1853 to 1862 at Christ's Hospital, going on from there with a scholarship to Magdalene College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1867. In 1866 he had gained through competitive examination a position as a Foreign Office student interpreter. He was appointed to Peking (Beijing) on 28 July 1866. Baber wrote to his father on 29 June 1867 of his studies of the Chinese language reporting how 'I have been working with small intermission between nine and twelve hours a day for six months, and yesterday evening I finished the colloquial course... the shortest time it has ever been done in' ('Proceedings', 2nd ser., 5 July 1883, 469). 
Baber passed quickly through the various grades of the service. He was promoted to third-class assistant on 18 November 1869, second-class assistant on 24 August 1871, and was acting vice-consul at Kiukiang (Jiujiang) from 1 September 1871 to 9 May 1872. He was acting vice-consul at Taipei (Tabei) in Taiwan from 6 June 1872 until 30 September 1873, and was appointed Chinese secretary of legation at Peking on 22 October 1879. 
During this period, Baber made three very interesting journeys in the interior of China. The first of these was in 1876, when he accompanied Thomas Grosvenor across Yunnan to Bhamo, on the Burmese frontier, to investigate the murder of Augustus Raymond Margary. He prepared a map and narrative of the expedition, which formed the substance of the official blue book issued in 1877. He then journeyed to the Szechwan (Sichuan) highlands in 1877, during which he visited and studied the language of the Lolos tribe. A detailed account of this journey, with descriptions of Chinese customs and attitudes, was printed in 1886 under the title 'Travels and Researches in Western China'. In 1878 he journeyed from Chungking (Chongqing) northward by a new route through mountain country, occupied by the Xifan tribes, to the great Lhasa Road, and wrote a monograph entitled 'The Chinese Tea-Trade with Thibet' (1886). On 28 May 1883 he was presented with a Royal Geographical Society patron's medal. 
From 23 October 1885 to 24 November 1886, Baber was acting consul-general in Korea. Soon afterwards he received the appointment of political resident at Bhamo on the upper Irrawaddy, where he died unmarried on 16 June 1890, at the age of forty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 965


Baber, Henry Hervey (bap. 1775, d. 1869), librarian, was baptized at Slingsby, Yorkshire, on 22 August 1775, the son of Thomas Baber, barrister, and grandson of Thomas Draper Baber, of Sunninghill, Berkshire. He entered St Paul's School, London, in 1786, and became a 'Bible' clerk at All Souls, Oxford, in 1795, graduating BA in 1799 and proceeding MA in 1805. He was a sub-librarian of the Bodleian Library, curate of Ibstock, Leicestershire, in 1801, and vice-principal of St Mary's Hall, Oxford, in 1805 (and curate of St Mary the Virgin). In 1807 he was appointed assistant librarian of the department of printed books of the British Museum. In 1809 he married Ann (1785-1861), daughter of Harry Smith, a partner in Child's Bank; they had two sons and four daughters. 
In 1812 Baber became under-librarian (keeper) of printed books. Between 1807 and 1819 he and Henry Ellis, his predecessor as keeper, produced a revised catalogue in seven volumes of the museum's printed books. With Charles Dietrich Eberhard Konig (keeper of natural history), Baber travelled to Munich in 1815 to select material to be purchased from the collections of Baron von Moll. He supervised the move of George III's library to the new museum building designed by Robert Smirke, planned a new edition of the catalogue of the department of printed books in the 1830s, and spoke for his department before the 1836 select committee of the House of Commons which investigated the museum. 
Between 1816 and 1828 Baber published a three-volume edition of the 'Old Testament' part of the 'Codex Alexandrinus' ('Vetus Testamentum Graecum e codice MS. Alexandrino'), at a cost to the Treasury of $9000. In 1827 he was rewarded by the crown with the rectory of Stretham, Cambridgeshire (worth $900 per annum). When in 1837 the trustees of the museum decided that their staff should hold no other remunerative posts, Baber resigned. He spent the last thirty-two years of his life as rector of Stretham and died there at the rectory, 2 Front Street, on 28 March 1869. He was buried in Stretham churchyard on 3 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 966


Baber, Sir John (1625-1704), physician, the son of John Baber (1592-1646), recorder of Wells, Somerset, and Elizabeth, daughter of William Walrond of Isle Brewers, Somerset, was born in Wells on 18 April 1625. He was educated at Westminster School, and in 1642 was elected a student of Christ Church, Oxford. He was ejected from his studentship by the parliamentary visitors, but graduated bachelor of medicine on 3 December 1646, being admitted by virtue of the letters of Colonel John Lambert, governor of the garrison for Oxford. Travelling to the continent, Baber studied medicine at Leiden, and on 10 November 1648 took the degree of MD at Angers. On his return to England he was made DM at Oxford on 18 July 1650. 
Baber was a candidate of the College of Physicians, London, on 4 July 1651, and became a fellow on 17 August 1657. He established a practice in London, where he lived in King Street, Covent Garden. During the protectorate he was involved in the affair of Don Pantalean Sa, the brother of the Portuguese ambassador, who was executed for his part in the murder of a man in 1653. Baber, who had harboured Sa after the murder, was pardoned by Cromwell on 9 August 1654 ('Writings and Speeches', 3.397). Baber was a JP and involved in parish government. 
After the Restoration, on the recommendation of a near neighbour, Thomas Manton, rector of St Paul's, Covent Garden, who, with other Presbyterian divines, had taken a prominent part in the return of Charles II, Baber was made physician to the king, and was knighted on 19 March 1661. In the same year his support for a local dissenting priest led him to be attacked as a 'Spye to all sides, a 'Plague' to all his Neighbours, and a 'Pestilence' to the whole Town' (Donne). Baber frequently acted as a messenger for Charles and Lord Arlington in negotiations in 1668 on comprehension and toleration with Manton and Richard Baxter. North, who describes him as 'well known for a Busy Body in such tricking affairs', states that he was 'in possession of the protectorship at court of dissenting preachers' (North, 362). In September 1669 Baber informed Manton of the king's intention to do his utmost to 'get them accepted within the establishment' (Harris, 7); but it would appear that Charles made use of him to inspire a false trust in his intentions. Baber was banished from court in 1681, along with other dissenters (Miller, 349-50). 
Baber was three times married, first to Elizabeth (died 1658), daughter of Sir John Richards of Yaverland, Isle of Wight; second to Anne, Viscountess Bayning (died 1678), widow of Henry Murray, a groom of the chamber of Charles I, and daughter of Paul, Viscount Bayning, by licence (1 August 1674); third, on 15 February 1681, to Bridget (died 1696), widow of Charles Needham, fourth Viscount Kilmorey, and of Sir John Shaw, and daughter of William Drury of Besthorpe, Norfolk. He had three sons, Francis, William, and John, from his first marriage, but no children from the other two marriages. Baber died in 1704 and was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 3 April of that year. Robert Wild's 'The Grateful Nonconformist' (1665) was addressed to Baber. 


@@@@@


doc= 967


Babington, Anthony (1561-1586), conspirator, was born in October 1561 at Dethick, Derbyshire, the third child and eldest son of Henry Babington of Dethick and his second wife, Mary, daughter of George, Lord Darcy, and granddaughter of Thomas, Lord Darcy, who was beheaded for his role in the Pilgrimage of Grace. The family had been established in Derbyshire since the fifteenth century and had considerable property there and in adjoining counties. Henry Babington, who was said to be 'inclined to papistrie' ('DNB'), died in 1571, leaving Anthony as his heir under the guardianship of his mother, her second husband, Henry Foljambe, and Philip Draycot of Paynsley, Staffordshire, his future father-in-law. They were all probably inclined towards Catholicism. About 1579 Babington married Draycot's daughter Margery, and he appears to have spent some time at Lincoln's Inn the following year. 
Babington won his place in history by his leadership of a Catholic conspiracy in 1586 to assassinate Queen Elizabeth and free Mary Stewart from imprisonment. This would, the conspirators hoped, be followed by an invasion by the forces of Philip II and the Catholic league in France, leading to the restoration of the Catholic religion. It was the first Catholic plot in which the murder of the queen was an integral part from the beginning. Babington's connection with Mary had begun about 1579 when he had served as a page in the household of the earl of Shrewsbury at Sheffield, where the earl had charge of the Scottish queen. In 1580 he had gone to Paris, where he met Thomas Morgan, one of the leaders of the Catholic secular clergy, and James Beaton, archbishop of Glasgow, Mary's ambassador to France. The suggestion put forward in older works, including the 'Dictionary of National Biography', that Babington joined a secret society of young men for the protection of Jesuit missionaries is not true: there was no such society. A few years later, probably in 1583-4 when he was back in England, he did carry some letters to Mary from Morgan but then, according to his own confession, dropped out of the business. This gave him, however, a contact with Mary which later proved fatal to them both. 
In or about May 1586 Babington was visited by one of the key figures in the conspiracy, the Catholic priest John Ballard (d. 1586), who had been in England since 1581. Ballard made a brief trip to Rome in 1584 in the company of Antony Tyrell, who was hatching his own plot against Elizabeth. Not long before visiting Babington, Ballard had been in touch with the Spanish ambassador in Paris, Bernardino de Mendoza, and had told him of a plot being raised in England to kill the queen and overthrow the protestant religion. He now informed Babington that the leaders of the Catholic league in France, the dukes of Guise and Mayenne, wished to take revenge upon Queen Elizabeth and had been appointed by the pope to lead an invasion force into England. Babington was at first sceptical: he objected that nothing could be done while Elizabeth was alive, that there was little support in England for an invasion, and that the French Catholic princes were unlikely to come. 
To the first point Ballard replied that Elizabeth would be taken care of by another conspirator, 

Thomas Salisbury, or Salesbury (1561x4-1586), came from the important landed family of Salisbury of Lleweni, Denbighshire. His father had died when he was very young and he was brought up with his grandfather at Lleweni. On his grandfather's death in 1578 Thomas became the head of the family and ward of the earl of Leicester. He matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, in 1580, where he seems to have moved in Catholic circles. He and Babington were said to have been 'bedfellows for a quarter of a year or more' ('CSP dom.', '1581-90', 346). 
Two others, about whom little is known, were among this group of conspirators which met in London on 7 June 1586. Edward Windsor was the younger brother of Lord Windsor. He soon disappeared from the meetings of the plotters and was not present at the final trial. Robert Barnewell probably belonged to the prominent Irish pale family of that name. He used to attend court as a servant to the earl of Kildare and was apparently known by sight to Queen Elizabeth. One of Walsingham's agents left a brief physical description of him as tall, 'comely', white-faced, flaxen bearded, freckled, and disfigured with smallpox. 
Five others joined the plot a little later. Edward Jones of Plas Cadwgan, Denbighshire, was the son of another Edward, tailor to Queen Mary, master of the wardrobe to Queen Elizabeth, and sheriff of Denbighshire in 1576. The father was a protege of the earl of Leicester, to whom he recommended his son. Unhappily, the son turned to Catholicism under the influence of Thomas Salisbury, who involved him in the plot. They were deputed to set off a rising in north Wales. Henry Donne was a Londoner and a clerk of the first fruits office; he was probably an older relative of John Donne, the poet. Robert Gage came from Surrey, John Travers and John Charnock were both from Lancashire families; otherwise nothing is known of them. Sir Thomas Gerard, suspected by the government of involvement, was probably the Thomas Gerard of Bryn, Lancashire, MP for Lancashire in 1563. He was a known Catholic, the father of John Gerard, the Jesuit, and had been imprisoned in 1571 for plotting to free Mary Stewart. In 1586 his involvement was marginal and he escaped the main trial. He was, however, imprisoned in the Tower once again. Except for Savage, all those plotters about whom anything is known had links to the royal court. This was not a provincial conspiracy, but rather one hatched in London, mainly by young Catholic courtiers. 
One man with a different background was deeply involved in the conspiracy. Gilbert Gifford (1560-1590) was thought by Ballard, Babington, and the others to be one of themselves, but was in fact in the pay of the government. The son of a recusant family seated at Chillington, Staffordshire, Gifford had entered Douai College, by then at Rheims, in 1577 and transferred to the English College at Rome two years later. Here he seems to have made contact with one of Walsingham's agents. Whether for this or for some other reason, he was expelled from the English College. After a brief stay at Rheims, he went to Paris. By then he was probably in Walsingham's service. In December 1585 he returned to England with a letter of recommendation to Mary from her agent in Paris, Thomas Morgan. He was arrested on landing and taken to Walsingham, who employed him in carrying letters to and from Mary, then closely guarded by Sir Amias Paulet (or Poulet) at Chartley, without her knowing that all her correspondence was tampered with by the government. Walsingham's agents suborned a brewer from Burton upon Trent, known to Paulet and others as 'the honest man', who brought a regular supply of beer to Mary's household. The brewer placed letters to and from Mary in a small leather package inside the bunghole of the barrels as he delivered and collected them in the course of his business. Incoming and outgoing letters were received by Gifford and passed to Walsingham's cryptographer, Thomas Phelippes, for decoding. The originals were then resealed and sent to their intended recipients, while copies went to Walsingham. The government was thus kept fully informed of the entire progress of the plot, usually before the conspirators themselves. 
Babington seems to have become the leader of the conspirators, perhaps 'faute de mieux'. Weston described him as 'attractive in face and form, quick of intelligence, agreeable and facetious; he had a turn for literature unusual in men of the world' (Pollen, cvi). Perhaps he was not really a man of the world: he was certainly no leader. After their meeting on 7 June 1586 the conspirators settled down to discuss their position. Babington told them that: 'we seemed to stand in a dilemma... On the one side lest by a massacre... the magistrates here would take awaye our lives... and on the other side lest the straunger shoulde invade and sacke our countrye, and bring it into servitude to foreigners. (ibid., 54)' He concluded that it would be best for them all to leave the realm and asked Robert Poley, whom he thought to be an accomplice but was actually in Walsingham's service, to get him a passport. Through Poley, Babington secured three interviews with Walsingham, who kept him waiting for his passport and tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade him to give up his enterprise and to reveal the names of his associates. Babington also had conversations with Poley in which he expressed his desire for the contemplative life. By the end of June a great deal of talking had been done -- 'thus we discoursed', recalled Babington in his confession (ibid., 55) -- but active steps to raise support and set down plans were dragging. Extraordinarily, Babington spent some of the time arranging for the conspirators to have their portraits drawn. These have not survived, though they were at some stage shown to the queen, so that she might recognize them if any of the conspirators appeared at court. 
Early in July Babington returned to London from the country and once more met Ballard, who urged action upon him. The other conspirators 'still cryed out of my delaye', he recalled in his confession (Pollen, 60); but now he acted. On 6 July he wrote a coded letter to Mary pledging his devotion to her cause. He had earlier, he said, despaired of the situation of the Catholics in England and had resolved to leave the country and live in solitude. But, he wrote, 'one Ballard, a man of vertue and learning', had come to him and told him of the preparations being made overseas by Christian princes to deliver England from its miserable state. He vowed 'either to prevaile in the churches behalf and your majesties, or fortunately to die for that honorable cause' (Pollen, 20). He himself with ten gentlemen and one hundred followers would deliver Mary from imprisonment. 'For the dispatch of the usurper [Elizabeth]' there were six gentlemen, 'all my private friends', who will undertake 'that tragical execution' (Pollen, 22). It was necessary to assure them that they or their posterity would be rewarded. 
On 17 July Mary fatally replied. She expressed gratitude for Babington's letter and asked him to write frequently, commending his desire to frustrate the designs of 'our enemies'. She stressed that if remedy were not provided soon it would be too late. She followed this general exhortation with a practical and sensible agenda for preparing rebellion. They must assess what forces they could raise; what towns and ports could be assured; what foreign forces they required and the means of paying them; what place of assembly should be appointed; what provision should be made of horses and armour. They must decide 'by what means do the six gentlemen deliberate to proceed' and the manner of 'my getting forth out of this hold'. They should give out to potential followers that these preparations were defensive, 'against the puritans of this realme' and against an attempt by Leicester's forces in the Netherlands to return and 'usurp the crown'. These statements would, she said, serve as a pretext for assembly 'without touching the crown'. Then 'set the six gentlemen to work', ensuring that as soon as they have accomplished their design -- the murder of Elizabeth -- Mary herself should be rescued. All must be ready before they acted. She proposed three possible means of rescue and concluded with the injunction: 'fail not to burn this present quickly'. She did not, of course, know that her letter would be read by Walsingham before Babington even received it. There was a postscript: 'I will be glad to know the names and qualities of the six gentlemen, which are to accomplish the designment [the murder of the queen]' (Pollen, 38-46). This was almost certainly added by Walsingham's agent Phelippes, with the object of luring Babington into giving away the names of the principal plotters. The stratagem failed, but Walsingham already had enough evidence on which to condemn Mary. 
On 2 August 1586, three days after Babington received Mary's letter, Phelippes asked Walsingham 'whether Babington is to be apprehended, or otherwise played with' (Pollen, cl). Walsingham evidently opted to give him a little more rope, in the hope of uncovering more details of the plot. He decided, however, to deal at once with Ballard, who was arrested two days later. Babington claimed in his confession that only then did he decide to put into effect the plan for assassinating the queen. He told Savage to go at once to court and kill the queen. Savage replied: 'I cannot go tomorrow for my apparel is not ready, and in this apparel shall I never come near the Queen' (Hargrave, 1.129). Babington gave him his ring and money for clothes and told him to act. Babington himself then went out to dinner with one of Walsingham's undercover agents, a man called Scudamore. Realizing in the course of the meal that Scudamore had received an order for his arrest, Babington went to the bar to pay the bill and fled, for once showing power of decision. He hid with some companions in St John's Wood, his face smeared with green walnut shells, and was eventually caught at the house of the Bellamy family in Harrow. The government of the city put on a show of public loyalty, witnessing 'her public joy by ringing of bells, making of bonfires, and singing of psalms' (Camden, 303). 
All the conspirators were rigorously interrogated and each of them confessed fully, seemingly without the pains of torture, except perhaps in the case of Ballard. By the middle of September the crown had all the evidence it needed from their confessions. Seven defendants were arraigned before the judges on 13 and 14 September. Savage was dealt with first, since he had become involved separately from the others. He pleaded guilty to conspiracy, not guilty to assenting to kill the queen. However, since his confession stated clearly that he had sworn an oath to assassinate her, this plea could hardly be sustained and he changed it to guilty. Ballard, Babington, Barnewell, Donne, Salisbury, and Tichborne then all pleaded guilty to conspiring to free Mary and alter religion, not guilty to planning to kill the queen, Babington laying 'all the blame upon Ballard, for bringing him to his destruction' (Hargrave, 1.131). Told that they could not plead in different ways to separate charges, all except Tichborne changed their pleas to guilty. Tichborne claimed that he had intended to desert the conspirators and ride down to Hampshire, but had been prevented by lameness. He, too, then changed his plea. Counsel for the queen set out the evidence, in which the conspirators implicated one another in their confessions, and all were condemned to die traitors' deaths. 
On 15 September the remaining seven were arraigned: Abington and Tilney of the original conspirators, and Jerome Bellamy, Charnock, Jones, Gage, and Travers of those who became involved later. All pleaded not guilty, Abington invoking the rule demanding two prosecution witnesses in treason trials. Their pleas were to no effect and all were predictably found guilty. Given the opportunity to speak for themselves, Bellamy, charged with harbouring Babington in Harrow, 'spoke very little for himself, only he seemed to be a very clownish, blunt, wilful and obstinate papist'; Abington said it was all the fault of Babington, 'that brainless youth'; Tilney and Jones begged that their debts be paid, Jones also asking that 'some consideration may be had of my posterity' (Hargrave, 1.140). 
Gallows were set up a week later near St Giles-in-the-Fields, where the plots had been laid, and the first seven conspirators, led by Ballard and Babington, were executed on 20 September 1586, 'not without some note of cruelty', according to Camden: that is to say, they were hanged only for a short time, cut down while they were still alive, and then castrated and disembowelled. Their statements on the gallows varied in import and effect. Babington cried '''Parce mihi, domine Jesus'', that is 'Spare me Lord Jesus''. Tichborne made a long speech: 'I am a bad orator and my text is worse', he began. He blamed Babington, with whom he had lived in 'flourishing estate', for drawing him in. He acknowledged his fault 'and moved great pity among the multitude towards him, as in like manner did Tilney, a man of a modest spirit and goodly personage'. By contrast, 'Abington, being a man of a turbulent spirit, cast forth threats and terrors of blood to be spilt ere long in England' (Camden, 308). 
The other seven were brought to the scaffold the next day and suffered the same death, 'but, more favourably, by the Queens commandment, who detested the former cruelty' (Camden, 308). They hung until they were dead and only then suffered the barbarity of castration and disembowelling. Salisbury, very penitently, warned Catholics not to attempt to restore religion by force of arms. Jones condemned Babington's 'proud and headstrong mind'. Gage extolled the queen's bounty to his father and detested his own 'perfidious ingratitude'. The last to suffer was Jerome Bellamy, caught up in the business at the very end for hiding Babington and the others at his family's house in Harrow; his brother had strangled himself in prison (ibid., 309). 
The penalties for treason did not end with this brutality, for the lands and goods of convicted men were forfeit to the crown. In practice this severity was sometimes tempered. While the lands of Edward Jones seem all to have been forfeit, the entailed estates of his friend Thomas Salisbury passed to his brother John so that the Lleweni dynasty continued. Similarly, the entailed Babington lands passed successively to Anthony's brothers Francis and George, while other of his lands were forfeited and granted by the queen to Sir Walter Ralegh. 
Reaction to the plot was predictably hostile. Two tracts were published in the following year: George Whetstone's 'The Censure of a Loyal Subject' (1587) is a brief account in dialogue form of the executions, and W. Kempe's 'A Dutiful Invective Against the Moste Haynous Treasons of Ballard and Babington' (1587) is a piece of clumsy doggerel covering the same unhappy ground. A more serious account of the matter was Bishop George Carleton's 'A Thankfull Remembrance of God's Mercy' (4th edn, 1630), a description of various plots against monarchy and church, designed to demonstrate that both were protected by God's special mercy. The Roman Catholic church seems to have kept relative silence about the plotters, none of whom has ever been included in its lists of martyrs for the faith. 
The significance of the Babington plot lay not in the capture and punishment of fourteen inept and unfortunate conspirators, but in the death of Mary Stewart, whose fate was bound up with theirs. She was the target at whom Walsingham had aimed all along. Throughout the entire course of the plot he had controlled events, knowing better than the conspirators what was going on. Did he create the plot as well as control it? The surviving evidence leaves much uncertain. It is hard to say when the plot originated and who began it. Gilbert Gifford may have been its begetter, but it is not certain that he was in Walsingham's pay at that point. Certainly Ballard, who recruited Babington, was not. However, without the provision of a system by which mail could be got to and from Mary, the plot would not have gone forward as it did; and that system was of Walsingham's devising. He could have stopped the plot well before he actually did, but he let it run on until he could be sure that he had the evidence against Mary. For how much of that evidence was he responsible? Probably for the forged postscript to Mary's fatal letter, just possibly for other sentences in it. But whatever the truth of that, Mary was undoubtedly aware of the plot and condoned it. One other point should be noted about these events: for all the efforts made by Ballard to raise support, the leading Catholics in England were loyal to the monarch and rebuffed his overtures. The real backing for the conspiracy lay abroad, with Mendoza in Paris and Philip II in the Escorial. 
The poem called 'Tichborne's Elegy' was written by Chidiock Tichborne in the Tower before his execution. Its final stanza may serve as an epitaph for all the conspirators: '
I sought my death and found it in my womb, 

I looked for life and saw it was a shade; 

I trod the earth and knew it was my tomb, 

And now I die, and now I was but made. 

My glass is full, and now my glass is run, 

And now I live, and now my life is done. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 968


Babington, Benjamin Guy (1794-1866), physician and orientalist, the fourth son of the physician and mineralogist William Babington (1756-1833) and his wife, Martha Elizabeth Babington, was born on 5 March 1794 in Guy's Hospital when his father was resident apothecary there. Educated at Charterhouse School from 1803 to 1807, he entered the navy as a midshipman and served at Walcheren and Copenhagen, but left the service early, and, having obtained a nomination for the Indian Civil Service, studied at the East India College, Haileybury; he was appointed to the Madras presidency in 1812. Babington possessed an aptitude for languages and soon became distinguished as an oriental scholar. He translated into English 'A grammar of the high dialect of the Tamil language, termed Shen-Tamil: to which is added an introduction to Tamil poetry by the Reverend Father C. J. Beschi. Translated from the original Latin' (1822), and published other translations, including 'The Vedala Cadai, being the Tamul Version of a Collection of Ancient Tales in Sanscrit' (1831). His marriage in 1816 to Anna Maria, daughter of Benjamin Fayle, brought them three sons before her early death. 
Babington's health suffered in India, and he returned to England in 1819 to study medicine at Guy's Hospital and Cambridge. After matriculating at Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1820, at the age of twenty-five, and already a widower with a family, he became MB in 1825, ML in 1827, and MD in 1830. In 1831 he was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, where he was censor and Croonian lecturer in 1841. He became assistant physician to Guy's Hospital in 1837, and full physician in 1840. Babington was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1828 and in 1861 president of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. He was the founder, and for some years the president, of the Epidemiological Society, and was appointed by the crown a member of the medical council of the General Board of Health. He was also physician to the Deaf and Dumb Hospital, and to other charities. 
Babington was a man of remarkable intellectual power; proficient in several sciences, he was exact and thorough in all of them. In a lecture to the Hunterian Society on 18 March 1829 Babington demonstrated an ingenious instrument intended to allow the physician to examine the parts of the throat which were normally invisible. The instrument, which he proposed to call the glottiscope, consisted of an oblong piece of mirror fastened to a long piece of silver wire. With the patient's tongue held down by a spatula and the mirror placed against the palate, the epiglottis and upper part of the larynx became visible in the mirror. Babington's device, now known as the laryngoscope, was made public twenty-six years earlier than that of Manuel Garcia, a Spanish singing teacher long credited with its invention. 
Soon after his appointment at Guy's Hospital Babington studied animal chemistry, and assisted Astley Cooper, Richard Bright, and other colleagues in analysing morbid products. He also wrote in the 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions' two papers on the blood, in one of which he described the fat constantly present in the serum; in another he employed for the first time the term 'liquor sanguinis' to denote the fluid portion of the blood. He wrote some more strictly medical papers in 'Guy's Hospital Reports'. He translated from the German J. F. C. Hecker's 'Epidemics of the Middle Ages' (1844), and edited a translation of Ernst von Feuchtersleben's 'Principles of Medical Psychology' for the Sydenham Society (1847). 
Babington was highly regarded by his colleagues, but he hardly enjoyed the public reputation or gained the success which might have been expected. This was partly due to his retiring and unambitious character and partly, perhaps, to his having entered medicine somewhat late in life. 
Babington resigned his appointments at Guy's Hospital in 1855, and died at his home, 31 George Street, Hanover Square, London, on 8 April 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 969


Babington, Brute (d. 1611), Church of Ireland bishop of Derry, came from Cheshire. He entered Christ's College, Cambridge, on 17 June 1572, graduated BA in 1576 (incorporating at Oxford on 15 July 1578), and MA in 1579 (as a member of St John's College). He was a fellow of Christ's in 1577-84, graduated BTh in 1586, and is later termed DTh. He was rector of Thurcaston, Leicestershire, from 1583 to 1610, prebendary of Bishopshill (Lichfield) from 1592 to 1601, and divinity lecturer at Lichfield. He also held the vicarage of Tettenhall (Staffordshire) in 1602, and the rectory of Cossington (Leicestershire) in 1605. Disappointed in his efforts to secure the deanery of Lichfield in 1603, he also lost his lectureship. In 1610 he turned to Ireland for preferment. On 11 August the king nominated him to the see of Derry, and he was appointed on 8 November 1610, being consecrated in Drogheda by Archbishop Henry Ussher. 
Derry was a large see, strategically placed in the plantation of Ulster, which was then beginning to transform the province from a Gaelic stronghold into a major centre of English and Scottish settlement. According to his own account Babington's missionary efforts were successful. The leading Catholic priests were initially hostile, but by 'dealing with them lovingly and kindly', he persuaded well over half to submit and join the established church. By sitting in person in the new ecclesiastical courts and punishing offenders 'cum moderamine' ('with moderation') he confidently claimed 'I shall in short time bring this rude and uncivilized people to some good conformity' ('CSP Ire.', '1611-14', 3). Whether this optimism would have led to long-term success may be doubted -- certainly other English bishops elsewhere in the plantation failed to win over large sections of the native clergy, though it could be argued that their methods were less sensitive and more coercive. The experiment was, in any case, cut short by his sudden demise in Derry on 10 September 1611 'being well at seven o'clock evening and dead at eight' (ibid., 103). As often happened in the case of unexplained sudden protestant deaths, later Catholic sources attributed his demise to providential judgment -- in this case on his vain efforts to burn an image of the Virgin Mary in Coleraine Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 970


Babington, (Charles) Cardale (1808-1895), botanist and archaeologist, was born on 23 November 1808, at Ludlow, Shropshire, the son of Joseph Babington (1768-1826), at that time a physician, and Catherine, daughter of John Whitter of Bradninch, Devon. The historian Lord Macaulay was his first cousin. His father having taken holy orders, Babington's early years were punctuated by frequent family moves, initially round the midlands and later in Wessex, moves reflected in frequent changes of school. A short, probably unhappy spell as a boarder at Charterhouse School was succeeded by four years as a day boy at a school in Bath, whose good teaching, he later held, was responsible for equipping him for his university career. His father passed on to him his own fondness for field botany and fed that by introducing him to the chief works of identification then in vogue, and he spent much of his time in his teenage and undergraduate years exploring the local countryside for plants, an activity which was to culminate in a slender 'Flora Bathoniensis', written only after he had graduated and published later still, in 1834. At that period a parallel keenness for entomology had meanwhile developed into a passion for collecting and studying Coleoptera. These were to be the subject of more than half of his earliest published papers and so dominated his leisure hours at university as to earn him the nickname Beetles. After building up a collection of some 4000 specimens, however, he gradually lost that interest and after 1840 botany increasingly monopolized his scientific attention. 
The year before Babington went up to Cambridge in 1826 John Stevens Henslow had been appointed professor of botany, a subject newly necessary for medical students, and his Easter term lectures, field excursions, and evening parties in his rooms were quickly winning a large and enthusiastic following among naturalists in the university. Henslow's college, moreover, was St John's, where Babington now followed his father and three of his father's brothers. He and Henslow soon became friends, and in time he became Henslow's 'de facto' assistant and eventually deputy during the latter's absences after 1839 for much of each year tending his Suffolk parish. Although Babington could look forward to no university appointment in Cambridge until the chair of botany fell vacant, he had no need to train for a profession, his father having meanwhile died and left him financially independent. After graduating BA in 1830 and proceeding MA in 1833, he kept on his rooms in college and settled into a comfortable bachelor existence there. He was not elected a fellow until 1874 and his freedom from official duties enabled him to give all his time and energy to his personal research, such teaching as he did being purely informal and confined to sharpening the taxonomic acumen of undergraduates whose interest in botany was non-vocational. Many of those who came under his influence later produced county floras or otherwise rose to prominence as amateurs. That influence was exercised especially through the Ray Club, of which Babington served as secretary for fifty-five years and whose weekly meetings filled the role previously played by Henslow's parties. His particular proteges he sometimes took with him on the many tours of exploration he now embarked upon to almost every part of the British Isles. These early took in the Channel Islands, of which his impressively wide-ranging two seasons' fieldwork resulted in his second local flora, 'Primitiae florae Sarnicae' (1839). 
Increasingly, though, Babington's focus was more broadly national. The study of the higher plants of the British Isles had lapsed into shameful insularity, partly through the long isolation from the continent resulting from the Napoleonic wars, and there was a pressing need for a new, concise, scholarly handbook which brought British usage into line with that in France, Scandinavia, and especially Germany. Babington's 'Manual of British Botany', first published in 1843 after nine years in preparation, not only had all those assets but like its eighteenth-century predecessor, the Dillenian edition of Ray's 'Synopsis', was convenient for field use by being small enough for a pocket. Regularly revised in successive editions, of which eight appeared in his lifetime and two more after his death, it is credibly held to have revolutionized the situation in Britain. 
By the 1840s Babington was acknowledged leader of taxonomic research on British higher plants, just as Hewett Cottrell Watson dominated research into their distribution and its causes. Pugnacious and agnostic where Babington was gentle and pious, Watson was temperamentally drawn to the radically inclined Botanical Society of London while Babington identified with its more academic counterpart in Edinburgh, each of them being engaged to overhaul their respective societies' large and chaotic herbaria (to the great benefit of their own personal collections). Babington's bond with Edinburgh was reinforced by election to its quasi-Masonic Brotherhood of the Friends of Truth and, in 1842, appointment as joint botanical editor of the 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History', then the most respected of the specialist journals in Britain and run from the Scottish capital. These moves led the ever-touchy Watson to suspect an emerging Cambridge-Edinburgh axis 'determined... to exclude all works which do not take up their species and names', as he grumbled in a letter to Sir William Hooker in May 1844 (Watson to Hooker, May 1844, RBG Kew, Hooker MSS). Dependent in his own work on checklists and on stable categories, he resented the steady rain of additions and amendments required by the finely discriminating researches of Babington in particular. There were species, there were subspecies and there were 'Bab-ies', he was once moved to quip. Nevertheless the two, while keeping their distance, respected each other and never became estranged. 
Babington ventured outside the British Isles only once, to Iceland in 1846. The product was a magisterial paper in the 'Journal of the Linnean Society' bringing together all information on the country's flora recorded up to that time. Usually, though, the challenges presented by British Isles plants were quite enough, and none of those teased him longer and more frustratingly than the blackberries. By no means the first to grapple with that perplexing group, Babington had the disadvantage of living in an area with minimal scope for prolonged familiarization with a wide range of the microspecies in the wild. Overdependent on dried examples, neglecting as a result the key characters offered by the floral organs, he was led to adopt much too broad an approach. Though 'A Synopsis of the British Rubi' (1846) and his numerous subsequent publications, combined with his readiness to name specimens submitted (for he was always the most helpful and untiring of correspondents), made study of the group fashionable, the many years he devoted to it proved largely in vain. The path through the maze was to be discovered only after his death. 
Babington's stature by mid-century was recognized by election as FRS in 1851 and president of the botany and zoology section of the British Association in 1853, 1858, and 1861. In 1860, exactly 200 years after Ray's pioneer Cambridge 'Catalogus' had appeared, he filled the gap for a further century with an excellent new flora of the county. The next year, on Henslow's death, he at last succeeded to the chair of botany at Cambridge. His main achievement in that office was a new and larger building for the herbarium, for which he purchased the extensive and valuable collections of John Lindley and Gaston Genevier and donated the no less vast one formed by himself. The department's library also benefited from his personal generosity, for he regularly needed to supplement with his own funds the slender official budget. That budget, however, his younger colleagues would have much preferred spent instead on up-to-date laboratories, for by then experimental botany had come into general favour and left the professor isolated in his interests. 
That Babington was almost equally devoted to antiquarian studies cannot have helped. It was said of him and his relation Churchill Babington, the university's Disney professor of archaeology, that each might fill the chair of the other, and to the publications of the Cambridge Antiquarian Society, of which he was one of the founders in 1840, he contributed over fifty papers. Through that body he also published in 1851 'Ancient Cambridgeshire', an attempt to trace Roman and other early roads in the county, of which a much-enlarged edition was published in 1883. Another favourite was the Cambrian Archaeological Association, the committee of which he chaired for thirty years and whose president he became in 1881. 
To his upbringing Babington also owed a lifelong interest in evangelical mission work, an interest that deepened after his late marriage, on 3 April 1866, to Anna Maria, daughter of John Walker of the Madras civil service. A wide range of bodies operating in that field received their strong support, while their commitment also found expression locally in the founding of a home for orphan girls in Cambridge. 
Babington's last years were sad. Failing health had already compelled some shedding of activities when in 1891 an acute attack of pneumonia while in Scotland was succeeded by a rheumatic condition which confined him permanently to a wheelchair. This ended his botanical research and his visits to his beloved herbarium. A deputy professor, in the person of Francis Darwin, had to be appointed, to whom Babington voluntarily made over half his stipend, but his tenure of the chair terminated only with his death, at his home, 5 Brookside, Cambridge, on 22 July 1895. He was buried in the churchyard at Cherry Hinton, on the outskirts of Cambridge, on 26 July. His library of some 1600 volumes was bequeathed to the university, of which by the time of his death he had become the oldest resident member. His name is borne by three British plants, two of them, fittingly, blackberries, but 'Babingtonia', given to a genus of tropical members of the myrtle family by Lindley in 1842, has disappeared into synonymy. 


@@@@@


doc= 971


Babington, Churchill (1821-1889), scholar, was born at Roecliffe, Leicestershire, on 11 March 1821, the only son of Matthew Drake Babington (1788-1851), rector of Thringstone, and his wife, Hannah (died 1873), daughter of Benjamin Fleetwood Churchill. He was connected with the Macaulay family, and slightly, on his mother's side, with that of the poet Charles Churchill. Charles Cardale Babington was his father's cousin. He entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1839. While he was still an undergraduate his youthful love of nature found expression in a contribution to T. R. Potter's 'History and Antiquities of Charnwood Forest' (1842). He graduated BA in 1843, being the seventh in the classical tripos, and a senior optime in mathematics, and was president of the Cambridge Union in 1845. In 1846 he graduated MA, was elected a fellow of St John's College, and was ordained, having gained the Hulsean prize for an essay entitled 'Christianity in relation to the abolition of slavery'. From 1848 until 1861 he was perpetual curate of Horningsea, Cambridgeshire. In 1849 he published a defence of the English clergy and gentry of the seventeenth century against T. B. Macaulay's aspersions in the famous third chapter of his 'History of England'. Gladstone, in reviewing G. O. Trevelyan's life of Macaulay in the 'Quarterly Review' (1876), was strongly impressed with Babington's essays, and considered that he had convicted Macaulay at least of partiality. 
In 1850 Babington was entrusted by the university with the task of editing the recently discovered fragments of 'The Orations of Hyperides Against Demosthenes, and for Lycophron and for Euxenippus' from the papyri found at Thebes in Upper Egypt, and his edition was issued in two volumes (1850 and 1853). In 1855 he brought out an edition of 'The Benefits of Christ's Death', supposed to be by the Italian reformer Aonio Paleario. In 1860 he edited for the Rolls series R. Pecock's 'Repressor', and in 1865, for the same series, the two first volumes of R. Higden's 'Polychronicon'. In 1865 he was elected Disney professor of archaeology at Cambridge, and published his inaugural lecture. He was re-elected to the chair in 1870 and 1875. His contributions to the 'Dictionary of Christian Antiquities' included the articles on medals, glass, gems, inscriptions, seals, rings, and tombs. He made numerous contributions to the journals of learned societies, such as the 'Numismatic Chronicle', Hooker's 'Journal of Botany', and the 'Suffolk Institute Papers'. 
Babington left Cambridge in 1866, relinquishing his fellowship, and accepted the rectory of Cockfield in Suffolk. In 1869 he married Matilda Whytt, daughter of Colonel John Alexander Wilson RA, but left no children. In Cockfield, Babington was able to concentrate his attention on ornithology, and the result was his very thorough monograph on 'The Birds of Suffolk' (1886). During his last years he took up the study of conchology, and formed a fine collection both of British and exotic shells. He was an exemplary parish clergyman, and applied his archaeological knowledge in the restoration of Cockfield church, which took place during his incumbency and culminated in the erection of a new organ in 1887. 
Babington proceeded DD in 1879. In the following year he resigned the Disney chair of archaeology and was elected an honorary fellow of St John's College, Cambridge. He died at Cockfield rectory on 12 January 1889, and was buried in the parish churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 972


Babington, Francis (d. 1569?), college head, was probably the third son of Humphry Babington of Rothley Temple in Leicestershire. He matriculated as a pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1544, and proceeded BA in 1548-9. He became a fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, in 1551, proceeding MA in 1552. There is no evidence of his religious sympathies during the reign of Edward VI. However, he subscribed to the Roman Catholic articles of faith in 1555 prior to taking permanent leave of Cambridge for Oxford. He remained at Oxford for the rest of his academic career, taking in succession the degrees of MA (1554), BTh (1558), and DTh (1560). He was elected a proctor of the university on 18 April 1557, being already a fellow of All Souls. 
Babington was ordained priest in London on 5 March 1557. He then began to accumulate church livings, being admitted first to the vicarage of Aldworth, Berkshire, on 6 November 1557, upon presentation by St John's College, Cambridge. On 27 November he received the rectory of Adstock, Buckinghamshire, then the rectory of Sherrington, Buckinghamshire. He subsequently resigned Adstock, and took in its stead that of Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire. Upon the accession of Elizabeth I Babington professed himself to be a protestant, despite his prominence in enforcing Catholic orthodoxy at Oxford during the reign of Mary I. He also became chaplain to Lord Robert Dudley, then Elizabeth's master of horse. He preached the funeral sermon for Dudley's first wife, Amy Robsart (who was buried in St Mary's, Oxford, on 22 September 1560), an indication of the favour in which he was held. His conduct of the funeral, however, was marred by his repeated reference in the sermon to the 'lady so pitifully murdered' (Cooper, 'Ath. Cantab.', 1.557). Babington became master of Balliol College on 5 September 1559, and on 21 May 1560 was appointed vice-chancellor of the university, a post he held until 1562. With Dudley's support he was then appointed rector of Lincoln College in August 1560 (an appointment which lasted until 1563). He also held the benefice of Twyford, Buckinghamshire, in conjunction with the headship of Lincoln. He later came into possession of the rectories of Caythorpe, Lincolnshire (1560), and Holsworthy, Devon (1562). 
Babington's career at Oxford reached its apogee with his appointments both to Lincoln College and to the post of Lady Margaret professor of divinity (made effective towards the end of 1560, and held until 1563). Though university statutes did not permit, he remained vice-chancellor while holding the professorship. In 1562 Babington was involved in forcing a protestant warden, John Man, upon Merton College, whose fellows were Roman Catholic in their sympathies. Nevertheless, it was suspicion of the sincerity of his adherence to protestantism that blocked his succession in early 1561 to the deanery of Christ Church, Oxford (the post went instead to Thomas Sampson), and which ultimately led to his downfall. Babington resigned the vice-chancellorship in Michaelmas term 1562. In 1563 he resigned as rector of Lincoln and then as Lady Margaret professor, and he was subsequently deprived of his church livings in 1564. He remained in Oxford for a year after his resignations, and then fled to continental Europe in 1565, where he apparently died in exile in December 1569. 
Babington had a reputation for scholarship, and was known for his skill in philosophical and logical disputations. The contents of his personal library indicate a wide range of scholarly interest. He owned works of the church fathers (Origen, Clement of Alexandria, John Chrysostom, Augustine, and Gregory the Great) and of medieval theologians (Bede, Anselm, Bonaventura, Duns Scotus, and Hugo of St Cher), as well as works of his contemporaries, including Erasmus, and some mathematical works. He also collected manuscripts. Subsequent to his death, some of his books stayed at Lincoln. Others found their way to the library of the Jesuit College of the Immaculate Conception (in fact a nominal college, of no fixed location but embracing the counties of Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, and Rutland), where they remained during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Most of these books are now at Stonyhurst College, Lancashire. 
Babington's career reflects the difficulties faced by many English academics in the turbulent years of the mid-sixteenth century. Like a number (but by no means all) of his fellows, he sought to comply with the religious requirements of the successive regimes of Edward VI, Mary I, and Elizabeth I. Although a Roman Catholic, he was able for a time to dissemble his true confessional commitments after the accession of Elizabeth, and even joined in the persecution of Catholics resistant to changes at Oxford in the early 1560s. In the end Babington failed in this endeavour, and having lost the patronage of Dudley, he chose the path of exile taken by so many of his co-religionists. 


@@@@@


doc= 973


Babington, Gervase (1549/50-1610), theologian and bishop of Worcester, was born in Nottinghamshire, as Sir John Harington noted, 'by birth... a gentleman of a verie good house' (Harington, 129). Claims that he was a native of Devon, made by John Prince in 1701 and repeated by Browne Willis, are incorrect. No record of his mother's family has been found, but his father, Bernard Babington of Puxley, was closely linked to the main branch of the family at Dethick in Derbyshire which was to gain notoriety in 1586 with the conspiracy of Anthony Babington. For his university education Gervase Babington was sent to Cambridge where he matriculated from Trinity College in Michaelmas term 1567. The master at Trinity was the recently appointed John Whitgift who was to become his mentor. He graduated BA in 1571, was admitted junior fellow of the college on 28 September 1573, and then two years later proceeded MA. Babington was also incorporated at Oxford on 15 July 1578 (and again in 1589). At this stage he was becoming known as a 'hard student' of theology, versed in Hebrew and Greek, recognized especially for a persuasive style of preaching, so that after his return to Cambridge he was selected preacher for the university in 1580. 
Of equal consequence for the advancement of Babington's career was his selection -- after recommendation 'by the ancients and heads of the said university' -- as domestic chaplain to Henry Herbert, second earl of Pembroke. He served as chaplain at Wilton House in 1581 and possibly during part of 1582, and maintained a close relationship with the Herberts for the rest of his life. Mary, countess of Pembroke and sister of Sir Philip Sidney, was notable for her learning and scholarship, a true bluestocking in the best sense of the word; it was she who made Wilton 'like a little Universitie... a more excellent nurcerie for learning and pietie' (Hannay, 132). Mary Herbert completed the metrical version of the 'Psalms' that she and her brother had started, although opinion is mixed as to whether Harington was correct that she needed Babington's help because 'it was more then a womans skill, to expresse the sence so right as she hath done in her vearse' (Harington, 129). This supposition has been questioned, on the grounds that the finished translation can be explained by reliance on the Genevan 'Psalms' and commentaries. 
Babington benefited greatly from the court position and extensive patronage of Pembroke whose massive landholdings were concentrated in Wiltshire and Wales, and from the earl's concern to forward the protestant cause. In 1581 Babington was made warden of St Giles's Hospital, Wilton, which was followed by appointments to a set of livings, all in Wiltshire: vicar of Bulbridge (1585), and rector of both Ditchampton and Wilton St Mary (1585). Part of this accumulation is explained by the law (21 Hen. VIII c. 13), which permitted domestic chaplains to peers to purchase a dispensation to hold two benefices in plurality. During this period Babington began to publish the first of his theological and pastoral works, partly derived from his instruction to the Wilton household. In 1583 he dedicated to Pembroke 'A Very Fruitfull Exposition of the Commaundements by Way of Questions and Answeres' which went through three further editions (1586, 1590, 1596). The following year he published and dedicated to the countess 'A brief conference betwixt Mans frailtie and faith wherein is declared the true use and comfort of those blessings... in the fifth of Matthew... laide down in the plain order of dialogue' (1584; 5th edn, 1602). This commentary on the sermon on the mount clearly shows his advanced Calvinism especially in the prayers for the family. In morning prayer God is to be praised because he has 'chosen and elected us for thy children, when others as good as we by nature shall burn in hell eternally' (Hannay, 133). Babington's writings proved to be very popular, usually represented in a number of editions, often enlarged and revised. 'A Profitable Exposition of the Lords Prayer, by Way of Questions and Answers for most Playnnes' was dated at Wilton 'the ii of May 1588', this time dedicated to both Herberts. His teachings were practical 'aswell for the terror of the dull and dead, as for the sweet comfort of the tender harted'. In the dedication he thanked his patrons for their great favours to 'me and mine'. Babington must have married in the early 1580s; only his wife's given name, Joan, is known from the later probate of his will. Their son, John Babington, who was to matriculate at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 23 July 1603 (aged eighteen), was also a student at the Inner Temple in 1606. 
Babington continued to add to his preferments. In 1588 he was installed in the prebend of Llandegla in the collegiate church of Brecon and also the prebend of Wellington in Hereford Cathedral. One of the requirements at Cambridge for the degree of DTh that he was granted in 1589 was the promise to preach at Paul's Cross within a year of his inception. He fulfilled this prescription with a sermon delivered on 11 October 1590 and printed the following year under the imprimatur of Archbishop Whitgift. The sermon unswervingly followed the Genevan line on predestination: 'All men [were] at the first before the Lord in his eternall counsell, to receive an end or use according to his will, to life or death... to heaven or hell. In which good pleasure of his... he hath disposed of some one way, of some another.' Indeed Babington's sermon, one commentator asserts, 'must rank among the harshest of Elizabethan statements on predestination' (Tyacke, 253). He was appointed treasurer of Llandaff, being collated on 28 January 1590, and under this title he preached before the court at Greenwich on 24 May 1591. Babington was a committed Calvinist, not a puritan in the sense of a nonconformist. His court sermon was a vigorous defence of the ecclesiastical 'status quo', of uniformity, and church discipline against those who would prefer 'open assemblies in this land, and... erect a forme according to [their] wils, in woods, in fields, in holes and corners' (McCullough, calendar). Thereafter he was appointed with some regularity as a court preacher, usually on the Lenten roster. 
An important advancement came with his elevation to the see of Llandaff, probably through Pembroke's influence and the archbishop's backing. He was elected bishop on 7 August 1591, confirmed on the 27th, and then consecrated on 29 August in the parish church at Croydon by Whitgift. He held on to his lesser preferments as commendams because the diocese was impoverished, the stipend valued at the meagre annual sum of $154. His punning comment on Llandaff was that 'his true title should have bene Affe, for the land was gone' (Harington, 129). His cathedral was described in 1594 as in 'ruins and decayed state' -- 'more like a desolate and profane place than a house of Prayer' (Williams, 326). Babington fits Fincham's model of an 'evangelical' bishop whose primary role was always an active preacher and teacher. His activity as diocesan visitor and pastor is less distinct since there is no extant register or act book. However he was always a stickler for conformity, particularly against popish recusants. He was automatically a member of the council in the marches of Wales of which Pembroke was president and which had broad judicial and administrative powers especially against the suppression of recusancy. 
Babington continued to write lengthy treatises even after he became bishop, and in 1592 published the first of his volumes on the 'Pentateuch', 'Certaine Plaine, Briefe, and Comfortable Notes upon Everie Chapter of Genesis'. Its popularity is shown by the second 'enlarged' edition of 1596 which had, in fact, doubled in length. The sequel on 'Exodus' and 'Leviticus' did not appear until 1604, and by then he had been moved twice. He was elected to the see of Exeter on 4 February 1595 and enthroned on 22 March. There is a rare description of a confirmation at Barnstaple in August 1595 when on his first visitation he laid his hands on 'divers children' at the Castle Green. But on the following day such a crowd came in from the country that he withdrew to his lodgings and quietly left town, whereupon 'the people lamented that they had lost a fine harvest day' (Collinson, 52). The diocese was reckoned one of the poorest in England. Whether the low income or his ambition to push ahead explains his short tenure is open to question. The claim by Prince that Babington alienated the valuable manor of Crediton, one of the few remaining temporalities of the see which 'made Way for his translation', is a canard (Willis, 1.649). In truth the manor was procured during the vacancy of the see by William, Lord Burghley, and his son Robert Cecil for a relative under the terms of the 'Act of Exchange' of 1559. Babington was nominated by the queen to Worcester on 30 August 1597, elected on 15 September, and confirmed on 4 October. In contrast the new diocese was one of the more affluent English sees. On his translation he relinquished his prebend at Hereford but added at the same time the rectorate of Stokeinteignhead, Devon. 
A clearer picture emerges of Babington as an energetic and influential administrator at Worcester. He was commended for his constant preaching by Miles Smith, bishop of Gloucester after 1612, who edited the literary works of his former patron in 1615, and this claim was seconded by an anonymous clergyman, not of his diocese, in a work of 1601 which praised Babington's 'painfull preaching' and scriptural commentaries (Fincham, 88). Robert Abbot, brother of the archbishop and of the same cut of theological cloth as Babington, also noted his forceful preaching. Babington continued to serve on the council in the marches of Wales, and played a very active role sitting as magistrate at the quarter sessions, while working with determination to obtain convictions of popish dissenters at assize hearings. He likewise employed both preaching and personal argument to persuade papists to recant, methods approved by one who heard his 'publike exhortations or private conferences' (Questier, 172, n. 20). Like many bishops Babington inherited a dispute between the cathedral close and the Worcester civic authorities. When the latter attempted to secure a new charter from the crown, extending their jurisdiction over the cathedral precinct, he appealed to the earl of Salisbury to block the request, protesting that they were 'very injuriously encroaching' upon his territory and the dean and chapters ('Salisbury MSS', 18.460). The altercation, which dragged on from 1604 to 1607, was not settled until after the bishop's death. 
Babington was regularly in his diocese, dividing his residence between the Worcester palace and Hartlebury Castle, with periodic appearances in London and at court to preach. His one foray into court politics ended almost disastrously. On 2 March 1600 Babington preached before the ageing queen at Whitehall in the Preaching Place, an outdoor pulpit open not just to courtiers but also to Londoners of lesser rank. The ill-fated second earl of Essex, even though under house arrest and in disgrace, still retained an enormous popularity with the masses. Chamberlain reported that the bishop 'made many profers and glaunces in his [Essex's] behalfe, as he was understoode by the whole auditorie, and by the Quene herself'. When Babington was carpeted for his impertinence, 'he flatly forswore that he had any such meaninge' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.92-3). Despite his protestations Babington's name disappeared from the court sermon roster until the new reign. 
Within a year of James I's accession Babington was one of nine bishops summoned to the Hampton Court conference to consider puritan demands for reform. Even though Stephen Egerton, one of the presenters of the 'Millenary Petition', in a letter before the conference identified him as one of three bishops who 'are turned Puritans', this characterization is highly doubtful (Tyacke, 17). Babington would probably have endorsed Whitgift's Lambeth articles but there is no evidence that he ever abetted nonconformity. In his Paul's Cross sermon of 1590 he pleaded for moderation between puritans and the establishment, reproving such sins as bitterness in church controversy. A better characterization would be as a Calvinist episcopalian. Even so Babington was not in agreement with Bishop Bancroft, the chief spokesman for the establishment at the conference, who upheld the legality of lay baptism in case of necessity, a point Babington strongly contested. Not long after the conference Whitgift was buried at Croydon; his old pupil Babington preached the funeral sermon on 27 March, using as his text '2 Chronicles' 24: 15-16 and comparing the late archbishop to Jehoida who 'had done good in Israel in the service of God and of his house' (Fuller, 10.26-7). In April 1606 another confrontation between Babington and Bancroft took place in the House of Lords when Bancroft as primate tested opinion whether 'the papists might have a toleration for four years', and Babington retorted 'that it was pity they should be tolerated for seven days' (Questier, 141n.). 
Babington died at Worcester on 17 May 1610, aged sixty, and was buried in his cathedral without a memorial. No will has been found but his public legacy was a large folio of five major works published in 1615. Included for the first time were his notes on 'Numbers' and 'Deuteronomy', thereby completing his collection on the 'Pentateuch'. Four editions, the last in 1637, show the influence of his writings. In 1624 Joseph Hall, a future bishop, opened the southern convocation with a sermon to his fellow clergy. 'I must say it,' he informed them, ''Stupor mundi clerus Britannicus'' ('The wonder of the world is the clergy of Britain'). Making his point Hall listed some twenty learned theologians and 'eloquent' preachers: named among his 'great lights' of the English church was Babington (Collinson, 92). 


@@@@@


doc= 974


Babington, Humphrey (bap. 1615, d. 1692), college administrator, was baptized on 5 November 1615 in the village of Cossington, Leicestershire, the younger of two sons of Adrian Babington, rector of that parish, and his wife, Margaret Cave. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a sizar in 1634. He graduated BA in 1639, becoming a fellow of Trinity in 1640 and proceeding MA in 1642. He served as tutor at Trinity from 1642 to 1647. In 1650 he was ejected from his fellowship for refusing to take the engagement. He went on to become rector of the Nottinghamshire parishes of Keyworth in 1654 and Stanton on the Wolds in 1655, later serving as vicar of Easton Maudit in Northamptonshire, in 1657, and from the same year vicar of Grantham, Lincolnshire. After the Restoration he successfully petitioned the House of Lords to be restored to his fellowship at Trinity. In 1661 he became rector of Boothby Pagnell in Lincolnshire, succeeding Robert Sanderson after his elevation to the episcopate. He proceeded DD 'per literas regias' in 1669. 
Babington was an important figure in Trinity College throughout the Restoration, serving as senior dean in 1671-2 and also as senior bursar in 1674-8. He eventually became vice-master of the college in 1690. He appears on the roll of college benefactors, contributing funds for the development of Nevile's Court in the 1680s and building two sets of rooms for the use of the Babington family. Circumstantial evidence suggests that he was an important patron for Isaac Newton and possibly even the means by which Newton came to Trinity (Westfall, 70, 73-4). Babington died on 4 January 1692 after suffering a stroke, and was buried in the chapel of Trinity College. His extensive will indicated his substantial means. It also contained provisions for the founding of the Old Men's Hospital in Barrow, Leicestershire, which was established in 1694 in the memory of his uncle Theophilus Cave. 
Babington's sole published work consists of a sermon, 'Mercy and Judgement', preached to the Lincoln assizes in July 1678. This was published a few months afterwards in Cambridge at the request of Thomas Harington, high sheriff of Lincoln. The sermon displays Babington's learning in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew and his political and religious views may be estimated by its assertion that 'Monarchy is the best safeguard against the great 'furious Bulls' of Tyrannical 'Popery', and the lesser 'giddy cattle' of Schismatical 'Presbytery'' (Babington, 27). 


@@@@@


doc= 975


Babington, John (bap. 1604, d. after 1635), soldier and mathematician, was baptized on 21 August 1604 at St Nicholas Acon in the City of London, the son of John Babington and his wife, Dorothie Rosse. No details of his life are known beyond those disclosed in his book 'Pyrotechnia, or, A Discourse of Artificiall Fireworks' (1635). Babington explains that he was, and had been for some years past, 'one of the inferiour gunners of his Majestie'. In the halcyon days of peace he had turned his attention from gunnery to fireworks, which were important both for military use and as popular civic entertainment. The major portion of his book sets out, clearly and with illustrations, how to make up the chemicals and structures for each type of firework display. Babington was a citizen of London and a member of the Salters' Company, which may have assisted his familiarity with these chemicals. This section was dedicated to the earl of Newport, master of the ordnance, and prefaced by verses in praise of the author, one of which was by John Bate, whom Taylor tentatively identifies with John Bate of Tower Hill, maker of gunnery and other mathematical instruments. 
The second part of Babington's book, a 'Short treatise of geometrie', dedicated to Sir John Heyden, lieutenant of the ordnance, was intended for the use of young mathematical practitioners and gunners. A third section consists of logarithmetic tables, possibly the earliest to be published in England in this form. The circumstances of Babington's later life are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 976


Babington, Sir William (c.1370-1454), justice, was from an ancient Northumberland family, whose members had, by the mid-fourteenth century, abandoned their interests there in favour first of Cambridgeshire and then of Nottinghamshire, where they had long held a manor at Rolleston near Newark. His father, John, married a Cambridgeshire bride but was buried in the Nottinghamshire church of East Bridgford. William's marriage to Margery, heir of the Martels of Chilwell, confirmed the shift of the family's interests, for she brought to the family the manors of Chilwell and Ruddington near Nottingham. Of age by 1395, William pursued a highly successful legal career, which enabled him to extend these landholdings greatly. By 1408 he was retained as an apprentice-at-law by the duchy of Lancaster; in January 1414 he was appointed king's attorney; and in June 1415 he became deputy chief steward of the northern parts of the duchy. In the following month he and others were called by the crown to take up the degree of serjeant-at-law. Their refusal, on grounds that are unclear, led to their appearance in parliament in November 1417, where they were obliged to accept the honour. 
Thereafter Babington's promotion was rapid. A year's service as king's serjeant was followed, in November 1419, by appointment as chief baron of the exchequer, and, in June 1420, by elevation to a seat on the common bench. Three years later, in May 1423, he became the chief justice of that court, a position he held until his retirement in February 1436, and, at the dubbing of Henry VI on Whitsunday 1426, he received the further honour of the Order of the Bath. He exploited his success not only to extend his estates through the purchase of several manors in Bedfordshire, Nottinghamshire, and Derbyshire, but also to find a remarkable series of wealthy brides for his sons and his younger brothers. The most noteworthy of these marriages was that of his son John to Maud, granddaughter of Eleanor, heir of the barony of St Amand, and hence, on the death of Maud's father, Gerard Braybrooke, in 1422, one of the three coheiresses of that barony. Only the couple's childless death prevented a further substantial addition to the Babington lands. The chief justice's influence probably also explains the marriage of his brother Thomas to one of the two daughters and coheirs of Robert Dethick of Dethick in Derbyshire. The Catholic conspirator, Sir Anthony Babington (died 1586), was a direct descendant of this marriage in the male line. 
On William's retirement from the bench in 1436, he was probably in his early sixties, and advanced age explains why little is known of him in the last years of his life. A comparison of the tax returns of 1436 and 1451 shows that, before the latter date, he had made over the bulk of his estates to his son and heir, William: in 1436 he was assessed on an annual income of $160 but by 1451 his assessment had fallen to $40 p.a., while that of his son had risen from $37 to $100 p.a. He drew up a short and uninformative will on 3 October 1454, directing burial in the newly built chapel of St Mary in the church of the monastery of Lenton, and died a few days later (his will was proved on 10 October but the jurors in his inquisition 'post mortem' give his date of death as 13 October). His money and goods to the value of 600 marks were employed by his executors in the foundation of a chantry in the church of Flawford (demolished in 1773) in the parish of Ruddington. 


@@@@@


doc= 977


Babington, William (1756-1833), physician and mineralogist, the son of a clergyman, was born on 21 May 1756 at Portglenone, near Coleraine, co. Antrim, Ireland. After being apprenticed to a practitioner at Londonderry, he completed his medical education at Guy's Hospital, London, but did not take a medical degree. In 1777 he was made assistant surgeon to the Haslar naval hospital in Portsmouth, and held this appointment for four years. He then became apothecary to Guy's Hospital, and also lectured on chemistry in the medical school attached to the hospital. He published 'Syllabus of a Course of Lectures at Guy's Hospital' in 1789. William and Martha Elizabeth Babington were married before 1794, and had four sons and four daughters between 1794 and 1810. The family lived in Cornhill, London, until about 1796, in Basinghall Street until 1801, and then in a large house in Aldermanbury until 1830. 
Babington resigned the post of apothecary, and, gaining his MD from the University of Aberdeen in 1795, was elected assistant physician to Guy's Hospital in the same year. He was elected to the post of full physician in 1802. In 1811 he and James Curry published 'Outlines of a Course of Lectures on the Practice of Medicine as Delivered' [at Guy's]. Babington resigned from his post at Guy's in the same year because of the pressures of private practice; however, within a week the hospital governors persuaded him to serve once again as an assistant physician, which he did until 1813. He had also been admitted a licentiate of the College of Physicians in 1796 and he remained so until 1827, when he received the unusual honour of being elected fellow by special grace. In 1831 he was made honorary MD by the University of Dublin. 
Babington was a very able and successful physician, whose skill and knowledge were confirmed by his contemporaries. He was a patron of the Royal Jennerian Society and a dominant figure in the Hunterian Society in the 1820s, being president of the latter in 1824 and orator in 1827. However, his chief interests were in chemistry and mineralogy, rather than in medicine. He lectured on chemistry at Guy's Hospital for many years, and published some memoirs in 'Nicholson's Journal'. He was friendly with chemists such as Humphry Davy and Joseph Priestley, and he lectured on the application of science at the Chapter Coffee House Society in the 1790s. His interest in mineralogy was even greater, and he achieved more. While apothecary to Guy's Hospital he acquired the valuable collection of minerals which had belonged to John Stuart, earl of Bute. Babington made an elaborate catalogue of the collection, which served as the foundation of his 'Systematic Arrangement of Minerals' (1795) and his 'New System of Mineralogy' (1799). Babington was a member of the short-lived British Mineralogical Society (1799-1806), and joined the Askesian Society in 1801. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1805, being described as 'a gentleman eminently learned in chemistry and mineralogy' in the citation. 
Babington did more by encouraging science than by his own work, and has some claim to be regarded as the founder of the Geological Society. The circumstances are recorded by G. B. Greenough: 'With a view to enable Count Bournon, of whom he had been a pupil, to publish his elaborate monograph on the carbonate of lime, Dr. Babington in 1807, invited to his house a number of gentlemen the most distinguished for their zeal in the prosecution of mineralogical knowledge. A subscription was opened and the necessary sum readily collected. The object having been accomplished, other meetings of the same gentlemen took place, for the joint purpose of friendly intercourse and mutual instruction. From such small beginnings sprang the Geological Society, and among the names of those by whose care and watchfulness it was supported during the early and most perilous crisis of its history, that of Dr. Babington must always stand conspicuous. (Greenough, 42-4)' Babington was president of the society in 1822, but he did not contribute to its 'Transactions'. After this he took lessons in geology from Thomas Webster, and he attended the chemical lectures at London University in the year before his death. He was also appointed by the government to be one of the referees to put a price on the Greville collection of minerals, bought by the nation and preserved in the Natural History Museum. 
Babington had acquired a large and lucrative medical practice, and continued with his medical and scientific work until within four days of his death, which occurred from influenza, at his home in Portland Place, London, on 29 April 1833. He was buried in the church of St Mary Aldermanbury. Four years after his death a monument was erected to him in St Paul's Cathedral by public subscription. He left a son, Benjamin Guy Babington, also physician to Guy's Hospital, and a daughter, Martha, who married the physician Richard Bright. 


@@@@@


doc= 978


Babion, Peter (supp. fl. 1150), supposed religious writer, is the creation of the bibliographer John Bale (died 1563). In his notebook, the 'Index Britanniae scriptorum', Bale conflated two entries in the 'Catalogus' of Henry Kirkestede (died in or after 1378) and two in the early fourteenth-century union catalogue of books on the British mainland compiled by the Oxford Franciscans, known as the 'Registrum Anglie'. Kirkestede had listed an exposition of 'Matthew's gospel' and numerous sermons under the name Babio. These were certainly by Geoffroi Babion de Loroux (died 1158), archbishop of Bordeaux. Under the heading 'Opera Petri Babilon', the 'Registrum' gives a treatise on the mass and a collection of sermons. The archbishop of Bordeaux may have written the former, though it has also been attributed to an otherwise unknown Peter, while the sermons are almost certainly those listed by Kirkestede. Bale noted that the two sets of sermons were the same, but failed to identify their author as Geoffroi Babion, and attributed all three works to a Petrus Babion (or Babylon). 
The final item in Bale's list is the late twelfth-century comic play 'Babio', which he entered under Geoffroi Babion in his notebook, but under Peter Babion in his published work, known as the 'Catalogus'. Earliest extant in Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 53, written at the end of the twelfth century, 'Babio' is anonymous, though it has tentatively been attributed to the late twelfth-century writer Nigel of Canterbury (also known as Nigel Wireker). This may be doubted, but it was certainly composed in England, which may explain why Bale thought that his Petrus Babion was British. 


@@@@@


doc= 979


Bache, Francis Edward (1833-1858), composer and organist, was born on 14 September 1833 at Birmingham, the eldest of the seven children of Samuel Bache (1804-1876), a Unitarian minister, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Higginson (died 1855). From a very early age he showed extraordinary talent for music, learning the piano, organ, and violin. On the last instrument, which he studied with Alfred Mellon, he played in the orchestra at the Birmingham festivals of 1846 and 1847. Having decided to become a professional musician, he left school in the summer of 1849, and, after studying for a short time with the city organist of Birmingham, James Stimpson, went to London, and continued his studies with Sterndale Bennett. He became organist at All Saints' Church, Gordon Square, in October 1850, and in November his first overture was performed at the Adelphi Theatre. 
From 1849 to 1853 Bache worked hard in London, teaching, studying, and, under contract to the publishing firm Addison, Hollier, and Lucas, composing numerous piano pieces. In October 1853 he went to study with Moritz Hauptmann in Leipzig, where he remained until the end of the following year; he returned to England in 1855 after short stays in Dresden and Paris. He then obtained an appointment as organist at Hackney, but was soon forced to give it up by illness. In 1856 he went to Algiers, where for a time the symptoms of his tuberculosis were alleviated. From Algiers he travelled through Paris 'en route' to Leipzig, then, via Dresden and Vienna, to Rome, where he spent the winter. In June 1857 he returned to Britain, and passed the next winter at Torquay, but on his return to Birmingham in April 1858 his condition gradually worsened, and he died, at 44 Frederick Street, Edgbaston, on 24 August. 
It is undeniable that Bache's potential was greater than his achievements; as a twentieth-century commentator remarked, 'Bache's early death deprived Victorian music of one of its most promising talents' ('New Grove'). But though much that he wrote was obviously the ephemeral and immature work of one whose powers were prevented from full development, some of his compositions show that he possessed considerable talent. His piano compositions evidence attractive spontaneity and polish in their essentially Mendelssohnian idiom; and similar traits, developed to a higher level, are encountered in his songs, especially those published as op. 16 ('c'.1850), which include settings of Uhland, Goethe, and Heine, and which constituted a significant contribution to the development of sensitive word-setting, on the German model, in nineteenth-century England. 


@@@@@


doc= 980


Bache, Samuel (1804-1876), Unitarian minister, was born on 24 December 1804 at Bridgnorth, Shropshire, to Joshua Tilt Bache, a grocer (died 1837), and his wife, Margaret Silvester, of Newport, Shropshire. After his mother's death in 1808 he was raised by his father's sister, Mrs Maurice, at Stourbridge. He was educated by a Mr Beasley, of Nodland near Stourbridge, a cousin of the well-known Revd Ebenezer Beasley (1763-1824), dissenting minister at Uxbridge, and was for a time assistant in the school of the Revd Lant Carpenter (1780-1840) at Bristol. He was educated for the ministry at Manchester College, York, in 1826-9. 
On 1 July 1829 Bache became minister at Dudley, and in 1832 moved to Birmingham as co-minister with John Kentish (1768-1853) at the New Meeting, Moor Street, once the congregation of Joseph Priestley (1733-1804); Kentish declined a salary after 1832 but continued to preach until 1844, after which Bache was in all but name sole pastor. During much of his pastorate, Bache also kept a school. In 1862 the chapel was sold to Roman Catholics, and the congregation moved to a handsome Gothic structure in Broad Street, called the church of the Messiah. In 1859 Bache took a leading part with the Revd John Cale Miller (1814-1880), the evangelical rector of St Martin's, in the establishment of Hospital Sunday, an institution begun in Birmingham. 
Bache regularly attended the New Street Theatre in Birmingham; the only other minister to do so was the high-church clergyman at St Paul's. Shortly after his settlement Bache publicly defended theatre-going against evangelical denunciation, an action that brought him a gift of a case of port from an anonymous admirer. In 1840 he similarly defended the triennial music festivals against the criticism of the Quaker Joseph Sturge. 
On his settlement in Birmingham in 1832 Bache married Emily (died 1855), the second daughter of the Revd Edward Higginson (1781-1832) of Derby, whose eldest daughter, Helen, was the wife of the Revd James Martineau (1805-1900). Seven children were born, three of whom became prominent in the English musical world: Francis Edward Bache (1833-1858), composer; Walter Bache (1842-1888), pianist; and Constance Bache (1846-1903), musician and translator ['see under 'Bache, Walter]. The youngest son, John Kentish Bache (1844-1916), became Unitarian minister at Moretonhampstead in 1868, and took Anglican orders, after his father's death, in 1876. 
With a commanding, reserved presence, Bache was a compelling preacher and a dedicated teacher. His friend the Revd John Gordon (1807-1880) thought the very narrowness of his penetrating intellect was 'a condition of its exceptional power' (Gordon, 25). Among Unitarians Bache represented that section, deeply obligated to Priestley and aimed at carrying out the principles of John Locke's 'Reasonableness of Christianity', regarding Jesus Christ as the Messiah, the miraculously attested exponent of a pure morality and a simple theology, and the revealer, by his resurrection, of an eternal life; Bache's choice of the name for his new church in 1862 was thus a polemical statement at the height of a generational struggle within the denomination. 
Such theologically conservative views had come under increasing attack from the 'new school', particularly identified with James Martineau and John James Tayler (1797-1869). Their abandonment of the gospel miracles led Bache to propose on 23 May 1866 that the British and Foreign Unitarian Association require as a condition of membership 'recognition of the special divine mission and authority, as a religious teacher, of Jesus Christ'. The motion, of which ample notice had been given, was severely attacked as an effort to impose a creed on a denomination that had steadily rejected human formularies, and its overwhelming defeat was widely hailed as a victory for religious liberty. 
It was also a serious blow to Bache. His wife's death in 1855 had affected him deeply, and in 1868 failing health led him to resign his pulpit. Afflicted with 'softening of the brain', he lived the last two years of his life in a physician's house, Barnwood, in Gloucester, where he died on 7 January 1876. He was buried in Hockley cemetery on 13 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 981


Bache, Sarah (1771-1844), schoolmistress, was born at Bromsgrove, but was brought up in Worcester by close relatives named Laugher. With them, she attended the chapel of the Revd Thomas Belsham, a prominent Unitarian minister. She had many close connections within the Unitarian community: the Revd Thomas Laugher (died 1769) was her uncle, and Joshua Tilt Bache (died 1837), an important lay member of the sect, was her cousin. Some time after the death of her grandmother, Mrs Laugher, and before 1791, she moved to Birmingham, where she attended services led by Joseph Priestley. With the assistance of Phebe Penn, her half-sister, and A. Cameron, her niece, she for many years kept the Islington School, which, according to her obituary in the 'Christian Reformer', provided 'solid instruction and a truly parental instruction'. Another half-sister, Anna Penn, married the Revd Lant Carpenter; Sarah Bache contributed a hymn, 'See how he loved', to Carpenter's Exeter collection of 1812. She died at Hunter's Lane, Birmingham, on 23 July 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 982


Bachhoffner, George Henry (1810-1879), scientific lecturer, was born in London on 13 April 1810, the son of Andrew John Bachhoffner and his wife, Shepherdess Jane. He studied at the University of Giessen where he graduated MA and PhD. On 22 July 1834, in London, he married Caroline, 'nee' Derby (1811/12-1897), with whom he had at least four sons and two daughters. He was a well-known and popular lecturer on scientific subjects, publishing 'Chemistry as Applied to the Fine Arts' (1837) and 'A Popular Treatise on Voltaic Electricity and Electro-Magnetism' (1838). He was, with Sir George Cayley and others, one of the founders of the London Polytechnic Institution, Regent Street, which opened to the public in August 1838 as a place of popular instruction in science. He held the position of principal of the department of natural philosophy there from its foundation until August 1855. Among his many inventions was the Polytechnic gas fire, patented in 1850. He was briefly professor of natural philosophy at Elizabeth College, Guernsey. Appointed one of the district registrars of births, marriages, and deaths for Marylebone in 1837, he was superintendent registrar from 1853 to his death. He was lessee and manager of the Royal Colosseum, Regent's Park, from December 1856 until its final closure on 16 February 1864, delivering lecture courses similar to those that he had established at the Polytechnic Institution. Bachhoffner died at his home, 78 The Grove, Hammersmith, on 22 July 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 983


Back, Sir George (1796-1878), naval officer and explorer, was born on 6 November 1796 at Stockport, Cheshire, the second son of John Back and his wife, Ann. He entered the navy as midshipman of the 'Arethusa' in 1808. He was present at the destruction of the batteries at Lequeitio, northern Spain, and, after being repeatedly under fire, in 1809, while on a cutting-out expedition with the 'Arethusa''s boats, he was taken prisoner by the French at Deba. The prisoners were sent to San Sebastian, and Back was small enough to be carried in one of the panniers of a sumpter mule across the Pyrenees. While a prisoner at Verdun, he studied mathematics, French, and drawing. In the winter of 1813-14 he travelled on foot through a large part of France, and on reaching England was appointed midshipman to the 'Akbar', in which he served against the French on the North American station. The 'Akbar' was dismasted in a hurricane off Cape Hatteras, and nearly foundered. In 1816 she was paid off, and in 1817 Back was appointed Admiralty mate of the 'Bulwark'. 
In 1818 Back volunteered for service in the 'Trent', under Sir John Franklin, who was then entering on the first modern voyage of discovery in the Spitsbergen seas. On his return he rejoined the 'Bulwark', but in 1819 he set out with Franklin on his expedition by land to the Coppermine River, attempting to determine the latitude and longitude of the northern coast of North America, and the trend of the coast east of the Coppermine. In that terrible expedition it was largely owing to Back's dauntless determination that the party survived. At Fort Enterprise, Franklin sent him back to Fort Providence, and he was in imminent danger of starvation on the way. In five months he travelled 1204 miles on snow-shoes, with no other covering at night in the woods but a blanket and a deerskin, frequently at -48 degree F and once at 67 degree F below zero, and sometimes without food for two or three days at a time. Later on, when Franklin was in dire straits, he again sent Back to get help from the Indians, and after incredible exertions and sufferings, and after seeing one of his companions die, he succeeded just in time to save Franklin's life. On returning to England he was made lieutenant on 1 January 1821. 
In 1823 Back was appointed to the 'Superb', and sailed to the West Indies. In 1824, while at Lisbon, he was invited to join Franklin's expedition to the Mackenzie River, and hastened to do so, joining Franklin in London in December 1824. On that 1825-6 expedition he rendered Franklin notable service, especially in his dealings with the Inuit, and on coming home in 1827 he found that he had been promoted commander on 30 December 1825. His repeated applications for a ship met with no response, and he went to Italy to improve himself in the arts. At Naples in January 1832 he heard of the supposed loss of Captain Ross in the Arctic regions, and offered the Royal Geographical Society to go in search of him. He had been informed by Copper Indians on his previous journey of the existence of a river rising in the neighbourhood of the Great Slave Lake, and debouching on the Polar Sea, and by tracing this river to its mouth he hoped to make his way to Regent's Inlet, where he thought Captain Ross might be. The council accepted his offer, and grants from government and Hudson's Bay Company, supplemented by a public subscription, financed the expedition, on which Back set out from Liverpool with only one companion of his own rank, Dr Richard King, as surgeon and naturalist, in February 1833. 
Back's instructions were, in brief, firstly to make for the sea by the aforesaid river and, if possible, aid Captain Ross, and, secondly, to survey the coast as far as possible. The first winter he spent at Fort Reliance -- a house that he constructed near the Great Slave Lake, when himself half-starved and amid starving Indians. In April he received news of Captain Ross's arrival in England, but he was ordered to push on to the river and survey the coast from there to Cape Turnagain. His first difficulty was to discover where the river lay, and to avoid embarking on the wrong one. The name of it was Thlew-ee-choh-deeseth, or Great Fish River (later known as the Back River). His journey down it is vividly recounted in his 'Narrative of the Arctic Land Expedition to the Mouth of the Great Fish River, in 1834 and 1835' (1836), illustrated by his sketches. The ice prevented Back's proposed survey of the coast, and after again wintering at Fort Reliance he reached La Chene, the Hudson Bay station where he had started over two years before, in August 1835, having travelled 7500 miles, including 1200 of discovery. Besides his discovery of a river over 440 miles long, he had made important observations of the Aurora Borealis, and had given the name of Montreal to an island afterwards sadly familiar in connection with the fate of Franklin. 
In September 1835 Back reached England, and received a hero's welcome. He was awarded the Royal Geographical Society's gold medal, and was promoted by the Admiralty to the rank of captain on 30 September 1835, by order in council -- an honour that no other officer in the navy had received except William IV. In February 1836 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. Also in 1836 he was, at his own proposal, appointed to the command of an expedition, the object of which was to complete the coast line between Regent's Inlet and Cape Turnagain. Back was given command of HMS 'Terror' and the expedition set out in June 1836. The ship became trapped in ice; Back described the voyage in his 'Narrative', a book that captures much of the drama of Victorian Arctic exploration. 
Few sailors ever survived more terrible perils and hardships than Back did on his expeditions. 'Arctic work', as Lord Brougham said of Franklin, 'had got into his blood', and he could not resist a challenge. Not surprisingly, his body reflected the demands made upon it, and after his last expedition he was for six years more or less an invalid, and never sailed again. In 1837 he received from the Royal Geographical Society both its medals. In March 1839 he was knighted; in 1844 he became president of the Raleigh Club (the Royal Geographical Society's exclusive dining club) and in January 1847 he was elected FRS. He also received the gold medal of the Societe de Geographie de Paris (1835). He was employed by government to report on the harbour of Holyhead, but afterwards lived in retirement on half pay. On 13 October 1846 he married Theodosia Elizabeth (died 1861), widow of Anthony Hammond of Savile Row, London. He was a vice-president and long on the council of the Royal Geographical Society, and contributed many reports. He continued an active interest in Arctic exploration, and served on the Arctic council that advised the Admiralty on the search expeditions for Franklin. Back and nearly all his fellow members of the council were wrong about the location of the missing men, so the Admiralty sent expeditions to the wrong places. With the end of the Franklin search, Back again withdrew into quiet retirement. He was made rear-admiral in March 1857, vice-admiral in September 1863, and admiral in October 1876, and in June 1854 he became DCL at the University of Oxford. Expeditions sometimes engender rivalry and recrimination. To his critics, Back was vain, dandyish, a womanizer, charming to persons from whom he hoped to gain, but 'intensely selfish, sly and sycophantic' (Holland, 27). However, to his admirers, who included the British public, he was in bravery, intelligence, and love of adventure the very model of an English sailor. He died at his home, 109 Gloucester Place, Portman Square, London, on 23 June 1878 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. His paintings, drawings, and sketches from his expeditions are an invaluable historical record. 


@@@@@


doc= 984


Backhouse, Edward (1808-1879), Quaker minister and historical writer, was born at Darlington on 8 May 1808, the son of Edward and Mary Backhouse. He lived from his youth at Sunderland, where he was partner in the collieries and the bank with which his family had been connected for many years, although he took no active part in the business. He was fond of travel, a good amateur painter, and a student of natural history. He devoted himself chiefly to the promotion of philanthropic and religious causes. He was a generous supporter of various institutions in Sunderland, including a mission hall which he founded in one of the poorer districts, and is said to have spent over $10,000 a year on charities. In politics he was an energetic Liberal, and especially interested in questions bearing directly upon morality. In later life he was a prominent opponent of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', providing significant financial support to the Ladies' National Association for their repeal. He was a devoted member of the Society of Friends, to which his family belonged. He began to preach in 1852, and two years later was recognized as a minister. In 1862 and 1863 he served as clerk to the yearly meeting of Friends in London. He married Katharine, daughter of Thomas and Mary Mounsey of Sunderland, in 1856. They had no children, but he always enjoyed the company of the young and the promotion of their happiness. From 1874 until his death he devoted himself to church history; his manuscript, edited by Charles Tylor, was published in 1884 as 'Early Church History to the Death of Constantine'. The book, which makes no pretence to profound research, is interesting as an account of the early church from the Quaker point of view. Backhouse's health deteriorated in 1878; the following year he went to Hastings for a change of climate, and died there on 22 May 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 985


Backhouse, William (1593-1662), alchemist and antiquary, was born on 17 January 1593, probably at Swallowfield, Berkshire, the youngest of the four sons of Samuel Backhouse (died 1626), landowner, and his wife, Elisabeth (died 1630), daughter of John Borlase of Little Marlow. Samuel had acquired Swallowfield in 1582. The family was of good standing in Berkshire and he was twice high sheriff (1598, 1601). In February 1611 William matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, but he took no degree. About 1637 he married Anne (died 1663), daughter of Brian Richards of Hartley Westfield, Hampshire. They had three children: Samuel (died young), John (1640-1660), and Flower (1641-1700). Backhouse's three brothers all predeceased him and in 1649, on the death of the eldest, John, he inherited Swallowfield. About this time he engaged William Lloyd, the future bishop of St Asaph, as tutor to his children. 
Backhouse's life was outwardly obscure and uneventful but contemporaries testify that he was a respected figure in a network of people involved in occult and philosophical studies: 'a most renown'd chymist, Rosicrucian, and a great encourager of those that studied chymistry and astrology' (Wood). The most informative of Backhouse's contacts is Elias Ashmole, who acquired an estate near Swallowfield in 1649. Ashmole's first reference to Backhouse is dated 3 April 1651: 'Mr: Will: Backhouse of Swallowfeild in Com Berks, caused me to call him Father thence forward' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1136, fol. 24'v'). The relationship between Backhouse and his alchemical heir during the early 1650s is celebrated by Ashmole in an ode and in notes of various alchemical conversations; for example, on 13 May 1653: 'My father Backhouse lying sick in Fleetestreete over against St: Dunstans Church, & not knowing whether he should live or dye, about eleven a clock, told me in Silables the true Matter of the Philosophers Stone: which he bequeathed to me as a Legacy. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1136, fol. 29)' Both Backhouse's heraldic crest -- an eagle holding in its claws a serpent -- and his personal motto 'Scache cache' (archaic French, 'Know to conceal') were perfectly in tune with his character of secretive adept. He and his library of alchemical manuscripts greatly assisted Ashmole in the preparation of the latter's 'Theatrum chemicum Britannicum' (1652). 
Backhouse's learning extended to other fields. George Wharton, dedicating an almanac to Backhouse in 1653, refers to him as a master of astrology. His antiquarian interests are suggested both by the 'old deedes' that Ashmole recorded as being in his possession (7 Sept 1657; Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 833, p. 443) and by Aubrey's observation of Backhouse's habit of a summer tour of antique buildings. In 1660 Samuel Hartlib noted in his 'Ephemerides' that Backhouse was 'a favourer of all manner of ingenuities', and that he possessed 'a long Gallery wherin are all manner of Inventions and Rarities' (Sheffield University, Hartlib MSS, 'Ephemerides', sect. 61, 3-4). Given this interest in scientific instruments, Anthony Wood's statement that Backhouse invented the waywiser (later called the odometer) is not inherently unlikely, though more probably he improved an already existing instrument for measuring distances travelled by means of a device for counting the revolutions of a wheel. 
Backhouse's only undoubted original composition is an alchemical poem, 'The Magistery', in Ashmole's 'Theatrum chemicum Britannicum' (342-3); it is signed W. B. (Ashmole expanded the initials in his own annotated copy of the 'Theatrum') and dated December 1633. Ashmole also explicitly ascribes two manuscript translations of alchemical texts to Backhouse: 'The pleasant founteine of knowledge... by John de la Founteine of Valencia in Henault' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 58, fols. 1-23), a verse translation, dated 1644; and 'The golden fleece, or, The flower of treasures... by... Solomon Trismosin' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1395). Also in MS Ashmole 58, the verse translation of Jean de Meung's 'Planctus naturae: the complaint of nature against the erronious alchymist' (fols. 27-48'v') is in the same hand as 'The founteine of knowledge', as is the closely associated 'The alchimysts answere to nature' (fols. 50-67); Anthony Wood ascribes the 'Planctus naturae' to Backhouse, so the 'Answere' is probably his too. The final translation in MS Ashmole 58, 'A treatise of the phillosophers stone... by Synesius the Greeke abbot' (fols. 72-88'v'), may also be Backhouse's work. 
Backhouse's daughter, Flower, became sole heir to the Swallowfield estate when her brother John died childless in 1660. She married three times: first, in 1656, to William Bishop; next, in 1662 after his death, to her cousin Sir William Backhouse of London, who also left her a widow; and finally, in 1670, to Henry Hyde, who in 1674 became second earl of Clarendon. William Backhouse died of a wasting fever on 30 May 1662 and was buried on 17 June in Swallowfield church. 


@@@@@


doc= 986


Backwell, Edward (c.1619-1683), goldsmith and banker, the son of Barnaby Backwell of Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire, a yeoman, was apprenticed in 1635 to Thomas Vyner, a leading goldsmith. He became free of the Goldsmiths' Company in 1651, of which he was to be prime warden in 1660. 
Like his master, Backwell was actively involved in credit finance during the time of the English republic. He also dealt in the former crown property that was put on the market; having bought the park at Hampton Court under the Commonwealth, he sold it back to the state at a profit under the protectorate. He was engaged in bullion transactions as early as 1650 and helped Vyner to handle captured Spanish plate in 1657. However, he was most active as treasurer for the Dunkirk garrison from the time of the town's capture and establishment as an English base on the continent in 1658, and this probably provided him with a natural transition from his role as a disbursing official and credit financier in the service of the republic to a similar position under the restored monarchy in 1660. He continued to manage the affairs of Dunkirk, although jointly with the more committed royalist financier Sir John Shaw, until after its sale to France in 1662, when he handled the bullion payments made by Louis XIV to Charles II. He also acted jointly with Sir Thomas Vyner in providing money for the supply of the royal household, and with the latter's nephew Sir Robert Vyner in handling bullion brought in for coinage at the Royal Mint, both Vyners having also already been involved in bringing over the French money received for Dunkirk. 
Backwell was elected an alderman of the City shortly before the Restoration, early in 1660, but paid the customary large fine of $720 in the following year in order to be excused from continuing to serve. It is not clear whether this had any political or religious significance. It is indicative of Backwell's importance, or at least of his ceaseless activity, that he is mentioned more often than any other financier of the 1660s in Samuel Pepys's 'Diary'. In January 1664 Pepys expressed himself strongly (in his famous naval white book, not in the diary) of the opinion that Backwell was profiteering at the crown's expense by asking 4's'. and 7died for each 'piece of eight' which he delivered, when the clerk of the acts had a merchant friend who would supply them at 4's'. and 61/2died each. 'This is the unhappy posture of the King's credit. And the effect of making use but of one or two men', so Pepys reflected ('Samuel Pepys and the Second Dutch War'). 
But all was not plain sailing for Backwell during these years. When he was on a confidential mission to Antwerp on the crown's behalf in the summer of 1665 his head clerk (who had been an under-officer in the exchequer with Pepys back in 1659-60) succumbed to the plague when in charge of the London office. In Backwell's absence this led to a temporary crisis of confidence in his creditworthiness and a run on his bank's resources, from which he had to be rescued by the crown largely with the help of Sir Robert Vyner, to whose assistance Backwell in turn rallied during another liquidity crisis in 1667-8. Both in his own capacity, by having advanced credit to the crown through numerous of its agents, and as the recipient of many reassigned Treasury orders for payment on future revenues, Backwell was inevitably one of those hardest hit by the stop of exchequer (December 1671-January 1672). As a result of this measure, taken to avert general bankruptcy, and to allow expenditure to continue in preparing for the Third Anglo-Dutch War, all hypothecated payments on incoming revenues were to be frozen for one year; this was later extended for a second year, by the end of which time the dates by which the hypothecated payments should have been made had all passed. When the crown reviewed its obligations to the bankers, initially in 1674, Backwell was reckoned to be owed a total of nearly $296,000 (principal, plus interest due since January 1672). This was less than the amount owed to Sir Robert Vyner (by then a baronet), whose uncle Sir Thomas, Backwell's old master, was not involved (having died in 1665), but it was more than that owed to any other goldsmith, and a very considerable sum, equivalent to about one-quarter of the crown's annual peacetime income; for this he was to receive a 6 per cent annuity, amounting to $17,759 13's'. 8died, in order to help him meet his obligations to his own creditors. The crown sought to give the letters patent, reissued in 1677, empowering the annuity payments to Backwell, Vyner, and the other goldsmith bankers, who had been the direct sufferers from the stop, the additional legal force of a statute; but a bill which had passed the Lords in 1678 failed in the Commons. 
Meanwhile the extent to which Backwell continued to act as a private banker after 1672 is doubtful; he is not named in a 1676-7 pamphlet listing the bankers. He did, however, continue actively as a financial agent of the crown, and had already been rewarded early in 1671 by his appointment, jointly with his son John, as comptroller of customs in the port of London, the duties of which he performed by deputy. Along with Vyner he completed a four-year term as a commissioner of the customs and farmer of the customs revenues in 1671, so as comptroller he was not thereafter having to cross-check on his own activities as a farmer; he and Vyner were not members of the new syndicate, which offered to undertake the next and abortive farm, the failure of which led instead to the institution of direct management by salaried commissioners. While he was on a special mission to the Netherlands in 1674, trying to collect what the United Provinces and their allies owed Charles II, as the price of England abandoning their French ally and making a separate peace, Backwell made an ambitious, it might be said audacious, proposal to the lord treasurer, Lord Latimer, shortly to become earl of Danby. This was to the effect that he should 'buy' the first $5 million to be yielded by the new impost on wines and vinegar, due to be raised over the years 1674-8, for which he was to give $430,000, although of this he was actually to pay only $150,000 within the following ten months; the remaining $280,000 was to be written off as the debt which was owed him by the king (on which he offered to forgo further interest as from that midsummer). The correspondence is frustratingly one-sided, Danby's replies to Backwell not being known to have survived; but when, not surprisingly, the offer was not taken up, Backwell seems to have become convinced that the lord treasurer had turned against him, due to the promptings of some secret enemy, whom Backwell perhaps unwisely identified in a later letter as the merchant financier Sir John Banks, who had indeed prudently moved his own bank account away from Backwell and from Vyner to another goldsmiths' partnership before the 1672 financial crisis. Backwell did collect some of the money owing to the king by the Dutch, but his relations with the still dominant Danby may well have been damaged by this curious episode. 
In 1676 an informer reported that Backwell had been seen calling on the duke of Buckingham, one of the leading opposition peers, at his house just outside London. By contrast with Vyner, who was eventually bankrupted by the actions of some of his private creditors against him, Backwell's bankruptcy in 1682 seems to have been precipitated by the crown's action against him in respect of money which he allegedly owed from his dealings with Sir George Carteret as treasurer of the navy many years earlier (1660-67), and following his death the next year payment of the 6 per cent annuity was stopped. Eventually a private act of parliament in favour of his creditors, and their heirs and executors, was passed in 1698, in the parliamentary session preceding the passage of a similar measure for Vyner's creditors. Under the terms of this act, a minority of one-third or less of the creditors, measured by their numbers and by the amounts which they were owed, was obliged to accept any agreement made with Backwell's own heirs and executors by a two-thirds majority, or else forfeit any claims whatever on his estate -- statute thus being employed to prevent the possibility of any future legal actions. Some of his family did survive as Buckinghamshire landowners, albeit on a modest scale; one branch even added to their estates, although as absentees living in London. But the male lines all died out before the end of the eighteenth century, and Backwell's descendants in the female line finally sold up during the early twentieth century. Unlike the case with the Vyners, some of his family did continue as City financiers. 
Backwell's activities as a banker are very fully, yet also incompletely, documented. A series of large ledgers descended to one of his grandsons, who married into the Child family; these records then passed to Child's Bank, then to Glyn Mills, and subsequently into the possession of the Royal Bank of Scotland. They constitute the earliest known systematic archive of any British bank, antedating even those of Hoare and Child, and have therefore been of much interest to historians of banking and finance. The account books of the scriveners Robert Abbott, Robert Clayton, and John Morris, it is true, go back to an earlier date, in so far as these can be equated with bankers' cash ledgers. There is one general letter-book with entries running from the 1650s to the 1670s, sometimes misleadingly described as 'the Dunkirk ledger' because it begins with items about Backwell as paymaster for Dunkirk under the Cromwellian protectorate. It also contains a record of the full establishment for the garrison and ancillaries shortly after the Restoration, when the annual cost was calculated to be over $113,000, an absurdly large amount in relation to Charles II's total revenue at that time, and ample justification for the sale of Dunkirk to France the following year. 
A less expected item to find is the full, lengthy text of the 1667 agreement made between all the incoming farmers of the hearth tax or chimney money, since Backwell was not one of them; however, Sir Robert Vyner, while notionally only one of the ten parties to this complex agreement, was clearly the power behind the whole undertaking, and Backwell may have felt it necessary to have the full facts about this partnership recorded because some of those involved, including of course Vyner himself, were currently banking with him. In general this volume illustrates his relations with the crown, both before and after the stop of the exchequer. The other nine surviving volumes are ledgers more properly so-called. They run from 1663 to 1672, with a gap in 1664 and another in 1665; it is clear from internal references, and from the alphabetical numbering of the volumes, that the series must have originated before 1663 (possibly even going back to the early 1650s), and must have continued after March 1672. They are basically records of debit and credit transactions with the system of internal balancing of the entries having been changed at some stage in 1665. 
As with the other goldsmith bankers of the time, Backwell had among his clients many individuals who reassigned to him their orders guaranteed on future royal revenues after this system was implemented in 1665-6, although it is impossible to calculate what proportion such items constitute of the total private side of his business. Use has been made of the ledgers (chiefly of the continuous part of the series covering 1666-72) in order to calculate the scale of his advances to the crown, and the effect on his business of Sir George Downing's system of Treasury orders, devised to increase the crown's short-term credit, and their reassignability to third parties. More recently the use of computers has made it possible to construct day-to-day cashflow tables and diagrams for Backwell's relations with the other goldsmith bankers among his clients, and (separately) with Sir Robert Vyner. One or two special factors served to increase Backwell's potential vulnerability. Besides the crisis in his affairs, already noted, back in 1665, it has been suggested that the destruction of his City premises in the great fire of 1666 led him to abandon altogether his original trade as a goldsmith and to concentrate wholly on banking and government service. He lacked Vyner's continuing commitment to the craft through the latter's position as the king's goldsmith. 
Although there is some disagreement as to how far Backwell was 'the bankers' banker' in the sense of providing clearing arrangements between others engaged in the business, he certainly had very active dealings with several, both individuals and partnerships; in the absence of comparable records for his contemporaries (except Vyner's fragmentary ledger of September-October 1666), we can only surmise or infer the extent to which he was unusual, or even unique, as a bankers' banker. For the general historian of the period, lacking the skills and application of the cliometrician, the transactions in his ledgers may be classified as follows: those with, first, other bankers, including his involvement in the foreign exchanges and the bullion market; second, royal office-holders, most notably receivers and paymasters, but also those serving abroad as diplomats; and, third, others ranging, if not from dustmen to dukes, at least from men and women of sub-gentry or plebeian status to royalty and the top ranks of the peerage. The largest numbers of individual entries are recorded with the other bankers, several of whom were also to be involved in the stop and its complicated aftermath. By contrast the largest total amounts of actual issues and receipts, and of obligations for future out-payments and in-payments due, relate to various branches of royal revenue and expenditure -- for example, in 1663-4, the farm of the London excise, the customs farmers, and Stephen Fox as a disbursing official. However, the largest numbers of different individuals come from the third category, although these generally contain fewer entries per client, and are for amounts of smaller value. To complicate matters, some people appear in more than one capacity: thus Samuel Pepys had a private account with Backwell (as can be verified from his 'Diary'), but also dealt with the banker in his capacity as treasurer for the garrison of Tangier. Fox too is represented in both capacities. 
Backwell was twice returned as MP for Wendover, Buckinghamshire, in 1673. On the first occasion the election was voided because the writ had been improperly issued; on the second he was again unseated after being accused of bribing the electors. He sat for the same constituency in all three of the Exclusion Parliaments of 1679-81, but is recorded as having taken an active part in only the first of these, serving on various committees and reportedly opposing the exclusion from the succession of James, duke of York. Nothing is known of him in the sittings of 1680 and 1681. It has been suggested that he used his privilege as an MP to protect himself against his creditors. He also served as a common councilman of London in 1676-81, which was unusual for someone who had been chosen as an alderman many years before. His eldest son sat in parliament for Wendover in James II's parliament of 1685 and after the revolution of 1688. 
Backwell married his first wife, Sarah, the daughter of a London merchant called Brett, by 1653; they had one son, John, who was involved with his father in both banking and office-holding. He married, secondly, by 1662, Mary, the daughter of Richard Leigh or Lyse; she is the lady who appears in Pepys's 'Diary'. By the time of her death in November 1669 they had three sons and two daughters; his son Leigh was apprenticed to his father in 1682, but disappears from the Goldsmiths' records after Backwell's death the following year. In January 1666 a warrant was drawn for him to be made a baronet, but this was never implemented. Either he declined the honour, or it was opposed, conceivably on account of either his humble origins or his Cromwellian past, though neither of these factors kept others from acquiring knighthoods, baronetcies, or even peerages under the restored monarchy. 
Backwell died abroad in the Netherlands; his body was embalmed, and was buried in St Mary Woolnoth in the City on 13 June 1683, but exhumed on 20 October 1685 in order to be reburied at Tyringham in Buckinghamshire, where he had earlier gained control of the estate belonging to his son's father-in-law, Sir William Tyringham, an impoverished ex-cavalier. Although Backwell had made his will in 1679, it was not proved until after the passage of the act to satisfy his creditors in 1698. He left property in Buckinghamshire to his eldest son, in Huntingdonshire and the City to his second son, and further London properties to his third and fourth sons. Noting that everything left to the three younger ones was already mortgaged for the payment of his debts, he bequeathed to them jointly the large annuity granted by letters patent in 1677. His solitary bequest otherwise was a $40 annuity to a female relative. The will is unusual in lacking any religious prologue and in providing for no other legacies, either personal or philanthropic. Initially Backwell's brother and all four sons were made executors; a codicil of 1683 altered this to the second and fourth sons only. The only known visual representation of Backwell is a particularly fine life-size contemporary engraving in the possession of the Goldsmiths' Company; the inscription is of a later date, but small details confirm the portrait's authenticity. 
For the historian, Backwell is important as far and away the best documented banker of his time. The relationship of the goldsmiths of the 1660s and 1670s to the later development of banking and the new system of public credit established in the 1690s remains open to debate. As this brief account has sought to show, the history of banking after the Restoration is inseparable from that of public, alias royal, finance, which in turn cannot be separated from the general political history of the time. 


@@@@@


doc= 987


Bacon, Anne, Lady Bacon (c.1528-1610), gentlewoman and scholar, was probably born at Gidea Hall, Essex. She was third of the nine children of Sir Anthony Cooke (1505/6-1576), one of the humanist educators who tutored Edward VI, and Anne (died 1553), daughter of Sir William FitzWilliam and widow of Sir John Hawes of London, and second of the five Cooke sisters whose education by their father in the classical languages and the early church fathers made them, according to Thomas Fuller, 'all most eminent scholars, (the honour of their own and the shame of our sex)' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1.328). In a Cambridge oration, Walter Haddon celebrated the Cooke household, where Anne came to excel in Greek, Latin, and Italian, as a 'small university', but one where 'the industry of the females was in full vigour' (Jardine and Stewart, 25). How fully the children of both sexes shared in educational opportunities is clear from Anne's inscription in a copy of 'Moschopulus': 'My father delivered this book to me and my brother Anthony, who was mine elder brother and schoolfellow with me, to follow for writing of Greek' (Essex RO, Sage collection, 773). Under Sir Anthony's zealous protestant guidance, the rigorous intellectual training focused on advancing God's word, but there were playful occasions, as when she penned a spirited Latin letter exhorting a sister to marry Haddon. Anne's determination to put to significant use even her study of Italian, criticized by her mother as a potential distraction from godliness, bore fruit in her published translation of 'Sermons' by Bernadino Ochino ('c'.1548). 
In February 1553 Anne became the second wife of Sir Nicholas Bacon (1510-1579), who would serve as Queen Elizabeth's lord keeper of the great seal. He celebrated in verse the 'fruits of mind' shared between them, their mutual profit from 'your Tully and my Seneck' (Jardine and Stewart, 27). Given her strong reformist convictions, it is surprising that Anne served Queen Mary as a gentlewoman of the privy chamber, but this role positioned her to help gain a pardon for her brother-in-law, William Cecil. A presence at court to be reckoned with, she was described by the count of Feria as 'a tiresome bluestocking' (Hume, 1.18). After the deaths of two baby daughters, Anthony Bacon was born in 1558 and Francis Bacon in 1561. Lady Bacon helped to supervise their early education, and, when widowed in 1579, took up earnestly Sir Nicholas's charge of 'well bringing up' these 'poor orphans without a father' (Smith, Baker, and Kenny, 2.27). 
In 1564, Anne Bacon made her mark on English religious prose with her translation from Latin of John Jewel's 'Apologie of the Church of England'. The accuracy and stylistic distinction of her work received gratifying and immediate recognition when Archbishop Matthew Parker arranged publication of his manuscript copy, making her words the voice of the established church. In her widowhood, she took on a more activist role to advance 'right reformation', pressing Cecil, for example, to secure a fairer hearing for the nonconformist preachers deprived under Whitgift's articles of 1583. 'The Lord raise up many such matrons for the comfort of his poor afflicted church', wrote Nicholas Faunt in 1584, of her 'earnest care and travel for the restoring' of deprived preachers 'to their places' (Birch, 1.48), and Theodore Beza, John Walsall, and Thomas Wilcox celebrated her contributions in printed dedications to her. Even in her seventies, she kept radical puritanism alive in Hertfordshire, sheltering preachers at Gorhambury, securing them employment, and almost certainly supporting the major project to collect and disseminate a register of puritan documents. As a godly widow, she judged it her duty to admonish straying believers, and wrote like a minister to the earl of Essex in 1596 to exhort him against 'carnal dalliance' (Birch, 2.218). 
Lady Bacon's formidable personality comes most vividly to life in over ninety surviving letters to her sons, most sent from Gorhambury to Anthony in London between 1592 and 1597. She counsels her adult sons about their bodily health, spiritual welfare, financial solvency, fit use for their talents, housing arrangements, and male companions, with a persistence only intensified by her frustration at the limited credit they give her advice. Her life as the female head of a godly household is richly illustrated -- the daily business of transporting beer, catechizing servants, and negotiating with tenants, together with the sustained struggle of a strong-willed woman for authority: 'A man master would go nigh to break thy head for this speech' she tells a disrespectful manservant (LPL, MS 653.205). She impoverished herself to help with her sons' debts, signing bitterly regretted releases of her interest in family properties, until finally, after Anthony's death, she surrendered even Gorhambury to Francis in 1602. 
Little is known of Anne's last years. On 27 August 1610, Sir Francis Bacon requested the company of his friend Sir Michael Hicks at her funeral, promising 'a good sermon' but no feast (Spedding, 4.218). His direction for his own burial adds the detail -- 'I desire it may be in St. Michael's church, near St. Alban's: there was my mother buried' (Spedding, 7.539). 


@@@@@


doc= 988


Bacon, Anthony (1558-1601), spy, was the fourth of five sons of Sir Nicholas Bacon (1510-1579), administrator, of Gorhambury, Hertfordshire, and the first with his second wife, Anne, 'nee' Cooke ('c'.1528-1610) ['see 'Bacon, Anne], daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke of Gidea Hall, Essex, and his wife, Anne. Through the marriages of his mother's sisters he was nephew to Sir Henry Killigrew, Sir Thomas Hoby, and, most significantly, to Elizabeth I's secretary of state and later lord treasurer, William Cecil, Lord Burghley. He grew up with his younger brother, Sir Francis Bacon, possibly with his half-brother Sir Edward Bacon ['see under 'Bacon, Sir Nathaniel], and with five sisters, at his parents' Hertfordshire estate of Gorhambury, tutored by John Walsall. Two other half-brothers were Sir Nathaniel Bacon and Sir Nicholas Bacon. From April 1573 Anthony and Francis studied for three years at Trinity College, Cambridge, under the master, John Whitgift, without graduating. From an early age, Anthony was prone to ill health: he recovered from a dangerous fever in 1560; Francis's earliest extant letter in 1574 attributes his brother's absence from Cambridge to his 'sore eyes', and Whitgift's accounts record moneys paid 'for Anthony being sick' (Jardine and Stewart, 37). These early illnesses were to become habitual and impact deeply on his career. 
Anthony Bacon was admitted to Gray's Inn on 27 June 1576, studying under Richard Barker; his correspondence from the period shows an interest in the puritan Thomas Cartwright's writings against his erstwhile tutor Whitgift, an interest encouraged by his zealously nonconformist mother. Following his father's death in February 1579, and a bitter fight with his elder half-brothers, Bacon inherited estates worth $360 per annum, and the reversion of Gorhambury on his mother's death (she outlived him by nine years). An earlier attempt to marry him profitably had failed, and now at twenty-one, with personal assets that he could mortgage, he decided to go abroad. In December 1579, armed with letters of recommendation from Burghley and the French ambassador, Michel de Castelnau, seigneur de Mauvissiere, he set off to Paris, where he began to provide intelligence reports for Burghley and Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary, and made a lifelong friend and correspondent in the latter's secretary, Nicholas Faunt. From Paris he moved on to Bourges, but, unable to reconcile himself to the strong Catholic faith of the city, he headed for the Calvinist republic of Geneva in the summer of 1581, lodging with Theodore Beza, who dedicated the French publication of his meditations on the penitential psalms to Bacon's mother 'for my sake' (LPL, MS 659, fol. 24). 
Over the following years, Bacon frequently lost contact with England, citing illness; Walsingham rightly blamed his incapacity on an over-dependence on 'physic', and advised him, 'you shall find in time many incommodities, if you do not in time break it off' (LPL, MS 647, art. 52). Having spent time in Lyons, Montpellier, Toulouse, and Marseilles, in November 1583 Bacon travelled to Bordeaux, where he met the essayist Michel de Montaigne; there, at the request of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, he performed certain business for the queen: she welcomed 'so good a man as you to have and receive letters by' (LPL, MS 647, art. 75). At the same time, however, Bacon was fighting accusations that 'my lodging was charged to be the receptacle of all rebellious Huguenots', and was ill again with a persistent quartain ague. Moving on to Bearn, he was befriended by the theologian Lambert Daneau, who dedicated his commentary on the minor prophets to him. Elizabeth sanctioned his continued stay in France, using him as an unofficial contact with the Huguenot leader Henri of Navarre. By October 1584, Bacon was established in the Huguenot stronghold of Montauban, embraced by Navarre's court, including the poet Guillaume de Salluste Du Bartas. However, he gained an enemy in the wife of Henri's counsellor Philippe Duplessis Mornay when he refused to support her fight to wear wigs in church, and then rebuffed the prospect of marrying her daughter. His position deteriorated during 1585 and 1586, when Montauban was in desperate straits; in the heightened atmosphere of suspicion, Bacon and one of his pages were accused of sodomy, a capital offence. Details are sketchy: interrogations took place in August 1586 and November 1587, and Bacon may have been tried, because Navarre certainly intervened to commute a sentence against him, although this may have related to his debt problems. None of this was known in England, where Bacon's failure to return was regarded with increasing anger. One messenger, the Catholic Thomas Lawson, was gaoled by Burghley; the next, Captain Francis Allen, was subjected to a tirade by Lady Bacon, who called her elder son 'a traitor to God and your country' (LPL, MS 647, art. 121). 
In 1590 Bacon returned to Bordeaux, where he engaged in a merchants' controversy, renewed his acquaintance with Montaigne (sending one of the last known letters to the writer), and befriended the imprisoned Catholic double agent Anthony Standen. Hearing of this, Lady Bacon claimed that he was 'illegitimate and not to be born of her body' (LPL, MS 648, art. 51) and encouraged his brother to shun him. But when he finally returned home in February 1592 after a twelve-year absence, Francis welcomed him into his Gray's Inn lodgings. Anthony had hoped to profit from his long-standing intelligence service to his uncle Burghley, but soon found that path blocked, receiving instead only such fair words as: 'make fools fain, and yet even in these no offer or hopeful assurance of real kindness, which I thought I might justly expect at the Lord Treasurer's hands, who had inned my ten years' harvest into his own barn without any halfpenny charge. (LPL, MS 648, fols. 23'r'-26'v')' Bacon's relations with Burghley and his cousin Sir Robert Cecil remained strained; an attempt in late 1596 by his aunt Lady Russell, wife of Sir John Russell of Blackfriars, London, to smooth matters over failed to help. 
This rejection paved the way for Bacon's future life path. Francis Bacon introduced him to his own patron, Elizabeth's controversial favourite, Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. Anthony Bacon soon enhanced Essex's remarkable secretariat by co-ordinating (unpaid) a massive foreign intelligence operation with contacts across Europe, including Thomas Bodley, Sir Thomas Chaloner, Dr Henry Hawkins, John Napier, Sir Anthony Sherley, and Standen. A good quantity of his correspondence is extant at Lambeth Palace Library and formed the basis of Thomas Birch's once standard history of Elizabeth's reign. 
Bacon shuttled between Gray's Inn, the Bacon estates at Gorhambury and Redbourn, Hertfordshire, and his brother's estate at Twickenham, Middlesex, but he was increasingly incapacitated by the stone and gout (affecting his hands, ankles, and feet) which prevented him from ever attending on the queen. A final attempt in October 1593 to travel the few miles from Twickenham to the court at Windsor had to be abandoned at Eton. As Essex's nominee, he was returned as MP for Wallingford, Berkshire, in 1593 and Oxford, in 1597, but, even if he attended, he made no impact on either parliament. Bowing to Essex's desire to have him nearer at hand, in May 1594 he bought a London house in the disreputable Bishopsgate Street, much to his mother's concern: she complained that the presence of nearby Butt Inn with its 'continual interludes had even infected the inhabitants there with corrupt & lewd dispositions' (LPL, MS 650, art. 114). Her passions were similarly roused by Anthony's acquaintance with the urbane Spanish politician Antonio Perez, who moved into Essex's circle and became a close friend: 'I would you were well rid of that old, dooted, polling papist. He will use discourses out of season to hinder your health, the want whereof is your great hindrance' (LPL, MS 653, art. 77). Worse was Bacon's decision in 1596 to move into the earl's residence, Essex House on the Strand. 'You have hitherto been esteemed as a worthy friend', she wrote, 'now shall be accounted his follower... brought as it were into a kind of bondage' (LPL, MS 651, art. 210). Above all, Lady Bacon disapproved of what she considered her son's profligate spending: on his return to England, completely penniless, he had been forced to sell certain of his manors, and was to spend the rest of his life involved in complex debt arrangements. 
In his final years, Bacon was almost certainly housebound but he maintained his powerful position at the heart of Essex's intelligence operations: Henry Wotton (a member of Essex's secretariat) described him as 'a gentleman of impotent feet, but a nimble head... being of a provident nature... and well knowing the advantage of a dangerous secret' (Wotton, 13). His intimacy and influence with Essex also aroused suspicions: Wotton alleged that Bacon extorted money from the earl by threatening to betray his secrets, a charge that is not repeated or supported elsewhere. Bacon's activities between 1597 and 1601, the turbulent period during which Essex fell from favour several times and controversially led English forces in Ireland, are difficult to reconstruct, since his papers from this period have been lost or, more likely, destroyed. While Essex was in Ireland in 1599, Bacon had a disagreement with his steward, Gelly Merrick; later, there was unsubstantiated gossip that the earl had given Essex House to Bacon in lieu of a cash sum owed to him. Certainly, Bacon remained in Essex House until Elizabeth ordered him and others to leave in March 1600; however, when Essex attempted his rebellion in February 1601, he was apparently not involved; he was not called to give evidence. By then, living on Crutched Friars in London, he was terminally ill: the date of his death is unknown, but he was buried on 17 May 1601 'in the chancel within the vault' in St Olave's, on nearby Hart Street (Bannerman, 132). On 23 June 1602 the administration of his estate was granted to Francis Bacon, but the newswriter John Chamberlain reported that he died 'so far in debt, that I think his brother is little the better by him' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.123). To ease this, on 20 November Lady Bacon freely surrendered her life interest in her manors, which she had insistently denied to Anthony, in favour of Francis. 
Bacon's life has usually been treated by historians as an adjunct to that of his more famous brother, not least because Francis Bacon presented it to posterity in that way. As his health deteriorated, making public office impossible, Francis capitalized on his brother's connections in ways that ultimately erased Anthony's contribution. Dedicating the first edition of his 'Essays' (1597) to him, for example, Francis Bacon declared that 'I sometimes wish your infirmities translated upon myself, that her Majesty mought have the service of so active and able a mind, and I mought be with excuse confined to these contemplations and studies for which I am fittest' (sig. A4'r'). In turn (and probably at Francis's urging) Anthony wrote to Essex, sub-dedicating the volume to him, praying 'leave to transfer my interest unto your Lordship' ('Works', ed. Spedding, 6.521-2) -- a manoeuvre that effectively wrote himself out of a transaction between Francis Bacon and Essex. In 1600, in an attempt to rehabilitate Essex with the queen, Francis Bacon confected a set of two letters, one from his brother to Essex and the other replying: both epistles, however, also served his interest by testifying generously to his talents. Later, he claimed intimate knowledge of his brother's affairs to forge links with his Scottish intelligence contacts, now useful figures in the new Jacobean regime, including David Foulis, Edward Bruce, and Sir Thomas Chaloner, citing: 'the infinite devotion and incessant endeavours (beyond the strength of his body and nature of the times) which appeared in my good brother towards your majesty's service... all which endeavours and duties for the most part were common to myself with him, though by design (as between brethren) dissembled. ('Letters', ed. Spedding, 3.59)' The ploy worked: when James I granted Francis Bacon the office of learned counsel, and a life pension of $60 per annum in August 1604, the patent was awarded 'on account of the good, faithful and commendable service, until recently, of our beloved servant Anthony Bacon' (T. Rymer, ed., 'Foedera, conventiones, literae', 3rd edn, 1739-45, 7/2.121). 
Viewed without the benefit of his brother's self-serving hindsight, however, another Anthony Bacon emerges. Early political compositions attributed by editors to Francis Bacon were probably in effect collaborative efforts -- the latter writing up material provided by the former. Anthony Bacon was undeniably a highly capable intelligence gatherer, a literate, experienced, and informed man, with a formidable archive of useful secrets, whose talents -- although divorced from flamboyant court life -- were fully recognized by those players engaged in the complex negotiations of English and European politics during the last two decades of the sixteenth century, and whose meticulously kept correspondence provides an unparalleled insight into the period. 


@@@@@


doc= 989


Edward Bacon (1548/9-1618), the sixth child of Sir Nicholas Bacon, matriculated (according to Venn) at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1561, aged twelve. In 1565 he entered Gray's Inn where he became ancient in 1576. His father set him up, as befitted a younger son, as a London-based agent complete with town house and a clerkship in chancery for licences and pardons of alienations (1571). A failed marriage suit in 1576 probably precipitated a two-year continental tour in which he reinforced his humanistic and radical protestant sympathies through studies under Johann Sturmius at Strasbourg and Lambert Danaeus at Geneva, while lodging in Beza's house. 


@@@@@


doc= 990


Bacon, Francis, Viscount St Alban (1561-1626), lord chancellor, politician, and philosopher, was born on 22 January 1561 at York House in the Strand, London, the second of the two sons of Sir Nicholas Bacon (1510-1579), lord keeper, and his second wife, Anne ('c'.1528-1610) ['see 'Bacon, Anne], daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke, tutor to Edward VI, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Fitzwilliam. He was baptized in the local church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, but spent most of his childhood, together with his elder brother, Anthony Bacon (1558-1601), at Gorhambury, near St Albans, Hertfordshire, which their father had purchased in 1557. In the 1560s Nicholas Bacon built a new house there, and this house (together with Verulam House, which Francis Bacon built nearby later in his life) became one of his three central emotional places (the other two being York House where he again lived, as lord keeper and lord chancellor later in his life, and Gray's Inn, where he lived for most of his life). The well-known story that Elizabeth I often referred to Francis as 'the young Lord-Keeper' is presumably no more than a legend. 
Bacon received his early education at home. Judging by their own experiences his parents must have set great store by education. In Nicholas Bacon's career from a sheep-reeve's son to lord keeper schooling had been crucial. His second wife's learning matched his own: her father, Sir Anthony Cooke, had inculcated classical erudition and protestant piety in his five daughters, and Anne Bacon was fluent in Greek and Latin as well as in Italian and French. Her erudition and piety were put to good use when, during Francis's infancy, she translated John Jewel's 'Apologia ecclesiae Anglicanae' into English. 
The chaplains who served the Bacon household had strong leanings towards puritanism. One, John Walsall, a graduate of Christ Church, Oxford, acted as the sons' tutor from 1566 to at least 1569. By this time the Bacon brothers were joined in the schoolroom at Gorhambury by Sir Thomas Gresham's illegitimate daughter, who had just married their half-brother, Nathaniel Bacon. When she returned home she wrote a letter of thanks to Anne, Lady Bacon, including regards for 'my brother Anthony and my good brother Frank' (R. Tittler, 'Nicholas Bacon', 1976, 156). Although there is no direct evidence there is little doubt that Bacon went through the whole of the normal primary and grammar school curriculum at home. His schooling not only included Christian teaching but also thorough training in the classics. 
Having provided seven or eight years' education for his youngest sons at home Sir Nicholas Bacon sent them to university. All his sons went to Trinity College, Cambridge. Anthony and Francis (who had just turned twelve) went up to Cambridge on 5 April 1573 and matriculated on 10 June. They stayed there until December 1575, although their period of residence was twice interrupted when plague broke out in the Cambridge area. At Trinity the brothers, with their companion Edward Tyrell, one of Sir Nicholas's wards, were put under the personal tutelage of the master, Dr John Whitgift, the future archbishop of Canterbury. From these years at Cambridge dates Bacon's earliest extant letter. It is a request addressed on 3 July 1574 to his half-brother Nicholas Bacon, who had promised to send a deer for the graduation of Nicholas Sharpe, a fellow Trinity member. 
According to the accounts kept by Whitgift he bought for the Bacon brothers' use the major classical texts and commentaries. These included the 'Iliad', Plato and Aristotle, 'tullies workes' (perhaps Cicero's philosophical works and letters), Cicero's rhetorical works, Demosthenes' 'Orations', Hermogenes' 'Ars rhetorica' in a facing-page Greek and Latin edition, as well as the histories of Livy, Sallust, and Xenophon (P. Gaskell, 'Books bought by Whitgift's pupils in the 1570s', 'Transactions of the Cambridge Bibliographical Society', 7, 1979, 284-93). 
Bacon's education was conducted largely in Latin and followed the medieval curriculum. But the impact of humanism had drastically changed the way in which this curriculum was taught. A particular emphasis was placed on practical problems at the expense of logical subtlety. As is evident from the books Bacon purchased in Cambridge there was a strong emphasis on philosophy, rhetoric, and history in his studies. This was a particularly typical feature of Renaissance humanism, whose main aim was to train youth for public life. 
The next step for a gentleman intending a public career was entrance to the inns of court. Francis Bacon was entered at Gray's Inn on 27 June 1576 and was admitted in November. Meanwhile, however, he was sent to France to accompany Sir Amias Paulet, English ambassador to France. Originally both Francis and his half-brother Edward were to go, but in the end only Francis followed Paulet late in September 1576, whereas Edward travelled on his own, heading not only to protestant centres like Geneva and Strasbourg but also to Vienna, Venice, and Padua. 
Travelling abroad was considered highly useful to a young gentleman's education -- an opportunity for learning foreign languages and finding out about customs, politics, and institutions. But Bacon's stay in France (mostly in Paris, Poitiers, and Blois), which lasted almost exactly two and a half years, was not so much an educative grand tour. While he studied language, statecraft, and the civil law most of his time was presumably spent in performing routine diplomatic tasks. 
When Bacon went to France he was only fifteen, and shared with Paulet's sons a tutor named Mr Duncumbe. When Duncumbe returned to England in October 1577 he was replaced by Jean Hotman, the son of the well-known Huguenot Francois Hotman. In 1578 Bacon was placed in the household of a civil lawyer to acquire a deeper acquaintance with civil law, then very important in diplomacy. This early exposure to Roman law had presumably a profound influence on his legal thinking, and when later in life Bacon developed his ideas of legal reform the impact of the Roman civil law was especially marked. 
During his stay in France, perhaps in autumn 1577, Bacon once visited England as the bearer of the diplomatic post, delivering letters to Walsingham, Burghley, and Leicester and to the queen herself. Fairly soon after his return to France he planned a trip to Italy but Paulet did not grant him permission, mainly on religious grounds (Jardine and Stewart, 61-3). 
Bacon's stay in France came to an abrupt end a few months before it was scheduled when the news of his father's death in February 1579 reached him. The youngest son made haste and arrived in London within a month of this event. He also brought the diplomatic post from Paulet, which included a recommendation from Sir Amias to the queen: 'Mr. Francis Bacon, is of great hope, endowed with many good and singular parts; and if God give him life will prove a very able and sufficient subject to do your Highness good and acceptable service' (Jardine and Stewart, 66). 
His father's sudden death was a serious setback for Francis Bacon. Sir Nicholas had settled estates for all of his other sons and was in the course of doing so for the youngest one when he died. Moreover, Sir Nicholas's two families contested his will, and although an agreement was eventually reached with the help of Lord Burghley the half-brothers were never again close. The situation was worst for the youngest son, who had neither land nor income nor even a position. 
Aged eighteen Bacon resumed his studies in Gray's Inn. Sir Nicholas had been a central figure in Gray's Inn and all his sons had been admitted there, but Francis was the only one who took up law as a profession. As a law student he was expected to attend readings or series of formal lectures on a specific English statute, to participate in hypothetical legal situations and thereby to learn cases, and to argue in moot courts (to argue on both sides of a case). Whether it was due to his natural talents or the seriousness with which he pursued his studies Bacon made rapid progress. He was admitted to the bar as an utter barrister of Gray's Inn (the equivalent of graduation) in June 1582, became bencher in 1586 and in November 1587 was elected as a reader, delivering his first set of lectures on church advowsons in Lent 1588. 
While still pursuing his legal studies Bacon embarked on a public career. He sought the help of his uncle, William Cecil, Lord Burghley, and his aunt, Lady Burghley ['see 'Cecil, Mildred], in September 1580, commending his earlier suit, which Burghley had promised to forward to the queen, and calling Burghley 'my patron'. By October Burghley informed him of 'her Majesty's gracious opinion and meaning towards' him ('Works', 8.13-14). When the duke of Alencon visited England in December 1580 Bacon was employed as a translator. 
By the time the third and last session of the parliament, originally elected in 1572, met in January 1581 many by-elections had taken place. Among the new members was Francis Bacon, who had his twentieth birthday during the session. He sat for Bossiney, Cornwall, which was controlled by his godfather, the earl of Bedford. There is no evidence of Bacon's activities in this session. In the parliament of 1584 Lord Burghley won him a seat (Gatton, Surrey), but Bacon preferred the earl of Bedford's patronage, sitting for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis, Dorset. He was named to one committee and made his maiden speech on a bill concerning wards. 
Bacon showed signs of sympathy to puritanism, not only attending the sermons of the puritan chaplain of Gray's Inn, but also accompanying his mother to the Temple chapel to hear the even more staunchly puritan sermons of Walter Travers. By 1584 Bacon, together with many key figures in the political nation, had become alarmed by both the perceived growing Catholic threat and the English church's suppression of the puritan clergy. He joined many others in critically reviewing in a tract this anti-puritan campaign led by his former tutor, recently appointed archbishop of Canterbury, John Whitgift, who demanded absolute submission to the church's discipline from the entire clergy. 
Bacon's tract is his earliest extant longer writing and was obviously widely circulated. He strongly criticized the Catholics both within and without England and gave support for the puritan cause. But his argument was couched in strongly political terms. He appealed to 'all reason of state' and to the example 'of the most wise, most politic, and best governed estates'. For the danger within the queen should do everything possible to strengthen protestantism, mainly through promoting preaching and schooling, because all her 'force and strength and power' consisted in her protestant subjects. As for the problems without, the best remedy was a political alliance with the enemies of Spain, above all with Venice and the Netherlands ('Works', 8.47-56). 
In 1585 Bacon felt that his age (twenty-four) blocked the advancement of his career. He requested Burghley's help with his career at Gray's Inn, and asked Sir Christopher Hatton and Sir Francis Walsingham to advance his suit for a political office. Although no office was forthcoming various other employments kept him busy. Through Walsingham's patronage Bacon was soon employed to investigate English Catholics. In the parliament which met in winter 1586-7 Bacon (sitting for Taunton, Somerset) was more visible than before. He argued for the execution of Mary, queen of Scots, and was named to the committee appointed to draw up a petition for her execution. He also spoke in favour of the proposed subsidy and sat on three other committees. In September 1587 the privy council consulted the attorney-general, the solicitor-general, and Bacon on legal matters concerning examination reports of two Catholic prisoners. Bacon's first surviving legal works -- 'A brief discourse upon the commission of Bridewell' and another discourse in law French on crown prerogatives and ownership -- were also written in this period. (There is however a near contemporary attribution of the former to William Fleetwood, recorder of London, GL, MS 9384.) In August 1588 Bacon was appointed to a government committee examining recusants in prison and a few months later, in December 1588, he was appointed to a committee of lawyers which was to review existing statutes. When a new parliament met in February 1589 he was busy throughout the session with committee work. In November 1589 he was granted a reversion of the clerkship of star chamber. Although he did not succeed to the post until 1608 the reversion demonstrated Bacon's growing importance and, since the post was worth $1600 per annum, it gave him a promise of economic security. 
This steady advancement of Bacon's political and legal career is aptly reflected by the importance attached to a position paper he wrote on ecclesiastical politics. 'An advertisement touching the controversies of the Church of England' (written some time between 1589 and 1591) was Bacon's response to the conflict between the Church of England and the nonconformists, sparked off by the publication of the pamphlets said to be written by one Martin Marprelate. These tracts used scathing satire in heavily censuring the Church of England. Richard Bancroft, chaplain to Sir Christopher Hatton and a future bishop of London, hired such writers as John Lyly and Thomas Nashe to answer in a similar irreverent style. 
Avoiding the mutual muckraking of both sides in the controversy Bacon emphasized his impartiality and called for a cessation to hostilities. According to him the puritans too easily imitated the government of foreign presbyterian churches. 'It may be', Bacon wrote in a remarkable passage, that 'in civil states, a republic is a better policy than a kingdom'. Yet, in church government, hierarchy rather than 'the parity and equality of ministers' was to be sought ('Bacon', ed. Vickers, 10). Nevertheless Bacon placed the main blame for the controversy at the bishops' door. 'The imperfections... of those which have chief place in the church have ever been principal causes and motives of schisms and divisions' (ibid., 6). Although his name was not mentioned in the tract Bancroft received Bacon's bitterest censure. 
'An advertisement' was never printed in Bacon's lifetime, but several extant manuscript copies attest to its wide circulation. Both sides of the controversy -- a presbyterian tract in 1591 and a treatise by Bancroft in 1593 -- invoked 'An advertisement' in their own defence ('Bacon', ed. Vickers, 498). Bacon's famous comment on another occasion that 'her Majesty, not liking to make windows into men's hearts and secret thoughts', also indicates his middle path ('Works', 8.98). 
In 1592 Bacon was commissioned to write a response to the Jesuit Robert Persons's anti-government tract 'Responsio ad edictum reginae Angliae', entitled 'Certain observations made upon a libel'. Just like Thomas Wilson and Thomas Norton in 1570, so Bacon in 1592 emphasized 'the resemblance between the two Philips, of Macedon and Spain', and thus identified England with republican Athens. English statesmen and counsellors were just like 'the Orators' in Athens, being 'sharpest sighted' and looking 'deepest into the projects and spreading' of the two Philips ('Works', 8.182-3). 
Bacon's life and career during the 1590s was dominated by his close friendship with Robert Devereux, the second earl of Essex. It is not clear when this relationship began and when it developed into an intimate friendship, but as early as summer 1588 there was at least a patronage relationship. In June 1588 Bacon wrote to the earl of Leicester asking his support for a suit which Essex was advancing on Bacon's behalf. 
Quite suddenly in the early 1590s Bacon broached the entirely novel theme of natural philosophy that occupied him for the rest of his life. Early in 1592 he wrote to Lord Burghley. In one of his most famous letters, assuring his 'devotion' both as 'a good patriot' and 'an unworthy kinsman', Bacon expressed anxiety about his age: 'I wax now somewhat ancient; one and thirty years is a great deal of sand in the hour-glass'. But instead of merely putting forward a suit for office, he was, Bacon told his uncle, pursuing a place for a higher purpose. He wrote: 'I confess that I have as vast contemplative ends, as I have moderate civil ends; for I have taken all knowledge to be my province; and if I could purge it of two sorts of rovers, whereof the one with frivolous disputations, confutations, and verbosities, the other with blind experiments and auricular traditions and impostures, hath committed so many spoils, I hope I should bring in industrious observations, grounded conclusions, and profitable inventions and discoveries; the best state of that province. This, whether it be curiosity, or vain glory, or nature, or (if one take it favourably) 'philanthropia', is so fixed in my mind as it cannot be removed. And I do easily see, that place of any reasonable countenance doth bring commandment of more wits than of a man's own; which is the thing I greatly affect. ('Works', 8.109)' In 1592 Bacon also produced a device entitled 'Of tribute, or, Giving that which is due'. There is no evidence that it was ever performed. The device consists of four speeches -- the first arguing for 'the worthiest virtue' (fortitude), the second for 'the worthiest affection' (love), the third for 'the worthiest power' (knowledge), and the fourth for 'the worthiest person' (Queen Elizabeth). The one on knowledge enlarged on the plans and ambitions which Bacon outlined in his letter to Burghley. He excoriated extant natural philosophy for both its barren products and its futile methods, the main culprits being 'the Grecians' (scholasticism) and 'the alchemists' (Paracelsians). Bacon thus argued against the barrenness of scholastic natural philosophy and against the preposterous claims of alchemy. He hinted that he would form a new method which would replace both exploded schools, and produce not just words but works. 
'Is truth ever barren?', Bacon asked and immediately provided the answer in another rhetorical question: 'Shall he not be able thereby to produce worthy effects, and to endow the life of man with infinite new commodities?' Moreover, he pointed to the mechanical artificers who had created printing, artillery, and the compass, as his forerunners. It is extremely significant that Bacon called knowledge 'the worthiest power', thus making as early as 1592 his novel link between natural philosophy and power ('Bacon', ed. Vickers, 34-6). 
When a new parliament met on 19 February 1593 Bacon sat as knight of the shire for Middlesex. This mirrored his enhanced importance. Nevertheless it was a catastrophic session for him. The queen had had two reasons to summon parliament: religious conformity and money. When the appeal for funds was made Bacon was among the first to speak, but curiously pleaded ignorance of war and did not speak about money but about the urgent need of a law reform. The appointed committee suggested the repetition of the exceptional grant of two subsidies made in the previous parliament. But in a conference of both houses Lord Burghley announced that the Lords would not assent to anything less than three subsidies, paid in three years (twice as quickly as usually), and that the assessments must be improved. 
Burghley's son, Sir Robert Cecil, reported this message to the House of Commons. With Cecil seated Bacon, who had been a member of the committee of both houses, rose and, while assenting to three subsidies, opposed joining with the Lords in granting it. The Commons, Bacon insisted, should stand upon its privilege of first offering a subsidy. If his earlier speech had been rather irrelevant this one must have been a worse irritant for his uncle. But more was to come. After several days of work the Commons referred the matter to yet another committee. The councillors wanted three subsidies paid in three or four years. When the committee met again, on the morning of 8 March, Bacon rose and announced that he would assent to three subsidies 'but not to the payment under six years'. 'The gentlemen', he said, 'must sell their plate and the farmers their brass pots ere this will be paid. And as for us, we are here to search the wounds of the realm and not to skin them over'. He was convinced that a quick payment of three subsidies in three years would 'breed discontentment in the people' and make 'an ill precedent'. Moreover, history amply demonstrated that 'of all nations the English care not to be subject, base, taxable' ('Works', 8.223). Bacon's heroic eloquence seems to have won no support. Walter Ralegh argued against him, as did Cecil, who refuted each of his cousin's arguments. The committee agreed to three subsidies payable in four years. 
Many of those who had opposed the unprecedented demand for three subsidies in three years incurred the ire of the queen. Bacon's speeches, while ostensibly high principled, were scarcely prudent for a gentleman looking for a career in the service of the queen. He may have been reprimanded during the session, and certainly felt the queen's anger afterwards. The queen thought that Bacon was 'in more fault than any of the rest in Parliament' ('Works', 8.254). As soon as Burghley had informed him of the queen's anger Bacon tried to excuse his speech. 'The manner of my speech', he told his uncle, 'did most evidently show that I spake simply and only to satisfy my conscience, and not with any advantage or policy to sway the cause'. In expressing his sincere opinions Bacon had simply endeavoured to signify his 'duty and zeal towards her Majesty and her service' (ibid., 8.234). 'There is', he later added, 'variety allowed in counsel, as a discord in music, to make it more perfect' (ibid., 8.362). 
Such justifications failed to make amends. The disaster of Bacon's speeches was made much worse by the fact that immediately afterwards Essex launched a campaign on Bacon's behalf for the office of attorney-general. During the campaign Bacon gained some legal experience. In January and February 1594 he argued his first two cases in king's bench and one in the court of exchequer, which won him general applause. He was also involved in the treason trial of Roderigo Lopez, and prepared its official account. Yet by spring 1594 it was clear that Edward Coke was to become the next attorney-general. Bacon told Essex that he would 'retire myself with a couple of men to Cambridge, and there spend my life in my studies and contemplations, without looking back' ('Works', 8.291). 
No such retirement took place. In July 1594 the queen made Bacon one of her learned counsel and he was employed in several legal cases. One of them -- obviously an investigation of the aftermath of Dr Lopez's conspiracy -- required him to travel north. Due to an illness Bacon got no further than Huntingdon. He took this opportunity to visit Cambridge and take his MA degree. 
Bacon wrote parts of the 'Gesta Grayorum', the Christmas festivities of 1594-5 at Gray's Inn. It was presented on 3 January 1595 in front of a formidable audience. Similar to the earlier device ('Of tribute'), it had six speakers arguing their choice of life. The first defended 'the Exercise of war', the second advised 'the Study of Philosophy', the third 'Eternizement and Fame by Buildings and Foundations', the fourth defended 'Absoluteness of State and Treasure', the fifth 'Virtue and a gracious Government', and the sixth 'Pastimes and Sports'. The second speech, pleading the cause of philosophy, urged 'the conquest of the works of nature', commending the erection of 'a most perfect and general library', 'a spacious, wonderful garden', 'a goodly huge cabinet', as well as 'a still-house [laboratory], so furnished with mills, instruments, furnaces, and vessels, as may be a palace fit for a philosopher's stone' ('Bacon', ed. Vickers, 54-5). But the device was part of Christmas festivities, and the day was carried by the last counsellor who declared 'let other men's lives be as pilgrimages... but princes' lives are as progresses, dedicated only to variety and solace' (ibid., 60). 
When Edward Coke was appointed attorney-general the solicitor-generalship became vacant. Essex pressed hard to secure it for Bacon, and if anything the suit became even more prolonged and exhaustive than the earlier one. Bacon even asked for a licence to travel abroad but the queen refused him. Venting his frustration to his brother Anthony, Bacon said that the queen had sworn that 'she will seek all England for a Solicitor rather than take me' ('Works', 8.348). By July 1595 he could no longer contain himself but wrote to Lord Keeper Puckering: 'There hath nothing happened to me in the course of my business more contrary to my expectation, than your Lordship's failing me and crossing me now in the conclusion, when friends are best tried' (ibid., 8.364-5). Trying to atone Essex referred to Bacon's burst of anger as 'a natural freedom and plainness', which Bacon had also used with Essex as well as with other friends (ibid., 8.366). 
Whatever Bacon's hopes, they were dashed early in November 1595 when the queen appointed Sir Thomas Fleming as solicitor-general. Most scholars agree that Bacon's opposition to the subsidy bill in 1593, which had offended the queen, and Essex's perseverance in pursuing the suit, which had annoyed her, account for Bacon's failure to obtain the post. Essex consoled Bacon by offering him a gift of land. Bacon responded that while he was 'more beholding to you than to any man', yet Essex could not purchase his loyalty, and that his first obligation was always to the queen and the public service ('Works', 8.373). Afterwards, Bacon sold the land for $1800. 
The painful experience of these suits led Bacon temporarily to entertain the idea of a purely scholarly career and 'not to follow the practice of the law... because it drinketh too much time, which I have dedicated to better purposes' ('Works', 8.372). But when, in spring 1596, the office of master of the rolls fell vacant it gave him new hope that a place would also be vacated to which he could succeed, receiving strong support from Essex. 
Intellectual and literary pursuits, most of them closely related to Essex and his circle, took up much of Bacon's time in the late 1590s. Essex had commissioned him to write a device for the Accession day celebration, presented at Essex House on 17 November 1595. Again Bacon's contribution consisted of three men defending their respective forms of life: a hermit defending contemplation, a soldier defending fame, and a statesman arguing for experience. These arguments were refuted by a squire who concluded by confirming his master's (representing Essex) dedication to the queen. In this, as in the earlier dramatic entertainments, Bacon could be seen as dramatizing his own choices between the active and contemplative modes of life. 
In addition to literary devices Bacon used letters of advice to display his learning and intellectual abilities, and to put his ideas across. The first of these was a series of three letters addressed to the earl of Rutland (who travelled in Europe during 1595-7) perhaps late in 1595 or early in 1596, which Bacon wrote on Essex's behalf. Bacon strongly argued for the 'vita activa', which needed above all 'liberality or magnificence, and fortitude or magnanimity'. Underlying these virtues, however, was 'knowledge, which is not only the excellentest thing in man, but the very excellency of man'. Restricting his account to 'civil knowledge', Bacon emphasized that such a knowledge consisted of doing 'good unto others' and it therefore contrasted sharply with 'the study of 'artes luxuriae'' ('Works', 8.9-12). 
Bacon wrote a somewhat different letter of advice to Essex himself in October 1596, after the latter's Cadiz expedition had weakened his position at court. Calling Essex 'a nature not to be ruled', Bacon advised him studiously to avoid giving such an impression. But he also counselled him to shun the impressions of 'a military dependence' and 'a popular reputation'. In both these, however, the earl should avoid the appearance but not the characteristic itself. He must abolish a military dependence 'in shows to the Queen' but retain it in practice. Similarly, in the queen's presence he must 'speak against popularity and popular courses vehemently; and tax it in all others: but nevertheless to go on in your honourable commonwealth courses as you do' ('Works', 9.41-4). 
Yet another intellectual pursuit to which Bacon devoted time in the 1590s was his idea of reforming the English law. In 1593 he had mentioned in parliament how in ancient Rome 'ten men' had been appointed 'to correct and recall all former laws' ('Works', 8.214). In the Christmas festivities at Gray's Inn in 1594-5 he had the counsellor advising the prince in 'Virtue and a gracious Government' to advocate a similar project ('Bacon', ed. Vickers, 59). In new year 1597 Bacon presented the queen with a work, 'Maxims of the law', which was meant as an example of how the English law should be restructured. It consists of twenty-five maxims in Latin each of which is followed by a fuller treatment. 
Early in 1597 Bacon appeared in print for the first time. Some of his essays had already been circulated in manuscript (in 1597 he noted that 'they passed long agoe from my pen'; 'Works', 6.523), and in 1596 one of them was plagiarized in Edward Monings's 'The Langrave of Hessen his Princelie Receiving of her Majesties Embassador', which borrowed a few passages from Bacon's essay 'Of studies'. On 24 January 1597 one Richard Serger entered in the Stationers' register 'a book entitled ESSAYES of M.F.B. 'with prayers of his Sovereigne'' ('Bacon', ed. Vickers, 546). In order to forestall this publication Bacon immediately assigned the rights to Humfrey Hooper. On 7 February 1597 the first edition of Bacon's 'Essayes', together with 'Religious Meditations' and 'Places of Perswasion and Disswasion', was published. The ten essays treated personal and courtly issues and belong, too, to the literature of advice. They were written in a terse, aphoristic style (individual sentences were marked with a paragraph sign), which Bacon conceived as a genre setting down discrete observations on life, and aspiring to some kind of objective validity. The slim volume had considerable success and was reprinted in 1597, 1598, 1606, and 1612. 
In 1597 Bacon tried his fortune with Lady Hatton, a young, rich widow (and the daughter of Burghley's eldest son) -- but without success. To make matters worse she married Bacon's old rival Edward Coke in November 1598. One of the chief reasons for Bacon's suit was economic. His estate was 'weak and indebted', both because of the lack of inheritance and because he in his 'own industry' had 'rather referred and aspired to virtue than to gain' ('Works', 9.61). When the marriage suit failed Bacon endeavoured to use his reversion of the star chamber clerkship to relieve his necessities. He would give it to the lord keeper Thomas Egerton's son if Egerton would give him the mastership of the rolls. Again the plan fell through, and in September 1598 Bacon was arrested for debt. Although his income increased considerably over time his economic situation was never secure, and he often had difficulties in settling his debts. 
In the parliament which sat from October 1597 to February 1598 Bacon was an active member for Ipswich, serving in numerous committees. He delivered his speech in favour of three subsidies, payable in three years. He initiated the important social and economic legislative work of the session with a motion against enclosures and the depopulation of towns and houses of husbandry, and for the maintenance of tillage, which he had not written, he said, 'with polished pen but with a polished heart, free from affection and affectation'. He defended his initiative with a Machiavellian argument: 'in matters of policy ill is not to be thought ill which bringeth forth good' ('Works', 9.82). 
In September 1598 Bacon examined one John Stanley for being involved in Edward Squire's conspiracy to assassinate the queen. In 1599 he published a quasi-official account of the conspiracy entitled 'Letter Written out of England to an English Gentleman in Padua'. From 1599 also comes a letter of advice to Fulke Greville on his studies ascribed to Bacon. The letter addressed the topic of employing research assistants, but it also criticized university learning and attacked the use of epitomes. Again, Bacon singled out Demosthenes and found 'his eloquence... more proper to a statesman than Cicero's'. While Livy and Thucydides were good historians Tacitus was 'simply the best' ('Bacon', ed. Vickers, 105). 
The situation in Ireland had been growing from bad to worse during the latter part of the 1590s. In 1598 Bacon had seen this as an exceptionally apposite opportunity for Essex 'to purchase honour' ('Works', 9.95-6). After some deliberation Essex was appointed in March 1599 to suppress the Irish uprising. What did Bacon think about Essex continuing his military career? In 1604 Bacon wrote that he had been firmly against Essex 'going into Ireland'. 'I did not only dissuade', he wrote in 1604, 'but protest against his going', omitting 'no argument'. In particular, he said, he had cited the example of the ancient Romans, who, despite their overwhelming military strength, had had extreme difficulties against 'the ancient Gauls, or Britons, or Germans'. These people had 'placed their felicity only in liberty and the sharpness of their sword' and in 'the natural and elemental advantages of woods, and bogs, and hardness of bodies'. From such examples, Bacon claimed in 1604, he had 'concluded, that going over with such expectations as he did, and through the churlishness of the enterprise not like to answer it, would mightily diminish his reputation' (ibid., 10.146). 
There is no contemporary evidence indicating that Bacon actually gave such advice. In a letter that appears to have been written by the time the earl had already decided to embark on this project, Bacon on the one hand pointed out the great merit and great peril of the enterprise which Essex was poised to undertake, and on the other found hopeful portents of its success. Moreover he cited exactly the same example of the ancient Romans as in 1604, but stressed the fact that triumphs against a 'barbarous' enemy did not 'extenuate the honour' ('Works', 8.131), rather than the difficulty of the enterprise, as in 1604. It is impossible to say whether Bacon remembered in 1604 what he wanted, or whether he had first advised Essex against going to Ireland but, when the earl decided against such advice, warned him about the great peril while trying to reassure him. 
When Essex unexpectedly returned from Ireland in September 1599 Bacon worked hard to reconcile the earl to the queen, despite rumours to the contrary. When she came 'to dine at my lodge' he even presented her with 'a sonnet directly tending and alluding to draw on her Majesty's reconcilement to my Lord' ('Works', 10.149). Although Bacon advised the queen to deal with Essex in private the case was heard in star chamber, where neither the earl nor Bacon was present. Finally, in June 1600 Essex was subjected to an informal trial at York House, where Bacon was involved as one of the queen's learned counsel. Essex was dismissed from all his offices of state and was to remain at Essex House. 
In spring 1600 Bacon had been chosen double reader at Gray's Inn and gave his six-day series of lectures on the 'Statute of Uses'. Double readers were senior barristers who had already given one reading. This statute was a common topic for readings and Bacon had appeared in an important case ('Dillon v. Freine' or 'Chudleigh's case') involving the statute in 1595. The 'Statute of Uses' also offered means for discussing law reform. 
As soon as Essex was fully freed in July 1600 Bacon wrote him a letter assuring him that he loved the earl more than anyone else. Yet he insisted even more strongly, just as in 1595, that he put 'the Queen's service' and 'the good of my country' before private friendship ('Works', 9.191). Bacon still endeavoured to restore Essex to the queen's favour, composing letters on the earl's behalf. These did not have the desired effect, and in February 1601 Essex made his forlorn attempt at a rebellion. 
At the trial that followed the queen made use of Bacon for the prosecution. When Essex accused Bacon of being an accomplice because he had written letters for Essex Bacon retorted: 'I have spent more time in vain in studying how to make the earl a good servant to the Queen, than I have done in anything else' (Jardine and Stewart, 244). Bacon was also commissioned to prosecute some of Essex's followers, and the queen called upon him to write the official account of the trial. Many of the accomplices paid large fines, most of which were given away as rewards. Bacon received $1200, although he had expected more. 
The spring of 1601 was not a particularly happy period in Bacon's life. In addition to the Essex trial the antagonism between him and Edward Coke exploded in the exchequer in April. According to Bacon, Coke had told him: 'Mr. Bacon, if you have any tooth against me, pluck it out; for it will do you more hurt than all the teeth in your head will do you good'. To this Bacon had riposted: 'Mr. Attorney, I respect you: I fear you not: and the less you speak of your own greatness, the more I will think of it' ('Works', 10.3). On top of all this his brother Anthony died in May. 
In the last Elizabethan parliament, which met in October 1601, Bacon again sat for Ipswich. He was a particularly active member, speaking to most of the matters and sitting in most of the committees. He supported the subsidy bill of four subsidies and emphasized that the poor as well as the rich should contribute, a view which evoked a scathing comment from Walter Ralegh (Neale, 2.415). Bacon also insisted that parliament, as well as raising money, must enact laws. He brought in a bill 'against abuses in weights and measures' and spoke 'for repealing superfluous laws'. But he also noted that it was not enough to introduce bills; they should also be properly debated. It was 'unfitting', he said, 'to bandy bills like balls and to be silent, as if nobody were of counsel with the Commonwealth' (ibid., 2.417). 
Bacon and Ralegh also argued against each other in a debate about the renewal of the 'Statute of Tillage'. Bacon defended the bill, which enacted that land converted to pasture should be restored to tillage, noting that 'the husbandman', being 'a strong and hardy man', made the best soldier. Raleigh riposted that since 'all Nations abound with Corn' it was best 'to set it at Liberty, and leave every man Free, which is the Desire of a true Englishman'. Bacon's view, receiving support, for instance, from his cousin Robert Cecil, carried the day (H. Townshend, 'Historical Collections', 1680, 299-300). The most controversial issue of the session was the abuse of monopolies. Bacon's opinion was clear: 'For the prerogative royal of the Prince, for my own part I ever allowed of it: and it is such as I hope I shall never see discussed' ('Works', 10.26). 
In 1602 Bacon argued in 'Slade's case', although in the report of the case Coke completely ignored Bacon's argument. When the Irish problem became pressing in 1602 Bacon volunteered and offered his advice to Cecil. He strongly argued for a non-violent solution, emphasizing 'the recovery of the hearts of the people' ('Works', 10.46). A letter of advice to Sir Henry Savile on the intellectual powers, which anticipated themes expounded in 'The Advancement of Learning' and later editions of the 'Essayes', has also been dated to 1602. 
When James VI of Scotland succeeded Elizabeth I to the English throne Bacon, like so many others, made a serious effort to secure the new king's attention. Just before the death of Elizabeth I on 24 March 1603 Bacon began to recommend his services to those who were close to the new king. He also prepared a proclamation 'for cherising, entertaining, and preparing of men's affections' to the new king, but it was not used ('Works', 10.67). Bacon's first impression of the new king was that he acted 'excellently well'; he was 'a prince the farthest from the appearance of vain-glory' (ibid., 10.73, 77). On 23 July 1603 James's bounty also reached Bacon. On that day he was knighted, though to his great disappointment so were 300 others, to mark the king's coronation. On 18 August 1604 Bacon was granted the office of learned counsel. 
In 1603 Bacon also published a short treatise on the proposed union between England and Scotland entitled 'A Brief Discourse Touching the Happy Union of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland'. It was clear to everybody that James was eagerly promoting a union between his two kingdoms. Bacon had his doubts, thinking that the king 'hastened to a mixture of both kingdoms and nations, faster perhaps than policy will conveniently bear' ('Works', 10.77). But on the whole he fully supported the union. In his proclamation proposal in spring 1603 he had already spoken about uniting 'these two mighty and warlike nations of England and Scotland into one kingdom' (ibid., 10.68). In 'Brief Discourse' he drew on an analogy between the principles of nature and policy. At the same time he revealed that he had been an attentive reader of Machiavelli, noting that: 'so likewise the authority of Nicholas Machiavelli seemeth not to be contemned; who enquiring the causes of the growth of the Roman empire, doth give judgment, there was not one greater than this, that the state did so easily compound and incorporate with strangers. (ibid., 10.96)' Bacon also tried to capture James's attention with a treatise on ecclesiastical policy, written perhaps in August or September 1603. In 'Certain Considerations Touching the Better Pacification and Edification of the Church of England' (1604) Bacon, again following Machiavelli, pointed out that, just like 'the civil state' 'the ecclesiastical state' requires to be constantly 'purged and restored'. The brunt of Bacon's critique was again directed against the hierarchy of the church and its government. Although 'the substance of doctrine is immutable' the 'policies and forms' of church government (just like those of civil government) 'are left free'. While he acknowledged that the government of bishops suited kingdoms better than 'parity of ministers and government by synods', he harshly criticized the bishops. Above all he censured their absolute power: 'the Bishop giveth orders alone; excommunicateth alone; judgeth alone' ('Works', 10.107-9). Little wonder that the tract incurred the bishops' displeasure: it was suppressed by Richard Bancroft, bishop of London, and surviving copies of the printed version are incomplete. 
Another tract which Bacon composed during the first months of the new reign was his 'Apology in Certain Imputations Concerning the Late Earl of Essex' (May 1604); it enjoyed some success and was twice reprinted. In the tract Bacon defended his own conduct in the Essex affair by exactly the same line of argument which he had presented to Essex as early as in 1595. Bacon repeated that the queen and the public service had always had his first priority: 'whatsoever I did... was done in my duty and service to the Queen and the State' ('Works', 10.141). 
James's first parliament met in March 1604, and Bacon again sat for Ipswich. The parliament had five sessions between 1604 and 1610 and was finally dissolved in February 1611. Bacon was one of the most active members of the house, speaking in almost every debate and sitting in almost every important committee and often reporting from committees or conferences to the house. In the first session of 1604 he assumed a conciliatory role in the dispute over who was the member for the county of Buckingham and in debates on wardship, monopolies, and purveyance. 
The union question dominated the first and third sessions, and Bacon was heavily involved in it. To avoid opposition James's plans for the union and its accomplishment were vague. Despite intensive committee work all that had been achieved by July when the parliament was prorogued was a joint Anglo-Scottish commission to prepare proposals for union. In autumn 1604 Bacon was busy with the work of the commission and wrote 'Certain articles or considerations touching the union of the kingdoms of England and Scotland', which argued that political and legal changes and innovations, while possible, were always difficult. Bacon also wrote a suggestion for a proclamation 'touching his Majesty's style', but it was not adopted when the proclamation was published in October 1604. In spring 1605 Bacon promoted the union by a new 'History of Britain' project, which would carry the union backwards in time. He did not proceed with this project but returned to it in 1610 when he wrote the beginning of 'The history of Great Britain' and sent it for comments to the king. 
The second session of James's first parliament, between November 1605 and May 1606, concentrated on purveyance and matters of finance as well as the Gunpowder Plot, and Bacon kept a fairly low profile. As early as 1603 Bacon had mentioned that he had 'found out an alderman's daughter, an handsome maiden, to my liking' ('Works', 10.80). Almost three years later, on 10 May 1606, he married her at Marylebone chapel. She was Alice (1592-1650), a daughter of Benedict Barnham, a wealthy London alderman. Bacon was forty-five, she was barely fourteen. 
The third session of James's first parliament, from November 1606 to July 1607, focused its attention on the Anglo-Scottish union. The commission had made three proposals: equal trading rights, repeal of expressedly hostile laws, and bestowal of a common nationality (naturalization). The first and third proposals aroused fierce opposition in the parliament, opposition which Bacon did his best to overcome. When, on 17 February 1607, Nicholas Fuller argued against the union by claiming that England would become overpopulated, Bacon arose to deliver a long speech, mustering all his eloquence in defence of the union in general and naturalization in particular. Just as fifteen years earlier in writing the official response to Robert Persons's anti-government tract, now Bacon appealed to the examples of Demosthenes and the republican Athens. If an MP merely looked at the union from 'his particular vocation' he would perhaps oppose it, but putting his own private good before the common good would hardly enable him 'to give counsel or take counsel'. He told them that instead the MPs should 'raise their thoughts, and lay aside those considerations which their private vocations and degrees mought minister and present unto them, and would take upon them cogitations and minds agreeable to the dignity and honour of the estate'. Seeing beyond their own private good would prompt the MPs to lend their support to the union ('Works', 10.307-8). Bacon's eloquence failed to pay off: a few days later the Commons decided against the naturalization of the 'post nati'. 
In so far as his particular vocation was concerned Bacon's efforts to promote the union brought him the long hoped for advancement to solicitor-general on 25 June 1607. In the same year Bacon wrote his most concrete work on the Anglo-Scottish union, 'Preparation for the union of laws'. He suggested that the English and Scottish laws should be organized in 'a book of two columns' which would make the comparison easy. 
Although the House of Commons had decided in February 1607 against the naturalization of the 'post nati', their decision was reversed in 1608 by exchequer chamber, which ruled that the 'post nati', but not the 'ante nati', were naturalized. Bacon appeared as solicitor-general on behalf of the king's interest and argued for the winning side, and like the lord chancellor, Ellesmere, based his argument on the nature of kingship. But he did not, as Ellesmere did, draw an absolutist conclusion, arguing instead that the law limited the king's power. 
Perhaps the most lasting effect of Bacon's close involvement in the Anglo-Scottish union project was his theory of civic greatness. From the very beginning of his public utterances concerning the union he linked it with the attainment of civic greatness. His strongest arguments to this effect were presented in his long speech in the House of Commons on 17 February 1607 and the closely related tract: 'Of the true greatness of the kingdom of Britain', which remained unfinished. He also treated it in an essay, 'Of the greatness of kingdoms', published in the second edition of the 'Essayes' (1612). 'For greatness', he told his colleagues in the House of Commons: 'I think a man may speak it soberly and without bravery, that this kingdom of England, having Scotland united, Ireland reduced, the sea provinces of the Low Countries contracted, and shipping maintained, is one of the greatest monarchies, in forces truly esteemed, that hath been in the world. ('Works', 10.323)' In his theory of civic greatness Bacon carefully followed Machiavelli's account and argued against more recent theories of civic greatness expounded by such theorists as Justus Lipsius and Giovanni Botero. While emphasizing the centrality of the army and military disposition Bacon concentrated on the morality underlying the army and questioned the importance of opulence, commerce, and victuals. He declared in the House of Commons: 'Neither is the authority of Machivel to be despised, who scorneth the proverb of estate taken first from a speech of Mucianus, that Moneys are the sinews of wars; and saith there are no sinews of wars but the very sinews of the arms of valiant men. ('Works', 10.323-4)' Just as his notion of the politically active citizen was based on classical precedents, so it was the classical idea of the armed citizen which underlay Bacon's conception of civic greatness. The only way to pursue civic greatness successfully, much less to survive in the predatory world, was to attain a large population and to arm it. Walter Ralegh aptly summarized Bacon's argument: 'Certaine it is (as Sir Francis Bacon hath judiciously observed) That a State whose dimension or stemme is small, may aptly serve to be foundation of a great Monarchie: which chiefly comes to passe, where all regard of domesticall prosperitie is laid aside; and every mans care addressed to the benefit of his countrie. (W. Ralegh, 'The Historie of the World', 1614, 496)' In 1607-8 Bacon's career was at an important turning point. In June 1607 he had finally gained a crown office. On 16 July 1608 he became the clerk of star chamber, the reversion of which he had held since November 1589. Surviving notes of a review of his life that he made between 25 and 31 July 1608 offer an unusually personal insight into Bacon's life. He began with a detailed review of his economic situation. Although his marriage and the clerkship of star chamber had given him some financial security he still had a long list of possible lenders. He detailed his debts but also his property and income as well as the possible ways to increase them. Bacon then discussed how he could maintain access to the king. In particular he wanted to be 'affectionate and assured to the Scots' at the court. He considered the kind of advice he should offer, what legal cases he should prepare for, how to run his office better than his predecessor, and how to take advantage of the weakness of the attorney-general, Sir Henry Hobart. He also reminded himself of his political projects -- 'greatness of Britain', 'union in Parliament' -- as well as of circulating his political and legal works -- 'my Argument of the postnati' and the speeches on naturalization and on union of laws ('Works', 11.41-3). 
Moreover Bacon listed his diet and medication. He also made extensive plans for improving his gardens at Gorhambury House and building a new house 'with an upper galery open upon the water, a tarace above that, and a supping roome open under that; a dynyng roome, a bedd chamber, a Cabanett, and a Roome for Musike' ('Works', 11.765-7). These plans eventually became Verulam House, which was to cost him $9000 or $10,000 and which, forty years after Bacon's death, in a state of dereliction, was sold to two carpenters for $400. 
As well as pondering his private life and political as well as legal projects in July 1608 Bacon reviewed his plans in natural philosophy, listing all those who he thought could help him with his project in general and with experiments in particular. Although political and legal work had started to pile up during the first decade of the new century Bacon had also devoted a considerable amount of time to natural philosophy. In October 1605 he published 'The Twoo Bookes of Francis Bacon: of the Proficience and Advancement of Learning, Divine and Humane'. It was the product of his two enforced periods of leisure, first from March 1603 to March 1604 and then from December 1604 to October 1605. 'The Advancement of Learning', as it is commonly called, was Bacon's first published philosophical work and the only one which he published in English. All the other published philosophical works (and most of those which remained unpublished) were written in Latin -- an indication of the international (rather than purely national) scope of his project. Initially Bacon planned to print 'The Advancement of Learning' simultaneously in English and Latin, but haste prevented this and caused the first book of the volume to be printed before the second was finished. Bacon did not abandon the idea of a Latin edition, and in summer 1606 contacted Thomas Playfere, Lady Margaret professor of divinity at Cambridge, requesting him to translate 'The Advancement of Learning' into Latin. Nothing came of this, but still in 1608 Bacon reminded himself of 'proceeding with the translation of my book of Advancment of learnyng' ('Works', 11.64). 

'The Advancement of Learning' was divided into two books. The first was an eloquent and powerful defence of the importance of learning to every field of life. It was therefore constructed according to the principles of epideictic oratory. The much longer and more important second book was a general survey of the contemporary state of human knowledge, identifying its deficiencies and supplying Bacon's broad suggestions for improvement. The book's real importance was not so much its encyclopaedic character but rather its professed aim of propagating the Baconian ideas of the advancement of learning and knowledge, and of the practical means of accomplishing it. 
Bacon often referred to himself with studied moderation as a mere 'bell-ringer', whose only task was 'to ring a bell to call other wits together' ('Works', 10.254, 300). Yet, by the first decade of the seventeenth century his calls for a new, productive natural philosophy began to emerge as a definite programme. The unpublished philosophical writings from this period are no less important than 'The Advancement of Learning' for understanding how Bacon's great philosophical programme -- ultimately entitled 'Instauratio magna' ('The great instauration') -- was taking shape. 
The earliest of these treatises, written in 1602-3 and called the 'Temporis partus masculus', continued Bacon's criticism of earlier philosophy, summoning all the schools of ancient and modern philosophy to the bar and heaping scorn on them. Its subtitle -- 'Instauratio magna imperii humani in universum' -- contains the earliest mention of the great instauration. A similar criticism was repeated in the 'Cogitata et visa', written in 1607, and in 'Redargutio philosophiarum', written in 1608, where Aristotle and Plato were roundly criticized, and a more favourable account was given of Empedocles, Heraclitus, and Democritus. 
'De interpretatione naturae proemium', composed in 1603, asserted Bacon's plans: 'Now among all the benefits that could be conferred upon mankind, I found none so great as the discovery of new arts, endowments, and commodities for the bettering of man's life' ('Works', 10.84). In 'Scala intellectus, sive, Filum labyrinthi', a tract written in English, perhaps in 1607, he declared that his aim was to produce 'active and operative knowledge' (ibid., 3.503). A singular mistake in the dominant view of 'sciences' was that they had to be 'believed and accepted'. Bacon insisted, however, that they should 'be examined and further discovered'. It was, he added, 'natural to arts to be in perpetual agitation and growth' (ibid., 3.498, 502). 
Bacon was convinced that the fulfilment of his programme required a wholesale change in the way in which men perceived knowledge and learning. But it also implied a new method of securing that knowledge. His first detailed methodological remarks occur in 'Valerius terminus of the interpretation of nature' in 1603. It also contains the earliest account of his doctrine of Idols, which were the systematic forms of error to which the human mind is subject: Idols of the Tribe, the Palace (later this was replaced by Market-place), the Cave, and the Theatre. In 'The Advancement of Learning' Bacon also offered a devastating critique of current methodology, and by 1608 he reminded himself to finish his new method in natural philosophy under the title 'The key of interpretation' ('Clavis interpretationis'), entertaining the idea of publishing it in France. 
From this period also comes the earliest evidence of Bacon's conception of natural and experimental histories and their centrality to the new natural philosophy or science. In 'The Advancement of Learning' Bacon discussed extant natural histories, their deficiencies and the ways to improve them, noting 'the use of History Mechanical is of all others the most radical and fundamental towards natural philosophy' ('Bacon', ed. Vickers, 178). In 'Redargutio philosophiarum' (1608) he pointed out that true natural philosophy should draw its material from 'natural history and mechanical experiences' ('Works', 3.583), and in a fragmentary piece entitled 'Cogitationes de scientia humana' (composed perhaps in 1604) he discussed this at greater length. The 'Cogitationes de rerum natura', perhaps also written in 1604, contains speculative discussions of bodies, the vacuum, and motion, defending Democritean atomism. In his private memoranda of 1608 Bacon listed various topics which urgently needed investigation. In the 'Phaenomena universi', written perhaps in 1611, he offered an introduction to and an example of natural history. He announced that an entirely new natural history was necessary before the 'instauration of the sciences' could take place (Bacon, 'Philosophical Studies', 7). 
It was between 1607 and 1611 that Bacon started to conceive his entire philosophical plan as consisting of six books (or later six parts). But he not only charted such an extensive programme: at the same time he endeavoured to carry it out. At the beginning of the second book of 'The Advancement of Learning' he made a bold attempt to invite James to begin a complete reform of the institutions of learning, including founding libraries and research institutes, raising the funding of universities and the salaries of professors, as well as initiating international scholarly co-operation. 
In his private notes of 1608 Bacon listed the names of several men, including even the fourteen-year-old Prince Henry, whom he thought of as potential patrons of his programme, and he planned to enlist foreign support. He had clearly lost some confidence in the older generation and looked to the younger and even future generations to take up his call. In 1609 he wrote that 'my writings should not court the present time' but rather 'future ages' ('Works', 11.135). He was also cognizant of the great labour needed in collecting natural histories. Although he criticized existing institutions in 'The Advancement of Learning' three years later he listed several of them (the schools of Westminster, Eton, and Winchester, Trinity College and St John's College, Cambridge, and Magdalen College, Oxford) as potential places of support. But he also reminded himself of international co-operation and of founding a new college 'for Inventors' which would have the necessary equipment, including a library and a laboratory (ibid., 11.66). 
By 1609 Bacon, corresponding with his closest friend Toby Matthew, confidently called his natural philosophical programme an ''Instauration'' and assured him that it 'sleeps not' ('Works', 11.134-5). But he noted that religious controversies were a serious threat to his entire programme. In one of these letters to Matthew, written on 10 October 1609, Bacon famously referred to himself as: 'the miller of Huntingdon, that was wont to pray for peace amongst the willows; for while the winds blew, the wind-mills wrought, and the water-mill was less customed. So I see that controversies of religion must hinder the advancement of sciences. (ibid., 11.137-8)' Furthermore religion and philosophy should be kept separate for, as Bacon told Matthew, the world must not 'reject truth in philosophy, because the author dissenteth in religion' (ibid., 11.145). 
There is some irony in the fact that these letters exist partly because of the heightened religious controversy which Bacon deplored. Matthew, son of the archbishop of York and a Catholic convert, was exiled for refusing to take the oath of allegiance imposed on Catholics in the aftermath of the Gunpowder Plot. Bacon and Matthew, unable to meet, were forced to correspond. 
In 1609 Bacon published the 'De sapientia veterum', a collection of thirty-one ancient myths complete with his interpretations of their allegories. Although traditionally listed under literary works the 'De sapientia veterum' treats various philosophical issues and has more recently been seen as an important contribution to both his natural and civil philosophy. In 1611 he wrote an unfinished tract 'De principiis atque originibus', which was designed to contain interpretations of the myths of the principles and origins of things, but in fact contains only the first. A short tract on tidal motion -- 'De fluxu et refluxu maris' -- has also been dated to 1611. 
In 1612 Bacon wrote an unfinished paper entitled 'Descriptio globi intellectualis', which was meant to be the beginning of the first book or part of the 'Instauratio'. It presented the classification or partition of sciences and was thus meant to survey the state of knowledge and learning -- the intellectual globe. Bacon had, of course, done such a survey in the second book of 'The Advancement of Learning', but this had been written before he had any six-part plan. 'Descriptio' was thus meant to be a revision on Ramist lines of book two of 'The Advancement of Learning'. 'Descriptio' was only a small fraction of the whole first part. Surveying all the branches of learning and their deficiencies with the same meticulousness as the extant fraction does would have produced a gigantic work. 
Almost immediately after 'Descriptio' Bacon wrote a brief text entitled 'Thema coeli' on cosmology and astronomy. Since Bacon was convinced that the primary aim of philosophy was to bring great benefits for the whole of humankind, to improve its material conditions, and even to restore the prelapsarian state of felicity, the prolongation of life lay at the heart of his whole project. Indeed, as early as 1603 he had announced that 'immortality (if it were possible)' was among 'the true ends of knowledge' ('Works', 3.222). Some time during the 1610s he also composed (and kept revising until he abandoned it unfinished) his earliest surviving treatise on the prolongation of life, entitled 'De viis mortis', which was discovered only in 1978. 
During the decade from 1603 to 1613 Bacon thus pursued various parts of his natural philosophical project vigorously but in a somewhat eclectic manner and was not in a hurry to publish anything. As he told Lancelot Andrewes in 1609, 'I hasten not to publish' ('Works', 11.141). Writing to Toby Matthew the following February Bacon explained his working habits: 'My great work goeth forward; and after my manner, I alter ever when I add. So that nothing is finished till all be finished' (ibid., 11.145). 
In 1608 Bacon had only a little official business as solicitor-general, and it was a period of intense literary activity. In addition to the natural philosophical treatises mentioned above he produced a memorial of Queen Elizabeth entitled 'In felicem memoriam Reginae Elizabethae', which was composed according to the principles of demonstrative rhetoric. Towards the end of the year he wrote a treatise on Ireland entitled 'Certain considerations touching the plantation in Ireland', which he presented to James as a new year's gift. The main aim of Bacon's short treatise was to find means of inducing the best possible people to undertake the plantation project. The treatise was thus a piece in deliberative rhetoric which aimed at persuading people to a desired course of action (plantation), appealing to the classical deliberative 'loci' of honour and profit. 
In winter 1608-9 Bacon was involved in the case of the jurisdiction of the council in the marches, defending the council. As early as 1607 he had prepared a paper on the issue. It was in this debate that Bacon employed absolutist principles. It had been argued that the king's prerogatives were given to him by the common law, but Bacon replied with a staple absolutist argument that the king held some of his prerogatives 'mediately from the law, but immediately from God'. Some of his prerogatives were indeed of such nature that they could be disputed 'in his ordinary courts of Justice'. But 'his sovereign power' could not be censured by any judge. Because 'the end of all government' was the 'preservation of the public', it was 'necessary' that the king could flout the law. As soon as 'prerogatives are made envious or subject to the constructions of laws' a monarchy, Bacon argued, would degenerate into an aristocracy or oligarchy, and 'further way may be opened to Parliament or lawyers to dispute more liberties'. He warned that those who wanted to limit prerogatives by 'subjects' birthrights and laws' were perhaps opening 'a gap unto new Barons' wars'. A good king did indeed govern by the law. Had not James himself admitted that 'God forbid... that we should be governed by men's discretions and not by the law'? But this did not entail the limitation of the royal power by the law, for the king was accountable to God alone ('Works', 10.371-2, 380). 
In the last two sessions of James's first parliament, which sat in 1610, Bacon was a royal official for the first time. In the fierce debates about whether the king had the right of impositions Bacon defended the king not by absolutist arguments but by advocating a balanced constitution. 'The King's Sovereignty and the Liberty of Parliament are as the two elements and principles of this estate... [which] do not cross or destroy the one the other, but they strengthen and maintain the one the other' ('Works', 11.177). By evoking such a view Bacon clearly tried to avoid getting involved in ideological disputes, but its reception was ambivalent. As Nicholas Fuller commented on Bacon's speech: 'though Mr. Solicitor's speech were full of rhetoric and art, yet it had some good substance in it' (Foster, 2.98). 
Later Bacon gave another speech in which he defended the king's right of impositions, again insisting that the question was ''de vero et falso', and not 'de bono et malo'; of the legal point, and not of the inconvenience'. So the question was reduced 'whether the King have not such a prerogative by law' ('Works', 11.191). The next speaker, Thomas Hedley, gave Bacon a lie direct: 'though it was said by one of the King's learned counsel that this question was not a question of 'bonum et malum', but of 'vera et falsa'', yet it was 'a good and necessary argument to say, it is ill for the good of the commonwealth, ergo, no law' (Foster, 2.176). Whereas Bacon had defended the king's right of impositions by legal precedents Hedley countered by announcing that the whole excellence of the common law was precisely that it was constantly redefined in the light of new circumstances. If this were not the case, Hedley argued quoting Bacon's 'Advancement of Learning', judges would have been devoid of 'versatile 'ingenium'' and 'subject to the reproof of 'idem manebat neque idem decebat'' (ibid., 2.178). Hedley ended his long speech by appealing to 'the ancient freedom and liberty' of the Englishman, and made use of the speech which Bacon had delivered in the committee of grievances on 19 May. Finally he paraphrased lengthy passages from Bacon's speech of 17 February 1607 where Bacon had defended the Anglo-Scottish union by his theory of civic greatness. 'It is', Hedley declared: 'the sinews of men's arms then (namely a valiant, populous and military nation), as hath been well observed and collected by one of the worthies of this House, that there are the true sinews of war and hath made our nation so renowned through the world. (ibid., 2.195)' In August 1610 Bacon's mother, Anne, Lady Bacon, died. It was also about 1610 that Bacon returned to his essays. He was preparing another edition and planned to dedicate it to Prince Henry. The prince had made Bacon his own solicitor, and in 1611 he appointed him steward of King's Langley in the duchy of Lancaster. Bacon was hoping for the prince's support for some higher position, and the edition of essays was intended to demonstrate his abilities as a counsellor. Bacon had already written the dedication, but Prince Henry suddenly died in November 1612 just before the edition came out and Bacon rededicated it to his brother-in-law, Sir John Constable. The edition contained thirty-eight essays, many of which analyse civil business from a much broader perspective than the first edition. It sold even better than the first edition and was reprinted six times between 1612 and 1624. 
Bacon had expressed hopes of preferment to the king early in 1611 and by the autumn had received a promise of the attorney-general's place. In May 1612 Bacon's cousin, the earl of Salisbury, died. This prompted Bacon both to censure Salisbury's competence as a politician and to recommend himself as an able successor. In all these suits for preferment Bacon consistently presented himself as the king's man. Writing to the king after Salisbury's death he stressed his 'little skill' in parliamentary business but hastened to add that he was 'a perfect and peremptory royalist' ('Works', 11.280). Writing to the king's new favourite Robert Carr, Viscount Rochester, he noted that 'the Attorney and the Solicitor are as the King's champions for civil business'. In 1613 he recommended himself to the place of attorney-general on the grounds that he would be able 'to recover that strength to the King's prerogative which it hath had in times past, and which is due unto it' (ibid., 11.280, 342, 381). 
After Salisbury's death Bacon acquired growing importance as a statesman and counsellor to James. Finally on 27 October 1613 he was appointed attorney-general. The years as solicitor and attorney became busier and busier with legal work. Among these in 1612 were the prosecutions of Lord Sanquhar for killing an English fencing master, and of James Whitelocke and Robert Mansell for slandering the king's commission of inquiry into the navy. As attorney-general, among Bacon's first tasks was to abolish duelling -- a recent social habit which rapidly gained ground in the early 1610s. In autumn 1613 Bacon suggested that a proclamation should be published against duelling, proposing that the offenders should be prosecuted in star chamber. In January he brought a convenient case of two obscure persons before the court. Bacon's charge, together with the decree of the court, was soon published. The actual proclamation was published in February 1614 with a treatise, entitled 'A Publication of His Majesties Edict, and Severe Censure against Private Combats and Combatants'. Some contemporaries attributed the treatise to Bacon, but it was composed by the earl of Northampton. 
According to Northampton the best strategy for abolishing duelling was to replace it by a court of honour. Bacon, however, insisted that such a strategy merely served the contrary purpose. By accepting the notion of courtesy, honour, and insult of the duelling theory, the court of honour would encourage men to fight duels. The only way to eradicate duelling, Bacon believed, was to discredit the underlying theory. 
More important issues at the beginning of Bacon's career as attorney were the king's finances and relations with parliament. Bacon had recommended calling a new parliament as early as 1612. In autumn that year he wrote to the king that 'your Majesty's recovery must be by the medicines of the Galenists and Arabians, and not of the Chemists or Paracelsians'. The recovery could not in other words be achieved 'by any one fine extract or strong water' but rather 'by a skilful compound of a number of ingredients' ('Works', 11.312). Northampton, who was James's chief minister from Salisbury's death until his own death in June 1614, was against calling a new parliament. Bacon disagreed. In 1613 or very early 1614 Bacon again urged James to call a new parliament, arguing that 'parliament hath been the ordinary remedy to supply the King's wants'. He was convinced that the disappointing conflicts of the 1610 sessions could easily be avoided partly because Salisbury would no longer create envy and partly because 'the opposite party heretofore is now dissolved and broken' (ibid., 11.365). 
Bacon wanted to give the impression that the failures in parliament were not based on deep ideological division, but could be explained by political intrigues and faction. He suggested that some course should be taken to avoid a packed house and 'to make men perceive that it is not safe [to] combine and make parties in Parliament, but that men be left to their consciences and free votes' ('Works', 11.368). More important, the king 'should not descend below' himself; 'those tragical arguments and (as the schoolmen call them) ultimities of persuasions which were used last Parliament should for ever be abolished'. Instead, the king should act 'in a more familiar, but yet a more princely like manner' (ibid., 11.369, 371). James must not use 'the language of a Merchant... crying of his royalties to sale'. But neither should he act as 'a Tyrant', telling the MPs that 'he most set upon the tenters his laws and prerogatives, if they will not supply him' (ibid., 12.26). If the king should thus keep away from airing absolutist principles the MPs should no less forbear from using ideological arguments. Bacon seemed to believe that the grave problems which surfaced in parliament could be avoided as long as men set their ideological arguments aside. 
The new parliament met in April 1614. Bacon was returned for St Albans and Ipswich as well as for Cambridge University, sitting eventually for Cambridge. Almost immediately the question was raised whether, as attorney-general, Bacon was eligible to sit in the Commons. Without a clear precedent Bacon was allowed to sit, but in future the attorney-general would be ineligible. James carefully followed Bacon's advice, telling the Commons several times that he 'would not deal with you like a merchant' or 'by way of a bargain'. He also distanced himself from absolutism, saying that he had never meant to 'stretch his prerogatives' (M. Jansson, 'Proceedings in Parliament, 1614', 1988, 44, 17, 141). None the less, without passing any legislation the parliament was dissolved after eight weeks. Bacon was unrepentant and insisted after the session to the king that he must rebut 'the opinion which is sometimes muttered, That his Majesty will call no more Parliaments' ('Works', 12.85, 176). 
In legal cases against Catholics, spawned by the oath of allegiance, Bacon also displayed reluctance to get involved in an ideological dispute. In January 1614, rather than developing a theoretical response, Bacon simply showered abuse on the Catholic resistance theorists. Their opinions, he argued in a similar case in king's bench in 1615, required rather 'detestation than contestation'. Those who wrote in favour of resistance or regicide deserved: 'rather some holy league amongst all Christian Princes of either religion, Papists and Protestants, for the extirping and razing of this opinion and the authors thereof from the face of the earth, as the common enemies of mankind, than the stile of pen or speech. ('Works', 12.165, 154)' During Christmas 1613 Bacon had been involved in preparing a masque to celebrate the marriage of the king's Scottish favourite Robert Carr, the earl of Somerset, to Frances Howard, whose marriage to the third earl of Essex had been annulled the previous September. 'The Masque of Flowers' was performed on twelfth night and printed soon afterwards with a dedication to Bacon. Somerset's position as James's principal favourite did not last long. By the end of 1615 his career was destroyed in a trial in star chamber, conducted by Bacon, for the murder of his former friend Sir Thomas Overbury. In May 1616, with Bacon acting as the chief prosecutor, both the earl and the countess of Somerset were tried, convicted, and sentenced to death, although this was commuted to imprisonment in the Tower. 
The downfall of Somerset and the entire Howard faction coincided with the meteoric rise of George Villiers, the son of a minor Leicestershire gentleman, who was introduced to the king in late summer 1614. Just as his friendship with Essex had dominated a central period of Bacon's early career so his close relationship to Villiers (later earl, marquess, and duke of Buckingham) had a crucial impact on his later career. Bacon's earliest existing letter to Villiers dates from January 1616, by which time a familiar acquaintance had been formed between them. Bacon had always emphasized the central importance of public service to the earl of Essex; similarly, in August 1616, when George Villiers was created Viscount Villiers, Bacon reminded him that 'it is the life of an ox or beast always to eat, and never to exercise; but men are born (and specially christian men), not to cram in their fortunes, but to exercise their virtues'. Villiers should dedicate himself 'to the public' and 'countenance, and encourage, and advance able men and virtous men and meriting men' ('Works', 13.6). There are also extant two different versions of a detailed advice letter which Bacon apparently wrote to Villiers at this time. 
As attorney-general Bacon defended the king in numerous legal cases. In January 1616 he wrote to the king, noting that 'it pleased your Majesty to commit to my care and trust, for Westminster Hall matters, three particulars: that of the 'Rege inconsulto'... that of the 'Commendans'... and that of 'Habeas Corpora'' ('Works', 12.233). When Bacon gave his argument in king's bench concerning the first case he, according to his own account, 'lost not one auditor' and even Edward Coke had thought 'it was a famous argument' (ibid., 12.235). This case touched royal prerogatives, but it was the two other cases later in 1616 which brought the king and Edward Coke into collision. In June 1616 Coke was excluded from the privy council and was ordered to amend his reports. The result did not satisfy the king and in November 1616 Coke was removed from king's bench, and later from the privy council, and finally from office altogether. In 1613 Coke had been removed from the chief justiceship of common pleas to that of king's bench on Bacon's advice. This, Bacon had argued, had been 'a kind of discipline to him for opposing himself in the King's causes' (ibid., 11.382). Now, in 1616, Bacon played an equally prominent role in Coke's removal, and prepared its explanation. Coke had been, Bacon wrote, 'a perpetual turbulent carriage, first towards the liberties of his [the king's] church and the state ecclesiastical; then towards his prerogative royal, and the branches thereof; and likewise towards all the settled jurisdictions of his other courts' (ibid., 13.95). 
The rapidly growing public and legal business which Bacon conducted reflected his growing importance. But Bacon also expected that it would reflect on his official position. In February 1616, when the lord chancellor, Ellesmere, fell ill, Bacon advertised himself as the fittest candidate to replace him. He especially warned James not to appoint Coke whom he called 'an over-ruling nature' ('Works', 12.242). Bacon's expectations were somewhat premature, for Ellesmere recovered. Bacon immediately wrote to Villiers, suggesting that Villiers promote his suit for a place in the privy council, and he reminded Villiers of it at the end of May, pointing out that 'the time is... now or never' (ibid., 12.347). James made Bacon choose between a promise that he would succeed Ellesmere or a place on the privy council. Bacon chose the latter and was sworn a privy councillor on 9 June 1616. 
This was an appropriate moment for Bacon to return to one of his lifelong projects: the reformation of the English laws. He had mentioned it to James in 1614 but now in 1616 he made a more comprehensive proposal 'touching the compiling and amendment of the laws of England'. Bacon explained his proposal by telling the king that 'the law is my profession' and that 'your Majesty hath set me in an eminent place' ('Works', 13.62). The plan was not to alter the law's substance but rather to improve its organization. Bacon had to wait nine months before James accepted Ellesmere's resignation, and on 7 March 1617 Bacon took the office of lord keeper. Before being able to move to York House, the lord keeper's usual residence, he leased Dorset House for two terms from the earl of Dorset. In May 1617 Bacon took his seat in the court of chancery, declaring his programme for the office. He perceived that the defence of the king was his and other judges' 'lanthorn'. In his speech to Sir John Denham, who was sworn as a baron of exchequer in 1617, Bacon told him that 'above all you ought to maintain the King's prerogative, and to set down with yourself that the King's prerogative and the law are not two things; but the King's prerogative is law, and the principal part of the law' (ibid., 13.184, 203). 
Only a week after Bacon's appointment in March the king and Villiers (who had been created earl of Buckingham) left London for Scotland. While this enhanced Bacon's status in London, it also brought difficulties. Ever since his dismissal Edward Coke had worked hard to regain his former position. Late in 1616 he had plans for his daughter Frances to marry Buckingham's brother Sir John Villiers. In June 1617 Coke renewed the marriage negotiations, but Coke's wife, Lady Hatton, opposed these plans, hid her daughter, and contacted Bacon for support (Bacon had of course competed with Coke for her hand twenty years earlier). When the mother of Buckingham and the intended groom applied to Bacon on Coke's behalf for a warrant to recover the bride, Bacon refused it, lending his support to Lady Hatton. As well as thwarting Coke's plans Bacon clearly believed that he was doing a favour to Buckingham. He wrote to Buckingham on 12 July 1617, claiming that 'Secretary Winwood hath officiously busied himself to make a match between your brother and Sir Edward Coke's daughter: and, as we hear, he doth it rather to make a faction, than out of any great affection to your Lordship'. The match, Bacon assured, would be 'very inconvenient both for your brother and yourself'. Buckingham himself would 'lose all such your friends as are adverse to Sir Edward Coke; (myself only except, who out of a pure love and thankfulness shall ever be firm to you)' ('Works', 13.223-4). 
On 25 July 1617 Bacon wrote to the king expressing his dislike of the proposed match. Describing the excellent present state of the kingdom in general and the rise of the king's 'prerogative and authority' in particular, Bacon warned the king that the proposed match would put all this in jeopardy: 'if there be but an opinion of his [Coke's] coming in with the strength of such an alliance, it will give a turn and relapse in men's minds unto the former state of things, hardly to be holpen; to the great weakening of your Majesty's service. ('Works', 13.233)' There was an ominous silence. Soon, however, Bacon learned that both Buckingham and James were furious. Buckingham told him that 'you have carried yourself with much scorn and neglect both toward myself and friends' ('Works', 13.237). The king's letter to Bacon is lost, but from Bacon's response is learned that it contained 'some matter of dislike, in which respect it hath grieved me more than any event which hath fallen out in my life' (ibid., 13.238). Bacon was ready to change his mind about the marriage, but could hardly make amends to the king, who wrote him a devastating letter in late August. In his reply Bacon could only hope for the speedy return of the king to London, 'expecting that that sun which when it went from us left us cold weather, and now it is returned towards us hath brought with it a blessed harvest' (ibid., 13.246). When James and Buckingham returned to London in mid-September Bacon received from Buckingham a reassurance of reconciliation and responded immediately: 'Your Lordship's pen or rather pencil hath pourtrayed towards me such magnanimity and nobleness and true kindness, as methinketh I see the image of some ancient virtue, and not any thing of these times' (ibid., 13.252). 
In making an abject submission to Buckingham, Bacon clearly understood that being the favourite's friend meant being his faithful servant. Bacon played this role dutifully and also reaped the concomitant harvest. In August 1617 he had moved to York House, the residence of lord keeper, where he had been born. In October the death of the secretary, Sir Ralph Winwood, strengthened his position in government. James did not appoint a new secretary of state and Buckingham and Bacon were the two most powerful men under the king. The new year brought new honours: Bacon was made lord chancellor on 7 January 1618 and on 12 July he was raised to the peerage and created Baron Verulam of Verulam. Thereon he styled himself Francis, Lord Verulam -- never Lord Bacon as subsequent generations have often styled him. 
As the most eminent lawyer in the country Bacon was called upon to sit in judgment on notable men. In October 1618 he was among the six privy councillors who were on the commission to examine and ultimately to condemn Sir Walter Ralegh for his disastrous trip to search for a mine in Guiana. It was Bacon who delivered the death sentence to Ralegh on 22 October 1618. A year later he was involved in the star chamber case against the earl of Suffolk, who was accused of misappropriating money when he had been lord treasurer. After yet another year Bacon, in autumn 1620, prosecuted attorney-general Sir Henry Yelverton in star chamber. 
But most of Bacon's days were filled with the routine of smaller cases in chancery. In many of these Buckingham contacted Bacon in favour of parties. By the end of January 1618 Buckingham wrote to Bacon: 'I have received your Lordship's letters, wherein I see the continuance of your love and respect to me in any thing I write to you of, for which I give your Lordship many thanks, desiring nothing for any man but what you shall find just and convenient to pass. ('Works', 13.297)' By and large, however, Bacon's career in chancery was highly successful. He worked with exemplary efficiency and conscientiousness. He made the court sit mornings and afternoons and extended the term 'for the expediting and clearing of the causes of the court'. Within three months of his appointment Bacon had cleared the backlog. His rules for chancery (ordinances in chancery) emphasized expedition and fairness, limiting jurisdictional conflict and eliminating vexatious suits. The rules also sought to increase accuracy of record keeping and dealt with numerous specific abuses in detail. Bacon's career in chancery also resulted in the improvement in its relationship with the common law courts. For Bacon the equity jurisdiction was a complementary system of justice, not a rival to the common law. 
Bacon's success is most evident in his concrete work in chancery. The court gained in popularity, the number of cases increasing during his term but dropping dramatically after his impeachment, and very few of his decisions were reversed, even then. There is ample evidence to suggest that despite his subsequent impeachment Bacon in fact frequently intervened to prevent even the appearance of improper influence or conflict of interest in chancery proceedings. 
Bacon had always favoured the summoning of parliament. Even after the disastrous session of 1614 he had emphasized to the king its central importance. In 1617 he wrote to James that 'I was ever for a Parliament; which seemeth to me to be 'cardo rerum' or 'summa summarum' for the present occasions' ('Works', 13.233). Bacon was thus enthusiastic when, early in October 1620, he was asked with other 'old Parliament-men' to advise the king how, 'without packing or degenerate arts, [to] prepare to a Parliament' (ibid., 14.114). He immediately set to work, thinking that 'the former grievances' and new potential problems needed to be carefully perused. It was important to consider 'what persons were fit to be of the House'. Equally crucial was 'the framing and having ready of some commonwealth bills, that may add respect to the King's government and acknowledgement of his care'. In all these it was of utmost importance to proceed with caution and secrecy. In particular, 'that which concerneth persons is not so fit to be communicated to the council-table'. Bacon realized that the king's finances would be the most pressing issue in the coming parliament; as he told Buckingham, 'the state of his Majesty's treasure still maketh me sad'. This must be reported to James 'faithfully and freely; for to flatter in this, were to betray his Majesty with a kiss' (ibid., 14.115-16). 
By 18 October Bacon sent a proposed proclamation for the parliament. According to Bacon, although James was peace loving, the 'invasion of the Palatinate' had altered 'the balance of Christendom', and 'the reason of state' now demanded the king to take action. The king, Bacon's draft suggested, was therefore seeking 'the faithful advice and general assent of our loving subjects'. Even more important, 'moneys being the sinews of war', it was of utmost importance that the king receive 'some large and bountiful help of treasure from our people' ('Works', 14.126). The king was, however, highly suspicious of revealing matters of state and the reasons for calling the parliament, 'whereof neither the people are capable, nor is it fit for his Majesty to open now unto them'. Bacon replied to Buckingham (who had passed on the king's opinion) that 'neither would I have thought of inserting matter of state for the vulgar, but that now-a-days there is no vulgar, but all statesmen' (ibid., 14.128-9). 
Another matter which needed careful planning was grievances. Among these the committee had listed patents and monopolies and hoped that the king would revoke unpopular patents and monopolies before parliament gathered. The matter was debated in the council on 14 December where Bacon vigorously argued for revoking the most notorious patents, but was overruled by the majority. 
The parliament assembled on 30 January 1621. Bacon was clearly at the pinnacle of his career. He had celebrated his sixtieth birthday with a lavish banquet at York House on 22 January 1621, and on 27 January he had been created Viscount St Alban. 
The turn of the year 1620-21 was also the climax of Bacon's philosophical work. While he had been extremely productive in his natural philosophical work between 1603 and 1612, after 1613, when he was appointed attorney-general, public business began to take a heavy toll and the periods when he could produce his 'vacation's fruits' became shorter and rarer. As lord keeper he made chancery sit mornings and afternoons and extended the term, reserving only 'the depth of the three long vacations... for studies, arts, and sciences' ('Works', 13.190). Bacon must have dedicated most of these depths to preparing his major philosophical work, the 'Novum organum', which was published together with the preliminary material of his entire philosophical plan -- the 'Instauratio magna' -- in October 1620. The volume consisted of a preface, a plan of the whole work, the incomplete second part ('Novum organum'), and a preparative to the third part of natural and experimental histories, as well as a catalogue of particular histories. 
In sending a copy of the book to the king Bacon explained his overall scheme and the particular intention of the 'Novum organum': 'The work, in what colours soever it may be set forth, is no more but a new logic, teaching to invent and judge by induction, (as finding syllogism incompetent for sciences of nature), and thereby to make philosophy and sciences both more true and more active. ('Works', 14.119-20)' The ultimate goal, he told the king, was nothing less than 'to enlarge the bounds of Reason and to endow man's estate with new value' (ibid.). James thanked Bacon profusely for the volume and promised 'to read it thorough with care and attention, though I should steal some hours from my sleep', and then 'to use the liberty of a true friend, in not sparing to ask you the question in any point whereof I shall stand in doubt' (ibid., 14.122). 
James's proposal raised serious doubts in Bacon's mind. It was one thing for Bacon to call James 'the wisest and most learned of kings'. It was quite another if the king took it upon himself to instruct Bacon in natural philosophy. The 'Novum organum', Bacon replied, 'doth disclaim to be tried by any thing but by experience, and the resultats of experience in a true way'. But he hastened to add that 'the sharpness and profoundness of your majesty's judgment ought to be an exception to this general rule; and your questions, observations, and admonishments, may do infinite good' ('Works', 14.130). None of these questions, observations, and admonishments were forthcoming. In early February John Chamberlain revealed why: 'the King cannot forbeare somtimes in reading his last book ['Novum organum'] to say that yt is like the peace of God, that passeth all understanding' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.339). 
The king was not the only person who received a copy of the 'Novum organum'. Bacon sent three copies to the diplomat Henry Wotton in Vienna. Wotton acknowledged the receipt of them in December and told Bacon that he had presented one of them to the famous astronomer Johann Kepler. Modern scholarship has often argued that Bacon was intellectually a provincial, that he was only a well-educated English gentleman who, classical sources apart, made use of a fairly limited range of popular encyclopaedic works in his natural philosophical writings (Jardine, 6-7, 9). The fact that Kepler received a copy of the 'Novum organum' within two months of its publication and that Wotton also fulfilled his earlier promise to Bacon of reporting ''Philosophical' experiments' suggests otherwise. Bacon actively participated in the vanguard of the philosophical discussions of the day. In 1616 Toby Matthew had informed Bacon of Galileo's defence of Copernican astronomy (Bacon, 'The New Organon', x). Three years later Matthew told Bacon that Galileo had written a response to Bacon's 'discourse concerning the flux and reflux of the sea' ('Works', 14.36). 
At the heart of Bacon's plan for the 'Instauratio magna' lay a novel view of natural philosophy. He wanted to replace the Aristotelian image of science as a contemplation and organization of eternal truths long since discovered by a conception of science as a discovery of the unknown, and also to create a truly active or operative science, to be seen not so much as a contemplative 'episteme' as part of the practical, active life. In his attempt to link human science ('scientia') and human power ('potentia') Bacon was making a novel claim which altered the function of science in human life. 
In the plan of the work of the 'Instauratio magna' Bacon described the six-part division of this whole programme: '
1. The Divisions of the Sciences. 

2. The New Organon; or Directions for the Interpretation of Nature. 

3. The Phenomena of the Universe; or a Natural and Experimental History for the Foundation of Philosophy. 

4. The Ladder of the Intellect. 

5. Forerunners, or Anticipations of Second Philosophy. 

6. Second Philosophy; or Active Science. 

' The second part, the 'Novum organum', was further divided into two books. The first book is a short refutation of the impediments (idols) which hinder the acceptance of the new method. Its intention is to prepare the reader to embrace the new method presented in the much longer, though incomplete, second book. 
According to Bacon, a crucial weakness in the old Aristotelian logic was that it jumped from empirical particulars to first principles (axioms), which formed the premises of deductive reasoning. But Bacon believed that the most general axioms should form the end rather than the beginning of scientific inference, and his own methodology was designed to avoid Aristotle's mistake. Natural histories (systematic accounts of natural phenomena) form the basis of all natural philosophy. For Bacon it was a serious mistake to assume (as Aristotle had done) that experience gives the human mind things as they are: our senses are unreliable -- our mind is 'like an enchanted glass' ('Works', 3.395). Rather than becoming a sceptic, however, Bacon took the sceptics' arguments in his stride, insisting that in order to yield reliable information human senses needed methodological assistance. Baconian logic proceeded along a strict hierarchy of increasing generality. A key role in it was intended for the induction of exclusion whereby all the wrong causes are eliminated or excluded, leaving only the true causes. The whole process is completed only when the fundamental laws of nature (the knowledge of forms) have been reached and, from there, new experiments or works have been derived by practical deduction. 
An important role in Bacon's methodology, both in collecting natural histories and in the inductive process from this material to the forms, is assigned to observations and experiments. Thus Bacon endeavoured to follow the contemporary scientific experiments carried out in England and Europe, and he emphasized the centrality of technical scientific instruments which made possible an increasing variety of experiments. Bacon himself not only carried out numerous chemical and mechanical experiments, he reported many of them in the 'Novum organum'. 
Bacon had not been wide of the mark in autumn 1620 when he predicted that patents and monopolies would be among the grievances presented in parliament. Attention was drawn to the issue of patents on the first full day of debate. Soon it was also asked who had sanctioned such grievances and had thus misled the king. When Sir Giles Mompesson's patent for inns came under scrutiny Buckingham, to whom Mompesson was related through marriage, became nervous and begged James to dissolve the parliament. The king refused, and the investigations continued. By the end of February another patent for gold and silver thread, whose profits had been divided among the king, Buckingham, and his brother, became a subject of enquiry. Soon it was revealed that Bacon, together with the lord treasurer, Montagu, had been a key figure as a legal referee certifying the original patents. 
James visited the House of Lords on 10 March, expressing his hatred for 'projects and projectors' and speaking of his willingness to protect his people from monopolies. Whereas Buckingham was singled out for praise James was ready to offer up Bacon and Montagu: 'As for the thinges objected against the Chancelor and the Treasurer, I leave them to answere for themselves and to stand and fall as they acquitt them selves' (Lady de Villiers, ed., 'The Hastings Journal of the Parliament of 1621', 'Camden Miscellany', 20, 1953, 26-7). 
Bacon defended himself by arguing that the referees could not be held responsible for the subsequent abuse of monopolies. Meanwhile allegations were brought before the parliamentary committee on courts of justice that he had accepted bribes. Bacon had taken gifts from two suitors whose trials had still been pending. He was shocked, and asked Buckingham to protect him. Bacon had never denied that he had taken these gifts; rather he insisted that they did not affect his decision, which had in fact gone against the suitors. Calling himself 'a good patriot born' he wrote to the king on 25 March: 'And for the briberies and gifts wherewith I am charged, when the books of hearts shall be opened, I hope I shall not be found to have the troubled fountain of a corrupt heart in a depraved habit of taking rewards to pervert justice; howsoever I may be frail, and partake of the abuse of the times. ('Works', 14.226)' It was during these troubled weeks that Bacon made his will. He bequeathed his 'compositions unpublished' to his brother-in-law Sir John Constable, who was advised to publish those which he might find fit. In particular Bacon advised that 'In felicem memoriam Reginae Elizabethae' should be published (ibid., 14.228). 
In order to prosecute Bacon the parliament revived an obsolete procedure of impeachment: the Commons acted as accusers and the Lords as judges. Working hard the committee had managed to find some twenty-eight cases where Bacon or his servants were accused of improperly accepting gifts or loans. Although many of these charges were dubious Bacon decided to give up. On 21 April he once more appealed to the king. Bacon of course understood that he had been unable to 'move your Majesty, by your absolute power of pardon or otherwise, to take my cause into your hands'. Yet it was, he wrote to the king, 'the utmost of my desire' that 'your Majesty will graciously save me from a sentence with the good liking of the House'. This appeal was going to be 'the last suit I shall make to your Majesty in this business, prostrating myself at your mercy-seat, after fifteen years' service' ('Works', 14.241). 
Bacon obviously realized that it was futile to put up a defence. The king's willingness to permit the trial would virtually ensure conviction (Marwil, 56). On 22 April Bacon sent his 'humble submission and supplication' to the Lords, craving for 'a benign interpretation' ('Works', 14.242). His final 'Confession and humble Submission' with responses to each charge was read to the Lords on 30 April. He confessed 'that I am guilty of corruption'. His only attempt at extenuation was that, on the one hand, he was not known to be 'an avaricious man' and, on the other, his 'estate' was 'so mean and poor, as my care is now chiefly to satisfy my debts' (ibid., 14.261). Bacon's punishment included a fine of $40,000 and imprisonment at the king's pleasure. He was also barred from any office or employment in the state and forbidden to sit in parliament or come within the verge (12 miles) of the court. The fine was never collected and his imprisonment in the Tower lasted only three days. 
Although Bacon was impeached for taking bribes there is little doubt that underlying the whole impeachment was the attack against patents and monopolies. Bacon was thus a victim of a political campaign against the king's chief favourite, Buckingham. Neither James nor Buckingham did anything to help or protect Bacon. They abandoned him and thus made him the scapegoat for the grievances of monopolies. At the same time there is equally little doubt that there was a more personal factor in the impeachment. The whole attack against Bacon was to a considerable extent orchestrated by Edward Coke and Sir Lionel Cranfield, who were both his known enemies. 
As soon as Bacon had been released from the Tower he wrote to Buckingham not only thanking him 'for getting me out of prison' but also offering his services to the marquess and the king: 'now my body is out, my mind nevertheless will be still in prison, till I may be on my feet to do his Majesty and your Lordship faithful service' ('Works', 14.281). Bacon's financial situation looked bleak. He was living 'upon the scraps of my former fortunes' but could not 'hold out longer'. He therefore humbly asked Buckingham to fulfil his 'loving promises... to settle my poor fortunes' (ibid., 14.297-8). He was given a generous pension of $1200 a year but its payment was withheld by the new lord treasurer, Cranfield. Bacon was also asking for release from the ban against coming within the verge of the court. Buckingham, who coveted Bacon's lease of York House, used these favours as a means of forcing Bacon to part with it. Extremely reluctant to do so Bacon even offered Gorhambury to make amends, but in the end he sold the lease to Cranfield in March 1622, from whom it passed to Buckingham. As Sir Edward Sackville advised Bacon, 'if York-house were gone, the town were yours' (ibid., 14.343). Indeed, as soon as Bacon consented to sell the lease Buckingham helped him obtain leave to come within the verge. 
Early in June 1621 Bacon wrote to the Spanish ambassador, Count Gondomar, that he was 'to retire from the stage of civil action and betake myself to letters' ('Works', 14.285). Comparing his fate with Demosthenes, Cicero, and Seneca, Bacon identified himself most closely with Seneca who, having been condemned, had 'abstained from intruding into matters of business' and had 'spent his time in writing books of excellent argument and use for all ages'. Yet Bacon also insisted that he could not 'altogether desert the civil person that I have borne' (ibid., 14.372-3). Thus his literary activities were not confined to natural philosophy but included forays into other fields as well. 
In his last appeal for James's help during the impeachment trial on 21 April Bacon had mentioned that if time permitted he would 'present your Majesty with a good history of England, and a better digest of your laws' ('Works', 14.242). In June he set himself to writing 'The History of the Reign of King Henry VII'. He wrote with breathtaking speed, presenting the manuscript to the king early in October. The work was dedicated to Prince Charles and published in March 1622. It should be seen in the context of humanist historiography rather than as a precursor of its modern methods. Bacon was keenly interested in the conventional topics of virtue and fortune, but was unconventional in placing a much stronger emphasis on fortune than virtue. The central lesson of 'The History of Henry VII' was that a ruler must remain open to accident and ready to seize the opportunities it offered. 
Bacon planned to continue his career as a historian by writing a similar history of Henry VIII. He was sent material relating to the project, but, as he complained to Toby Matthew in 1623, Sir Robert Cotton had been 'somewhat dainty of his materials in this' ('Works', 14.429). 
Early in 1622 Bacon cherished hopes of an interview with the king. Among the topics he planned to discuss with James were 'the recompiling of laws' and a 'General Treatise 'de Legibus et Justitia'' ('Works', 14.351-2). The hopes of an interview were dashed, but in March Bacon fulfilled his second promise given in April 1621 by sending the king 'An offer of a digest to be made of the laws of England', arguing that the English laws 'are as mixt as our language, compounded of British, Roman, Saxon, Danish, Norman customs; and surely as our language is thereby so much the richer, so our laws are likewise by that mixture the more complete' (ibid., 14.362). He was also working hard on the more theoretical treatises on law and justice which exist in two different versions: a recently unearthed manuscript treatise entitled 'Aphorismi de jure gentium maiore sive de fontibus justiciae et juris', and another which appeared in the eighth book of 'De augmentis' in October 1623 with the title 'Exemplum tractatus de justitia universali, sive de fontibus juris'. 
Bacon argued that the remedy for the defects in contemporary law was to be sought from the Roman law, and he often related his own project of legal reform to Justinian's 'Corpus juris civilis'. As his project developed the influence of the Roman law became more marked. Whereas in his early work 'Maxims of the law' he had sought to integrate Roman law concepts into a common law context, by the early 1620s he was assimilating his common law experience into a Roman law context. Nevertheless Bacon's strong Roman law bias did not involve replacing the English common law by the Roman civil law. Rather it served to emphasize the universal scope of his project. Although many of Bacon's ideas reflected his common law experience he sought to find the universal axioms of all different legal systems and focused on the methods of legal reasoning to remove uncertainty and ambiguity from the positive law. 
When he sent his offer of a digest of English law to James, Bacon told him that he esteemed his ''Instauration'' as his 'great work' with which he still went on 'in silence' ('Works', 14.358). Writing later in 1622 to Lancelot Andrewes he said he valued his ''Instauration'' most of all his work and explained how he was going to proceed. It was in this context that he put forward in 1623 a suit for the provostship of Eton. 
The section of the 'Instauratio' that Bacon most urgently tried to accomplish was the natural histories of the third part. In November 1622 he published a volume entitled 'Historia naturalis et experimentalis ad condendam philosophiam; sive phaenomena universi'. It contained the first instalment of his natural history project -- a natural history of the winds, 'Historia ventorum' -- and a plan for five others to be published on a monthly basis. In January 1623 the second part of the project, 'Historia vitae et mortis' ('History of life and death') appeared. A third natural history -- 'Historia densi et rari' -- was well under way but other projects apparently intervened. Although the piece survives in two different versions Bacon never finished it. 
Among the other projects was the translation into Latin of 'The Advancement of Learning', which was thereby going to take its place as the first part of the 'Instauratio'. It came out under the title 'De dignitate et augmentis scientiarum libri IX' in October 1623. Twice as long as the original English edition, the original book two had grown into eight books. Bacon sent copies of the volume to James, Prince Charles, and Buckingham, and to Cambridge and Oxford. To Prince Charles he mentioned that the book translated into Latin could be 'a citizen of the world, as English books are not'. He also apologized that the history of Henry VIII had not progressed according to earlier promises ('Works', 14.437). 
Bacon also worked on the fourth and fifth divisions of the 'Instauratio', which were meant, respectively, to give examples of his method in action and provide some anticipatory results. The 'Abecedarium novum naturae', which was written in 1622, was originally to be included with the third part (the natural histories), but Bacon changed his mind. As it stands the 'Abecedarium', consisting mainly of a list of natural philosophical enquiries, was the introduction to the fourth part. At about the same time Bacon also wrote a short sketch for a study to be included in the fourth part entitled the 'Historia et inquisitio de animato et inanimato'. Two short tracts, 'Inquisitio de magnete' and 'Topica inquisitionis de luce et lumine', both dating from 1625, were similarly intended for the fourth part. A very short piece, which has been dated to the early 1620s, 'Prodromi sive anticipationes philosophia secundae' was the intended preface to part five of the 'Instauratio'. 
In 1625 Bacon was also planning to finish the second part of the 'Novum organum', which, he said, he had already 'compassed and planned... out in my mind' ('Works', 14.531). By this stage he hoped that someone else would take on the work on natural history, claiming that his published histories were not pure histories, but rather pieces which properly belonged to part four of the 'Instauratio'. 
During his last years Bacon composed his utopia, the 'New Atlantis', and a natural historical work entitled 'Sylva sylvarum', meaning a collection of collections, a miscellany of subjects. It is a vast compilation of one thousand paragraphs consisting of extracts from many books and Bacon's own experiments and observations. The 'New Atlantis' is a description of an island society and its scientific community: Salomon's House. In it Bacon developed ideas which he had outlined thirty years earlier in the early 1590s. The aim of the Salomon's House was nothing less than 'the knowledge of Causes, and secret motions of things; and the enlarging of the bounds of Human Empire, to the effecting of all things possible' ('Works', 3.156). The actual description of the scientific community's work owes something to two contemporary scientists and craftsmen, the Dutchman Cornelis Drebbel, and the Frenchman Salomon de Caus, who both spent time in Jacobean England. The 'Sylva sylvarum' and the 'New Atlantis' were posthumously published in the same volume in 1626. 
No matter how highly Bacon valued his natural philosophical project he never abandoned hope of a political comeback. 'The History of Henry VII' was partly intended to show Bacon's abilities as a counsellor. In 1622 he planned to ask the king to employ him again 'publicly upon the stage' ('Works', 14.349) and composed his ''Advertisement Touching an Holy Warre'', which alongside many contemporary eulogies for peace, and Anglo-Spanish grammars and dictionaries, testified to the rapprochement between Britain and Spain. Finally, in January 1623, 'the excellent Marquis brought' him 'to kiss the King's hands', which made Bacon think that he was 'in the state of grace' (ibid., 14.402). There were rumours that he would again be placed in high office (Jardine and Stewart, 490). 
Prince Charles and Buckingham's hazardous trip to Madrid in 1623 inspired Bacon to wish he could participate fully in politics. Writing to Buckingham at Madrid in April, Bacon complained that 'I never felt my misfortunes so much as now' because he could not advise the marquess. 'But when I look abroad', he continued: 'and see the times so stirring, and so much dissimulation, falsehood, baseness and envy in the world, and so many idle clocks going in men's heads; then it grieveth me much, that I am not sometimes at your Lordship's elbow, that I mought give you some of the fruits of the careful advice, modest liberty, and true information.' He displayed no false modesty about his own political skill and experience. 'My good Lord', he went on, 'somewhat I have been, and much have I read; so that few things which concern states or greatness, are new cases unto me' ('Works', 14.423-4). 
As soon as Charles and Buckingham had returned from Madrid Bacon suggested that they could use his pen to capitalize upon the hazardous but futile trip. Sending a copy of the 'De augmentis' to the prince a fortnight after their return to England, Bacon announced that he was ready to 'do your Highness's journey any honour with my pen' ('Works', 14.437). Bacon also worked hard to offer Buckingham detailed advice concerning parliament, and even planned to declare his readiness to travel to the continent to negotiate a league with France. In January 1624 he petitioned to receive leave to sit in the coming parliament. 
The return of Charles and Buckingham prompted a dramatic change from a peaceful to a more belligerent foreign policy in which Bacon fully participated. Early in 1624 he wrote to Prince Charles the 'Considerations touching a war with Spain' 'out of long-continued experience in business of estate, and much conversation in books of policy and history'. In it he reiterated his views on civic greatness. Referring directly to his earlier writings on the subject Bacon now declared that those who thought Spain too mighty a state for Great Britain made the crucial error of stressing such external factors as money and territorial size as opposed to the intrinsic virtues of the populace. 
In December 1624 Bacon published the 'Apophthegms New and Old' and 'The Translation of Certaine Psalmes into English Verse'. Only a few months later, in April 1625, he published the third edition of 'The Essayes or Counsels, Civill and Morall'. It was his most popular work during his own day and has remained so since -- there were more than twenty editions in the seventeenth century. Bacon was aware of this, noting in 1622 that such writings as 'The Essayes' would 'yield more lustre and reputation to my name' than those in natural philosophy ('Works', 14.374). Whereas the first edition had contained ten and the 1612 edition thirty-eight, the third had fifty-eight essays, and can be read as his final comments on the contemporary world of politics. As the title announced, 'The Essayes' treated the questions of public life and morality. Earlier scholarship tended to see them as his account of civil knowledge or science. Of late, however, this conclusion has been questioned. Despite his pronounced confidence in his own ability to offer sound counsel Bacon seems to have later become less sanguine, if not wholly sceptical, about the possibility of political science. The final edition of 'The Essayes', while treating the moral and political topics listed in 'The Advancement of Learning' as demanding fuller treatment, stresses the contingency and instability of political affairs, which hardly conform to the requirements of a demonstrative science. Indeed, by 1622 Bacon counted his 'Essayes' 'but as recreation of my other studies' (ibid.), and in 1625 he noted that his writings on ethics and politics (including 'The Essayes', 'The History of Henry VII', and the 'De sapientia veterum') formed no part of his 'Instauration' (ibid., 14.531). 
In December 1625 Bacon composed his last will, at the end of which he suddenly stated: 'Whatsoever I have given, granted, confirmed, or appointed to my wife, in the former part of this will, I do now, for just and great causes, utterly revoke and make void, and leave her to her right only' ('Works', 14.545). This decision is probably linked to the fact that Bacon's widow married his gentleman usher, John Underhill, less than a fortnight after Bacon's death. Bacon also intended to endow lectureships in Cambridge and Oxford 'for Natural Philosophy, and the sciences thereupon depending', but for want of funds this plan never materialized (ibid., 14.546). In March 1626 he endeavoured by a private bill to confiscate and sell his 'lands, leases, and chattels' for 'the payment of his debts' (Jardine and Stewart, 511). 
Bacon died at Highgate on 9 April 1626. The only contemporary evidence of the circumstances is his last unfinished letter, which he obviously composed (without realizing it) on his deathbed. It was addressed to the earl of Arundel, in whose house Bacon had been forced to take refuge. In this letter, which has survived only in a printed version, he stated: 'I was likely to have had the fortune of Caius Plinius the elder, who lost his life by trying an experiment about the burning of the mountain Vesuvius. For I was also desirous to try an experiment or two, touching the conservation and induration of bodies. As for the experiment itself, it succeeded excellently well; but in the journey (between London and Highgate) I was taken with such a fit of casting, as I knew not whether it were the stone, or some surfeit, or cold, or indeed a touch of them all three. But when I came to your Lordship's house; I was not able to go back, and therefore was forced to take up my lodging here, where your house-keeper is very careful and diligent about me. ('Works', 14.550)' According to the traditional story, in an unseasonably cold spring it had occurred to Bacon to test whether snow would preserve flesh from putrefaction, as salt does. In order to conduct the experiment, he obtained a hen and stuffed it with snow with his own hands, but also caught the chill from which he subsequently died in the earl of Arundel's house. Recently, however, it has been suggested that perhaps Bacon was using 'himself in some way as an experimental guinea-pig, in the hope of restoring his own failing health'. Maybe he had 'been inhaling remedial substances in London, in an attempt to alleviate the symptoms of ill-health and, he hopes, help prolong his life'. According to this conjecture 'Bacon died from an overdose of inhaled nitre or opiates' (Jardine and Stewart, 502-8). He was buried at St Michael's Church, St Albans. 
Throughout his life Bacon pursued both a political and a philosophical career. The relationship between these two pursuits has always been a central question in any biographical study of Bacon. 
For a long time scholarship followed Bacon's own construction of his life and kept his two careers quite separate. His philosophical project was regarded as the more important and his quest for political power was often seen only as a means to promote his philosophical project. More recent commentators have put more emphasis on his political career and have argued that his natural philosophy and his political experience have something in common. This is most obvious in the centrality of the 'vita activa' in both his political and natural philosophy. In his political career and thinking he always set a great store by the classical republican notion of the virtuous active citizen. Similarly he insisted that natural philosophy was not primarily contemplative 'episteme' but rather a discovery of the unknown and part of the active life whose aim was 'the benefits and use of life' ('Works', 4.21). 
It has also been argued (by Leary) that Bacon's approach to natural philosophy was conditioned and shaped by his political experience and career. There appear to be a number of similarities between his legal method and his natural philosophical method. According to the strongest claim the creation of 'an imperial monarchy' was Bacon's great project and his natural philosophy was merely 'a subordinate part of this programme' (Martin, 2-4, 68, 134, 175). Nevertheless there is little, if any, evidence to support this last view. Bacon of course sought patronage but never promised any short-sighted economic or military gains in return. Though he frequently failed to win patronage he never yielded to the temptation to put his vision of natural philosophy in the service of purely political state power. If Bacon had conceived science as merely serving an imperial state then surely it would have made sense to say so when, at the pinnacle of his political career, he dedicated the 'Instauratio magna' to the king. Yet, far from doing so, he apologized for the precious time a statesman had spent on a project lacking any political relevance. The only way Bacon defended writing a philosophical treatise was in purely philosophical terms. 
Furthermore Bacon never perceived his philosophical project in nationalistic terms. 'The Advancement of Learning' apart he published his natural philosophical writings in Latin because he aimed them at an international audience. He always insisted that a reformed natural philosophy would serve, and bring benefits to, the whole of humankind -- extend 'the power and dominion of the human race itself over the universe' ('Works', 4.114). Therefore, in conducting natural philosophical work national boundaries must be ignored. Bacon was convinced that learning would make tremendous strides 'if there were more intelligence mutual between the universities of Europe than now there is'. Indeed, 'there may be many orders and foundations, which though they be divided under several sovereignties and territories, yet they take themselves to have a kind of contract, fraternity, and correspondence one with the other' ('Bacon', ed. Vickers, 174). 
In many respects Bacon's natural philosophical project stood in complete contrast with his theory of civic greatness (or 'imperial monarchy'). The former was an international enterprise requiring concomitant peace. He argued that one of the reasons why his own times were so conducive to learning was 'the present disposition of these times at this instant to peace' ('Bacon', ed. Vickers, 288). In striking contrast Bacon always insisted in his writings on civic greatness that the most important quality of a truly great state was 'the valour and military disposition of the people' ('Works', 7.48). He summarized his entire argument by emphasizing that 'no nation, which doth not directly professe Armes, may looke to have Greatnesse fall into their Mouths' (Bacon, 'Essayes', 95-6). Whereas natural philosophy was an international enterprise, progressing only in peace, civic greatness was its diametrical opposite: it was a purely national undertaking demanding not only a warlike disposition but continuous wars. 
This contrast is most glaring when Bacon's writings on civic greatness are compared with the 'New Atlantis', which some commentators have seen not merely as a representation of the ideal society of Bacon's natural philosophy but also as an embodiment of his 'vision of an imperial monarchy sustained by natural philosophy' (Martin, 135). The society of New Atlantis, dominated by its natural philosophical knowledge, was completely devoid of the chief ingredient of civic greatness -- war. Moreover the society of New Atlantis was organized as a self-contained unit which had as few contacts with other countries as possible -- indeed it was described as being of 'solitary situation' 'divided by vast and unknown seas' from the rest of the world ('Bacon', ed. Vickers, 463). Consequently strangers were rarely admitted to the island. This society, governed by both internal and external peace and tranquillity, was in marked contrast to the state which aimed at civic greatness, whose crucial quality was military spirit and warlike disposition, and which waged continuous wars to accomplish its desired end. Completely unlike New Atlantis a great state must be 'seated in no extreme angle, but commodiously in the midst of many regions' or 'in the very heart of the world' ('Works', 7.63-4). Even more it had to have a large population and it therefore needed to be liberal in granting naturalization. New Atlantis's exclusion of itself from the rest of the world into peaceful perpetual existence was hardly compatible with the state which searched for civic greatness by martial enterprises. 
Bacon's character and personality as well as his philosophical and political works have always provoked strongly contrasting interpretations. For many contemporaries Bacon was cold and arrogant, extravagant and pompous. In his letters John Chamberlain rarely had a good word for Bacon. He was especially critical of Bacon's ostentatious lifestyle and his indulgence in ceremonial. Similarly John Aubrey commented that when Bacon was at Gorhambury it seemed as if the court was there. The parliamentarian and diarist Simonds D'Ewes also depicted him in mostly negative terms. Commenting on Bacon's fall D'Ewes was convinced of his utter corruption, which was matched only by the prodigality that had eaten up his gains. Bacon could have been a good scholar and decent lawyer but, according to D'Ewes, he was immoderately ambitious and excessively proud, which necessitated his corrupt behaviour. 
On top of these accusations D'Ewes also mentioned Bacon's 'most horrible and secret sin of sodomy' (Jardine and Stewart, 464). John Aubrey also noted that 'Bacon was a 'paiderastos'' and such a view was often repeated in contemporary satirical verses (ibid.). A canon of St Paul's, embittered by Bacon's decision in a chancery case, is said by Chamberlain to have accused him of sodomy in a sermon in 1619, mentioning Bacon's 'Catamites' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.243). While there is no certainty about Bacon's sexual orientation or identity the likelihood that he may have been homosexual is undeniable. 
The moral condemnations of Bacon have been repeated ever since the seventeenth century, but they were most vociferous during the nineteenth century when Lord Macaulay, above all, castigated Bacon's moral and professional character. Macaulay freely acknowledged Bacon's greatness as a philosopher but condemned outright his morality and his complete failure to maintain justice. 
Nevertheless many of those contemporaries who knew Bacon more intimately depicted his personality and character in highly positive terms. William Rawley compiled and published a commemorative volume in Bacon's honour in 1626. The volume contained thirty-two Latin poems in his praise. These poems called Bacon 'the very nerve of genius' and 'the greatest philosopher since the fall of Greece' (Mathews, 7). But those who thought highly of Bacon admired his moral and personal traits as well as his intellectual powers. Ben Jonson called Bacon: 'one of the greatest men and most worthy of admiration that hath been in many ages. In his adversity I ever prayed that God would give him strength... knowing no accident could do harm to virtue, but rather help to make it manifest. (ibid.)' Similarly, Bacon's close friend Toby Matthew's praise, as he stated in his preface to the Italian edition of the 'Essayes' in 1618, was 'not confined to the qualities of his intellect, but applies as well to those which are matters of the heart, the will and the moral virtue' (ibid., 13). 
Two main strands can be distinguished in Bacon's impact on the Western philosophical tradition. First, his theory of scientific method in general, and induction in particular, was much commented on in subsequent epistemological debate. Second, and more important, Bacon's impact on Western philosophy is to be found in the ideological part of his philosophy -- the active ethos with which he infused modern science. 
The continental philosophers of the seventeenth century saw in Bacon an eloquent critic of scholasticism, but it was in England that he had his greatest impact. On the one hand Bacon's conviction that the advancement of science was an effective means to assuage humankind's sufferings and improve its state found eager response in republican England during the mid-seventeenth century. But his followers also focused their attention on the institutional aspects of his philosophy. The full translation of these ideas into action, in the founding of the Royal Society after the Restoration of 1660, represents Bacon's deification as a philosopher and the final victory of the Baconian project of collaboration, utility, and progress. Another high point in Bacon's fortune occurred in the eighteenth century, when the French 'philosophes' revered him as the most important propagandist of science (although they largely ignored the more technical parts of his philosophy). Bacon's methodological precepts received an enthusiastic response from the English epistemologists of the early nineteenth century, but a reaction soon followed, and by the latter part of the century Bacon was ridiculed as an ignorant 'Wunderdoktor', as Justus von Liebig put it in the most extreme formulation. 
Such negative assessments have continued in two contrasting forms. For some present-day epistemologists Bacon was a spokesman for a hopelessly naive induction by enumeration, and had thus nothing to do with the development of modern science. In striking contrast the Frankfurt school criticized Bacon for being the very epitome of the modern scientific domination of nature and humankind. 
Recent scholarship has, however, emphasized Bacon's central importance in early modern philosophy. His plan of scientific reform has been given a central place in historical accounts of the birth of the new science. Bacon declared that a new era in the history of humankind was at hand and that therefore traditional philosophy should be refuted. By replacing contemplative science, interested in words rather than works, with an active or operative science, humankind would have power to produce effects and thus to transform its conditions. 


@@@@@


doc= 991


Bacon, Sir Francis (c.1587-1657), judge, was the eldest of five sons and a daughter of John Bacon (died 1618), of King's Lynn, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Paynell of Belaugh, Norfolk. He was a great-grandson of Thomas Bacon of Hessett in Suffolk. Although Hessett passed from Bury St Edmunds Abbey to the immediate ancestors of Lord Keeper Bacon, no firm links between his family and the Bacons of Hessett have been made, and their heraldry is distinct. 
Bacon commenced his legal studies at Barnard's Inn, moved to Gray's Inn in February 1607, and was called to the bar in 1615. His first practice may have been either in chancery or in the provinces. About 1621 he married Elizabeth (1595-1651), daughter of William Robinson of Norwich; their eldest daughter, Barbara, was baptized at St Gregory's Church there in October 1622. The Bacons were firmly settled in the parish, paying towards the repair of the font and east window of the church, and their six sons and two daughters, all born in the 1620s, were eventually buried there, the last in 1710. 
In 1634 Bacon was autumn reader at Gray's Inn; two years later the king granted him the office of drawing licences and pardons of alienations to the great seal for life, and in 1640 he was admitted serjeant-at-law. He became steward of Norwich in 1639 and recorder in 1642, the year he was appointed to the king's bench and knighted in October by the king at Bridgnorth. Parliament accepted his appointment, and, when demanding that the king dismiss several judges in February 1643, conceded 'that Mr Justice Bacon may be continued' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 6.231). While Charles was at Oxford, Bacon was one of 'the sworn judges still at Westminster, of which there were three in number'. He presided alone in the king's bench, as his 'brothers' Reeve and Trevor did in the common pleas and exchequer (ibid., 7.317). 
In 1645 Bacon was the only judge at the trial of Lord Macguire on the charge of high treason for his share in the Irish rising and massacre of 1641. Macguire had demanded to be tried by a jury of Irish peers, but 'Bacon delivered his judgment that a baron of Ireland was triable by a jury in this kingdom' ('State trials', 4.665), and this judgment was formally approved of by both houses. When the prosecution desired 'speedy progress, this being a public case', Bacon said that 'a public case must have public justice on both sides. We must do that which the law doth allow' (ibid., 668). Bacon's impartiality was further shown when he committed James Symbal and others to prison 'for speaking of words against the king in time of war' (Whitelocke, 269). After the king's execution, new commissions were issued to the judges, requiring them to take the oath in the name of the people instead of in that of the king, and Bacon had the courage to resign. Five of his colleagues, after some hesitation, agreed to hold office, 'provided that by act of the commons the fundamental laws be not abolished' (ibid., 378). 
Bacon retired to Norwich, where he soon lost his wife; she was buried at St Gregory's on 9 October 1651, aged fifty-six. He died on 22 August 1657, and was buried in the same place three days later. Their eldest son, Francis, commissioned a magnificent monument in the south-east chapel of St Thomas there. It has been wrongly stated that this Francis became reader in Gray's Inn in 1662, but in fact the Ipswich MP Francis Bacon (1600-1663) held that appointment. 


@@@@@


doc= 992


Bacon, Sir James (1798-1895), judge, was born on 11 February 1798, the son of James Bacon and his wife, Catherine Day, of Manchester. His father was a certificated conveyancer between 1805 and 1825 and barrister of Middle Temple. 
On 4 April 1822 Bacon joined Gray's Inn, and was called to the bar on 16 May 1827. He also joined Lincoln's Inn on 3 October 1833, and on 8 May 1845 became barrister there. On becoming queen's counsel he was elected bencher on 2 November 1846 and treasurer in 1869. 
On 23 April 1827 Bacon married Laura Frances (died 1859), daughter of William Cook of Clay Hill, Enfield, Middlesex; they had at least two sons. 
Bacon practised on the home circuit and the Surrey sessions. He also reported and wrote for the press and was said to have been a sub-editor of 'The Times'. Eventually he specialized in conveyancing, chancery, and bankruptcy business. 
In 1859 Bacon was appointed under-secretary and secretary of causes to the master of the rolls, and on 7 September 1868 commissioner in bankruptcy for the London district, becoming chief judge under the 'Bankruptcy Act' of 1869 until its repeal in 1883, and transfer of the bankruptcy jurisdiction to the Queen's Bench Division of the High Court of Justice. Having succeeded Sir William James as vice-chancellor on 2 July 1870, Bacon held the two offices until 1883. He was knighted on 14 January 1871. 
The 'Judicature Acts' of 1873 and 1875 allowed existing vice-chancellors to keep their titles for life, giving them the status of justices of the High Court, but provided that no more vice-chancellors would be appointed. Though considerably older, Bacon outlived his fellow vice-chancellors, Malins, Wickens, and Hall, and so became the last vice-chancellor, a post whose creation in 1813 he could remember. 
Bacon continued as vice-chancellor after 1883. He was still in good health when he retired on 10 November 1886 at the age of eighty-eight. He was then sworn in as a member of the privy council (26 November 1886). Soon afterwards Bacon told one of the leaders of his court, Mr Miller, that if he had known how pleasant leisure was, he would have retired sooner. Bacon died of old age at his home, 1 Kensington Gardens Terrace, Hyde Park, London, on 1 June 1895. 
Bacon's career spanned an era of incessant and unprecedented reform. It was perhaps no wonder that as vice-chancellor he showed some of the foibles of an old practitioner confronted with a new order or that many of his judgments were reversed or modified on appeal. Bacon was a courteous judge who liked to liven up court proceedings with humour and wit. He was a clever cartoonist and his illustrated trial notes were much appreciated by the lords justices of appeal. Lord Coleridge said: 'A man of keener intellect, of more vigorous health of mind and body, at 90, I never met.' 


@@@@@


doc= 993


Bacon, John (c.1250-c.1323), justice, was probably born in north-east Suffolk, near Great Yarmouth. He began his career as a junior clerk of the Westminster bench, 'c'.1273. By 1280 he had entered the service of the more senior royal clerk, John Berewyk, and during the following decade assisted him in his duties both as keeper of writs and rolls on the southern eyre circuit and as treasurer to Queen Eleanor. In 1292, two years after the queen's death, Bacon was himself appointed keeper of writs and rolls of the common bench, with responsibility for the compilation of one of the court's subsidiary plea rolls, and for the interim custody of all original and judicial writs returned into the court, all final concords levied there, and all deeds produced in court whose authenticity was challenged. Contemporary law reports also show him playing a role in the adjudication of litigation. He was accused of serious official wrongdoing at the Lent parliament of 1305, but the two accusations against him were later withdrawn and he retained his post until 1313, when he was appointed one of the justices of the common bench. Bacon does not appear in any of the cases reported in the year-books during his period of office as a justice (1313-20). This is probably because the reporters recorded only cases heard in one of the two divisions of the court and he was sitting in the other division, dealing with more routine procedural matters. John Bacon probably died not long after his last known judicial appointment in October 1323. 
John had at least four brothers. Adam, who was also a clerk, was in the service of John Salmon, bishop of Norwich, between 1309 and 1315 and was pardoned in 1318 for past adherence to the earl of Lancaster. Edmund, a knight, was in the king's service in Gascony from 1293 to 1297 and in Scotland in 1298 and 1303. He was constable of Wallingford during the first half of the reign of Edward II, and in the service of the king's half-brother Edmund of Kent from 1320. He was in Gascony again from 1324 and was captured near Bordeaux on his return from an embassy to Aragon in 1325. In 1330 he was a king's knight. A third brother, Henry, was also a knight; and a fourth, Robert, was a clerk. The Thomas Bacun who became a serjeant of the common bench in 1311, was a justice of the king's bench from 1332 to 1335, and died in 1336, was probably also a relative, possibly a brother. 
John Bacon's earliest traceable property holdings were at Gorleston and Reston in north-east Suffolk, some held jointly with his mother, Sabina. He acquired further properties in the same area and had permission in 1293 to divert a highway to extend his house at Reston. By 1301 his mother had given him her holding at Ludham in south-east Norfolk, and he subsequently acquired other holdings in a number of neighbouring villages. He also made a series of property acquisitions at Widford and Mountnessing and surrounding villages in Essex, and at Ewelme in Oxfordshire. A clerk in major orders, John Bacon held a number of ecclesiastical livings, including those of Reston and Ewelme, and is known to have travelled to Rome on unspecified private business in 1306. 


@@@@@


doc= 994


Bacon, John (1740-1799), sculptor, was born on 24 November 1740 in Southwark, London, the son of Thomas Bacon, a clothworker. He was descended from an old family living in Wincanton in Somerset. In 1755 he was apprenticed to Nicholas Crispe, the owner of a porcelain factory in Vauxhall, with workshops in Bow churchyard and Lambeth. Crispe encouraged the young Bacon to exhibit with the Society of Arts. In 1759 Bacon's figure of 'Peace' won him a premium, and over the next twenty years he was awarded eleven more premiums from the society, including their gold medal. Bacon worked for Crispe until 1764, when he began designing for the ceramic and metalwork industry. Among his clients were Daniel Pincot of Paternoster Row, Spitalfields; Josiah Wedgwood; William Duesbury of the Chelsea-Derby Porcelain Works; Sir William Chambers; Benjamin Vulliamy, the royal clockmaker, of Pall Mall; Matthew Boulton of Birmingham; James Tassie; and Neal & Co., of Hanley. Indeed, Bacon is considered to be the most important designer for British industry before John Flaxman. Bacon entered the Royal Academy Schools on 24 June 1769 and received the academy's first ever gold medal in sculpture for his relief 'Aeneas Carrying his Father from Burning Troy' (1769). In 1770 he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy, and in 1771 he moved from Wardour Street to 17 Newman Street, Marylebone, where he established a large sculpture workshop that employed as many as twenty assistants, notably Henry Webber and Charles Peart. In that same year Bacon became chief designer and manager of the Coade Artificial Stone Company, a position he held until his death. In 1773 he married Elizabeth Wade, who died in February 1783 leaving him with five children -- two sons, Thomas Bacon (b. 1773) ['see under 'Bacon, John] and John Bacon the younger (1777-1859) and three daughters. In the autumn of 1783 he married Martha Holland, with whom he had three more sons. 
The turning point in Bacon's career as a sculptor came with the exhibition of his life-size terracotta figure of 'Mars' for the Society of Arts. The statue caught the attention of the archbishop of York, who commissioned a bust of George III. The sittings with the king proved to be highly advantageous to the sculptor. In 1778 Bacon was elected Royal Academician. His diploma piece, 'Sickness', served as the model for the sick man on the monument to Thomas Guy he sculpted for the chapel at Guy's Hospital. The memorial group to Guy has been praised as the finest British monument of its time. In 1778, when the competition was announced for the national monument to William Pitt the elder, earl of Chatham, the astute Bacon chose to show his model to the king, usurping the normal competition procedures of the Royal Academy. The sense of favouritism shown to Bacon with the awarding of the Chatham commission was the first of a series of such accusations and jealousies brought upon the sculptor. The memorial group to Chatham, some 30 feet high, established the scale for all future monuments in Westminster Abbey and brought praise from the king and Sir Joshua Reynolds, president of the Royal Academy. In 1784 Bacon won the competition held by the academy for a statue of Admiral Rodney for Spanish Town, Jamaica. The prestige of the Rodney figure, with its elegant relief panels, led to fifteen more commissions for funerary monuments for the island. In 1788 Bacon was selected to execute the marble statue of Dr Johnson, as well as that of John Howard, for St Paul's Cathedral, London. During the same period he was commissioned to execute the colossal figures of 'Fame' and the 'Genius of England', together with 'George III and the River Thames', for Somerset House. His success at working in bronze caused him to be recognized as 'exceptional amongst British sculptors of the time' (Bryant, 25). In 1793 the court of directors of the East India Company commissioned Bacon to sculpt a series of works. The first of these was a marble portrait statue of Governor-General Cornwallis for their general court room, and the second the pediment decorations for East India House on Leadenhall Street. 
In addition to the public and corporate commissions, the Bacon studio produced an array of funerary monuments, chimney-pieces, garden sculpture, and portrait busts. While his figures have neo-classical drapery, the elaborateness of their surfaces, like the illusionistic effects employed on some of the monuments, indicates his appreciation of the work of earlier sculptors such as Roubiliac. The productivity of the workshop was based first on Bacon's perfecting the use of a pointing machine that enabled his assistants to translate his models into full-scale works of sculpture. Second, he used a pattern book for clients to select a specific design for a monument. While these practices brought an extraordinary amount of work and prosperity to the studio, Bacon's entire career came under the critical eye of the fine-art establishment. In addition to the undue favouritism he received, his fellow artists, knowing that the sculptor had never studied in Italy, cited his natural inclination towards sentimentality as being out of date with the new neo-classical aesthetic. Despite these criticisms, which were often harsh, his work was much admired by his clients, who were powerful and influential both within Britain and abroad. Bacon was a staunch supporter of the British monarchy, an ardent Methodist, and a founding member of the Eclectic Society, later the Church Missionary Society. 
Bacon died from an inflammation of the bowels at his home at 17 Newman Street on 7 August 1799 and was buried under the north gallery in Whitfield's Chapel, Tottenham Court Road. He left a substantial fortune, as well as many unfinished commissions, to his children. John Bacon the younger inherited his father's studio and remaining commissions, and Thomas, who had exhibited with the Royal Academy, assisted his brother for a brief time. 


@@@@@


doc= 995


Bacon, John (1738-1816), ecclesiastical administrator, spent nearly the whole of his working life in the first fruits department of the office of Queen Anne's Bounty, where he rose from being junior clerk to become the receiver in 1782. He combined these offices with the duties of treasurer to the Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy. Elected FSA in 1774, in 1786 he published an edition of John Ecton's 'Thesaurus rerum ecclesiasticarum', a detailed account of the valuations of all ecclesiastical benefices which were charged with first fruits and tenths. He attracted severe criticism in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1st ser., 56/2, 1786, 1027-8) for failing to acknowledge Ecton in his own preface and on the title-page. 
Bacon was married and had two sons and a daughter, Maria, who married Sir William Johnston of Aberdeen. In 1783 he obtained the leasehold interest of the manor of Friern Barnet, from the dean and chapter of St Paul's. When the 'Land Tax Redemption Act' authorized them to sell their landed property, he purchased in 1800 the reversion of the manor house and the whole estate. The house, formerly the priory of St John of Jerusalem, and its contents are described by Daniel Lysons in his 'Environs of London'. Bacon died at his home, Friern House, Middlesex, on 26 February 1816, aged seventy-eight, and was buried in a small vault outside Friern Barnet church. 


@@@@@


doc= 996


Bacon, John (1777-1859), sculptor, was born on 13 March 1777 in his parents' house in Newman Street, London, the second son of the sculptor John Bacon (1740-1799) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Wade (died 1783). His elder brother, 
After his father's death the younger Bacon succeeded to his business and finished many of the works left in progress, including the popular statue of Lord Cornwallis, which led him to secure many important civic and imperial commissions. He was assisted in this by his brother Thomas, but soon after 1800 all trace of Thomas is lost. (The statue of William III in St James's Square, London, erected in 1808, was begun by the elder John Bacon and completed by Thomas.) The younger John Bacon's work, in a neo-classical style, was in such great demand by 1803 that he was encouraged to organize a public exhibition of his works, a largely unprecedented step at the time. He continued to receive numerous commissions: in 1806 his model of William Pitt the younger was unveiled in Cambridge; and 1809 was his 'annus mirabilis', during which he made statues of the Marquess Cornwallis for Calcutta, the Marquess Wellesley for Bombay, and George III for the Bank of Ireland. His statue in honour of Lord Lavington was unveiled in Antigua and featured a personified image of the island paying tribute to its imperial governor. Sadly, the statue did not fare well in its final colonial context -- it was later destroyed by a hurricane. By 1814 the prestige of Bacon's work was so great that he was asked to restore the famous images 'Madness' and 'Melancholy' by the seventeenth-century sculptor Caius Gabriel Cibber, located at the Bethlem Hospital in London. His other works include portraits of various eminent late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century dignitaries, including the bishop of Rochester, the archbishop of York, Richard Payne Knight (the art critic and theorist of the picturesque), captains Harvey, Hutt, and Cooke, and Admiral Totty. 
In 1808 Bacon largely retired from public life, choosing to focus his attentions instead on ecclesiastic and architectural sculpture and monumental masonry. To this end, he formed a highly prolific partnership with Charles Manning (1776-1812), to whom he entrusted the design and execution of the majority of commissions while retaining the family name on the work. Manning's brother Samuel (1788-1842) succeeded him in the business, continuing its extensive production of monuments with Bacon as a sleeping partner until 1843. Bacon's work was treated with increasing disrespect in high aesthetic circles, since contemporaries felt that his later architectural masonry was mostly repetitive and dull, and he was blamed by later Victorian critics for the aesthetic and imaginative decline of mid-nineteenth-century British sculpture. Although his name was put forward, he did not receive sufficient votes to be elected ARA. Even though this has been attributed to his unusual business practices, it should also be noted that, in his diary, Joseph Farington recorded John Flaxman's views on 'the flimsiness of Bacon': 'Bacon he considered as scarcely to be taken up with a view of comparing his works with the pure standards of Sculpture. He had not made such his models, but worked 'from notions of his own', often showing much ingenuity, but void of greatness and simplicity. (Farington, 'Diary', 7, 2511)' More recently, however, Bacon's reputation has been reassessed more generously in the light of his earlier work, which has been, according to M. H. Grant, 'too little recorded or regarded' ('Dictionary of British Sculptors from the XIIIth Century to the XXth Century', 25). 
Bacon died at his home, 35 Bathwick Hill, Bath, Somerset, on 14 July 1859, leaving his two sons, John Bacon and Thomas Bacon, who were both clergymen, as executors of his ample estate. A comprehensive list of his works is included in 'Allgemeines Kunstler-lexikon: die bildenden Kunstler aller Zeiten und Volker'. 


@@@@@


doc= 997


Bacon, Montagu (1688-1749), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born in December 1688 at Coddenham, Suffolk (and baptized on 13 December), the second of the three sons of Nicholas Bacon of Shrubland Hall, Coddenham, and Lady Catherine Montagu (1660/61-1757), youngest daughter of Edward Montagu, first earl of Sandwich, about whom in 1734 he wrote warmly to the public orator at Cambridge University, Philip Williams (in a letter reprinted in 'GM', 51, 1781). On his father's side Montagu was descended from Sir Nicholas Bacon, lord keeper of the great seal. He was educated at Westminster School and Trinity College, Cambridge, which he entered on 16 February 1705 but from where he did not graduate MA until 1734. 
Prior to his graduation Bacon resided in Leicestershire where, as John Nichols surmises, he may have been curate of Newbold Verdun (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 4.243). Bacon referred to his residence there in letters to the dramatist George Jeffreys written from Quarles's Coffee House, Cambridge, between October and December 1732. In the correspondence Bacon defended the reputation of the philosopher Malebranche, criticized Cambridge as a 'very dull place', and spoke of his weariness with college life. None the less it was the university which presented Bacon with the rectory of Newbold Verdun acquired from the duke of Norfolk. Bacon did not remain there long, however, being soon afflicted with mental illness. By this date Bacon had established himself as a learned and wide-ranging scholar of English poetry. After a spell at Duffield's madhouse in Little Chelsea, he moved to Manor Street, Chelsea, where he died on 7 April 1749. He was buried at Coddenham on 19 April. 
Bacon's scholarship was collected by Zachary Gray in a single volume published posthumously as 'Critical, Historical and Explanatory Notes upon Hudibras' (1752) to which was prefixed a dissertation on burlesque poetry. 


@@@@@


doc= 998


Bacon, Sir Nathaniel (1546?-1622), local politician, was probably born at his father's house in Noble Street, London, the fifth of seven children of Sir Nicholas Bacon (1510-1579), lord keeper, and his first wife, Jane (died 1552), daughter of Thomas Ferneley, a merchant from West Creeting, Suffolk. His half-brothers included Anthony Bacon (1558-1601) and Francis Bacon (1561-1626), later Viscount St Alban. Educated under his father's watchful eye, he matriculated as a fellow-commoner at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1561 and entered Gray's Inn in December 1562, becoming an ancient in November 1576. In July 1569 he married Anne (died 1594), the illegitimate child of a liaison between his uncle Sir Thomas Gresham and Anne Dutton. Their respective fathers endowed them with a fragmented estate of seven manors ranging from Stiffkey and Langham-cum-Morston in north Norfolk to Combs in east Suffolk. In the early 1590s these manors were yielding an annual income of about $2000, declining thereafter through the sale of Combs to finance dowries for his three heirs, Anne ['see 'Townshend, Anne], Elizabeth, and Winefred. 
In 1578 Bacon settled at Stiffkey Hall where, for over forty years, he devoted himself to the business of county government. Appointed JP in 1573, he remained on the bench until his death. Twice sheriff of Norfolk (1586-7 and 1599-1600), commissioner for musters (1596-1605), and deputy lieutenant (1605-22), he served variously as commissioner for the export of grain, for piracy, sewers, recusancy, subsidies, loans, and the impressment of mariners. Appointed deputy steward of the duchy of Lancaster estates in Norfolk in 1582, he succeeded to the stewardship in 1599, renting the valuable manor of Methwold where he became feodary, coroner, escheator, and clerk of the market in 1604. The unrivalled collection of records that these offices generated has been exploited by historians of Elizabethan and Jacobean government to exemplify an assiduous magistracy dedicated to the service of the state. Bacon's assiduity is not in doubt, but his dedication appears to have been directed more to implementing his own analysis of what best suited his 'country' (by which he usually meant north Norfolk) than to acting as the handmaid of central government. 
Bacon epitomized a type of Elizabethan county magnate who, schooled in mid-Tudor common weal humanism, considered himself better placed than the state to decide what constituted good government in his locality. In Norfolk, which had two contrasting identities -- the sheep and corn areas of the north and west and the wood-pasture of the centre and south -- Bacon became spokesman for the former, where residence acquainted him with its economic and social problems. For their alleviation he advocated the repeal or amendment of a raft of government measures; some of these dealt with the export and marketing of grain. Others, particularly militia statutes, had introduced a rating system which fell inequitably on many parishes in his region. Such advocacy set him at loggerheads with his counterparts in south Norfolk where a different socio-economic structure pertained. Simultaneously he became involved in a bitter controversy as to whether county government, hitherto conducted by statutorily empowered magistrates and commissioners, should be buttressed by the intrusive activities of informers, deputy lieutenants, and patentees acting under the authority of the crown. In his view they were abusing the crown's power, acting arbitrarily and placing private gain before the public good; to thwart them he invoked legal and constitutional arguments and devices. Whatever the merits or success of his case, the discourse and debate he provoked began to transform the factions and affinities of mid-Tudor Norfolk into political groups that pursued particularist policies. 
Although well connected at court through his family, Bacon rarely exploited the patronage network this offered. Instead he chose quarter sessions, the assizes, and parliament as the arenas in which he pursued the interests of his 'country'. Having served his parliamentary apprenticeship as burgess for Tavistock, Devon, in 1571 and 1572, he sat as second knight of the shire for Norfolk in 1584 and 1593, burgess for King's Lynn, Norfolk, in 1597, and first knight of the shire in 1604. Esteemed by his electoral supporters as 'a speciall phisytion that will put his best indevour to purge and cure those maladies' of his country (Smith, 315), he arrived at Westminster furnished with a sheaf of draft bills which embodied the nostrums of his neighbours. His frequent contributions to debates and his regular nomination to serve on committees (at least twenty-five) suggest that he earned their trust and undoubtedly articulated his own views on economic, social, and religious issues. 
His puritan beliefs made Bacon an outspoken critic of church government, especially of the practices and procedures of the church courts. 'The office of bishops is to preach', he told the Commons during a debate on a 'Bill to Search for Recusants': 'for they and their officers beeing men utterly unacquaynted with theis proceedinges, or being no parte of their studie or exercise, it were not fit to use them in this cause, but to leave it to the justices of the peace and others of the laitie. (LPL, MS 2109)' A zealous favourer of moderate puritanism, he envisaged a society in which magistrates and ministers worked together to create a godly common weal. Such a view provided the imperative for his proactive magistracy, for the care he took to appoint preaching ministers, and for the institution of a weekly 'exercise' and conference led by local preachers, which continued for at least fifteen years at Wiveton, a coastal parish adjacent to his estate. 
By the time Bacon was knighted in 1604 his reforming zeal had ebbed, although he remained deeply involved in local administration. Or perhaps the changing nature of puritanism, coupled with the years of peace under James I with their attendant amelioration of local rating demands, deprived him of his mission. His domestic life, clouded by the death of his first wife in 1594, was plunged into turmoil by his unhappy marriage on 21 July 1597 to Dorothy ('c'.1570-1629), daughter of Arthur Hopton and widow of William Smith of Burgh Castle, Suffolk. She failed to give him the heir he so badly wanted. Temperamentally incompatible, they quarrelled to the point where their servants talked openly of their 'great falling out'. Of his two stepsons, William Roberts, whom he planned to make his proxy heir by marriage to one of his granddaughters, and for whom he built Irmingland Hall, died aged sixteen, while Owen threatened to sue him for abusing his guardianship. Finally in 1620 the county rejected him as knight of the shire and even his heirs failed to inscribe his date of death, November 1622, on the tomb that he had commissioned in 1614. 
Although he had inherited his father's industry and sense of responsibility, Bacon lacked his wit and wisdom. Self-righteous and plain-speaking to the point of tactlessness, an 'almost obsessive constitutionalist' who was dubbed 'Mr Lawier' by his sharp-tongued stepmother (MacCulloch, 260; 'Papers of Nathaniel Bacon', 'Papers', 3.20), and not given to sociability, he was referred to affectionately by his friends as 'honest Nathaniel' ('Letters of Philip Gawdy', 65). Although he possessed a well-stocked library, he showed little interest in cultural pursuits, while his failure to complete the house and gardens that his father had designed suggests that he had no appreciation of the Renaissance features incorporated in their plan. He died at Stiffkey Hall and was buried at Stiffkey on 7 November 1622. 


Bacon's political impact, however, never quite matched his socio-economic status since he lacked both the aspiration and the necessary application. He sat twice in parliament -- for Beverley, Yorkshire, in 1563 and as first knight of the shire for Suffolk in 1572 -- 'without once being mentioned in the records' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603',). Despite this tardiness he was tireless in local administration. Sheriff of Suffolk in 1581-2, of Norfolk in 1597-8, and of Suffolk again in 1603-4, JP in Suffolk from 1573 and in Norfolk from 1578 almost continuously until 1624, he served on numerous special commissions and was steward of the honours of Eye and Clare. Knighted in 1578, he was appointed premier baronet of England in 1611. 
Bacon's paramount concern was for good government within the liberty of St Edmund's, west Suffolk. When its landowners felt threatened during the 1590s by patentees' and lieutenancy exactions, he consorted with other justices within the liberty to flout what they deemed to be excessive demands by central government and its agents. A staunch patron of puritan ministers, he died on 22 November 1624, and was commemorated in Redgrave church by one of Nicholas Stone's monumental masterpieces. 


About 1581 Edward Bacon married Helen, daughter and heir of Thomas Little of Bray, Berkshire, and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Robert Lyton of Knebworth, Hertfordshire. Among their children were the politician and author Nathaniel Bacon (bap. 1593, d. 1660) and the politician Francis Bacon (1600-1663). Initially, presumably, he lived at Bray, since he served as a JP in Berkshire between 1583 and 1591. Elected burgess for Yarmouth in a by-election (1576), he sat for Tavistock, Devon, in 1584 and Weymouth and Melcombe Regis in 1586. By 1592 his wife had inherited Shrubland Hall, Barham, where he settled and lent support to both the puritan cause and county government in Suffolk. Although he is frequently confused with his nephew Edmund Bacon, the record clearly shows him as JP there between 1592 and 1609 and sheriff in 1600-01. Arguably he may also have sat as knight of the shire in 1593. He died at Shrubland Hall on 8 September 1618 and was buried in Barham church. 


@@@@@


doc= 999


Bacon, Sir Nathaniel (1585-1627), painter, was born at Redgrave in Suffolk in August 1585, the grandson of Lord Keeper Bacon and the youngest son of Sir Nicholas Bacon (c.1543-1624) ['see under 'Bacon, Sir Nathaniel (1546?-1622)], subsequently the premier baronet of England, and his wife, Anne Butts ('c'.1547-1616). He was admitted to the Order of the Bath in February 1626 to mark Charles I's coronation. Raised at Redgrave Hall, Bacon acquired Brome Hall in Suffolk on his marriage, on 1 May 1614, to Jane, 'nee' Meautys (1580/81-1659) ['see 'Bacon, Jane], widow of Sir William Cornwallis, and inherited Culford Hall, 4 miles north of Bury St Edmunds, from his parents. 
Bacon has been described as 'The most accomplished [British] amateur painter of the [seventeenth] century' (Jackson-Stops, 150), although fewer than a dozen of his works survive, of which a number are self-portraits. The earliest documentary reference to specific pictures appears in the will of the author William Austin, of Southwark, signed on 19 May 1632, which bequeathed 'Joseph and Mary made by Sir Nathaniel Bacon' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/165/14). A later reference is in the inventory of Culford attached to his widow's will of 1659, which mentions 'Ten great peeces in wainscoate of fish and fowle &c done by Sr: Nath: Bacon'. The 'Cookmaid with Still Life of Birds', still in the possession of the artist's descendants, is thought to be one of these, as are the 'Cookmaid with Still Life of Game', acquired by the family in the 1950s, and the Tate collection's 'Cookmaid with Still Life of Vegetables and Fruit', all executed about 1620 to 1625. A tiny 'Landscape', painted on copper, bearing the conjoined monogram NB (Ashmolean Museum, Oxford), is thought to be the 'small Landskip drawn by Sir Nath. Bacon' listed in the Tradescant Collection in 1656 ('Musaeum Tradescantianum', 1656, 40). If so it is the first known pure landscape by an English-born artist. 
The main surviving source of personal information about Bacon is a group of letters to his wife, a considerable heiress and formerly an attendant of James I's queen, Anne of Denmark. These letters show Bacon as a devoted family man, much interested in his own health, and enthusiastic about horticulture. They also indicate that he travelled to the Low Countries and, judging from his artistic style and technique, it is extremely likely that he received some training there. No other British artist of the period painted still lifes, and indeed the cookmaid subject originated in the Low Countries. The Antwerp artist Frans Snijders was a major exponent of the genre, and Bacon visited that city in 1613. 
A gentleman, Bacon did not need to paint for his living but his art was clearly significant to him. His funerary monument in St Mary's Church, Culford, bears two carved painter's palettes. He also included his palette and brushes in his great, full-length self-portrait ('c'.1620, priv. coll.). Contemporaries alluded to his skills as an artist. In 1622 Henry Peacham commended him as a well-born Englishman who could draw and paint, while Edward Norgate credited Bacon with inventing a particular 'Pinke' (that is to say, yellow) apparently used by other artists, such as Peter Oliver and John Hoskins. The antiquary George Vertue, who noted the Culford monument in 1739, stated that Bacon had visited Italy, but there is no corroborating evidence for this; Vertue also mentioned two mythological paintings, now lost. 
Bacon died in June 1627 and was buried at St Mary's, Culford, on 1 July 1627. The record of his funeral states that he died of 'a lingering illness', and the letters indicate a decline in health from about 1622. Of his three children only Anne ('b'. 1615), who married, second, Sir Harbottle Grimston, had any children. Unusually wide-ranging in his work as a painter, perhaps as a result of his Netherlandish travels, Bacon explored genres not attempted by his British contemporaries, whose work was almost entirely confined to portraiture. 


@@@@@


doc= 1000


Bacon, Nathaniel (bap. 1593, d. 1660), politician and author, was baptized on 12 December 1593 at Coddenham, Suffolk, a younger son of Edward Bacon (1548/9-1618) ['see under 'Bacon, Sir Nathaniel], politician, and his wife, Helen, daughter and heir of Thomas Little, who owned Shrubland Hall, Suffolk. Francis Bacon (1600-1663) was his brother. Born into a Suffolk family long influential in law and politics, his father, who was the son of Lord Keeper Sir Nicholas Bacon and half-brother to Sir Francis Bacon, came into possession of Shrubland Hall when he married. Nathaniel Bacon matriculated as a pensioner from Christ's College, Cambridge, in July 1606 and graduated BA in 1611. Admitted to Gray's Inn in August 1611, he was called to the bar in 1617 and became a bencher of Gray's in 1640. He lived for a time in Langham, Essex, where he served as a JP. It was probably during this period that he married his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Maidstone of Boxtead, Essex, and widow of Edward Glascocke of Horsley, Essex. They had no children. His first wife had probably died by 1630, about which year he married Susanna, daughter of John Holloway of Oxford and widow of Matthew Alefounder of Dedham, Essex. They had three sons and five daughters. After returning to Suffolk he served as recorder of Bury and on 20 December 1642 was elected recorder of Ipswich. 
A staunch presbyterian -- his father had studied with Beza in Geneva -- Bacon was an early and determined opponent of Charles I. He was reported as refusing to pay the forced loan in 1628, and he worked diligently for the parliamentarian cause throughout the civil wars. In 1644 he became the chairman of the Cambridge committee of the eastern association, in which capacity he had extensive dealings with the earl of Manchester and probably with Oliver Cromwell, who had close ties to the association. In November 1645 Bacon was elected a recruiter MP for Cambridge University, and subscribed to the covenant. The lists of the 'Commons Journals' show Bacon to have been an active member, serving on scores of committees that dealt with religious, legal, and military concerns. His most important committee duty came when he was appointed by the lower house to deal with the proposals for making accommodations with the king in 1648. 
Excluded from parliament at Pride's Purge in December 1648, Bacon was admitted to the Rump Parliament in June 1649 and subscribed to the engagement. Although he took the post of admiralty judge in 1649, he did not support the Commonwealth as enthusiastically as he had supported the Long Parliament, sitting on only three committees from January to September 1649. Still, his presbyterian zeal made him a valuable member, and he is considered one of five religious 'experts' whose opinions carried special weight (Worden, 126). His provincial base was established as Ipswich, where he lived in the house on St Margaret's Green latterly known as the Manor House, and where he was churchwarden of St Margaret's parish in 1650 and 1651 and town clerk from 1651 until his death. In 1654 he edited Ipswich corporation's records, compiling 'The annalls of Ipswiche', which was eventually published in 1884, edited by W. H. Richardson. As one of the MPs for Ipswich from 1654, during the protectorate, his staunch commitment to the Calvinist cause led him to support wholeheartedly the Commons' attack on the Quaker James Nayler, against whom Bacon railed vociferously and often during the second protectorate parliament. In 1657 he became a master of requests. He continued to hold this post in Richard Cromwell's government and also served in his parliament as well as in the restored Long Parliament of 1660. 
But Bacon's greatest service to anti-Stuart causes came in the form of a political tract entitled 'An Historical Discourse of the Uniformity of the Government of England', which was probably written using notes collected by John Selden. Published in 1647 to justify the Long Parliament's war against Charles I, with a continuation appearing in 1651, the work has been referred to as 'the English 'Francogallia'' (Burgess, 96). Contemporaries of various political leanings would have agreed. Indeed, according to Bacon's co-religionist and fellow anti-royalist Richard Baxter, 'An Historical Discourse' was one of the four most influential tracts written in support of the parliamentarian cause, the other three being Henry Parker's 'Observations upon some of his Majesties Late Answers and Expresses' (1642), Philip Hunton's 'Treatise of Monarchie' (1643), and William Prynne's 'Soveraigne Power of Parliaments and Kingdomes' (1643). But the reach of Bacon's treatise extended far beyond the civil wars and interregnum. Continually republished well into the eighteenth century, when it won the praise of the elder William Pitt, 'An Historical Discourse' was secretly reprinted in 1672, in 1682 at the time of the exclusion crisis, in 1689 at the revolution, again in 1739, and by 1750 in a fifth edition. So fearful were the royalists of Bacon's message that Charles II's government attempted to suppress it by prosecuting the radical printer John Starkey, perhaps a member of the Green Ribbon Club, who dared to publish it. Although Starkey and his like-minded friends might want to 'pretend it is only an old book reprinted and an historical discourse of past times without any application to the present', the king's government knew better. In fact, Bacon's treatise, containing as it did 'numerous extracts to prove the anti-monarchical' agenda, was a 'dangerous book' that was 'dedicated to the service of rebellion' ('CSP dom.', '1682', 263, 608; 'CSP dom.', '1 March 1677-28 Feb 1678', 406, 409). 
Charles II and his advisers were right to be scared, for Bacon's 'An Historical Discourse' argued with unrelenting force an anti-royalist ideology of enormous persuasive power. This was the radical ancient constitution which, according to modern scholarship, was first fully articulated during the civil wars by polemicists such as William Prynne and Bacon himself. Early a mainstay of the Long Parliament's cause, the ideology consisted of the following propositions: first, while government in general was from God, the particular form came from the people. In England the people in the remote past had made a contract with their ruler, a contract in which their obedience to him rested upon his governing according to the laws made by both king and community. The ruler who failed to act upon the bargain unkinged himself and left his subjects free to replace him with another. For proof of this theorizing, radical ancient constitutionalists such as Bacon turned to the 'Modus tenendi parliamentum', the 'Mirror of Justices', and the so-called laws of St Edward the Confessor. These three treatises, which claimed to date from the Saxon period but were in fact written in the early twelfth and early fourteenth centuries, described how institutions, especially the common law and a parliament that included the House of Commons, existed in Saxon England and had survived the Norman conquest intact. The continuity of Saxon institutions across the great divide of 1066 was assured when William I and all of his successors down to the Stuart period confirmed St Edward's laws in coronation charters, coronation oaths, and in documents such as 'Magna Carta'. Stories supportive of this view of medieval history, which are now known to be wrong in important respects, could be read in the works of medieval chroniclers such as Matthew Paris and Henry Huntingdon and also in the more popular histories of Tudor and Stuart writers such as John Foxe, Raphael Holinshed, John Speed, and Richard Baker. By the 1640s, then, radical ancient constitutionalists could draw upon a large and substantial body of literature in support of their particular version of English history, law, and government. 
In 'An Historical Discourse' Bacon turned repeatedly to the medieval past, especially St Edward's laws and the 'Mirror of Justices', to justify the Long Parliament's right to make war against Charles Stuart and the duty of the English people to transfer allegiance to the Cromwellian regime. Bacon wrote to help those who needed guidance in such difficult times. In order to act justly and lawfully, he suggested, they must turn to their own national history, and in particular, to Saxon times. Then they would learn that the Saxon monarchy had been elective and the Saxons' relationship with their king contractual. And, Bacon would argue at length, what held for Saxon rulers held for the Stuarts. 
Bacon found one part of St Edward's laws particularly apt for his polemical purposes. This was chapter 17, 'Of the Office of a King'. It read: 'The King... who is the vicar of the highest King, was established for this, that he rule and defend the kingdom and the people of the Lord and, above all, the Holy Church from wrongdoers'; but a king who failed in his duty 'loses the very name of king' (B. R. O'Brien, 'God's Peace and King's Peace', Philadelphia, 1999, 175-7). To Bacon, as to Prynne before him and radical ancient constitutionalists throughout the rest of the century, this meant that rulers who broke the terms of the contract with their people deposed themselves and freed their subjects from allegiance. No mere 'dead word', the people's right to make and unmake kings was frequently put into practice in Saxon times, when the nation 'made the monarchical crown in this land to walk circuit into all parts of the country to fit heads to wear itself until the Normans came'. This meant that 'a Saxon king was no other than a 'primum mobile' set in a regular motion, by laws established by the whole body of the kingdom' (Bacon, 49-51, 53, 112ff.). 
In addition to being ruled by a king of their own choosing, the Saxons were governed by a 'grand assembly' of ''king, baronibus, and populo'', that is, a parliament (Bacon, 59, 60). As for the relationship among the constituent parts, the two houses held the upper hand. So much was clear from the 'Mirror of Justices', which described parliament's ancient right to govern the kingdom. This task necessarily entailed sitting in judgment of the king, since rulers could not be judges in their own causes. 'To sum up all', Bacon concluded in the 1647 portion of his work: 'the Saxon commonweal was a building of greatest strength downward even to the foundation... It was a beautiful composure, mutually dependent in every part from the crown to the clown, the magistrates being all choice men, and the king the choisest of the chosen. (ibid., 111-12)' Nor was this situation altered by the arrival of the Normans, despite royalist claims to the contrary. Indeed, William I never shook 'off the clog of Saxon law' or 'raise[d] the title of conquest'. Instead he followed the Saxon coronation ceremony, making 'a solemn covenant to observe those laws which were 'bone & approbate & antiquae leges Regni'', that is, St Edward's laws. So, too, did William govern with parliament, as the Saxons had done. In fact, William went so far as to confirm St Edward's laws in a parliamentary assembly of 1070, a confirmation that deserved, in Bacon's view, to 'be called the first 'Magna Carta' in Norman times' (Bacon, 'An Historical Discourse' 115-16, 118-19, 155ff., 160ff.). And so it went with William I's heirs and successors, each of whom promised in his turn to govern according to the ancient Saxon laws. This explained how the people of Stuart England came to be governed by the very same laws and institutions as their Saxon predecessors. 
Writing a summation of his work in 1651, Bacon re-emphasized the continuity of an elective and contractual monarchy and a parliament which oversaw its proper functioning. With a salute to both past and present he wrote at the very end of his tract: 'as I found this nation a commonwealth, so I leave it, and so it may be forever' (Bacon). Since the 'commonwealth' of which he wrote referred not to a utopia but to the government established after the regicide, Bacon's ancient constitutionalism was indeed of the radical sort. Living in Gray's Inn in 1660 he was a man of some wealth, receiving an annual salary of $500 as master of requests and perhaps as much as $1500 for his anti-royalist services. He died on or after 26 August 1660, when he made his will, and was buried at Barham on 1 September. His wife and seven children survived him -- his sons Philip and Francis and his daughters Elizabeth, Katherine, Hanna, Ellen, and Susanna. His eldest son, Nathaniel, predeceased him. The family were left land and property in Suffolk, including the family home at Ipswich, individual bequests of between $250 to $400, and Bacon's law, history, divinity, and philosophy books. The borough of Ipswich awarded Bacon's widow $250 in 1661 in recognition of his work on the 'Annalls'. His house in Ipswich was marked by a blue plaque by the Ipswich Society in 2000. 


@@@@@


doc= 1001


Bacon, Nathaniel (1647-1676), politician in Virginia, was born on 2 January 1647, the son of Sir Thomas Bacon of Friston Hall, Suffolk. His mother's name has been given as Elizabeth Brooke but this seems to be a mistaken identification. He attended St Catharine's College, Cambridge, for a while, toured the continent, spent time at Gray's Inn, and graduated MA from Cambridge in 1667. Then in 1670 he married Elizabeth Duke over the strong objections of her parents and his father, and as a result Sir Edward Duke disinherited his disobedient daughter. Bacon now had to scrabble for a livelihood, which involved him in fraudulent land dealings and protracted litigation. His father, fed up with his impish offspring, did what seventeenth-century English parents often did with their mischievous children. He gave Nathaniel $1800 and shipped him, Elizabeth, and their two daughters off to Virginia, where the couple could rely upon family connections as well as their grubstake. Bacon was related to Dame Frances Berkeley ('nee' Culpeper), wife of the governor, Sir William Berkeley, while a cousin, also Nathaniel Bacon, sat on the council of state. 
The Bacons landed in Virginia in 1674. Immediately Bacon purchased Curles Neck plantation in Henrico county, miles up the James River from Jamestown, where he fell to growing tobacco and trading with local Native Americans. Well situated, finely educated, bright, but of a gloomy, sometimes arrogant, temperament, and given to impetuousness, he soon gained the acceptance of his fellow planters. Indeed, his proximity to Berkeley brought a political rise that could only be accounted meteoric; on 3 March 1675 he won a seat on the council of state, which high office customarily went to men with records of long service in Virginia's local and provincial governments. Flying so high so fast went to the young councillor's head, and Bacon apparently presumed his new-found rank and nearness to the governor allowed him to question Berkeley's policies openly. That was one in a series of miscalculations that ended up with his becoming a rebel. 
Bacon's rebellion exploded suddenly in 1676, following a protracted period of unsettled politics, economic dislocations, and a series of deadly skirmishes between frontier settlers and the Native Americans, which broke out in the summer of 1675. By early 1676 Berkeley's grip on the situation had weakened precipitously. Leading planters in the affected areas openly challenged his ability to lead the colony through its gravest crisis of the century. Bacon too questioned the governor's passive defensive strategies, which made him receptive to pleas that he lead a force of angry, terrorized militiamen against the Native American Indians. When Berkeley tartly refused his request for a commission in April 1676, Bacon took command anyway and attacked Native Americans without regard to who was friend or foe. Berkeley countered by declaring Bacon a rebel, removing him from his council seat, and calling an election for a new general assembly. 
Bacon's neighbours promptly elected their hero to a seat in the house of burgesses. When Bacon went to Jamestown to take his place, he was captured, and brought before the council of state on 10 June, where he confessed his error, received Berkeley's pardon, regained his council place, and posted a bond for good behaviour. Several days later he slipped off to his plantation. Meanwhile, the general assembly continued its business of enacting defensive measures against the Native Americans and addressing constituents' complaints about abuses in local government. Its work neared completion on 23 June, when Bacon and a force of men suddenly seized control of the capital. Bacon extorted a commission as general and a pardon, which the terrified members of the assembly voted, but once he left Jamestown Berkeley again proclaimed him a rebel. From this point forward, what had started as a disagreement over Native American policy became a duel to the death between Bacon and Berkeley and their adherents. Throughout the ensuing summer and autumn each sought to gain the upper hand, and in the course of their struggle Berkeley seized Jamestown, only to have Bacon retake it and burn it to the ground. Bacon also promised freedom to servants and slaves who joined him, which cost him support among leading planters. He himself seemed to lack clear goals, and his situation grew more untenable as his men began sacking the estates of men loyal to Berkeley. The revolt came to an abrupt turning-point in October, when on the 26th Bacon unexpectedly died, probably from dysentery, and his followers buried him secretly. Bereft of its leader, the revolt soon collapsed. Berkeley regained control, but not before the crown dispatched a military expedition to smash Bacon and a commission to investigate the causes of the disturbance. 
By leading the uprising that bears his name, Bacon became a central actor in colonial Virginia. Adherents adored him as their deliverer, whereas enemies despised him as a traitor. Reverberations of that partisanship echo still in the opinions of modern scholars, who have disagreed even over Bacon's nature and his impulses to rebellion, let alone his proper place in Anglo-Virginian history. Without portraits, diaries, or letters to depict him, only snippets of information remain, and, unfortunately, they are supple enough to form Bacon into variously a hater of Native Americans who destroyed the reputation of an ever popular governor, Sir William Berkeley, a patriot who struck the first blow for American independence, or someone else. Yet however one chooses to view him, his rebellion undoubtedly precipitated major changes for Virginia. The Native American nations nearest to the settlers suffered losses from which they never recovered. Berkeley was disgraced and dismissed. Virginia came under greater royal scrutiny and management after 1676, and the general assembly lost considerable autonomy, while the colony's social order stabilized. 


@@@@@


doc= 1002


Bacon, Sir Nicholas (1510-1579), lawyer and administrator, was born on Childermas day (28 December) 1510, the second son and one of the five children of Robert Bacon (died 1548), yeoman and sheep-reeve to the abbot of Bury St Edmunds, and his wife, Isabel (died after 1548), daughter of John Cage, yeoman, of Pakenham, Suffolk. He seems most likely to have been born at his parents' home in Drinkstone, Suffolk. Both his brothers, Thomas (died 1573 or later) and James (died 1573), became prominent members of London livery companies, the Salters' and the Fishmongers' respectively. His sisters, Anne and Barbara, married within the lesser gentry of Suffolk, where the family had deep roots. 
Bacon married Jane Ferneley (died 1552), daughter of a Suffolk yeoman, on 5 April 1540 and with her had six surviving children, of whom only the second son, Nathaniel Bacon, enjoyed a career of any note; the others were Elizabeth, Sir Nicholas Bacon ['see under 'Bacon, Nathaniel (1546?-1622)], Anne, Edward Bacon ['see under 'Bacon, Nathaniel (1546?-1622)], and a second Elizabeth. Jane's sister Anne married the London merchant and future royal financial agent Thomas Gresham ('c'.1518-1579), making Bacon and Gresham brothers-in-law. 
Jane Bacon died late in 1552, and by February 1553 her husband had married Anne, daughter of the humanist and statesman Sir Anthony Cooke (1504-1576) of Gidea Hall, Essex, and a familiar figure at court in the days of Queen Katherine Parr. Bacon's children from this second marriage were the future courtier Anthony Bacon and the future chancellor and philosopher Francis Bacon. In addition to her formidable intellect, Anne Bacon (c.1528-1610) brought with her an exceptionally important set of marital connections. Her four sisters married respectively: William Cecil (Mildred); the London goldsmith Ralph Rowlett (Margaret); the courtier-humanist Thomas Hoby and then John Russell, second earl of Bedford (Elizabeth); and the diplomat Henry Killigrew (Katherine). 
Bacon's career amply demonstrates the value of education to social mobility in his time. He progressed in 1523 from the abbey grammar school at Bury St Edmunds to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. Both institutions were then known for progressive theological ideas. The tradition that Bacon's father intended him for the clergy but that the young Nicholas ran away when faced with the tonsure seems apocryphal: Bacon entered Corpus Christi, a college known for training clerics, on a 'Bible' scholarship and must have accepted the idea of such a career. Entering a decade before the emergence of the 'Athenian tribe' which was such a fertile training ground for the generation of statesmen and intellectuals who served Elizabeth, Bacon nevertheless made connections at Cambridge which proved formative to both his intellectual development and his career. These included the future Archbishop Matthew Parker, the future protestant martyr Thomas Dusgate, and probably other young reformers frequenting the White Horse inn and the parish church of St Mary the Great. Academically successful, Bacon came third among his year in 1527. 
Bacon's early postgraduate years, 1527-32, are largely unrecorded, though it is obvious that thoughts of a clerical career proved ephemeral. It is likely that he followed his brothers to seek his fortune in London; he may have travelled abroad. Having perhaps first attended an inn of chancery, by 1532 he had entered Gray's Inn and quickly made his mark in legal studies. He became a barrister a year later, an ancient in 1536, a bencher in 1550, and treasurer in 1552, serving in the latter post at least into 1556 and thus through the extensive reconstruction of the inn's main hall in the reign of Mary. 
In the study of the law Bacon found both his true metier and the first sure rungs to a career. By mid-1538 he had appeared on the payroll of the newly formed court of augmentations. His appointment indicates that he had the patronage of Thomas Cromwell, while the fact that Archbishop Thomas Cranmer described him in that year as 'of so good judgment touching Christ's religion', and recommended him (unsuccessfully) for the post of town clerk of Calais, shows that he was already committed to the reformist camp (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 1.359). By 1539 Bacon was serving as deputy to the solicitor of the augmentations, Walter Henley, and by 1540 he had succeeded Henley as solicitor at $70 a year. 
Throughout the 1540s Bacon began building a landed estate, purchasing properties (several of them former monastic) especially in and around the western half of his native Suffolk, and to a lesser extent in western Norfolk, Essex, London, and elsewhere. He bought the Suffolk manor of Redgrave in 1545, and began building his first country seat there almost at once. In 1560, with his well-established career in London and Westminster making it difficult to spend much time in Suffolk, he purchased the Hertfordshire manor of Gorhambury, outside St Albans, and built a substantial mansion there. The main construction of Gorhambury House took place from 1563 to 1568, with a long gallery added about 1574. 
Bacon's work at the augmentations brought him further prominence as a loyal and effective official. No later than 1542 he had entered parliament, sitting as one of the knights of the shire for Westmorland, his selection being probably ultimately due to influence wielded at court, perhaps by the earl of Cumberland. He sat again in 1545, this time for Dartmouth, through the patronage either of his augmentations colleague Sir Thomas Arundel or that of his friend John, Lord Russell. Unusually, the townsmen paid Bacon for his services, suggesting that he was feed by them as their counsel, or even their recorder. 
The next step in Bacon's rise came in September 1546, when he took over as attorney to the court of wards and liveries; his position was formalized in January 1547 and he held it until 1561. Although particular expertise was not then as necessary a qualification for office as it later became, Bacon would have been an obvious candidate under any circumstances. In addition to his obvious administrative skills and experience, his share in a report commissioned by Henry VIII on the state of the inns of court -- what has come to be known from its authors as the 'Denton-Bacon-Carey report', written some time about 1538-40 -- exhibited his concerns for educating the sons of the well-to-do. This worthy but stillborn vision recommended the creation of a fifth inn, to be run as something of a humanist academy, in which young men could be trained in the arts of law and diplomacy. 
Bacon worked diligently at the wards and frequently returned to the subject of education for the young. He eventually committed his views to paper in a manuscript of 1561 (BL, Add. MS 32379, fols. 26-33) entitled 'Articles devised for the bringing up... of the queen's majesty's wards'. In it he returned to the idea of a humanist academy which might not only educate the individual child in the broad sense, thus fulfilling the moral obligation of a guardian, but also prepare him for a career in government service. 
Bacon matched his theoretical concerns for education with practical application. He provided fine educations for his five sons. To educate boys in communities with which he became associated he founded or refounded grammar schools at Redgrave, Bury St Edmunds, and St Albans, and wrote the governing statutes for each. To Cambridge he donated some seventy books in 1574, gave $200 in 1578 which he estimated (erroneously, as it happened) as sufficient to build the new chapel at Corpus Christi, and established six scholarships for boys from Redgrave School to attend that college. His statue stands across from Parker's at the entrance to the college chapel, rebuilt in the nineteenth century. 
The death of Edward VI on 6 July 1553 and the subsequent scramble for the throne placed Bacon in a difficult position, both professionally and geographically. His close association with the Reformation, and with many who were prominent in advancing it, gave him reason to fear a Roman Catholic regime. Yet because his seat at Redgrave and the burgeoning political presence which went with it lay in precisely the East Anglian areas to which Mary Tudor fled, it was impossible for him to temporize in announcing his loyalties. Here his bride of five months, Anne Bacon, proved both her own mettle and her value to him. She had probably been recently in Mary's service, and now, between 9 and 12 or 13 June, she made her way to Kenninghall and there pledged her support to Mary. Her husband's movements are obscure, but thanks to Anne's prompt action he and Cecil were permitted to make their peace with Mary at Ipswich between 24 and 26 July; Robert Wingfield, in whose house the latter was staying, records that 'Bacon's wife, who had once been a waiting woman of Queen Mary's, was their chief aid in beseeching pardon for them' (MacCulloch, 270). Somewhat ironically in view of her strong protestant convictions, Anne became a gentlewoman of the new queen's privy chamber. 
Notwithstanding that safe transition from Edward's regime to Mary's, the latter's reign proved awkward for Bacon. He retained his post at the wards, continued to be active at Gray's Inn, and kept his head down in other ways, neither advancing further nor losing his footing in royal service. At the same time, and along with his brother-in-law Sir William Cecil, he kept in close touch with his father-in-law, Sir Anthony Cooke, and other protestant exiles. 
Elizabeth's accession found Bacon a strong candidate for high office. He had become known as broadly educated and particularly learned in the law; he had served long and well in the courts of augmentations and then wards; he had been linked with the Reformation and the rise of protestantism on the one hand but had demonstrated his moderation and ability to compromise on the other. Perhaps of equal importance to the rest, he could bring to the queen's service his strong links with several important circles. These included the extensive family connections wrought by both his marriages: those to Gresham and the world of London politics and finance; those to the Cooke sisters and their husbands and reform-minded associates. They also included his considerable political presence in East Anglia as well as important groups of friends and associates from his days at Cambridge, Gray's Inn, the augmentations, and the wards. 
Within weeks of her accession Elizabeth called upon Bacon's advice in forming her government and his help in persuading the reluctant Parker to take the see of Canterbury. She knighted Bacon about 15 December 1558. A week later (too socially conservative to name a common-born lawyer lord chancellor) she made him a privy councillor and named him lord keeper of the great seal with all the perquisites and powers of the chancellorship. A statute confirming that arrangement, and perhaps reflecting his insecurity about it, followed later on: 5 Eliz. c. 18. As lord keeper Bacon presided 'ex officio' over the House of Lords (the only non-peer to sit there), allowing him to exercise his renowned eloquence and wit as the queen's spokesman. 
His appointment also honoured Bacon's extensive legal expertise by placing him at the head of the court of chancery. Although denied the full title of the office, Bacon served longer and arguably with greater impact than any lord chancellor of the century. He was greatly admired by his contemporaries, including Queen Elizabeth herself, who wept at his memory when appointing his successor. The latter was Sir Thomas Egerton, later Baron Ellesmere, who said of Bacon on this occasion that 'he was wiser than any that are ever like to succeed him' (Jones, 82), and whose reforms of chancery were largely an implementation of his predecessor's plans and policies. Bacon actively clarified that court's jurisdiction and issued specific orders to formalize several legal actions, including 'supersedeas', 'certiorari', and testimony 'in perpetuam rei memoriam'. He regulated the duties of the six clerks and the clerks of the petty bag, insisted on rigorous standards of professionalism from the masters in chancery, and took particular pains to clarify the jurisdiction and advance the standing of the cursitors. In 1566 he issued ordinances regarding the latter's authority, saw to their incorporation as a professional body in 1573, and some time later negotiated the acquisition from Lincoln's Inn of a tract of land on Chancery Lane on which to build them an office building. On legal matters outside the purview of chancery as such, he proposed reform of the operation of JPs and of the printing and promulgation of statutes. Finally, his views on the nature of judicial leniency and on prerogative authority, expressed in several speeches and legal decisions rather than in any comprehensive treatise, considerably elucidated both concepts. 
As a privy councillor Bacon was involved in most of the activities of the queen's government. His first statements on religion came in his opening address to parliament in January 1559. Although his oft-quoted and notably eloquent speech could be taken more as a statement of Elizabeth's views than of his own, his call for moderation and tolerance seems to be essentially that of a man who was wholly committed to a reformist position, and anxious to foster its triumph as smoothly as possible against overt opposition. His leading role in that effort was nowhere more obvious than during the Easter recess, when he presided at the Westminster disputation between the Marian and the Elizabethan bishops over the nature of the church settlement then being debated. In an unusually heavy-handed display of support for the reformist position, Bacon bullied the Catholic bishops into submission and helped goad two of them into behaviour sufficiently offensive to justify their imprisonment. They remained incarcerated just long enough for the reconvened session to pass a more protestant version of the settlement, which scraped through the Lords by only three votes. 
Bacon's position on religion in subsequent years was by no means as extreme as that of many of his contemporaries, and even some of his fellow privy councillors. Although not necessarily a radical puritan, Bacon unquestionably held strong reformist views. In his exercise of the ecclesiastical patronage which his keepership put at his disposal (he could expect to present to a substantial number of livings each year) he showed a perceptible sympathy with the aims of bishops and archdeacons who had been exiles under Mary. Indeed, to Catholics and conservatives both in England and abroad he came to symbolize the protestant cause. In 1568 the Spanish ambassador referred to him as 'one of the most pernicious heretics in Europe' ('CSP Spain', '1568-79', 79). In 1572 he and Cecil were so sharply attacked for their views in an anonymous tract known as 'A Treatise of Treasons againste Queen Elizabeth and the Crowne of England', published abroad, that they were defended by name in the queen's proclamation ordering the destruction of seditious books of 28 September 1573. In subsequent years the value which Bacon placed on a 'via media' kept him from espousing extreme positions in religion in the glare of court politics. Yet both he and his wife did their part in the cause of protestant reform whenever this could be done circumspectly. Together they sheltered and supported known puritans at Gorhambury and in other livings under their control. Bacon winked at the prophesyings which so distressed Elizabeth, furthered the influence of reformist gentry in East Anglia, and on several occasions even ran foul of his old friend Matthew Parker in encouraging the circumvention of the strict letter of the law in religious observance. 
Another subtle expression of Bacon's perspective on religious issues is revealed by his views on foreign affairs. Again he generally thought along the same lines as Cecil, though there were exceptions to this. He was much slower than Cecil to counsel supporting the Scottish lords of the congregation in late 1559, and in May 1563 he drew a notably angry rebuke from Cecil when he urged the surrender of the plague-stricken English garrison at Newhaven (Le Havre) against the secretary's wishes. Nevertheless, the two shared an active vigilance against the Catholic forces of Europe, tempering it (Bacon perhaps more than Cecil) with a keen sensitivity to England's limited fiscal resources. Bacon offered Cecil valuable advice on how to handle the arrival of the duke of Alva's payships which were storm driven onto England's south coast in November 1568. 
In almost all respects Bacon proved sure-footed in traversing the contentious political issues of Elizabeth's early years, but there was one exception. His apparent involvement in John Hales's efforts to build a case for the legitimacy of Katherine Seymour (Lady Jane Grey's sister) as Elizabeth's closest heir to the throne landed Bacon in hot water in summer 1563. Hales had circulated a pamphlet on the subject in the aftermath of Elizabeth's near-fatal bout of smallpox in October 1562, and after she reportedly designated Lord Robert Dudley as protector of the realm on what many took to be her deathbed. Once Hales's proposals came to light in the following spring, and the queen sought to probe the full extent of what she took to be a presumptuous and even treasonous intervention, it appeared that Bacon helped Hales gather information and legal opinions. Undoubtedly urged on by Dudley, who no doubt saw Bacon, with Cecil, as obstacles to his ambitions, Elizabeth vented her fury on her lord keeper. His influence dwindled rapidly in the latter months of 1563 until he was banished from the court and privy council altogether by the end of the year. His disgrace, and the 'disquietude of mind' and even ill health which came with it, lasted until spring 1565. 
In the end, and with Cecil's help, Bacon regained his previous standing and even managed an eventual rapprochement with Dudley, now earl of Leicester. Yet the experience proved very painful and had lasting effects. It emphasized his dependence on the queen's favour, and on Cecil's continued support, for his career and very livelihood. It reconfirmed his inclinations to avoid behaviour which could be construed as extreme. It also took its toll on his health. Although this had not been especially robust beforehand, it now increasingly limited his activities and caused increasingly frequent, if short, absences from his official duties. Although most of his illnesses remain undefined, Bacon suffered from gout, a tendency towards kidney stones, and above all, the discomforts of substantial corpulence in his latter years. 
A full indication of Bacon's restoration to the queen's favour came following the flight to England of Mary, queen of Scots, in May 1568, and in the political challenges arising from that dramatic event. Acknowledging his reputation for legal acumen, eloquence, and integrity, Elizabeth chose Bacon to preside over the conference convened at Westminster later that year to determine the extent of Mary's responsibility for the murder of her husband, Lord Darnley. This was a tricky assignment in all sorts of ways, and Bacon excelled at giving the impression of a sensitive and fair-minded investigation while reaching a desirably indecisive conclusion. 
The rising of the northern earls in 1569 gave another fillip to Bacon's fortunes at court. As Elizabeth well knew, the attempted coup was as much directed at Cecil and such of his close associates as Bacon as it was towards her. Its failure left those figures very much more in command of the scene than they had for some time been. She relied on both councillors to investigate the rising after its collapse. 
The northern rising was also closely linked to the presence of Mary Stewart in England, and though the rising itself came to an abrupt end, Mary's presence continued to plague the queen and court. In her prolonged and agonizing indecision, Elizabeth chose Bacon in the following spring to preside over the York House conference which was at least to appear to hear from all sides on Mary's appropriate fate. Once again Bacon skilfully brought the meeting to the sort of impasse which the indecisive Elizabeth found appropriate. In the ensuing months, Bacon's urgings against the idea of freeing Mary earned him the reputation with the French ambassador Fenelon as 'chef de la partie contraire' (Teulet, 3.187), and earned him Elizabeth's mild disapproval as well. He then turned to support the idea of a royal match with the duc d'Anjou which had long been on the table, and which he and others preferred to a Marian succession. 
In the end the Ridolfi Plot of 1572 did more to discredit Queen Mary than any machinations by Bacon or others at court. Bacon had but to preside, in the House of Lords, over the full expression of indignation which ensued. By that time he was not only fully restored in the queen's graces, but had realized the peak of his political influence. He would by no means disappear suddenly from the scene thereafter, but his declining health in subsequent years gradually diminished the force of his presence. To an increasing extent his involvement in current affairs came not directly in the council chamber, but through letters from Gorhambury or his house near Charing Cross in London. 
In these latter years Bacon sustained his concern for the royal succession and for the nation's security from foreign entanglements or even attack. Yet he also retained his vivid awareness of England's modest resources in pursuing expensive and risky policies abroad. This made him more cautious than most of his fellow councillors on the question of open intervention in the Netherlands in 1575-6, and more willing than most to encourage the Dutch to come to terms with their Habsburg rulers or, when events made this increasingly implausible, to accept French support and even overlordship. 
Throughout his career Bacon maintained a political presence away from court as well as at it. Even from his days at the augmentations, his prominence at Westminster made him a valuable high steward for numerous landholding interests, including the archdiocese of Canterbury and the dioceses of Ely, Gloucester, Bristol, Winchester, and Chester. The Elizabethan years brought him high stewardships for Trinity College, Cambridge; the honour of Clare, Suffolk; and the borough of St Albans. Those offices, added to the bulk of his landed estate and the extensive activity of his sons Nathaniel, Nicholas, and Edward, also gave him a key political presence in the counties of Suffolk and Norfolk, and particularly in urban centres like Norwich and Bury St Edmunds. 
Right to the end, as much as his health permitted, Bacon remained engaged in the affairs of both the privy council and the chancery. A commission to investigate the operation of the mint in spring 1578, further plans to improve the cursitors' role in chancery, and the construction of a chapel for which he had left funds at his old Cambridge college, took up as much time in this period as his active correspondence and exchanges of news from court. These days brought recognition and honour as well. Elizabeth paid him the honour of a four-day visit to his home at Gorhambury in 1577, one which even an expenditure of nearly $600 could not tarnish. Months later the queen sent him a new year's gift of a silver bowl, crossing his gift to her 'en route'. 
The end came on 20 February 1579, probably from pneumonia. As his son Francis later recalled, Bacon had several days earlier fallen asleep in his barber's chair and broken into a heavy sweat. Seeking to cool him, the barber opened the window onto a cold winter's day and thus gave Bacon a chill which led to his final illness. His body lay in state at his York House residence in London for nearly a fortnight, as tributes poured in from far and wide, before his burial in St Pauls Cathedral on 9 March. The tributes included a laudatory poem by George Whetstone, a verse from the Scottish humanist and royal tutor George Buchanan (who also wrote the inscription for Bacon's tomb, erected in the cathedral in 1576), and a touching letter from the puritan parliamentarian Thomas Norton which remarked at length upon Bacon's sensitivity towards his family. 
Bacon was indeed a sensitive man, not only towards those with whom he dealt professionally, but also towards his wives and children. His poem to his wife, Anne, upon her illness in 1558, is but one of his written expressions of affection. His relatively few surviving family letters attest the same concern for her and for his children from both marriages: his was surely a companionate marriage. 
Nor is it his only poem. Bacon was something of a bibliophile and a student of classical literature. He enjoyed reading poetry, or having Anne read it to him when he was ill. He also wrote a number of poems himself, evidently intended for his own pleasure rather than for publication. Although undated, they seem to have been composed after his marriage to Anne in 1553 -- many of them perhaps in the period of his disgrace from late 1563 to mid-1565 -- and were published only in 1919 by the Daniel Press, Oxford, under the title 'The Recreations of his Age'. Most of them deal with weighty subjects in the classical mode, such as love, moral philosophy, and religion, and emphasize the stoic virtues (which were also Bacon's virtues) of hard work, education, reason over emotion, and the value of the mean estate. But some are lighter and anecdotal in nature. A few, including 'Of a Snowe Balle' and 'Of a Lover' draw clearly on Petrarchan conceits and show a playful inventiveness of imagery. 
Despite his accomplishments and stature, and the high esteem of his contemporaries, there are indications that Bacon never forgot his origins, or felt entirely secure in the social and political circles to which he ascended. Although reasonably well off, his was very far from one of the great fortunes of the day. He must have felt the limits of his place every time he presided over the Lords, each and every one of whom held a rank which the conservative Elizabeth kept ever beyond his grasp. And before the queen paid him the honour of her first visit to Gorhambury in 1572, he wrote a confidential letter to Cecil asking how to bring the occasion off, pointing out how 'rawe' he was in such matters. 
To support his literary and philosophical interests, Bacon assembled a library which was very substantial for its time. When in 1574 he gave some seventy volumes to Cambridge at Archbishop Parker's urging, he printed his own dated bookplate to mark the occasion: allegedly the first Englishman to have such a device. It bears his arms, his motto ('Mediocria firma' -- 'Safety in moderation'), and a personal inscription marking the donation. In addition, he (and/or perhaps Anne) had stencilled a series of Latin 'sententiae' on the walls at Gorhambury, largely Senecan (as was his motto) in substance and derivation. They show his deep humanist learning, his affinity for the works of Horace, Cicero, and Seneca in particular, and his essential humanity. 
The eloquence and wit by which his contemporaries knew Bacon, and which they often quoted, undoubtedly owed something to these classical models. Most of his important parliamentary speeches have survived in manuscript copies which were made as much for the sake of their rhetorical content as for their political content. Contemporaries like George Puttenham, Thomas Nashe, and William Camden, and slightly later writers like Ben Jonson, who knew Bacon only by reputation, considered him among the most eloquent men of his time. Authors like these would perhaps have been especially attracted by the neo-classical tone of his speech and writings, but he could also turn a homely quip at will. When he first saw Cecil's house at Theobald's and found the privy too close to the larder and lodgings, he remarked that 'you had bene better to have offendyd yor yey outward than yor nose inward' (Tittler, 66). More famously, when Elizabeth made her first visit to Gorhambury and commented on how small it seemed, he covered his wounded pride with a witty allusion to his own expanding girth, 'Madame, my house is well, but it is you that have made me too great for my house' (ibid., 215). Her next stay allowed him to display a new long gallery 120 feet long, built in the hope of just such a return visit. 
In addition to numerous protestant (and puritanically inclined) clerics and tutors, Bacon patronized several writers and scientists. The latter included Leonard Digges in his works on optics and Thomas Blundeville (who also served as a tutor in the Bacon household) in his mathematical investigations. His two country houses, Redgrave as well as the later Gorhambury, and the house at Stiffkey, Norfolk, which he built for his son Nathaniel, show him to have been an active builder. His accounts reveal his close supervision of their design and construction. The architectural vocabulary of these structures is for the most part that of the English Gothic tradition, but the porch which he added at Gorhambury is exceptional, and serves as another reminder of Bacon's humanistic inclinations. Evidently done by a master craftsman familiar with the artistically precocious circle of Protector Somerset, it represented one of the first truly Renaissance structures of its type in England. 
Notwithstanding the expense of such building projects and his financial distance from the wealthiest men of the day, Bacon was certainly comfortably affluent at his death two years later. He had the satisfaction of having established his family, and especially the three sons of his first marriage, with estates and connections linking them to a wide circle of East Anglian gentry. He managed his properties and his professional income closely and well. For a man of his rank he lived in relative frugality, entertaining in the grand manner but rarely, and travelling little save from his London home at York House near Charing Cross to Redgrave, and later to Gorhambury. His worth in cash on hand and plate at his death came to some $4450, about equal to his annual income, to which his lands and other investments have to be added. His debts came to but $860. It may well be that he was poised to spend some of this cash to purchase an estate for young Francis, the only one of his five sons not yet thus provided for. His will nevertheless served them all handsomely, also containing bequests or gifts to twenty-five of his chancery associates, nine personal retainers, seventeen relatives, and a further nine friends and colleagues. His funeral alone cost some $900. 


@@@@@


doc= 1003


Sir Nicholas Bacon, first baronet (c.1543-1624), was the third child of Sir Nicholas Bacon and his wife Jane. Admitted fellow-commoner at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1561, he entered Gray's Inn on 15 December 1562, becoming an ancient in 1576. About 1562 he married Anne (died 1616), daughter and heir of Edmund Butts of Thornham, Norfolk, and Anne (died 1609), daughter of Henry Bures of Acton, Suffolk. Through her he inherited substantial estates in north Norfolk and on the Suffolk-Essex border. From his father he received the mansion house at Redgrave, Suffolk, together with at least seven other manors. In 1586 he added by purchase the Culford Hall estate. It has been estimated that at death his annual income exceeded $4000. Such an inheritance, combined with the residual aura of his distinguished father, might be expected to have ensured his pre-eminence in a region that, after 1572, lacked a resident nobleman. 


@@@@@


doc= 1004


Bacon, Phanuel (1700-1783), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born at Reading on 13 October 1700, the son of Phanuel Bacon ('b'. 1652), fellow of St John's College, Oxford, and his wife, Elizabeth Harrison. His father was also vicar of St Lawrence's, Reading, and author of 'A Pastor's Admonition to his Parishioners' (1728). Bacon became a demy of Magdalen College, Oxford, and graduated BA on 12 June 1719, MA on 17 April 1722, BD on 29 April 1731, and DD on 9 December 1735. In 1734 he was presented to the rectory of Bramber in Sussex by Magdalen College. Later he was collated to the living of Marsh Baldon in Oxfordshire, which became his chief residence until his death in 1783. 
In addition to carrying out his clerical duties Bacon established a reputation as a writer and dramatist. His first works of note were heroic ballads. In 1719 he published 'The Kite', an epic poem celebrating the foiling of the Jacobite plot. The poem was forgotten in subsequent years, and Bacon lived in relative obscurity for the next three decades. In 1756, however, 'The Kite' was rediscovered and reprinted in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. It was an immediate sensation, but was republished anonymously because the editors of the magazine could not discover who had written it. When Bacon's authorship was established his fame grew. He subsequently published anonymously a number of new works, all of which were based on morality plays. Bacon's dramatic works were satirical and comical, but also had serious moral messages. Five separate works appeared in one collection, 'Humorous Ethics, or, An Attempt to Cure the Vices and Follies of the Age by a Method Entirely New' (1757). The plays were 'The Moral Quack', 'The Insignificants', 'The Tryal of the Time Killers', 'The Occulist', and 'The Taxes'. Bacon may have been spurred to write them by his own experiences: in the preface to 'Humorous Ethics' he makes oblique reference to morally bankrupt people who had troubled him severely, and been prosecuted in the law courts. The characters he created included Sir Amorous Flutter, Sir Jeremy Tippler, Mr Cankerworth, Mr Saveall, Mr Cholerick, and Mr Saunter Dolittle. As well as portraying morally flawed and straying people getting their come-uppance, Bacon was prepared to indulge in political satire. In 'The Taxes', for example, he chided the government for the proliferation of tariffs levied on everything from malt and ale to chocolate, paper, and clothes. In 1757 the 'Monthly Review' gave Bacon's book a decidedly lukewarm reception; and there is some question as to whether or not the plays were ever performed on stage, though the subtitle to the collection includes the line 'as they are now acting to the life at the great theatre by His Majesty's company of comedians'. His other works included 'The Snipe' (1765), a popular ballad supposedly based on a true story, and 'A Sermon on the Great and General Day of Judgment' (1731). 
Bacon died on 10 January 1783 at Marsh Baldon, Oxfordshire. In his will he left significant properties and sums to Magdalen College, Oxford, as well as the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and Queen Anne's Bounty. He was survived by his wife, Catherine. His gravestone contained a tribute to the modesty of his poetic wit: '
The soul of Ovid warbled on his tongue; 

And his gentle [?] Harp Aubereon strung. 

Athenian Wit reviv'd in all he spoke, 

Stript of indecent gibe, and cruel joke. 

His Mirth was moral, and without offense; 

T'was Wisdom, drest by Modesty and Sense. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 1005


Bacon, Philip (d. 1666), naval officer, was the second son of Nicholas Bacon of Shrubland Hall, Suffolk, and his wife, Martha, only child of Sir Richard Bingham of Bingham Melcombe, Dorset. Philip (who has sometimes wrongly been called Philemon) joined Charles II during his exile in Flanders, and by the favour of Sir Charles Berkeley obtained a place in the duke of York's troop. He was wounded at the battle of Mardyck (14 June 1658), one potentially lethal bullet being stopped by his hatband, whence it was plucked by the duke himself; soon afterwards Bacon was made a cornet of horse. After the Restoration he went as a reformado (volunteer officer) on Sir John Lawson's first expedition to Algiers, and was then (1661) made lieutenant of the 'Assistance'. He served as lieutenant of the 'Bonaventure' (1662) and the 'St Andrew' (1663) in successive Mediterranean voyages, and returned in 1664 as lieutenant of Sir Thomas Allin's flagship 'Plymouth'. While the fleet was at Algiers in November, Bacon replaced Nicholas Parker (left behind as consul) as captain of the 'Nonsuch'. This ship was accidentally lost off Gibraltar on 2 December, and by the 29th, when Allin attacked the Dutch East India fleet, Bacon was back aboard the 'Plymouth' as a supernumerary. A shot from the 'King Solomon' struck him as he sat charging his gun, but again he was saved by his hat: 'had he stood up, he had gone' ('Journals of Sir Thomas Allin', 1.192). 
Bacon returned to England in March 1665, and by the 19th he was captain of the 'Oxford', which he would command at the battle of Lowestoft on 3 June. For his service there he was promoted to captain the 52-gun 'Bristol', in which he sailed once more for the Mediterranean in December. In his absence he was (16 March 1666) designated to command the 'Assurance' in the summer's campaign, but on his return in May he remained with the 'Bristol'. He was with Albemarle's part of the divided fleet, and on 28 May was instructed to cruise off the North Foreland in search of the enemy. It was his ship that, at 6 a.m. on 1 June, signalled the presence of the Dutch and the beginning of the Four Days' Fight. At 3 p.m. on the first afternoon Bacon received a fatal bullet wound to the thigh. His body was brought back to Harwich and thence to Coddenham church, Suffolk, for burial in the family vault. A marble monument records his achievements and the affection in which he was held. 


@@@@@


doc= 1006


Bacon, Richard Mackenzie (1776-1844), newspaper editor and music critic, was born in Norwich on 1 May 1776, the only son of Richard Bacon (1745-1812), proprietor from 1794 of the 'Norwich Mercury', one of the leading provincial organs of liberal opinion. He was educated at the Norwich Free School, and on leaving joined the paper; he was manager of the printing department until 1804, when he became proprietor. He also had shares in the Theatre Royal from 1806, and from 1808 served in the Norwich rifle volunteers, rising to the rank of major. In 1813 he and Bryan Donkin obtained a patent for improvements in the apparatus employed in printing. The 'Norwich Mercury' of 3 December 1814 published a prospectus of Bacon's printing machine, with an account of the progress it had then made, and it was highly praised by the author of the article 'Printing' in Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' (1819). In 1816 he became editor of the 'Mercury'. He published a number of pamphlets on social, political, and military matters. 
Bacon also studied music in London with Samuel Arnold. Having published some music criticism, he founded in 1818 the 'Quarterly Musical Magazine and Review': this lasted for ten annual volumes. Written for the most part anonymously, but largely by Bacon himself and his daughters, the 'Review' was one of the earliest musical journals in England and did much to encourage proper standards of critical discussion. Its interest centred on the education of professional musicians, but it also provided an account of musical events and a picture of early nineteenth-century musical thoughts and attitudes, which remain valuable. What appear to be Bacon's own discussions of new books and their subjects reflect a wide-ranging intellect and a probing mind well schooled in philosophical matters. The journal had considerable influence in its own day, and Bacon was widely respected. About 1822 he issued proposals for an encyclopaedia of music, to be printed by subscription, and to appear in 1823 under his editorship. Although he is said to have collected the materials for this project, it was never published. Bacon was largely responsible for founding the Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival in 1824. 
In 1797 Bacon had married Jane Louisa (1768-1808), only daughter of Augustine Noverre. Their eldest child, Richard Noverre Bacon (died 1884), played the cello in the first Norwich Festival and edited the 'Norwich Mercury' after his father's death. Bacon died at Cossey, Norfolk, on 27 November 1844. Besides Richard, Bacon was survived by five other children. His eldest daughter, Louisa Mary Bacon ['see 'Barwell, Louisa Mary], had worked with her father on the 'Quarterly' from its foundation, then, after her marriage to a Mr Barwell, wrote some books on children's musical education. Mary Anne Bacon ('c'.1806-1875) was a contributor to the 'Quarterly' and to other journals, and edited a collection of manuscripts relating to her father. George Peter Bacon ('c'.1807-1878) was editor and proprietor of the 'Sussex Advertiser'. Jane M. Bacon (died 1870), a successful mezzo-soprano, studied music with William Horsley and singing with Manuel Garcia, then settled and studied further in Paris before returning to London to complete her studies with Sir George Smart. A further daughter, Rose Bacon, also moved in musical circles. 


@@@@@


doc= 1007


Bacon, Robert (d. 1248), theologian, was born in the 1170s or 1180s, into a family of which nothing is known except that he had a sister Mabel, resident within the Forest of Savernake, Wiltshire. Bacon was to achieve distinction as a theologian and preacher; it is therefore frustrating that so little can be established about his early education. However, in 1948 Beryl Smalley demonstrated that the 'tractatus' on the 'Psalms' in Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 745, which is attributed to Brother R. Bacon, used as its basic text the commentary on the 'Psalms' of the Parisian master Jean d'Abbeville; she deduced from this that Robert Bacon had been John's pupil in Paris about 1210. He is likely to have received considerable training in the arts before this. In a statement produced in the early 1240s to support the canonization of Edmund of Abingdon, Robert Bacon described himself as having been Edmund's pupil, auditor, and close companion. Although he provided no context for this relationship, C. H. Lawrence has suggested that it may have been formed in Oxford between about 1214 and 1219. 
In 1219 Bacon, now described as master, received from the Benedictine abbey of Eynsham the presentation to the living of Lower Heyford, Oxfordshire. The abbey's propinquity to Oxford (and perhaps the presence of one of Edmund of Abingdon's brothers as a monk there) suggests that Bacon's promotion and his academic reputation were connected. It was a condition of the presentation that the incumbent should reside in his parish and fulfil the functions of parish priest. Bacon is likely therefore to have been ordained either before 1219 or shortly afterwards. By 1227, however, he had resigned the living, perhaps because he was already considering entering the Dominican order. The date of Bacon's profession is unknown, but Thomas 'of Eccleston', the Franciscan chronicler, alleged that it happened on the day of his entry into the order, and that he was dispensed from the usual probationary period. Jordan of Saxony, the provincial of the order, visited England in 1229, hoping to recruit a good haul of candidates; Bacon may have been among these. 
Bacon then embarked upon the career that was to occupy him for the rest of his life, that of preaching and of teaching theology in Oxford. Here he worked on occasion with Robert Grosseteste (died 1253), and he taught Richard Fishacre (died 1248). It is also likely that he kept up his connection with Edmund of Abingdon, who became archbishop of Canterbury in 1233 amid the crisis that followed Henry III's dismissal in the previous year of his justiciar, Hubert de Burgh. In June 1233, according to Matthew Paris, Robert Bacon preached a sermon before the king at Oxford, warning him of the dangers to national peace posed by allowing Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester, and his nephew Peter de Rivallis, to dominate royal counsels. Such blunt speaking did not apparently alienate Henry entirely; after the fall of the much disliked Poitevin counsellors in 1234, the king sometimes called on Bacon's services, usually to protect newly converted Jews, or to impose discipline on Oxford clerics, or on their prostitutes and concubines. But after 1238 Bacon seems to have evaded royal notice. 
Robert Bacon may have performed commissions for Edmund of Abingdon until the archbishop's death in 1240. Much of his energy in the next few years went into promoting the canonization of his old friend. He featured prominently in the University of Oxford's appeal to the pope, he wrote an important 'Veriloquium' on Edmund's sanctity, and in 1244 he was a member of the commission of three set up to investigate the facts. The bull of canonization of 1246 must have given him much satisfaction. 
The rest of his time was spent in teaching and preaching. Smalley dated his commentary on the 'Psalms' to the period 1230-48, and pointed out that he added much to Jean d'Abbeville's material, including some 'quaestiones' and allusions to new Aristotelian material. The 'tractatus' in the form in which it has been preserved was prepared, whether by Bacon himself or by an editor, as moralities for use in composing sermons. The attribution to him of the 'Syncategoremata' in Oxford Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 204, folios 88-100 is more doubtful. Bacon's sermons, famous in their day, have all disappeared except one for the first day of Rogation, in BL, Royal MS 7 A.ix, folio 70'v'. His high reputation among his contemporaries is best appreciated from the warmth of the tribute paid to him and to his pupil Richard Fishacre by Matthew Paris, in 1248, the year of their deaths. They were, he said, without equal in theological and other fields of knowledge; they taught with distinction for many years in the theology faculty of Oxford, while also preaching the word of God to the people. Bacon was buried in the church of the Blackfriars, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 1008


Bacon, Roger (c.1214-1292?), philosopher and Franciscan friar, is by inference from his later career usually assigned a birth date about 1214, and from early traditions it seems that he came from the south-west of England, perhaps near Ilchester in Somerset. 
Bacon studied and probably lectured on arts in Oxford, and then lectured at Paris, where he was a pioneer in teaching Aristotle's natural philosophy. The assertion that he was in Paris by 1236 rests on the very dubious ascription to him of a work 'De retardatione accidentium senectutum', but he was certainly there by 1245. He was also there in 1251, but a question mark hangs over the intervening years. This arises largely from a reorientation of intellectual outlook which he himself fairly clearly dates at some twenty years earlier than works that he was writing 'c'.1267. 'In the twenty years in which I have laboured specially at the study of wisdom, disregarding the crowd's approach, I have spent more than two thousand pounds on these matters' ('Opus tertium', ed. Brewer, 59). In this view his early Aristotelian works deriving from his Paris lectures may be seen as representative of the 'crowd's approach', and, although early in date, they do not seem especially remarkable. His new approach may loosely be described as more 'scientifically' and technologically oriented, and was strongly influenced by Robert Grosseteste and the Franciscan school at Oxford, especially Adam Marsh, and to a lesser extent Thomas Wallensis, but a question remains as to how exactly he received this influence. 
Grosseteste was lecturer to the Franciscans at Oxford from 1229 to 1235, when he became bishop of Lincoln, but for various reasons it is implausible to date much acquaintanceship to this period. Another possibility is to deny that Bacon knew Grosseteste at all, except perhaps for having heard the odd sermon. This may be a little extreme, and does not solve the problem of when he became acquainted with Adam Marsh (whom he certainly knew) and, possibly, Thomas Wallensis. Thomas was lecturer to the Oxford Franciscans from about 1240 to 1247, when he departed to become bishop of St David's, and was succeeded by Adam Marsh, who was also a regent master in theology from 1247 to 1250. Taking all these facts into consideration, there is much to be said for the hypothesis that Bacon returned to Oxford about 1247, in time to have come to know, albeit briefly, Thomas Wallensis, and to have attended Adam Marsh's theological lectures. Grosseteste was by that time bishop of Lincoln, but Oxford was in his diocese and he was friendly with Adam Marsh. It therefore seems quite likely that Bacon would at least have been introduced to him, although A. G. Little's suggestion that he became Grosseteste's assistant, and that one of Grosseteste's works was influenced by him, seems improbable. 
It is often assumed that another important cause of Bacon's reorientation was the important pseudo-Aristotelian work, 'Secretum secretorum', which he believed to be by Aristotle himself. This takes the form of a long letter on kingship addressed to Aristotle's erstwhile pupil Alexander the Great, and has as a strong theme the extreme usefulness of philosophy, of various sciences (including those that would now be called pseudo-sciences), and of medicine. This theme was especially important to Bacon in his new orientation, and from at least 1267 he cites the work with great frequency. He also prepared an edition of it, which included an introductory treatise by himself together with a series of glosses. Since Robert Steele's edition (1920) it has been conventional to date the glosses to the 1250s and the introduction to about 1270. However, a study by S. P. Williams has made a strong case for dating both the introduction and the glosses to about 1270 or later. This weakens the case for its being an especially important factor in bringing about his 'conversion' to a new way of approaching knowledge, but at least it was to provide strong reinforcement. 
Another important event in Bacon's career that can only be dated tentatively is his entry into the Franciscan order; this has plausibly been put at 1257. Bacon's vocation is unexpected, for his likeness to St Francis was minimal: once again the influence of Adam Marsh and other Englishmen must be suspected. This in turn makes it probable that the event occurred in England, and renders less appealing J. Hackett's otherwise interesting conjecture that Bacon remained in Paris for most of the 1240s and 1250s. It may be accounted unfortunate for him that at roughly the same time Bonaventure became master-general of the order, a man who had a very different spirituality from Bacon's (with, for instance, far greater emphasis on prayer and contemplation). Whether or not it was from a truculent attitude which made it seem advisable to keep him under closer supervision, Bacon was soon back in Paris for a period of some ten years at least, during which time resentment against his superiors may well have induced hypochondria. Nevertheless he managed in this period to make contact with Guy Foulquois, who had formerly been a lawyer and military man, but by 1261 was a cardinal, and in 1264 became Pope Clement IV. Before this Guy had shown interest in Bacon's schemes and asked for his writings, a request that was repeated as a command after his elevation: 'Truly, in order that what you intend should be more evident to us, we will and command you as instructed by apostolic letters that, notwithstanding the contrary instruction of any prelate or any regulation of your order, you do not fail to send to us as quickly as possible and in a fair hand the work which, when we were established in a lesser position, we asked you to communicate to our beloved son Raymond de Laon, and that by your words you should make clear to us what remedies seem to you should be applied to those things that you have lately intimated as the occasion of such great danger, and that you do this without delay as secretly as possible. ('Opus tertium', ed. Brewer, 1)' Because of constraints on writing that had been imposed on the Franciscan order to stop the spread of possibly heretical apocalyptic tracts, and perhaps for other reasons, Bacon had done relatively little writing over the past ten years, and, as he was later to protest to the pope, he had been speaking of works to be produced and not of those already written. 
However, a papal command could not be ignored, and Bacon commenced a flurry of activity. The exact details have caused much dispute, and the following account must be to a degree conjectural. What is certain is that it brought about Bacon's most famous work, the 'Opus maius'. This was divided into seven parts, and was aimed at promoting in summary form (albeit at some length) a wide expanse, although not the whole gamut, of natural knowledge. Part 1 treated the causes of human ignorance; part 2, the relation of the other sciences to theology; part 3, grammar and the power of languages; part 4, mathematics (including astronomy and astrology); part 5, optics ('perspectiva'); part 6, 'experimental science'; part 7, moral philosophy. It seems most likely that this was immediately dispatched to Rome, but then Bacon contracted three worries: the work could be lost in transit; it might be too long for a busy pope to read; some things had been omitted that should have been included. He accordingly started on another work, the 'Opus minus', to summarize and supplement the larger work. This, it may be surmised, was dispatched to the pope under the care of a special courier known simply as John. This young man, who came from a poor background, had been one of Bacon's favourite pupils, on whom he had tested his educational theories, and whom he had imbued with his own views as to the proper way to approach natural philosophy. It is not certain what happened to John in later life, but quite probably he remained in Rome for some time after this commission. A similar concern that had led Bacon to produce the 'Opus minus' now led him to work on the considerably longer 'Opus tertium'. This may never have been properly revised to Bacon's satisfaction, and was quite probably never sent to the pope, who died in 1268 without leaving any known record of how he reacted to Bacon's ideas. The editorial state of these three works, as of many others in the corpus, is unsatisfactory, but is steadily improving. 
Bacon did not give up writing with the death of Clement IV, but he seems to have become more and more disillusioned and infuriated with what he saw as the increasing corruption of knowledge. His efforts were directed mainly towards a great systematic treatise, in comparison with which the 'Opus maius' had been (because of the shortness of time available) a mere summary. Scholars often refer to this projected writing as the 'Scriptum principale', but the evidence suggests that Bacon used this term generically rather than as the title of a specific work. More probably he saw the work as entitled 'Compendium studii philosophiae' or 'Compendium studii theologiae'. A fragment with the former title, which can be dated to 1272, was published in the nineteenth century by Brewer, and one with the latter title, datable to 1292, was published by Maloney in 1988. Other fragments, both published and unpublished, were clearly also intended as parts of the grand synthesis. 
The evidence strongly suggests that Bacon was back in Oxford about 1270, and he may have spent much of the rest of his life in England. About 1278 there perhaps occurred one of the most controversial episodes in Bacon's career, for it is reported in the 'Chronica XXIV generalium', a work compiled some 100 years later, that in that year the master-general of the Franciscans, Girolamo da Ascoli, 'condemned and disapproved the teaching of Brother Roger Bacon, Englishman, Doctor of Sacred Theology, as containing certain suspect novelties, on account of which the said Roger was condemned to be imprisoned' (Crowley, 67). A somewhat earlier, but garbled, report says that for alchemical reasons Bacon was imprisoned and later released by Raimondo Gaufredi. Gaufredi did become master-general of the Franciscans in 1289, and did release many prisoners, especially in Italy and those of the spiritual or 'left wing' of the order, but notwithstanding many scholarly speculations, there is little evidence that Bacon belonged to this camp. 
Because of the tenuous nature of the evidence some scholars have rejected the view that Bacon was imprisoned at all, but on the whole it seems reasonable to suppose that he was placed under some form of restraint, and this for two principal reasons. The first is that by his habitually expressed contempt for many intellectuals of his time, including prominent Dominicans and Franciscans, he was bound to have been highly unpopular in many quarters. The second is that in 1277 the bishop of Paris had produced a famous condemnation of 219 propositions that were not to be maintained (which was soon followed by a much shorter list from the Dominican archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Kilwardby). Bacon's supposed imprisonment was an internal Franciscan matter, but still these condemnations could have provided his superiors with a heaven-sent opportunity for indicting him. For instance, it would have been hard to defend him against the charge of maintaining 'That by diverse signs of the heaven are signified diverse conditions in men as regards both spiritual gifts and temporal things' (Denifle and Chatelain, 1.551). If he was released by the order of Raimondo Gaufredi, this could well have been about 1290, and his last datable writing can be assigned to 1292. Tradition avers that he died in June of that year, and that he was buried in Oxford. 
Bacon's intellectual schemes were heavily conditioned by his view of how knowledge had developed. Drawing on sources such as Josephus and Augustine, he held that the plenitude of philosophy had been revealed to the ancient patriarchs and prophets near the beginning of time. For various understandable reasons, its transmission to later ages was accompanied by notable deteriorations and corruptions, and reforms had continually been necessary, often by means of special divine illuminations. By his time there had been three particularly great restorers of knowledge, who significantly came from three distinct cultural and religious traditions: Solomon, Aristotle, Avicenna. The time was obviously ripe for a Christian renewal, and it seems fairly clear that Bacon saw himself as the potential provider of this, although, especially later in life, he emphasized the need for co-operative endeavours. 
The ways to reform were manifold, but the means, as he stressed to the pope, were heavily dependent on financial resources, and his had become severely depleted, both (presumably) through his having become a Franciscan, and because of a severe reduction in his family's wealth as a result of their royalist allegiance in the recent troubles in England. One very important way towards the restoration of knowledge was the provision of more and better translations of ancient works, so as to be able to latch more reliably onto an earlier stage in the genealogy of knowledge. He made this point especially strongly with regard to Aristotle, who was one of his greatest heroes. Bacon's early works had typically taken a normal scholastic form of following through a particular Aristotelian text with a series of questions. In his later works he followed his own line of argument, but drew copiously on Aristotle to back up his views, and interestingly he seems often to have drawn not on Aristotle's own text but on a florilegium or florilegia, at least one of which was apparently a source for Johannes de Fonte's 'Parvi flores' or 'Auctoritates Aristotelis'. Aristotle was of course not infallible, but wherever possible Bacon attributed his apparent errors to bad translations. 
Bacon's remarks on contemporary translators were scathing and his requirements stringent: 'While it is necessary that an interpreter should know excellently the science which he wishes to translate and the two languages from which and into which he translates, only Boethius the first interpreter knew fully the power of languages and only the Lord Robert called Great Head, lately bishop of Lincoln, knew the sciences. ('Opus maius', ed. Bridges, 3.82)' Bacon himself tried to alleviate the situation by composing a Greek grammar and a fragmentary Hebrew one; his knowledge of Arabic probably remained at best minimal. On the more logical side of grammar he wrote considerably on the theory of linguistic signs, and regarded some logical doctrines, which it is tempting to call merely technical, as having profound philosophical and theological consequences. One such came from the theory of appellation, where Bacon insisted (in accord, as he saw it, with Aristotle) that a name could not univocally signify a being and a non-being, nor something past, present, and future, but only equivocally. (A point of reference here was the question of whether Christ was a man during the three days in the tomb.) Even in 1292 Bacon was fulminating against Richard of Cornwall for promoting the contrary opinion of the crowd back in 1250. 
Another important way to restore knowledge was for Bacon that of experimental science ('scientia experimentalis'). Not surprisingly this phrase has for more than three centuries excited much interest as marking him out as an important, and for the thirteenth century possibly unique, precursor of modern science. Despite much well-reasoned scepticism from modern scholars, this view is not completely unjustified, but it does need to be augmented and modified. Both the Latin terms 'experientia' and 'experimentum', just like early English 'experience' and 'experiment', covered a wide range of meanings, from active testing (perhaps in a legalistic sense), through experiences of a quasi-mystical kind, to the experience recognizable in such phrases as 'long experience'. All these meanings and more can be found in Bacon's discussions of experimental science. In some topics, such as that of the formation of rainbows and of haloes around the sun and moon, his procedures seem very similar to those of modern experimental science, while in others he is reminiscent of Francis Bacon and the compiling of histories (or accounts) of trades, with a view both to increasing knowledge and improving practice; moreover, he often approaches the borderlands of magic. 
All this is particularly evident in Bacon's lavish praise of one of his contemporary heroes, Petrus Peregrinus, a man famous for his work on magnetism, but about whom little is known except that he may at times have acted as a military engineer: 'He investigated all works of founding metals, and all things that are worked with gold, silver, other metals and all minerals; and he knew all that pertained to warfare and arms and hunting; and he examined all that were for agriculture and the measurement of fields and rural works; also he considered the experiments, divinations and charms of old women and all magicians, and similarly the illusions and devices of all jugglers, so that nothing that should be known would be hidden from him, and he would know how far to reject them as false and magical. ('Opus tertium', ed. Brewer, 47)' Bacon also moved easily from public to private experience, for he asserted that 'human and philosophical' experience was hardly sufficient for corporeal matters, let alone spiritual ones, and hence internal illuminations, arising from faith and from divine revelations, were necessary, and he even managed to cite from the non-Christian world the view found in the 'Centiloquium' (erroneously ascribed to the astronomer Ptolemy) that 'The way of coming to the knowledge of things is twofold, one by the experience of philosophy, and the other by divine inspiration, which as he says, is much the better' ('Opus maius', ed. Bridges, 2.169-70). This draws attention to the theme often found in pre-modern science of revelation as a proper source of scientific knowledge, which can seem less dated if the epithet 'divine' is shed from the term 'inspiration'. 
Many of Bacon's schemes remained purely programmatic, but he did make an exception in the case of optics: 'If the task is to set forth the individual natural sciences in their proper form, either I shall proceed to this, or others can be incited by my labours. But I do wish to compose a compendious treatise on optics ['de perspectiva'], because it is more beautiful than the other sciences, and without it nothing can be finely treated. ('Opera hactenus inedita', 2.13)' Bacon's account of optics was indeed more systematic than that of other special sciences, and this was especially because he was able to draw heavily on the recently translated work of the great Arabic scientist Ibn al-Haytham, who flourished in Egypt in the early eleventh century, and became known in the West as Alhazen. Bacon seems to have been the first Latin writer to have assimilated his work with any thoroughness. A leading idea of Alhazen's treatise was that vision was effected by intromission, that is, by light and colour coming into the eye rather than visual rays being projected out of it. Bacon agreed with Alhazen on intromission, but also insisted that for vision to be completed there must be an action proceeding outwards from the eye. Although this may prima facie seem obscurantist, it was rooted in Bacon's more general doctrines of natural philosophy. Besides his major optical work Alhazen had also written on the theory and practice of constructing parabolic burning mirrors. This drew Bacon's attention especially because of the apparent use of the treatise by Petrus Peregrinus in his pioneering work in making such a mirror in France. Bacon followed his efforts assiduously, and later had several concave mirrors made for his own use. 
The optical work of Alhazen, like that of Ptolemy (another of Bacon's heroes), was highly mathematical, a point that greatly appealed to Bacon, and he spoke of geometry as being principally grounded in this science and in astronomy. But this by no means exhausted the range of mathematics' applicability, and Bacon waxed at length about its extreme utility and indeed necessity for a whole gamut of philosophical, theological, and human practical purposes. He himself had a certain, but in the technical sense not a high, level of competence in the subject. He frequently railed at the multiplication of 'useless' conclusions and demonstrations, and most modern mathematicians would look askance at his insistence that even geometrical theorems needed to be certified by the test of experience. Another strategic move that he made in pure mathematics is of some interest. Since at least the time of the Pythagoreans, there had been a tradition of treating arithmetic and geometry as two very distinct sciences: the former dealt with discrete quantity and the latter with continuous quantity, and there were various points (notably incommensurability) that resisted the assimilation of these disciplines. From the Renaissance onwards this divorce was increasingly seen as unsatisfactory, and there were frequent attempts to unite the two subjects under some form of universal mathematics. In antiquity also there had been some attempts at this, and Aristotle provided a few vague hints. Iamblichus, in a work no longer extant, apparently developed the idea further, and Proclus's commentary on Euclid contained a substantial (but still short) discussion of common mathematics. It is therefore of some interest to note that Bacon's first division of mathematics was into things common to the whole of mathematics and those proper to its specialized areas, and that the only completed section of the mathematical volume in his intended grand synthesis was that on the common mathematicals. His discussions are readily reminiscent of Proclus, but the latter's commentary on Euclid is not known to have been available in Latin in the middle ages, and it seems unlikely that Bacon consulted it in Greek. Accordingly the sources of Bacon's discussion remain problematic. 
Optics not only reinforced Bacon's faith in mathematics: it also suggested a generalization. Bacon's universe was a very active one, and he was extremely interested in how action was transferred from one body to another, especially when they were not in contact. A clear example was the transmission of lighting and heating action from the sun to things below, and Bacon proposed that other forms of action at a distance were of the same kind, whereby substances and qualities radiated species or likenesses of themselves in all directions, which were 'multiplied' through the medium in stages, with first one part of the medium being altered, which then altered another adjacent to it, and so on. It is sometimes tempting, but also historiographically hazardous, to compare Bacon's multiplication of species with the nineteenth-century incorporation of optics in a general theory of electromagnetic radiation. It would certainly be fanciful to claim an influence, and Bacon included many actions foreign to most modern conceptions. Prominent among these were astrological and psychic influences. For instance, Bacon had great faith in the power of words: when their utterance was backed up by the right psychological conditions, they were reinforced by corresponding mental species proceeding from the rational soul, and had great power for both good and ill, and this power could be further augmented by species proceeding from the appropriate configuration of the heavens. 
Bacon's doctrine was certainly influenced by Grosseteste, but, it would appear, even more more strongly by the 'De radiis' of al-Kindi. This work had the ominous alternative title 'Theorica artium magicarum', and, despite its short length, Bacon's contemporary Giles of Rome felt able to list eighteen serious errors contained in it. It is therefore not surprising that Bacon did not mention it in the works that he composed for the pope, but he cited it elsewhere, albeit in ambivalent terms. 'The book's author puts forward many excellent things about the multiplication of rays, which are philosophical and true, so that he may the better draw the readers' minds to the poison of falsity that is his principal intent' ('De laudibus mathematicae', BL, Royal MS 7 F.vii, fol. 72'v'). For Bacon, 'false mathematicians', a term that comprehended both magicians and a certain type of astrologer, had two main faults: they held that all things happen of necessity, and they called upon the action of demons. One of the main planks of Bacon's programme was to show that many effects that might vulgarly be accounted magical and dependent upon demons were in fact perfectly legitimate products of art and nature, and his doctrine of the multiplication of species was, by analogy with optics, particularly potent for providing such naturalistic explanations; to this extent al-Kindi's work was a great aid. Less acceptably the Arab philosopher proposed a naturalistic account of the efficacy of prayer, and was a rigorous astrological determinist. This could not be acceptable to Bacon, and determinist interpretations of astrology had for centuries been a principal reason for giving 'mathematicians' a bad name, an accusation to which Bacon was very sensitive, and did his utmost to repudiate. Hence al-Kindi was a dangerous friend. 
Nevertheless Bacon was a fervent advocate of the power of astrology, and in this he was strongly backed up by his incorporation of celestial influences into the doctrine of multiplication of species. These influences could be particularly important in the context of Bacon's geographical investigations, for they were potent in explaining how peoples differed from each other in their customs. This gave Bacon visions of technological possibilities, and he was fond of quoting a supposed piece of advice that Aristotle gave to Alexander the Great: 'When Alexander found races having very bad customs and wrote to Aristotle about what to do concerning them, that prince of philosophers replied: If you can alter their air, let them live; if not kill them all. Oh what an occult reply this is! -- but full of the power of wisdom. For he understood that by a change of the air that contains celestial virtues, men's customs are changed. ('Opus maius', ed. Bridges, 1.393)' Bacon apparently thought that the required change of air could be brought about by mirrors deflecting the celestial virtues. 
More routinely, astrological predictions could allow evasive action if danger seemed to be imminent, and more grandly Bacon following Albumasar (Abu Ma'shar) held that the rise of particular religions could be correlated with planetary conjunctions, although he naturally argued a special status for Christianity. Islam had been the latest moderately worthy candidate on the scene, but very soon there would arise the sect of Antichrist. This would be particularly dangerous, for he would be armed with the sort of technological weapons that Bacon himself wrote about: it was therefore imperative that Christians be likewise provided. Bacon's best-known recommendations were addressed to Pope Clement IV, but he continued similar themes with increased vehemence until the end of his life, which may well have contributed to his supposed confinement. It must, however, be noted that at least in his later years Bacon displayed reservations about the epistemological basis of astrology, and he stressed that not only should a good practitioner of the art be experienced in disciplines ranging from physiognomy through alchemy to agriculture, but that he should himself have been born under the right celestial configuration. The empirical orientation that justifiably recommended him to later ages of natural science is again evident. 
Roger Bacon's influence was vast but problematic, and at times it is tempting to suspect a conspiracy of silence. For instance, Thomas Bradwardine seems clearly to have used his edition of the 'Secretum secretorum', and to have been influenced by his views on the growth of knowledge, but in his writings he apparently never mentions his name. John Dumbleton, a younger contemporary of Bradwardine's at Merton College, Oxford, does refer to him in an optical context, but with the peculiarly grudging description as 'one who is called Bakun' (MS Vat. lat. 6750, fol. 194'v'). On the other hand, in alchemical circles he was sufficiently renowned to have attracted a wealth of pseudepigrapha to his name. Bacon himself did write on alchemy, and prized the science highly. He also showed a delight in the mystification of the subject, as when he told the pope that, although he had written separately four times to him about its secrets, he would still need a 'viva voce' explanation for full understanding. However, Bacon's undoubtedly genuine writings on alchemy are small in volume, and it is hard to feel secure in accepting any of the later ascriptions. 
Bacon also acquired a reputation as a magician, but this again has its problems. There seem no grounds for regarding him as the author of such works as a 'De nigromantia' attributed to him, and apart from some stories retailed by a late fourteenth-century Franciscan chronicler, it is not until the sixteenth century that a full account of his supposed doings appears -- in an anonymous romance, 'The Famous Historie of Fryer Bacon', which formed the basis of Robert Greene's well-known play, 'The Honorable Historie of Frier Bacon, and Frier Bungay'. (Bungay incidentally seems to have been a composite figure, formed from an innocent, and possibly dull, thirteenth-century Franciscan and a fifteenth-century friar with a definite reputation for magical practices.) The most famous legend is probably that of the talking brazen head. For England's greater protection Bacon and Bungay learned that they should construct such an object, but it was essential that they actually heard it speak. Enabling it to vocalize involved the advice of a devil and was extremely arduous. It thus turned out that the exhausted friars were asleep when it uttered its few enigmatic words 'Time is -- Time was -- Time is past': accordingly, as they were deaf to these, it disintegrated in a vast explosion and the project failed. Almost simultaneously with such legends there began the tradition of defending Bacon against charges of magic, and John Dee projected, and perhaps actually wrote, a treatise, 'Mirror of unity, or, Apologia for Friar Roger Bacon the Englishman, in which it is taught that he did nothing by the aid of demons, but was a most great philosopher, and performed naturally and in ways allowable to a Christian man, great things which the unlearned crowd is wont to ascribe to the action of demons' ('Dee on Astronomy', 116). 
The publishing history of Bacon's works was slow. The only one to appear in print before 1600 was the short but significant 'Epistola de secretis operibus artis et naturae' (Paris, 1542). Some alchemical works (quite probably all spurious) were published in 1603 at Frankfurt under the title 'Sanioris medicinae... de arte chymiae scripta', and in the same place in 1614 Johann Combach brought out two volumes containing genuine mathematical and optical writings, largely drawn from the 'Opus maius'. Thereafter, for over a century there were only trickles, despite the fact that members of the Royal Society of London in its early days, for whom Bacon had joined his namesake Francis as a hero of experimental science, were anxious to see more of his works in print. In 1733 there appeared in London a large folio volume, edited by Samuel Jebb, which contained most of the 'Opus maius' and the 'De multiplicatione specierum', but it was only in the nineteenth century and more particularly the early twentieth century that serious editorial and scholarly work on Bacon really began to flourish. He was then often portrayed as a lone beacon of light in an age of darkness, and this understandably provoked a counter-reaction from many medievalists to bring his importance into perspective, and see him as a quite typical, although noisy, product of his own age, who perhaps suffered greatly from 'sour grapes' as a failed theologian. More recently emphasis has again been put on his individuality, originality, and influentiality, but now coupled with a determination to locate him much more precisely within the complex and vibrant web of medieval intellectual life. 


@@@@@


doc= 1009


Bacon, Sir Thomas (d. 1336), justice, apparently came from Norfolk, where he held land at Burnham Deepdale. His parentage is unknown, but he seems to have been connected in some way with Sir Edmund Bacon, who held the manor of Gresham; suggestions that he was lord of Baconsthorpe in the same county appear to result from confusion with a namesake. First recorded in November 1306, following his marriage to Denise, the widow of John de Boys (which brought him a life interest in lands and rents in Essex and Cambridgeshire), he had become a sergeant in the court of common pleas by Hilary term 1311, and appeared regularly in the central courts thereafter; at the London eyre of 1321, for instance, he is reported as acting as counsel in eighteen cases. If it was he, rather than his namesake, who was pardoned as an associate of Thomas, earl of Lancaster, in 1313, this might help to explain why his career was confined to the courts until 1327, and also why he advanced rapidly afterwards. His appointment as a justice of the common pleas on 30 December 1329 did not take effect, but that may have been the result of his heavy engagement in the Northamptonshire eyre of 1329-30, where he was one of the most active sergeants. But on 28 January 1332 he was appointed a justice of king's bench, and in the same year was made a knight-banneret, appropriate apparel being provided at the king's expense. 
Bacon served in king's bench until Michaelmas 1335. At the same time he shouldered a substantial burden of judicial and administrative business, as a commissioner of oyer and terminer, and as a justice of assize and gaol delivery, mostly in East Anglia and the home counties. In the parliament of Hilary term 1332 he was a trier of petitions for Gascony, Ireland, and Wales, and later in that year he was an assessor of tallage in Norfolk and Suffolk. Two years later he was a commissioner to negotiate a lay subsidy in Kent, while in 1335 he was appointed to investigate the conduct of tax collectors in a number of counties in south-east England. Such employment continued after Bacon had left king's bench, his last commission being dated 10 October 1336. He was dead by 10 December following, and in October 1337 his executors -- the prior and sub-prior of St Bartholomew's, Smithfield -- were ordered to surrender his rolls into king's bench. Survived by his widow, who lived until 27 April 1349, Bacon is not known to have had any children. 


@@@@@


doc= 1010


Thomas Bacon (b. 1773, d. after 1800), was also a sculptor who entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1788 and exhibited some religious works at the Royal Academy between 1793 and 1795. Until the age of twelve the younger John Bacon was under casual apprenticeship in his father's studio, and this enabled him to enter the Royal Academy Schools on 29 March 1790. He exhibited his first work in 1792, a statue entitled 'Moses Striking the Rock'. From then on, his progress through the ranks was steady: he gained a silver medal in 1793 and a gold medal the following year for his study of the Greek prophet Cassandra. He continued to exhibit work at the Royal Academy until 1824, and he also exhibited at the British Institution in 1806 and 1807. 


@@@@@


doc= 1011


Baconthorpe, John (c.1290-1345x52), Carmelite friar and theologian, was born at Baconsthorpe, near South Erpingham in Norfolk. According to his younger contemporary John Trisse, Baconthorpe was 'tiny' ('minimus'), though 'very great in his wisdom and learning' (Xiberta, 206). Probably at a young age, he entered the Carmelite convent at Blakeney. He studied at Oxford, where he was taught by Robert Walsingham, regent master in 1312. Unlike most Carmelites of the English province, however, he went on to complete his studies in Paris, where he was taught by Guido Terreni. He lectured on the 'Sentences' and the 'Bible', probably before 1318, but was still a bachelor in 1321, if (as seems likely) he is 'John the English Carmelite' who was present at Jean de Ponilly's ceremonial renunciation of his errors. He incepted very probably in 1323, and his regency may well have been prolonged beyond the required two years. In 1330, when he conducted his third quodlibetal disputation, he seems still to have been in Paris. He then returned to England and may have taught (as John Hornby, writing in 1374, testifies) at Cambridge, where there was a Carmelite house. In distinction 1, question 4 of his later 'canonical' questions on book 4 of the 'Sentences', Baconthorpe discusses Bradwardine's views on predestination in a way that suggests that he had disputed with him on the subject. Historians have seen this as evidence that Baconthorpe returned to teach at Oxford in the 1340s. But Bradwardine left Oxford in 1335. Perhaps Baconthorpe disputed with him there before then (Bradwardine had already begun to develop his own distinctive position); or perhaps later elsewhere. In addition to his teaching and writing, Baconthorpe was provincial of the English province, from 1326 or 1327 until 1333 at the earliest, but probably until 1336. He certainly died before 1352 and very probably after 1345. 
As in the case of many fourteenth-century theologians, Baconthorpe's most important work is his 'Quaestiones in quatuor libros sententiarum', a commentary on the 'Sentences', an 'ordinatio' (written up and revised version) of his lectures as a bachelor on the 'Sentences'. A note in BL, Harley MS 1819, states that Baconthorpe completed book 1 of the commentary in March 1325. For books 1-3 there are two recensions: an earlier one, found in the one surviving manuscript, BL, Royal MS 11 C.vi, and a later one, found in all the editions (Paris, 1484; Milan, 1510; Venice, 1526; Cremona, 1618). Baconthorpe rewrote his questions on book 4, calling his earlier set the 'speculative questions'; the later set, the 'canonical questions', were written after 1336, since they use material from his commentary on 'St Matthew'. Only some of the speculative questions survive, interspersed among the canonical questions in BL, Royal MS 9 C.vii (some of the former have been edited by Borchert, 1974). The other manuscripts (BL, Royal MS 11 B.xii; Paris, Bibliotheque Mazarine, MS 900; Vienna, Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, MS 1530) and the editions (Milan, Venice, and Cremona; the Paris edition has just books 1-3) have only the canonical questions. Three sets of quodlibetal questions by Baconthorpe are known (no surviving manuscript; editions: Venice, 1527; Cremona, 1618). According to the colophon in the first edition, the third of them was discussed by him 'in the school of the Carmelites at Paris in 1330'. The other two are probably earlier, since Baconthorpe refers to them, but not to the third set, in his 'Sentences' commentary. 
Part of Baconthorpe's work as a master of theology was to comment on the 'Bible'. A commentary on 'St Matthew' by him is preserved in Cambridge, Trinity College, MS 348 (after January 1336). A now lost manuscript contained his commentaries on the Pauline epistles, and commentaries on many other books of the 'Bible' were attributed to him by John Bale. It has also been suggested that Baconthorpe wrote a commentary on Aristotle's 'Metaphysics'; a commentary by him on the 'De anima' is mentioned by Osbert Pickenham, a fellow English Carmelite, and by Richard Lavenham, and there is evidence that he commented on the 'Nicomachean Ethics'. More unusually, Baconthorpe also commented on two works of Augustine, the 'De trinitate' and the 'De civitate Dei', and on Anselm's 'De incarnatione Verbi' and 'Cur Deus homo' (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS 9540). He also wrote three short works on specifically Carmelite matters: a 'Compendium historiarum et jurium pro defensione institutionis et confirmationis ordinis B. Mariae de Monte Carmeli', a 'Speculum de institutione ordinis ad venerationem virginis deiparae', and a 'Tractatus super regula ordinis Carmelitarum' (ed. in 'Speculum ordinis fratrum Carmelitarum', Venice, 1507, and in later collections); and there is evidence he wrote a short treatise on the immaculate conception. 
Baconthorpe was one of the theologians who brought English philosophical and theological ideas to Paris in the 1310s and 1320s, and who, in his turn, was influenced by Parisian developments. He sometimes repeats the arguments of his teacher, Robert Walsingham and he is especially close to the secular master Thomas Wilton, from whom he takes his discussion of predestination in his commentary on the 'Sentences' (bk 1, distinctions 40-41). He is usually opposed to the theories of Duns Scotus and those of Henri de Gand. Baconthorpe first lectured on the 'Sentences' before he knew the work of the Parisian theologian, Pierre Aureole. But in his quodlibets and the written-up 'Sentences' commentary (especially book 1), Aureole is his main adversary. Baconthorpe argues with him on a wide range of subjects, from Trinitarian relations and the object of theology to the nature of truth (Aureole holds that it is just in the intellect, Baconthorpe considers that it is also in things), and whether God knows each creature distinctly (as Baconthorpe maintains against Aureole). William Ockham's thought seems to have had almost no impact on him (probably because Ockham's work was not known in Paris when Baconthorpe studied and taught there). An unusual feature of the canonical questions on book 4 is their attempt to integrate theology with jurisprudence; although Baconthorpe was not a professional canonist, he shows himself a very able synthesist, far more at home in this field than most theologians. 
The aspect of Baconthorpe's work which has most occupied historians is its relation to Averroism. Augusto Nifo judged him to be 'the chief ['princeps'] of the Averroists', a title that his early biographers were happy to repeat. More recently it has been questioned whether Baconthorpe should be considered an Averroist at all, since that description suggests that he upheld various doctrines incompatible with Christianity, whereas he was in fact very careful to avoid any unorthodoxy. His true position seems to have been more complex than either of these judgements represents. On many occasions Baconthorpe tended to interpret Averroes's own views in a way that diminished or removed their unacceptability to Christians. For instance, he accepted, like almost all his contemporaries, that according to Averroes there is only one 'intellectus possibilis' ('possible intellect') for all men. But he devised the notion of a 'twofold conjunction' between the possible intellect and the individual man, which allowed him to attribute knowing to human individuals, not just to the single possible intellect; and he argued that in a certain way the possible intellect could be considered multiple. Where, however, there is no way of interpreting Averroes in a way acceptable to Christians, Baconthorpe is willing either to ignore him -- as he does when discussing human freedom -- or to set him aside. For example, he argues that Averroes's Aristotelian reasons for holding that the world must be eternal contradict the principles Averroes himself states elsewhere. None the less, he allows that God could (although he did not) have created the world not in time but eternally. This was Aquinas's position, but Baconthorpe has to justify it against the sophisticated arguments developed since the 1270s. 


@@@@@


doc= 1012


Badby, John (d. 1410), Lollard heretic, was a craftsman (possibly a tailor or smith) of the diocese of Worcester, who achieved notoriety by his uninhibited denial of the doctrine of transubstantiation. Charged before his bishop, Thomas Peverell, on 2 January 1409, Badby insisted that the bread in the eucharist was not, and could not be, miraculously transformed into Christ's body. His acknowledgement of the influence of 'John Rakyer of Bristol' (a leading centre of Lollardy) represented a more general challenge to priestly power. Although Badby was adjudged a heretic, and so liable to the death penalty under the statute 'De haeretico comburendo' enacted in 1401, recent precedents suggested that the church had no wish to make martyrs of insignificant men. However, circumstances arose in the following year in which Badby's case came to serve the highest affairs of state. 
The coming to power of a 'ministry' led by Henry, prince of Wales (the future Henry V), emboldened the Commons to hope that he might endorse a Lollard solution to the crown's financial problems; the wholesale confiscation of the church's temporal possessions. This political misjudgement, perhaps inspired by the prince's friendship with allegedly 'Lollard' knights, provoked vigorous reactions from Henry IV and his ally Archbishop Arundel of Canterbury. The reassertion of orthodox authority, it seemed, might be furthered by making an example of a particularly obdurate Lollard. When on 1 March 1410 Badby was summoned before a convocation of the clergy, the hearing became a show trial of national importance. Badby remained impervious to persuasion, and was sentenced to be burnt at Smithfield on 5 March. As he was consigned to the flames, the prince -- possibly seeking to embarrass political rivals by succeeding where they had failed -- halted the execution and offered Badby a pension if he would recant. When Badby still refused, the prince's decision to return him to the fire sealed his own commitment to the cause of orthodoxy. Badby was the first layman to be executed as a consequence of anti-Lollard legislation; as his precursor William Sawtrey had been burnt in 1401 before the statute came into force, Badby was its first victim. 


@@@@@


doc= 1013


Badby, William (d. 1380/81), Carmelite friar and preacher, was born in East Anglia, of unknown parents. He joined the Carmelite order and probably passed his early years in religious life at Norwich. He was sent for his studies to Oxford, where his ability was quickly recognized, and he became one of the leading Carmelite theologians there, incepting as DTh. John Bale, deriving his information from an obituary or notes in the lost register of the late fourteenth-century Carmelite provincial Robert Ivory, records that Badby was an eloquent preacher, frequently preaching at court before the nobility, and his reputation was such that crowds would flock to hear him as if going to a show. His fame brought him to the attention of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, who appointed him one of his confessors and, on 4 July 1372, granted him an annuity of $10 a year. Bale claims that Badby was elected bishop of Worcester 'c'.1380, but there was no vacancy in the Worcester diocese at this time, nor is there any trace of Badby's name in the episcopal records. The error must have arisen from Bale's misattribution to Badby (perhaps arising from a misreading of his own notes) of a work on penitence preserved in Oxford, Balliol College, MS 228 (6) and elsewhere, by Walter de Cantilupe, bishop of Worcester (died 1266). Bale knew that this treatise was by a bishop of Worcester, and in his manuscript notes ascribes it to Cantilupe's predecessor, William de Blois (died 1236). Badby died on 11 April in either 1380 or 1381. Bale gives titles of three more lost works -- lectures on the 'Bible', a collection of sermons, and a set of 'diocesan constitutions'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1014


Badcock, John (fl. 1810-1830), writer and journalist, is known only by his works and even the attribution of these is uncertain. He was the probable author of the pretentious introductory chapter to 'Pancratia', published in 1811. That year the 'Lives of the Boxers' also appeared, arguments over the authorship of which contributed to a bitter rivalry between Badcock and Pierce Egan. Badcock's most sustained journalism was as Jon Bee in the 1820s, when he published thirteen volumes of the 'Annals of Sporting and Fancy Gazette' between 1822 and 1828. Of his works on non-sporting subjects, the 'Living Picture of London' was compiled as a guide to the city's condition in the year 1818, and a similar volume was produced in 1828. From a note in the 'Fancy Gazette' (1.330), it appears that the volume entitled 'Letters from London: Observations of a Russian during a Residence in England of Ten Months' (1816), which purported to be a translation from the original manuscript of 'Oloff Napea, ex-officer of cavalry', was also the production of Badcock. His last work under the signature of Jon Bee was an edition of the works of the playwright Samuel Foote (3 vols., 1830). There are indications here that Badcock was connected with Devon or Cornwall, a supposition supported by the fact that in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1819, pt. i, 618-20, pt. ii, 326), Badcock had announced his intention of printing the lives of the celebrated natives of Devon. His later writings, as John Hinds, all concern horses and riding; they include 'The Veterinary Surgeon', issued in 1827 and 1829, and reissued at Philadelphia in 1848, and the preparation of new editions of W. Osmer's 'Treatise on the Horse' and C. Thompson's 'Rules for Bad Horsemen', both of which appeared in 1830. This was the last year in which any work that can be attributed to Badcock was published. 


@@@@@


doc= 1015


Badcock, Samuel (1747-1788), theologian and writer on literature, was born at South Molton, Devon, on 23 February 1747, the son of a butcher. His mother's maiden name was Plake. His parents were dissenters and he was educated at a dissenting academy at Ottery St Mary. After training for the dissenting ministry, in 1768 he settled in Wimborne, Dorset, and was ordained on 23 August 1769. After three years there, he was appointed as minister in Barnstaple, where he remained until 1778. During this period, he contributed to the 'Theological Repository' and thereby came to know Joseph Priestley. 
In July 1779 Badcock wrote to Ralph Griffiths, editor of the 'Monthly Review', who had been making enquiries about him as a possible reviewer, to describe the scandal that caused him to sink 'to the very Gates of Death' and had forced him to leave Barnstaple. Badcock explained that three years earlier he had been connected with a family 'in which there lived a Girl of most agreeable Person & of as lewd & vicious a Disposition', who had almost succeeded in her attempt to seduce him -- she came to his bedroom, but they were interrupted before what he called the 'last act'. He never had anything to do with her again but when she became pregnant, after having been caught in bed with a footman, she blamed Badcock and tried to blackmail him. He confided in two friends who then spread the gossip throughout Barnstaple and his reputation was ruined. At this, he took to his bed in true eighteenth-century heroine style: 'for two Months my life was dubious & frequently despaired of... I was reduced to a Skeleton' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. C.90, fols. 8'r'-9'v'). He returned to his native town of South Molton to a congregation where he remained until 1786. His long-standing dissatisfaction with dissenting doctrine and what he described as 'the shackles of a dissenting Minister among a low and illiteral people' led him to join the Church of England in 1786 (ibid., fol. 115'r'). He was ordained deacon and priest within the same week in 1787 by Bishop Ross, of Exeter, and within a few months he became assistant to Dr Robert Gabriel at the Octagon Chapel in Bath. 
Most of Badcock's contributions to literature appeared in periodicals. From 1744, when he sent to the 'Westminster Magazine' a series of articles, until his death, he published widely in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', 'London Magazine', 'London Review', 'General Evening Post', and 'St James's Chronicle', but the most famous of his articles appeared in the 'Monthly Review'. His authorship of the reviews of over 650 works between 1779 and 1787 should not have been known in his lifetime, as Ralph Griffiths maintained a strict policy of anonymity for all his reviewers and disapproved of Badcock's hints and disclosures. Alexander Chalmers described the 'Monthly Review' as 'the great scene of his literary warfare' ('General Biographical Dictionary', 1812, 3.292) and it is clear that Badcock greatly enjoyed his part in four important controversies. He reviewed at great length Martin Madan's infamous work on polygamy, 'Thelypthora' (1780), and many responses to it; a number of works relating to Ossian and Chatterton between 1781 and 1785; and he engaged in furious combat with and about Joseph Priestley in 1783 and 1784. Although Badcock had been friendly with Priestley and had published in 1780 'A Slight Sketch of the Controversy between Dr Priestley and his Opponents', he published a harshly critical review of Priestley's 'History of the Corruptions of Christianity' in the 'Monthly Review' for June 1783. This, and an article by him in the following year on Priestley's 'Letters to Dr Horsley', produced two answers from Priestley and pamphlets from J. E. Hamilton and Edward Harwood. Badcock then replied in 'A Letter to Doctor Priestley: Occasioned by his Late Pamphlet'. 
During his time in Barnstaple Badcock had become acquainted with the daughter of Samuel Wesley, master of Tiverton School and elder brother of John Wesley. The letters and anecdotes which he obtained from her were sent by him to the 'Westminster Magazine' in 1774. A subsequent account, again based on her statements, of the Wesley family provoked a correspondence with John Wesley and was published in 'Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica', and reprinted in Nichols's 'Literary Anecdotes'. Several of Wesley's letters were published by Priestley in 1791 under the title of 'Original letters by Rev. John Wesley and his friends... communicated by the late Rev. S. Badcock'. Badcock's 'Sermons preached at the Octagon Chapel, Bath, for the benefit of the general infirmary, 23 Dec. 1787' was printed for private distribution with its full text restored. 
Badcock's published poetry included 'The Hermitage: Written at Castle-Hill, the Seat of Lord Fortescue', printed in January 1782 in the 'London Magazine' (vol. 51, 41), 'An Author's Address to his Book', published in both the 'London Magazine' (vol. 52, 192) and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (vol. 53, 389) in 1783, and 'To Eliza, on her Marriage', published in 1792 in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (vol. 62, 364) and in 'Poems, Chiefly by Gentlemen of Devon and Cornwall'. His last work was a sermon preached at St Peter's, Exeter, at the Lent assizes, which was published in 1795. The papers which the topographer William Chapple had collected for an improved edition of Risdon's 'Survey of Devon' were given to Badcock for arrangement and revision and he considered writing a new history of that county. Several letters on this matter were printed in Richard Polwhele's 'Reminiscences', but the work was stopped by Badcock's death. 
By December 1787 Badcock was in bad health and circumstances but he looked forward to a prolonged stay in London with Sir John Chichester, one of his Devon patrons, at whose house in Queen Street, Mayfair, he died on 19 May 1788. 
After his death, his friend Dr Robert Gabriel alleged that he was the virtual author of Dr Joseph White's Bampton lectures on the effects of Christianity and Islam, for which White had paid Badcock $500. A fierce war of words raged in the papers. Gabriel published 'Facts Relating to the Rev. Dr White's Bampton Lectures' (1789), reprinting six letters from White to Badcock, and White rejoined with 'A statement of Dr White's literary obligations to the late Rev. Mr Samuel Badcock and the Rev. Samuel Parr, LL.D.' (1790). These and other pamphlets relating to the controversy were very widely reviewed, achieving maximum exposure for both sides. White was criticized for failing to acknowledge the considerable assistance he had received, Badcock for exposing a private agreement. 
As a reviewer, Badcock was remarkably well known during the eighteenth century. Although the 'Gentleman's Magazine''s obituary notice of the 'reverend, ingenious, and learned' Badcock had printed some biographical anecdotes about him, it was after the scandal of the Bampton lectures that both biographical notices and republications of some of his poems proliferated in periodicals in 1790-92. 'The Peeper: a Collection of Essays' (1796) included as no. xxxiv a 'biographical sketch' of him and reprinted two of his poems. 


@@@@@


doc= 1016


Baddeley, Robert (1733-1794), actor, was born on 20 April 1733, perhaps in London. The identities of his parents are unknown; it is usually said that he was orphaned at an early age. He was brought up to be a cook. Among his early employers was the actor and manager Samuel Foote, who may have inspired him to follow a stage career. As a young man he spent three years as a valet on the grand tour, where he gained an insight into foreign customs as well as exposure to different languages and accents. It was his facility with these that later provided the basis for his most popular stage performances. 
On his return to London, Baddeley rejoined Foote, this time as an actor at the Haymarket, where he made his debut on 28 June 1760, as Sir William Wealthy in Foote's 'The Minor'. He travelled with the play to Drury Lane, appearing there for the first time on 20 October 1760, and played several other roles at Drury Lane that season, including Gomez in Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar' -- a part which was also included in his repertory in winter 1761 at the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin. He became a full member of the Drury Lane company at the beginning of the 1762-3 season and remained there for the rest of his career, with the exception of a single appearance at Covent Garden as Polonius on 21 April 1772. He was most renowned for his comic foreigners, an early success (in addition to Gomez) being Canton, the Swiss valet in 'The Clandestine Marriage', by George Colman the elder and David Garrick. 
In 1763 Baddeley eloped with Sophia Snow ['see 'Baddeley, Sophia (1744?-1786)]. He supported his wife's acting career, introducing her into the Drury Lane company in 1764, but although the couple were successful on the stage they rapidly became estranged. By 1770 Baddeley was insisting his wife stop living with a Dr Hayes; Sophia consented on the condition that she receive her own salary from Garrick rather than have it paid to her husband. Baddeley agreed on condition that Sophia pay some of his debts. Hope of a settlement was frustrated when Garrick's brother and assistant manager George declared that he did not believe reports of Sophia's misconduct and challenged Baddeley to a duel. Baddeley was probably no stranger to duelling -- Kelly recalled that he once challenged Foote to a duel while acting at the Haymarket -- and assented. The parties met in Hyde Park on the morning of 17 March 1770. Baddeley fired first and missed; he was saved after Sophia stood between the combatants and implored George Garrick to spare her husband's life. A separation was subsequently agreed. Baddeley later lived with Catherine Sherry, and at the time of his death with Catherine Strickland. 
Baddeley's separation did not harm his acting career. As well as continuing at Drury Lane he appeared at the Haymarket in some summer seasons and also experimented with other entertainments, such as 'The Modern Magic Lanthorn', which he presented at various locations in 1774 and 1775. On 8 May 1777 he made his first appearance as Moses in Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal', creating the role with which he would most be associated and which he perpetuated in at least two interludes written by himself. 
Although he suffered an apoplectic fit on 30 May 1780, which prevented him from playing Catchpenny in 'The Suicide' (by Colman the elder), Baddeley returned to the stage on 6 June and seems to have remained in good health until 19 November 1794, when he was taken ill while dressing for Moses in 'The School for Scandal' at Drury Lane. He died the next morning, 20 November, at his home, 10 New Store Street, Bedford Square, and was buried beside Catherine Sherry, as he requested, in St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 27 November. 
Baddeley was the last member of the Drury Lane company to wear the scarlet cloth and lace livery of a gentleman of the great chamber; ten actors of the company were meant to wear this livery as a badge of the company's royal protection. His commitment to Drury Lane and the theatrical profession had been demonstrated in 1774 by his place among the founders of the Society for the Relief of Indigent Persons Belonging to Drury Lane Theatre, usually called the 'theatrical fund'. His will, dated 23 April 1792 and proved on 18 December 1794, left his effects, his theatrical possessions, his 'Garrick's head' (probably his medallion as a member of the School of Garrick, a club established to honour Garrick's memory), and his houses at New Store Street and West Molesey, Surrey, to Catherine Strickland, 'Mrs Baddeley'. After her death the houses and $650 held in trust were to pass to the Drury Lane theatrical fund. The house at Molesey was to become Baddeley's Asylum, a home for theatrical folk who 'from accident or misfortune may have been prevented continuing their subscription long enough to entitle them to an annuity'. However, whether through legal problems regarding the bequest or insufficient money to support the property, the house was sold. 
Baddeley also created a small trust whereby every 5 January the Drury Lane company, still in their costumes, receive a glass of punch and slice of cake, known as the 'Baddeley Cake'. This tradition was still being maintained at the close of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 1017


Baddeley, Sophia (bap. 1744, d. 1786), actress and singer, was baptized on 12 October 1744 at St Mary-at-Lambeth, the daughter of Valentine Snow (died 1770) and his wife, Mary, and not in the parish of St Margaret, Westminster, in 1745, as stated in 'The Memoirs of Mrs Sophia Baddeley' (1787). Valentine Snow was London's leading trumpeter, for whom Handel wrote virtuoso parts in his oratorios, including 'The trumpet shall sound' in 'Messiah'. Sophia was taught music by her father, but finding his lessons 'a task of labour' (Steele, 1.3) she eloped with the actor Robert Baddeley (1733-1794). They married with Valentine Snow as a witness on 24 January 1764, and that September she made her debut at Drury Lane as Ophelia. Despite her beauty, her career developed slowly, and in January 1766 the prompter Hopkins found her performance of Ophelia 'very bad, all but the singing' (Stone, 2.1147). However, Thomas Snagg, who acted with her at Manchester in summer 1765, remembered her as the best and most beautiful Ophelia he ever saw, and David Garrick later described her in the role as an 'inspired idiot' (Wilson, 11). Following singing lessons from Thomas and Michael Arne and coaching from the actor Charles Holland she drew audiences to the theatre with her portrayal of tender heroines in comedies and musical pieces: 'One admired her person, another her voice, and a third her acting' ('Theatrical Biography', 24). When she played Fanny in a command performance of 'The Clandestine Marriage', by George Colman and David Garrick, the royal family so admired her that they commissioned a portrait of her in the role from Johan Zoffany. She sang at Vauxhall and Ranelagh gardens and at Stratford upon Avon in September 1769 for Garrick's Shakespeare jubilee celebrations. There Boswell admired 'that beautiful insinuating creature' (Brady and Pottle, 299) as she sang 'Sweet Willy O!', a song in Shakespeare's praise which she was to make extraordinarily popular in London. 
After about three years of marriage Sophia Baddeley became the mistress of a rich merchant and then of the actor Charles Holland (1733-1769) -- both affairs reputedly being condoned by her husband. Holland died of smallpox on 7 December 1769, and she was so distraught that she did not appear on stage for nearly a fortnight. George Garrick, Drury Lane's treasurer, agreed to pay her salary directly to her rather than to her husband, which led to a bloodless duel between the two men in March 1770. A legal separation was arranged, after which the Baddeleys spoke to each other only when in character on stage together. Dissolute aristocrats and wealthy men flocked around Mrs Baddeley, and success turned her head. She left Drury Lane at the beginning of the 1771-2 season after David Garrick refused her demands for special privileges and an increase of $3 a week and lived in great style under the protection of various lovers, of whom the chief appear to have been Captain John Hanger and Peniston Lamb, first Viscount Melbourne. When the Pantheon opened in 1772 the management attempted to exclude women of ill repute, but her aristocratic admirers insisted on her admission. She was generous, affectionate, and wildly extravagant. Her debts forced her to return to Drury Lane in 1774 and to act in Ireland and Liverpool in the summers of 1778 and 1779. 
Mrs Baddeley made her last appearance at Drury Lane on 1 December 1780 in the title role of Arne's opera 'Artaxerxes'. She continued to take lovers, progressively lower in the social scale, while her career and health degenerated. In winter and spring 1781-2 she sang at De Loutherbourg's scenic light-and-sound show, 'Eidophusikon', and wrote begging letters for help in supporting her young children, including a five-year-old son. To escape her creditors she fled from London and acted in Dublin (December 1782-January 1783) and then in Edinburgh. In May and June 1783 she appeared with Tate Wilkinson's company in York and Leeds, but at her York benefit she was 'so stupidly intoxicated with Laudanum, that it was with great difficulty she finished the performance' (Wilkinson, 2.151-2). She performed at Edinburgh in summer 1783 and from January 1785, but by April she was unable to continue. In her final illness she was kept from starvation by contributions from fellow performers and the Drury Lane Fund. She died at her lodgings in Shakespeare Square, Edinburgh, on 1 July 1786. 
The following year saw the publication of 'The Memoirs of Mrs Sophia Baddeley by Mrs Elizabeth Steele'. Steele (1741-1787), who was a school friend of Baddeley, had set up an establishment with the actress in 1769, the year in which her husband Hugh John Steele (died 1789), was confined to the king's bench prison for debt. The relationship between Elizabeth Steele and Sophia Baddeley seems to have been one of mutual support and exploitation. Steele claimed that she did not see Baddeley after 1780, but Tate Wilkinson recalled that 'a 'Mrs. Stell'' was with her at York in 1783 and implied that she was sponging on Baddeley (Wilkinson, 2.152). The 'Memoirs' were published 'for the Author' by John Trusler's Literary Press on or shortly before 2 June 1787, but Steele claimed that Trusler had not paid her the money due to her and advertised a self-published edition on 5 July. This led to an acrimonious dispute with Trusler over publication rights. Towards the end of October 1787 Steele was being sought on a charge of forging an acceptance to a bill of exchange, a capital offence, with a ten guinea reward offered. She died in wretched circumstances on 14 November at an inn in Bishopsgate Street, where she had been living under an assumed name. How far Steele was the actual writer of the 'Memoirs' is difficult to ascertain, but contemporary reviewers assumed that her role had been to provide material to Alexander Bicknell, who had acted as ghost writer for the 'Apology for the Life of George Anne Bellamy' (1785). More recently, William Jackson has been suggested as Steele's collaborator. 


@@@@@


doc= 1018


Baddeley, Thomas (1786/7-1823), Roman Catholic priest, is of unknown parentage. He was educated and later ordained at Oscott College. In 1815 he succeeded to the mission of Creswell, near Cheadle in Staffordshire, where the earl of Shrewsbury erected a Gothic chapel in the following year. Baddeley shortly afterwards established a seminary for ecclesiastical students. He was assiduous in the performance of his duties and, in 1819, Bishop Milner sent him an assistant. He was best known as the author of a controversial tract, 'A Sure Way to Find out the True Religion' (1822). This consisted of six dialogues, which argued trenchantly against various protestant tenets, including justification by faith alone and the primacy of scriptural authority. The tract provoked several replies, including James Richardson's 'Popery Unmasked' (1825). Even a reviewer in the 'Catholic Miscellany' felt that Baddeley's arguments on the protestant churches' lack of apostolicity and manner of biblical interpretation were imprudently extreme. However, the critic commended his attempt to render his style 'easy and familiar' ('Catholic Miscellany', 2/15, 118), an opinion which seems to be borne out by the longevity of the tract's appeal: it reached a seventh edition in 1847. Soon after its initial publication Baddeley died, apparently of overwork, on 18 February 1823, at Creswell, and was buried in the chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 1019


Badeley, Edward Lowth (1803/4-1868), ecclesiastical lawyer, was the younger son of John Badeley MD, of Leigh's Hall, near Chelmsford, and his wife, Charlotte Brackenbury. He matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, at the age of sixteen on 14 January 1820 and graduated BA in 1823, taking his MA degree in 1828. In January 1841 he was called to the bar as a member of the Inner Temple, and for a short time went on the home circuit, but his inclination was for the study of ecclesiastical law, and he was soon employed in solving its intricacies in the Tractarian cause. Like his friends and fellow lawyers J. R. Hope-Scott and Edward Bellasis he was a devoted follower of J. H. Newman, whom he first met in 1837. In 1848 he appeared before the queen's bench on behalf of the objectors to the appointment of R. D. Hampden as bishop of Hereford. A speech by him in support of the prohibition of marriage with a deceased wife's sister was submitted in 1849 by E. B. Pusey to the commission then sitting on the law of marriage. When Henry Phillpotts, bishop of Exeter, refused to admit the Revd G. C. Gorham to the vicarage of Brampford Speke on the ground of his unsound doctrine on the sacrament of baptism, Badeley argued the bishop's case before the judicial committee of the privy council in December 1849, and his speech on this occasion was published as a pamphlet. In the summer of 1850 Badeley and thirteen other churchmen, including H. E. Manning, signed a series of nine resolutions to the effect that the views of the privy council on baptism should be solemnly disowned by the national church. No such action was taken, and Badeley joined the Roman Catholic church in 1852. 
Badeley acted as assistant counsel to Newman at the Achilli trial in 1852 and thereafter frequently advised him on legal matters. It was on his advice that Newman rejected as inadequate the partial retractation of the charges levelled against him by Charles Kingsley and consequently embarked upon the composition of his 'Apologia'. In later life Badeley was frequently consulted on legal problems regarding the administration of ecclesiastical trusts and charities, and in 1865 he argued the legal validity of the seal of confession in the case of Constance Kent. He was deeply devoted to James Hope-Scott and his family, and his letters to Hope-Scott, written at intervals of two or three days over many years, offer a vivid commentary on contemporary legal and ecclesiastical matters. In January 1868 Newman gracefully dedicated to Badeley his 'Verses on Various Occasions' in gratitude for his staunch support at the time of the Achilli trial. Badeley died at his chambers at 3 Paper Buildings, the Inner Temple, on 29 March 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 1020


Badew, Richard (d. 1361), university principal and founder of University Hall, Cambridge, was born, towards the close of the thirteenth century, into an established knightly family which took its name from Great Baddow, near Chelmsford, Essex, where it had estates dispersed among several neighbouring villages. According to Philip Morant (died 1770), the Essex historian, Richard was probably the third son of Richard Badew and his wife, Isabel, daughter of Peter Marshall, although the matter is not conclusive. Nothing definite is known of his early education. In view of his subsequent career, however, it is to be presumed that he acquired his university education at Cambridge. By 1316 Badew had attained the title of 'magister', and he was described as a deputy chancellor of Cambridge University in August and October 1320. Between 1316 and 1321 Richard Badew, together with Saer Ros, parson of Magna Samford, was involved in a lawsuit against Joan Mareschall, a Cambridge prostitute, who, after an earlier acquittal, had accused Badew, Ros, and Robert Branketre of bringing a false charge against her at Cambridge. The case ended in 1321 in favour of the defendants when Joan was declared to have been excommunicated and was thereby ineligible to plead. In 1322 Badew was one of six masters who, supported by twenty-two clerks, accused the mayor of Cambridge, his bailiffs, and some 250 prominent townsmen of perpetrating serious assaults on the masters and scholars and on their hostels. 
In February 1325 Badew is recorded as chancellor of Cambridge University, and still held that office in 1326. During the latter year, while he was still chancellor, the university obtained a licence for the incorporation of University Hall, the predecessor of Clare College. University Hall had its origins in two houses acquired by the university in 1298, and it had probably been used as a hostel for graduates before 1326; it had attracted as benefactors Gilbert Rothbury (died 1321), a royal justice, John Salmon (died 1325), bishop of Norwich, and Thomas Cobham (died 1327), bishop of Worcester. Badew probably did not have the means to give much in the way of endowment to University Hall, but he was regarded as its founder and patron. However, a worsening in his financial situation was paralleled by a growing realization that the endowment for University Hall was wholly inadequate. Badew's small properties were dispersed over Essex, Huntingdonshire, and Cambridgeshire, and between 1325 and 1343 he engaged in costly lawsuits with his bailiffs and rectors for default of payments. Moreover, he fought extensive litigation with university colleagues -- in 1332 alone he was involved in eight separate lawsuits. Badew's straitened finances prevented him from aiding University Hall in a material sense; furthermore he was in dispute with at least two of its fellows, John Bokenham and William Thorpe. 
By 1336 University Hall was in a parlous state, and the master of the hall, William Thaxted, appealed for assistance to Lady Elizabeth de Clare, widow of John de Burgh and youngest daughter of Gilbert, earl of Gloucester (died 1295), and Joan of Acre, daughter of Edward I. Elizabeth responded by transferring the advowson of the church of Litlington, Cambridgeshire, to the master and fellows. But Badew was seemingly reluctant to relinquish his rights as founder and patron, and it was only by deeds of 6 April 1338 and 28 March 1346 that his complete extrication from University Hall was effected, leaving the way open to Lady Elizabeth to establish Clare College. In the meantime, as already indicated, the 1330s witnessed a series of disputes between the former chancellor Badew and members of the university. For instance, in 1331 the chancellor, John Langele, brought an action against Badew, demanding that he give an account of the money received by him when keeper of the university chest, and that he return nine charters that he had kept in his possession. The case led to a sentence of outlawry being passed on Badew in 1334. The sentence was revoked the following year, and the quarrelling parties seem to have reached a settlement in court. Badew held the rectorship of Braintree, Essex, from at least 1316 until 1333, and the rectorship of Somersham, Huntingdonshire, from 1335 until his death. He founded a chantry in Bicknacre Priory, Essex, in 1337, and a chantry in the church of Great Baddow, Essex, in 1361, the year of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 1021


Badger, George Percy (1815-1888), Arabic scholar and missionary, was born on 6 April 1815 at Chelmsford, Essex, the son of Edward Badger, army sergeant, and his wife, Ann (died 1844). He was brought up in Malta, where his father, a regimental schoolmaster, died during his childhood, leaving his education in a rudimentary state. His fluency in Maltese, however, laid the foundation of his later mastery of Arabic. From 1834 he worked successively for the Methodist, American protestant, and Anglican missions in Malta as teacher, Arabic typographer, and translator. At the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (ABCFM) press in Beirut in 1835-6 he improved his knowledge of Arabic. He travelled in Palestine, Syria, and Turkey. After returning to Malta he worked at the Church Missionary Society (CMS) press with Faris al-Shidyaq, preparing Arabic type founts and educational texts for publication; he also wrote an informative and popular guidebook, 'Description of Malta and Gozo' (1838), which passed into several editions, and more controversial works on press freedom and education in Malta. 
In 1840 Badger married Maria Christiana Wilcox ('c'.1812-1866), a missionary schoolmistress. In 1841 he went to London where, after a brief course of study at the CMS college in Islington, he was ordained priest in 1842, having abandoned evangelical protestantism in favour of Anglo-Catholicism under the influence of William Palmer. From 1842 to 1844 he served as an emissary of the bishop of London and the archbishop of Canterbury to the 'Nestorian' Church of the East in Kurdistan. He caused controversy there by his campaign against the American protestant mission. He was also accused of advising the patriarch to assert his independence from the local Kurdish ruler, advice which A. H. Layard and others blamed for the Kurdish massacre of Christians in 1843. It was partly to allay such criticism that Badger wrote 'The Nestorians and their Rituals' (1852), after a return visit to the area in 1850. This is both an informative travelogue and a sourcebook for 'Nestorian' history, doctrine, and ritual. Badger was not, however, a Syriac scholar, and in this and later publications (1869 and 1875) he relied on Arabic renderings. 
Between 1845 and 1862 Badger was a chaplain in the diocese of Bombay, serving mostly in Aden, where from 1854 he played a key role in British dealings with the local Arab tribes. There he made the acquaintance of Anna Harriette Edwards ['see 'Leonowens, Anna Harriette]. In 1856-7 he accompanied the campaign of General Sir James Outram in Persia, and in 1860 he served on the commission sent to Oman, which brought about the secession of Zanzibar. The Omani ruler Sayyid Thuwayni gave him the manuscript of Salil b. Raziq's chronicle, which he later translated and published as the 'History of the Imams and Seyyids of 'Oman' (1871); his notes in particular proved of lasting value. In 1861-2 he visited Egypt for Outram, and conducted a survey of military installations and of the Suez Canal works. 
Two more diplomatic missions took Badger to Zanzibar, in 1872 and 1878, the latter apparently as a double agent for Lord Salisbury, who, probably fearing that commercial involvement in east Africa would precipitate entanglement of the British government in the affairs of the mainland, sought to undermine the efforts of British entrepreneurs to win concessions. Otherwise he devoted the rest of his life (from 1862 to 1888) mainly to scholarship. His major work, the 'English-Arabic Lexicon' (1881), had been started with Faris al-Shidyaq in Malta some forty years earlier. It was reprinted in 1967 and is still sometimes used, despite its obsolescence. Other works include books and articles on Christianity and Islam (notably a defence of the Ottoman caliphate), a translation from Italian of Varthema's sixteenth-century 'Travels' (1863) with notes drawing on Arabic sources, and a catalogue of the Islamic manuscripts of Fredrick Ayrton, as well as several reports in connection with his diplomatic and military activities. Badger was awarded the degree of DCL by the archbishop of Canterbury in 1873. 
Badger's first wife died in 1866, and in 1871 he married Elizabeth Ann Talbot (1834-1897), his housekeeper. Her Somerset connections led to a friendship with the Allen family of West Bradley, and especially with Annie Allen (1858-1930s), forty-three years his junior, with whom he had an intense 'amitie amoureuse'. He bequeathed to her a fine oil portrait, revealing a striking, handsome, full-bearded, and full-bodied gentleman, wearing his 1857 war medal and others awarded by the king of Italy (1873) and the sultan of Zanzibar (1880). Badger died on 21 February 1888 at 21 Leamington Road Villas, Westbourne Park, London, his residence for nearly twenty years. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on the 25th. 


@@@@@


doc= 1022


Badham, Charles (1780-1845), physician and classical scholar, was born in London on 17 April 1780, the son of David Badham. After receiving a sound classical education he entered Edinburgh University, where he graduated MD in 1802 with a dissertation entitled 'De urina et calculis'. Badham was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1803. On 8 May 1806 he matriculated from Pembroke College, Oxford, as a gentleman commoner. He graduated BA (1811), MA (1812), BM, and DM (1817). In March 1818 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and in September of the same year he was admitted a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. He was censor of the college in 1821, and wrote the Harveian oration in 1840, delivered in his place by Sir Henry Halford. 
Badham began to practise in London in 1803, and before long he was appointed physician to the duke of Sussex. He also became physician to the Westminster General Dispensary, and in partnership with Dr Crichton of Clifford Street he delivered lectures in London on physic, chemistry, and the materia medica. 
After the peace of 1815 was agreed, Badham decided to visit the continent, where he spent two years travelling; he visited the less-known parts of the kingdom of Naples and passed to the Ionian Islands and then to Albania, where he was consulted by Ali Pasha. He then crossed Mount Pindus, went through Thessaly, and by Thermopylae to Athens, and then, by the isthmus and gulf of Corinth, to the Neapolitan coast. Badham's fondness for travel, in which he spent nearly half his time, and his taste for classical literature, was indulged at the expense of greater professional fame and fortune in London. Badham was content to earn his living as a physician to travellers on the continent. 
However, in 1808 Badham demonstrated his worth as a physician by the publication of 'Observations on the Inflammatory Affections of the Mucous Membrane of the Bronchiae', a second edition of which, corrected and enlarged, appeared in 1814 under the title of 'An Essay on Bronchitis, with a Supplement Containing Remarks on Simple Pulmonary Abscess'. In this treatise bronchitis, acute and chronic, was for the first time separated from peripneumony and pleurisy and the other conditions with which it had previously been confused, and its history, differential diagnosis, and treatment were established. 
In 1812 Badham published 'Specimens of a New Translation of Juvenal', which was followed by a version of 'The Satires of Juvenal, Translated into English Verse' in 1814. These works were very severely criticized in the 'Quarterly Review' by William Gifford, himself the author of a translation of the same satirist, who considered that in Badham's 'Specimens' 'in no instance has he entered the authors mind: he sees not his object; he feels not his energy; he comprehends not his dignified sarcasm' ('QR', 8.64). 
In 1827 the chair of the practice of physic at Glasgow became vacant, and Badham was recommended by his friend Sir Henry Halford to the duke of Montrose for the post. Although the Scottish physicians were not pleased at seeing an Englishman preferred before them, Badham's lectures justified his appointment. At Glasgow he devoted himself almost exclusively to the duties of his chair. The vacations he spent in travel, mostly in the south of Europe. Badham was a contributor to 'Blackwood's Magazine'. There appeared in April 1829 his 'Lines written at Warwick Castle', which had been printed with notes, for private circulation, in 1827. He also prepared 'An itinerary from Rome to Athens', but it was never published. 
Badham was twice married: in early life to the beautiful Margaret Campbell, first cousin of the poet Thomas Campbell. Their four sons included the naturalist Charles David Badham (1805-1857) and the classical scholar Charles Badham (1813-1884). There were at least two daughters. About 1833 Badham married, secondly, Caroline, eldest daughter of Admiral Sir Edward Foote (1767-1833). Badham died in London on 10 November 1845. 


@@@@@


doc= 1023


Badham, Charles (1813-1884), classical scholar and promoter of education, was born on 18 July 1813 at Ludlow, Shropshire, the fourth son of Charles Badham (1780-1845), regius professor of medicine in the University of Glasgow from 1827 and amateur classicist, and his first wife, Margaret Campbell, a relation of Lewis Campbell (1830-1908), Greek scholar and one of Badham's obituarists. 
Because of his father's long periods in Europe as physician to English travellers, and his distrust of British schooling, Badham was educated first under Pestalozzi at Yverdun, where he became Pestalozzi's favourite pupil and began his mastery of both classical and modern languages. He was next a pupil in England of Dr Charles Mayo, formerly chaplain at Yverdun, and then at Eton of the famous classical teacher E. C. Hawtrey. In 1831 he entered Wadham College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1837 but with only third-class honours because, the family believed, the teaching did not suit his independent temperament; he took his MA in 1839. 
The foundation and direction of Badham's Greek scholarship were formed during seven years of travel and study of manuscripts in European libraries, chiefly Italian; he began acquaintance with many scholars, especially the eminent Grecist G. C. Cobet of Leiden, who became a lifelong friend. In 1846 Badham returned to England and was incorporated MA at Peterhouse, Cambridge, where he went because of the Cambridge tradition of textual scholarship, and took holy orders (deacon 1846, priest 1848) to qualify himself for a college fellowship. He was always to be disappointed, however, and his marriage in January 1848 to Julia Matilda, daughter of John Smith of Dulwich Common, further prevented his election owing to the celibacy restrictions then in force. He failed also to gain preferment in the church, despite taking the degree of DD in 1852. His religious liberalism made him suspect, his friendship with F. D. Maurice in particular being held against him; his irascibility was also alleged. He achieved only headmasterships of minor schools, at Southampton (1851), Louth (1854), and Edgbaston proprietary school, Birmingham (1856), patronized largely by nonconformist parents. In Birmingham he won the esteem of the future Cardinal Newman. In 1857 after the death of his first wife, with whom he had a son and a daughter, Badham married his second wife, Georgiana Margaret Wilkinson, with whom he had four sons and four daughters. 
Recognition of Badham's scholarship came more quickly on the continent than at home and in 1860 Cobet secured him an honorary DLitt at Leiden. In 1863, however, he was appointed to the prestigious post of external examiner in classics to the University of London, where the lexicographer Dr W. Smith was among his colleagues. Smith liked him personally and perceived his quality, describing him as 'the greatest of our living scholars' in an unsigned article, 'Dr. Badham and the Dutch school of critics', in the 'Quarterly Review' (120, 1866, 324-55). In 1867 the University of Sydney, Australia, was looking deliberately in England for a new professor of classics and logic. Badham accepted appointment, with a panoply of testimonials from home and abroad (including Cobet, Newman, Smith, and W. H. Thompson, master of Trinity College, Cambridge; some are cited in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'). Others' lack of judgement or their hostility denied Badham a comparable post in England, a wrong memorably expressed by A. E. Housman: 'the one English scholar of the mid-century whose reputation crossed the Channel... but at home was excluded from academical preferment, set to teach boys at Birmingham, and finally transported to the Antipodes' ('Manilius', I, 1937, xlii). 
Badham's excellence as a Greek scholar lay in acute textual conjecture, in the highest tradition of philology. He set out his principles in the introductions to his editions of Euripides' 'Ion' and 'Helen' (both 1851) and in prefatory letters to those of Plato's 'Euthydemus and Laches' (1865), 'Symposium' (1866), and 'Philebus' (1878). He insisted on firmness towards texts demonstrably corrupt through scribal confusion, interference, or interpolation. Decrying vain conservatism, he advocated common sense as the foundation of critical method in general ('Criticism Applied to Shakespeare', 1866, a pamphlet). Thompson wrote of him as 'a better emender than Porson, but lacking Porson's caution' (Badham and Campbell, 97). The 'Prefatory letters' contain illustrative emendations to both Greek dramatists and prose writers. Badham also published long series of papers on the text of Herodotus, Thucydides, and Plato ('Laws') in the Dutch journal 'Mnemosyne', and on these and other authors in German periodicals, but very little in British journals. 
In Australia, Badham and his family found the climate congenial and he responded immediately to a society without inbred hierarchies and to a young university without religious conformism. At home, the routines of schoolteaching had frustrated him; but now he had an academic position, there was paradoxically much less time for scholarship. Instead, there was endless opportunity for Badham's ideals and energy as promoter of education, and for powers of organization, advocacy, and influence hardly needed or perceived in England. For the rest of his life he worked selflessly to enhance the university's standing and funding. He crusaded for those disadvantaged for education through distance or poverty, persuading the New South Wales state government to provide bursaries and himself teaching by correspondence, and not only in classics. He urged opportunities for women students, and greater tolerance for non-Anglicans. For many years dean of arts and then of the new faculty of laws, and also principal, his last success in the university was to establish evening lectures for working people. He engaged forcefully in reform of the curriculum, examinations, and inspection in schools, arguing from direct experience of visits throughout the state. He put special weight on English language and literature, and developed proposals to encourage pupils towards 'either arts or science' according to their natural inclination and talent -- ideas he had urged already in England ('Thoughts on Classical and Commercial Education', 1864). His overriding ideal was to give all citizens 'together with a consciousness of being educated... a conscience'. His work on the Birmingham library committee from 1860 to 1867 qualified him as trustee and tireless chairman of the Sydney Free Public Library from its foundation in 1870 until his death. In all these activities he canvassed and cajoled, often at parliamentary level, wrote countless reports and papers, led by example, and exploited the influence of his offices in university and city. During a visit to Australia, Anthony Trollope captured his public image as 'the prince of professors and greatest of Grecians' (A. Trollope, 'Australia', 1873, chap. 2). The mixture in him of volatile temper, wit, eloquence, artistic taste, prodigious memory, and formidable intellect made him an exceptional personality. University, city, and state honoured him with a banquet on his seventieth birthday in 1883. His death on 27 February 1884 was announced by extraordinary public gazette, and government offices in Sydney closed to permit attendance at his funeral. He is buried under a simple stone in St Thomas's churchyard, north Sydney. His public speeches were admired and posthumously published. 


@@@@@


doc= 1024


Badham, Charles David (1805-1857), naturalist, was born in London on 27 August 1805, the eldest son of Charles Badham (1780-1845), physician and classical scholar, and his first wife, Margaret Campbell, a first cousin of Thomas Campbell (1777-1844). He was educated at Westminster School, Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and Pembroke College, Oxford, from where he graduated MD in 1833. After taking his degree he was appointed a Radcliffe travelling fellow of the University of Oxford, residing for some time on the continent, especially at Rome and at Paris, where he practised medicine, having become a fellow of the College of Physicians in 1834. On returning to England in 1845 he was forced to give up medical practice for health reasons, choosing instead to enter the church. He was ordained deacon in Norwich on 31 January 1847 and priest the following year, becoming curate first of Wymondham and then of East Bergholt, Suffolk. He married Anna, daughter of James Deacon Hume (1774-1842), on 8 April 1847. 
As well as contributing to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' and 'Fraser's Magazine', Badham wrote several works of natural history, the first of which, 'The Question Concerning the Sensibility... of Insects' (1837), he published in Paris under the pseudonym Scarabaeus. His work on edible fungi, while being greeted with some derision, is said to have introduced many varieties of mushrooms to the English table. Perhaps his most famous work was 'Prose Halieutics, or, Ancient and Modern Fish Tattle' (1854), a compendium of fish lore and recipes. Badham died on 14 July 1857 in East Bergholt. 


@@@@@


doc= 1025


Badiley, Richard (c.1616-1657), naval officer, was formerly a mariner, shipowner, and merchant. Though nothing is known of his origins, he was probably related to the John and Thomas Badiley who figure in Trinity House lists of shipmasters in the 1620s. Bred to the sea, Badiley first occurs in the records as master's mate of the 'Increase', at Cadiz in 1636, aged twenty and of Wapping. He was master of the 'Advance' and 'Peregrine' (which he part owned) on trading voyages to the eastern Mediterranean in the period 1637-45, fighting actions against Turkish corsairs in 1637, 1640, and 1644; in one his forty-four seamen successfully repelled an attack by over 500 'Turks'. He also traded with North America. By 1648 he was a younger brother of Trinity House, and in 1654 he was described as a freeman of the Fishmongers' Company. He later combined his commercial interests with his naval commitments, despite the inevitable difficulties; he also leased several merchant ships to the state. Though he appears to have taken no direct part in the civil war, he had strong puritan leanings and associations. Following the naval revolt in May 1648 he was one of a small group of Trinity House masters who rallied to the earl of Warwick and parliament, signing a declaration early in July which supported plans to pursue the rebel fleet and insisted that any treaty with the king must guarantee freedom and religious reform. The signatories included several men who, like Badiley, were to play leading roles in the Commonwealth navy, among them Robert Moulton, William Goodsonn, and Christopher Myngs (who later served with him in the Mediterranean). In August Badiley published 'The Sea-Men Undeceived', warning that the mutiny posed a grave threat to London's trade, though its tone was conciliatory and he stressed that he had taken the covenant and was still hoping for a settlement with the king. 
Badiley was one of a number of experienced puritan shipmasters brought into the new republican navy to provide leadership. Early in 1649 he was appointed captain of the 'Happy Entrance', and commanded the fleet in the Downs, protecting merchant shipping in the channel. In June he won the council's permission to attack the 'Antelope', which had joined the royalists at Helvoetsluys in 1648, and a party under his lieutenant successfully fired the vessel. On 1 March 1650 he sailed for Portugal, as vice-admiral of Blake's expedition against Prince Rupert. At one point during the long blockade Badiley was dispatched with eight ships to revictual at Cadiz, and fought six French men-of-war he met at sea. He sailed for England on 14 October, convoying several rich Portuguese prizes. In the summer of 1651 he served as vice-admiral to Blake in the Downs, guarding against a possible attack to support the Scots' invasion. Following the Scots' defeat at Worcester, he assisted Blake with the reduction of Jersey before sailing in the 'Paragon' in December, commanding a convoy to the straits, calling at Genoa, Leghorn, Zante, and Smyrna. When war broke out with the Dutch in 1652 he was still in the Mediterranean, along with another squadron under Henry Appleton, then at Leghorn. Badiley, convoying merchantmen from the Levant, hoped to be able to join forces before meeting the Dutch, but Appleton ignored an urgent plea for support and remained at Leghorn, leaving him with only four vessels to face a much larger Dutch force under Van Galen near Monte Cristo (south of Elba) on 27 August 1652. In a fierce action the next day, fought at close range and mainly hand-to-hand, Badiley's 'Paragon' was badly damaged and a third of her crew killed or injured, while the 'Phoenix' was captured. He retreated next day into Porto Longone (Elba), whose Spanish governor forbade the Dutch to attack him, and set about repairing his battered ships. He wrote to England begging for help and, rather to his embarrassment, his wife also lobbied in London for reinforcements to be sent. Plans for a relief force had to be abandoned following Blake's defeat by the Dutch on 30 November, however, and the two squadrons were left to their fate. Early in November Badiley received overall command of the English forces in the region, and promptly crossed to the mainland to assess the position at Leghorn. He had a poor opinion of Appleton's competence and commitment, and found morale and discipline low. Using his new authority, he pressed a number of merchant ships at Leghorn into the state's service, despite the reluctance of their masters, and arranged for others to be hired at Venice. He also set out to restore national honour by backing Captain Owen Cox's plan to recapture the 'Phoenix', which the Dutch were refitting there, overriding Appleton's strong opposition. Appleton had earlier tried to dismiss Cox, but Badiley reversed his order and on 20 November Cox carried out a successful night-time raid to board and seize the ship. This and other incidents led the grand duke of Tuscany on 18 February 1653 to order the English to leave the port, a decision also influenced by news of Blake's defeat, which led him to suppose that the Dutch would win the war. Badiley now attempted to rescue the English ships at Leghorn. His plan was to approach to lure out the Dutch warships, whereupon Appleton's ships would follow and the two small English squadrons would engage the Dutch fleet from both directions. The plan, sound in principle, ended in disaster. As the Dutch remained at anchor, Badiley ordered Appleton to slip out to sea during the night but, locked in disputes with his insubordinate captains, Appleton missed his chance. When the Dutch did sail out to confront Badiley, early next morning (4 March), Appleton followed so closely that they were able to turn back and destroy almost his entire force before Badiley was near enough to help. There was no point in Badiley, with a much smaller force and disaffected seamen, engaging the enemy alone, and he took his ships home to England, arriving in May. Appleton, freed by the Dutch, returned home overland and blamed Badiley for the disaster, accusing him of deliberately abandoning the Leghorn squadron to destruction and alleging malice, treachery, and cowardice. Rumours circulated that Badiley would be tried and hanged. In self-defence he published two vigorous pamphlets justifying his actions and making counter-accusations against Appleton and his associates. The matter was referred to a lengthy parliamentary inquiry, and ended with Badiley's total vindication. While Appleton was never employed again, Badiley was promoted to be rear-admiral of the fleet (7 December), and commanded the 'Vanguard' for the last months of the war. 
In October 1654 Badiley sailed in the 'Andrew' as vice-admiral to Blake on his expedition to the Mediterranean, and took part in the hazardous attack on Porto Farino near Tunis in April 1655. He returned to England in the autumn. On 14 February 1656 he was appointed captain of the 'Resolution' and vice-admiral commanding the fleet in the Downs, in the wake of Lawson's sudden resignation. Rumours that Badiley, too, was disaffected proved groundless and, despite his enemies' attempt to have him arrested for debt, he sailed with Blake's fleet to Spain on 15 March. After a largely fruitless summer blockading the Spanish coast, he sailed for England with Montagu late in September, bringing home the treasure captured by Stayner from the Plate ships. This was his last service at sea, though he was still consulted by the admiralty commissioners and continued his commercial activities. 
Little is known of Badiley's private life. His first wife, Rebecca, died in 1641; his second wife corresponded with him during his enforced stay in Elba in 1652-3, and gave early warning of Appleton's campaign against him. One of Badiley's sisters was married to a business partner, the shipowner and master John Bennet, and another to Thomas Biggs, a naval surgeon. Badiley's writings reveal a strong puritan faith, and his first pamphlet mentions substantial religious compositions which remained unpublished. In 1653 he joined the gathered congregation, which contained several senior naval officers, at Stepney. In April 1657 he was living at Milk Yard, Wapping, in poor health, and he died there 'of an ulcer' on 7 or 11 August. He was buried on 14 August at St John-at-Wapping. Charles Longland, English agent at Leghorn and an old acquaintance, had earlier paid tribute to 'that honest man Capt. Badiley, who, like the silkworm, spun out his own bowels with the many cares and troubles that lay upon him day and night, yet ran through all with alacrity' ('CSP dom.', '1653-4', 214). 
Captain William Badiley, mariner, shipowner, and naval administrator, was probably Richard's elder brother. A younger brother of Trinity House by 1629, when he was trading with the Levant, he freighted ships for the Mediterranean and East Indies for the East India Company in the 1640s, and in 1649 was appointed one of the regulators to purge Trinity House and the navy. In 1652 he commanded the 'Dolphin', fighting courageously with Blake in two actions against the Dutch. He was appointed master attendant at Portsmouth in December 1653, in charge of the dockyard, and held the same position at Woolwich and Deptford from 1654 until his death in 1666, serving with great efficiency. He was the only Commonwealth elder brother of Trinity House to be reappointed at the Restoration. 


@@@@@


doc= 1026


Baffin, William (1584?-1621), Arctic explorer, was probably born in London, possibly in 1584. Neither his parents' names nor details of his early life are known. He certainly married, and may have been the William Baffin who married Susan Hodges at St Bride's, Fleet Street, on 24 January 1607. In 1612 he was chief pilot aboard the 'Patience', which led the navigator James Hall's fourth expedition to Greenland and sailed from Hull, accompanied by James Barker on the 'Heartsease', on 22 April. The voyage was largely financed by London merchants, who, if he was indeed a London man, may have insisted on Baffin's participation. 
Baffin's narrative of the journey, first published in 1616 as 'A Journall of the Voyage Made to Greenland', described how the expedition reached 67 degree N on Greenland's west coast before turning south to trade with the indigenous inhabitants. On 9 July, at lat. 65 degree 20' N in Cockin Sound, Baffin made the first recorded observation of a measurement of longitude by an English navigator, although he noted that the complicated calculations had been made by 'some of the better sort' of mariners. He estimated his longitude using calculations derived from the sun's height when the moon reached a meridian line he had established. The calculation of 60 degree 30' was significantly further west than the real position of 52 degree 50', an error that can be attributed to the fact that the complex motions of the moon were not understood until detailed lunar tables became available two hundred years later. Baffin also described the death of Hall, mortally wounded by an arrow in an apparently unprovoked attack when trading for furs on 22 July. Despite the incident the expedition continued its search for a mine known from Danish sources, but found its minerals of no value. The expedition turned for home on 26 July when they also realized the indigenous inhabitants would not trade, and reached Hull on 17 September. Baffin's narrative provided a useful description of the fauna and flora of the area, the various seasonal habitations and boats, as well as the religious beliefs and funerary practices of the inhabitants. He was especially impressed with their small, one-person boats, covered with watertight sealskin and powered by a single paddle, which he described as having 'incredible speed' and great manoeuvrability. 
In 1613 Baffin served with the Muscovy Company in their whaling expedition to the islands now known as Spitsbergen, employed in the 'Tiger' as chief pilot to Captain Benjamin Joseph's fleet of seven vessels. The fleet left London on 30 May and found over a score of vessels from the chief ports of western Europe in the area. They managed to assert their company's charter rights over the foreign vessels and planted crosses asserting King James's claim to the islands. Baffin pioneered observations to measure the sun's refraction at high latitudes, calculating a variation of 26' at 79 degree N. He also showed that the common sailing compass produced a critical error in latitude measurement of 51/2 degree E. Hence it is clear that his work significantly improved the latitude calculations of mariners, especially in high latitudes. Between 16 April and 4 October 1614 Baffin was part of Joseph's next venture to the area in the 'Tomasine', which led a fleet of eleven ships. He set out with two small boats from the main expedition to explore and map a great deal of the previously unknown Spitsbergen coast. 
However, it was the next two Arctic expeditions that established Baffin's real claim to distinction. On 15 March 1615 he sailed as pilot of the 'Discovery', commanded by Robert Bylot, the fourth venture by the Northwest Company of London to find the elusive passage to the south seas, following the previous expeditions of Hudson, Button, and Gibbons. With a small crew of sixteen men and two boys they left London on 16 April, reached Cape Farewell on 6 May, and crossed to Resolution Island at the entrance to Hudson Strait on 17 May. During this part of the journey Baffin described ice islands 240 feet high, speculating that they were seven times as deep; he was the first to record such measurements in feet rather than nautical terms. His narrative indicated he wanted to search for the elusive passage to the north, but Bylot insisted they try to penetrate the strait, although weather conditions meant they were unsuccessful for two weeks. On 8 June they landed on and named the Savage Islands, where they found evidence of a recently abandoned native camp, from which they took the skins they found, leaving knives and iron objects in return. Baffin also described finding a bag of carvings depicting human forms, including one of a woman with a child on her back, one of the first recorded examples of aboriginal art. Resuming their journey, they reached the vicinity of Salisbury Island by 22 June. Baffin noted that he had previously made a measurement of longitude at sea on 26 April using occultation of stars by the moon -- the first recorded mention of such a measurement at sea by an English navigator. His new attempt near Salisbury Island used lunar observation and estimated the longitude to be 74 degree 5' W. (In 1821 William Edward Parry recalculated Baffin's measurement in the same place and found it to be less than a degree to the west.) By 8 July the expedition had penetrated into Foxe Channel, naming Mill Island on the way. Ice conditions hindered progress beyond 65 degree 26' N, and their discovery that the flood tide came from the south-east convinced them there was no passage. On 13 July they turned for home, and reached Plymouth on 8 September. Baffin's narrative clearly indicates that he did not believe there was a passage to the south seas in this vicinity, given the depth of tide and ice conditions, but he covered himself by suggesting that if one existed it could be only a small strait or creek. This was borne out by Parry's 1821 discovery of the Fury and Hecla Strait separating Melville peninsula from the land that Baffin had glimpsed, which Parry realized was an island and named in Baffin's honour. Baffin's journal and chart for this voyage survive (BL, MS 12206) and were first published by Thomas Rundall in 1849. It shows the exemplary nature of his daily recording system; longitude estimates were routinely made, as well as those for latitude, wind direction, and high tides, together with brief comments on the events of the day. Baffin also pioneered the modern notation of compass needle variation by recording the northern deflection, rather than the more typical use of the southern end by his contemporaries. 
The most significant of Baffin's exploits was in 1616, again sailing under the command of Bylot in search of the north-west passage, when he succeeded in charting the basic outline of the area now known as Baffin Sea. They left Gravesend on 26 March, but were forced to shelter in ports in south-west England before sailing directly to the west coast of Greenland. Since their specific instructions were to try to reach 80 degree N before turning west and south-west to Japan, they coasted north past the area known as Hope Sanderson, the furthest point north that John Davis had reached on his third voyage in 1587. By 4 June they were at 74 degree 4', sailing with difficulty in a narrow channel only 7 or 8 leagues wide between the pack ice and the shore. On 1 July, at 75 degree 40' N, they found deep and open sea, leading to renewed hope that they would find a passage to the south seas since the land was trending north-west. The next day they discovered and named a large sound after Wolstenholme, one of their major sponsors. By 5 July they were confronted by a great bank of ice and land to the west but had found two large inlets to the east and north. The large number of whales in the area led them to name the first Whale Sound and the other Thomas Smith Sound, after another company sponsor. This latter inlet was described as trending north beyond 78 degree. Baffin's measurements led him to claim that the area had the greatest compass variation ever known, which he measured at 56 degree W, and which cast doubt upon Gilbert's principle that compass variations varied directly with the size of neighbouring lands. Forced south and west by the ice, they subsequently found two major west trending passages, Jones Sound on 10 July and later Lancaster Sound on 12 July at 74 degree 20' N (again named after principal company shareholders), but were unable to penetrate them because of ice conditions. It is ironic that outside Lancaster Sound Baffin wrote 'here our hope of passage began to be lesse'. This sound would eventually prove to be the much sought-after passage through the Arctic islands in the nineteenth century. On 27 June at 65 degree 40' N they turned east to Cockin Sound in Greenland in search of fresh provisions for their sick crew members. They recovered after eating scurvy grass, so on 6 August sailed for home, and arrived in Dover on 30 August. Baffin concluded that the area north of Davis Strait was 'no other than a great bay.... I would hardly have believed to the contrary until mine eyes became witnesse of that I desired not to have found'. But the expedition was not a complete loss. Baffin advised the company that the northern part of the bay contained considerable whale and seal resources, but warned that ships could normally get into the area only in early July and would be able to stay for only about a month. He also provided convincing explanations for the origin of icebergs in the area. 
Purchas's failure to include Baffin's map with the narrative of the 1616 expedition in his voluminous 1626 survey of exploration was made on grounds of cost and his belief that Baffin's work had shown there was no route to the Pacific via this route. Baffin's journal and maps were subsequently lost, so the utility of his exploratory work was often questioned until expeditions by Sir John Ross in 1818 and Parry in 1821-3 showed the accuracy of Baffin's work and immortalized his exploits by naming Baffin Island and bay after him. However, only Purchas suggested that Baffin 'would, if he might get employment, search the passage from Japan, by the coast of Asia' (Purchas, 411). If this was a true report of Baffin's opinion, then it was probably influenced by the disappointment of his own Arctic voyages and the standard view that Portuguese explorers had sailed eastwards from the Pacific through the passage. Whatever the truth of this opinion, it is clear that in 1617 Baffin sailed as master's mate on the 'Anne Royal', captained by Andrew Shilling, part of Martin Pring's East India Company fleet to India and Japan, which left Gravesend on 4 February and reached Surat in September. Some of the ships under Shilling's command were directed to the Red Sea, and reached Mocha on 13 April 1618. During the next four months Baffin surveyed and charted the area with his usual diligence and accuracy, following this up with similar activities during a visit to the Persian Gulf. He received a gratuity from the company for his comprehensive charts. 
Baffin again sailed under Shilling's command for India in February 1620, with a fleet of four new ships led by the 'London'. On hearing that Portuguese and Dutch ships had made common cause in the Persian Gulf to keep out British ships, they sailed to the area and attacked their rivals on 16 December. After two engagements the English drove off their rivals but Shilling had been mortally wounded in the engagement and command passed to Captain Blyth, who returned to Surat. In 1621 English officials in India were persuaded to help the shah of Persia's forces drive the Portuguese out of the historic trading entrepot of Hormoz. The English began with an attack on the neighbouring strategic castle and Isle of Qeshm. Baffin was mortally wounded by a cannon ball on 23 January as he ventured too close to the castle walls when measuring their height to help range the English siege guns. The English attack was successful and the island was captured on 1 February but the castle at Hormoz did not fall until 23 April. Baffin's childless widow pressed a claim for compensation from the East India Company for her husband's work and untimely death and was finally awarded $500 in 1628. Baffin's recorded career may have been short, but his work provided very important additions to the science of navigation and to knowledge of Arctic regions. 


@@@@@


doc= 1027


Bagard, Thomas (d. 1544), civil lawyer and divine, was born in the diocese of Hereford, of unknown parentage. He was a scholar in civil law by March 1515 at Oxford University and was a member of New Inn. He was connected with the diocese of Worcester as early as 1520, having come to the attention of William More, prior of Worcester -- Bagard received a small gift of 12died from More at about this time. He had received the degree of BCL by 29 April 1521 and of DCL by 22 July 1528. He was nominated by Cardinal Thomas Wolsey as one of the first eighteen canons of the newly founded Cardinal College on 19 October 1526; Wolsey chose to call the fellows and scholars of the college 'canons' in order to maintain continuity with the suppressed Frideswide Priory. Bagard was still in this position in 1530. 
Bagard was admitted to Doctors' Commons on 7 October 1528, having practised as a proctor in the consistory court of Worcester since 1527. He served as vicar-general to Geronimo de' Ghinucci, bishop of Worcester, from 1532, retaining the post until at least 1537. His ecclesiastical career was assisted by the patronage of de' Ghinucci, Edmund Bonner, and, especially, Sir Thomas Cromwell, principal secretary and vicegerent in spirituals. He was ordained by 1519, receiving the penny given to all who were in holy orders on 6 February. He had several benefices: he was rector of the free chapel of Parke, Herefordshire, from 1529 to 1538; vicar of Penbryn, Cardiganshire, in 1535; rector of Duntisbourne Abbots, Gloucestershire, from 1536; rector of Alvechurch, Worcestershire, from 1541; and rector of Rupple, Worcestershire, until 1542. He was rector of the parish church of Bredon, Worcestershire, from 1542 until his death. Bagard became chancellor of the diocese of Worcester through the intercession of the conservative Bonner and of Cromwell in 1532. Bagard seems to have held the position until at least 1535. He was replaced as chancellor by Dr Matthew Parker, who was appointed by the new bishop, Hugh Latimer. This may indicate Bagard's conservative religious views. With his appointment as canon and first prebendary of Worcester on 24 January 1542, he was one of the first to be endowed from the confiscated property of the dissolved priory of Worcester. Therefore, despite the dissolution of the monasteries he continued to prosper. 
Whether or not Bagard was on good terms with Latimer may depend on how the latter reacted when the former allowed an inhibition (a disqualification from exercising any function of one's order) to be issued against the bishop in 1533. There may have been tension between them over religion. Bagard was sufficiently concerned about the matter to write to Cromwell, reminding him that he had made this decision only after seeking the vicegerent's counsel and with his express backing. This and other surviving letters indicate Bagard was careful to keep his relationship with Cromwell in good order at all times. Bonner attempted to assist him in this matter as well. However, in 1534 Cromwell suspected Bagard of disloyalty to the cause of the Reformation, prompting the latter to reply to the accusation in a long letter asserting his anxiety to serve Henry VIII. His final years were less active, although he continued to participate in the administration of the diocese. He died in 1544. 


@@@@@


doc= 1028


Bage, Robert (1728?-1801), businessman and novelist, was born at Darley, near Derby, on 29 February 1728, according to his lifelong friend William Hutton (W. Hutton, 478), although Bage wrote to Hutton on 11 March 1800 declaring, 'This day I am 70' (Bage correspondence, Birmingham Public Library). Bage's mother was the first among four wives of George (?) Bage, a paper maker, of Darley. She died soon after his birth and his father moved to Derby, where Bage was educated at a common school. Hutton recalled that by age seven Bage made 'such progress in letters, that he was the wonder of the neighbourhood', having mastered both Latin and the manual exercise, or drill in handling a musket (W. Hutton, 478). The later supposition that Bage was raised as a Quaker has been discredited (Sutherland, 32-3). 
Bage's father trained him in paper making and at twenty-three, on 3 August 1751 at All Saints Church, Mackworth in Derby, Bage married Elizabeth Woolley. She was later described as 'a young woman who possessed beauty, good sense, good temper, and money', the last of which enabled him to enter business as a paper and cardboard manufacturer, at Elford, near Tamworth (C. Hutton, 'Memoir', xvii). There were three sons of the marriage: Charles Woolley Bage (1751-1822), the eldest, a wine merchant and land surveyor at Shrewsbury, went into linen manufacture and factory construction, and died in 1822 aged seventy; a second son died in young manhood; Edward was an apothecary at Tamworth. Bage continued his self-education, setting aside three hours each afternoon for reading. In his thirties he taught himself French and Italian and travelled to Birmingham once a week to learn mathematics, which he picked up so quickly that within a month he was teaching his teacher. He later told William Godwin that he had relished poetry as a youth, but his study of mathematics, pursued for twelve years, supervened. Bage rarely travelled more than 50 miles from home, and never spent more than a week in London ('Godwin and Mary', 101, 102; Paul, 1.262-3). According to Hutton, 'His person was of a smallish size, about five feet three inches, and of a spare habit, not robust, but his constitution good' (W. Hutton, 478-80). 
In 1756 Bage proposed to the businessman William Hutton that he sell paper for him by wholesale purchase or on consignment. With this 'small hint' Hutton opened the 'Paper Warehouse' at Birmingham and subsequently 'acquired an ample fortune' (C. Hutton, 'Life', 97). The arrangement brought Bage about $500 a year for the rest of his life. Others asked Bage to supply them but he declined. Hutton indicated what kinds and quantities of paper and board he anticipated selling, and Bage manufactured accordingly. Bage's brother also supplied Hutton; perhaps this was Joseph Bage, a paper maker at Bridge, Chester, in the 1780s. Paper and board making were crafts, supply of raw materials was uncertain and irregular, and product quality could be uneven, causing occasional friendly disputes between Hutton and Bage. Bage obtained rags for paper from London and Germany. Later he had some interest in another paper factory at Shugborough, which also supplied Hutton. 
Bage paid bills when tendered, and expected others to do likewise. In his witty, teasing notes to Hutton, written on invoices, he complained about Hutton's frequent requests for discounts, the inconsistency of excise tax on paper, the cost of rags, wet weather slowing paper's drying, his workmen's demands for higher wages, and the state of the country. He wrote to Hutton, 'God bless the king and thee But I wish you would both suck less vigorously' (Bage correspondence, Birmingham Public Library); none the less he usually complied with Hutton's requests and his workmen's and the excise officer's demands. 
Bage had other business interests. In 1765 he engaged in a large ironworks with three partners, one of whom was Erasmus Darwin, a leading figure of the midlands Enlightenment and later described by his wife as Bage's 'very particular friend' ('Godwin and Mary', 99). When the partnership was dissolved after fourteen years, Bage lost around $1500. According to Hutton, 'Fearing the distress of mind would overcome him, he took up the pen to turn the stream of sorrow into that of amusement; a scheme worthy a philosopher' (W. Hutton, 479). He later told William Godwin that he turned to novels 'for want of books to assist him in any other literary undertaking' ('Godwin and Mary', 101). He published four novels, anonymously, from 1782 to 1788: 'Mount Henneth' (2 vols., 1782; see Steeves, 27), 'Barham Downs' (2 vols., 1784), 'The Fair Syrian' (1787), and 'James Wallace' (3 vols., 1788); two more novels followed in the 1790s. Perhaps thanks to his German business contacts, all but 'James Wallace' were translated into German, and 'Barham Downs' and 'The Fair Syrian' were translated into French (Moran, 173-8). 
Bage is known to have subscribed to two works, 'The Life of Miss Fanny Brown, a Clergyman's Daughter' (1760), a novel by John Alcock, music director at Lichfield Cathedral from 1749 to 1760 and organist at Tamworth parish church, and 'An Inquiry into the Original State and Formation of the Earth' (1778) by John Whitehurst, a friend since youth and associate of the Derby Philosophical Society, to which Bage belonged. The society was founded in 1784 by Erasmus Darwin; it had links to the Lunar Society of Birmingham and the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, to the continental and Scottish Enlightenments, and to the English dissenting academies. It met regularly and united scientific research with commercial application. Some members' scientific interests appear in Bage's novels; more important, Bage fictionalizes ideas and values promoted by the society's members and others like them throughout Britain and Europe. 
In order to do so, Bage uses plots of romantic comedy, set in contemporary middle-class and gentry society, in which a younger generation imbued with idealism, toleration, egalitarianism, entrepreneurship, and reform replaces an older generation still relying on hierarchy, legalism, and inherited authority. Characters are designed to individualize these diverse values and practices; they are also designed for social comprehensiveness, to represent various kinds of social and cultural difference found throughout Britain and its empire, from Indians to Scots, from peasants to aristocrats, emphasizing issues of class, gender, and ethnicity. In order to give voice to such characters and issues, Bage preferred the epistolary form in his earlier novels; in his later ones he includes many letters, and in all his works he includes numerous dialogues, debates, and inset biographies and autobiographies. There is much satire on the established order, for Bage addresses divisive issues from the American War of Independence through the Irish crisis of the 1780s to the French Revolution debate in the 1790s. The novels' import is that the values promoted in their pages can address and resolve these issues, working at the domestic and local level, through civil society rather than the state and its institutions, from the church through the legal system to armed force. 
Bage maintained these politics through the local, national, and international conflicts of his time. On 1 August 1787, after another abrasive encounter with state officers, he wrote ruefully to Hutton, 'Oh how I wish thou wouldst bend all thy powers to write a history of Excise... with cases... Shewing the injustice the inequality of Clauses in acts... and the eternal direction every new one makes toward the oppression of the subject... It might be the most useful book extant. (Bage correspondence, Birmingham Public Library)' On 18 March 1789 Bage wrote teasing Hutton about the latter's news that he was writing a critique of the English judicial system, then held up by establishment supporters as the embodiment of British liberty: 'And hast thou dared to lift thy sacrilegious pen against Juries? Against the English palladium? Tremble then. I will hold thee up to public justice, in my next work. Send me thy book though when printed; that I may set about abusing it with a decent knowledge of its contents[.] I [am] not sure that every critic takes such pains. (ibid.)' A month later Bage wrote again, 'I received thy pamphlet; and am not certain whether I have not read it with more pleasure than any of thy former works. It is lively and the reasoning just. Only remember it is sometimes ag[st] the institution itself of Juries & County Courts that you have directed y[r] satire... which I think ought to be confined to the abuses of them. (ibid.)' A few months later, the outbreak of the French Revolution gave new hope for change in Britain to people like Bage and Hutton, though different degrees of enthusiasm for the revolution divided the Derby Philosophical Society and similar groups elsewhere. In July 1791 a mob supporting 'church and king' attacked the homes of leading religious dissenters, including Joseph Priestley and Hutton. Hutton and his family fled, penniless, but on identifying themselves at an inn as friends of Bage they received instant credit (W. Hutton, 479). Outraged at the mob violence, Bage wrote to his friend: 'Since the riots, in every company I have had the misfortune to go into, my ears have been insulted with the bigotry of 50 years [back]..., with, damn the presbyterians... [with] church and king [huzza]... and with true passive obedience & nonresistance... and may my house be burnt too, if I am not become as sick of my species and as desirous of keeping out of the way, as ever was true hermit? (Bage correspondence, Birmingham Public Library)' Bage supported Hutton's claims for compensation, and later kept him going when Hutton's business was undermined by the wartime economy, social instability, and possibly official persecution and unofficial boycott. 
Bage himself soon contributed to the public debate on the revolution, advancing his earlier principles of toleration, egalitarianism, and reform in a new novel, 'Man as he is' (4 vols., 1792). It narrates the rescue of a well-meaning young baronet from fashionable aristocratic vices by his love for a virtuous and independent woman, good friends, and his encounters in France with leaders of the earlier, moderate phase of the revolution. Perhaps prudentially, Bage did not identify himself on the title-page, even obliquely, as the author, and told Hutton, 'I have taken great pains, and sunk money to [William] Lane in the price, not to be known any more as a novel writer... The title of my last I even concealed from my sons'. Characteristically, he added, 'if thou hearest any thing said of it in Birm[m]... if good let me know... if bad... keep it to thyself. I can digest flattery but hate correction' (Bage correspondence, Birmingham Public Library). 
In 1792 Bage moved to Tamworth after the death of his younger son left him 'solitary & melancholy', but walked to Elford three times a week ('Godwin and Mary', 100). He was increasingly irritated by government suppression and local loyalist harassment of dissidents, writing to Hutton on 24 January 1793, 'No man's ear is open to anything but Church & king... and Damn the french... and damn the presbyterians. I abstain from all society, because respect for my moral principles is scarce sufficient to preserve me from insult on account of my political.' Bage himself may have encountered harassment by this time. In 1795 the excise unjustly seized a quantity of paper; Bage went to court and won, but heard the paper was to be reseized; similar measures were used by the government at that time to persecute or even bankrupt other dissidents. Nevertheless, Bage again had recourse to comic fiction to address the times, with 'Hermsprong; or, Man as he is not' (1796), which directly attacks intolerance towards new ideas and proposals for sweeping reform. Though his anti-establishment satire is even sharper here than hitherto, the novel was well received and preferred to his earlier work by several generations of readers and critics. It was his last novel. 
William Godwin sought Bage out in June 1797 and heard him described as 'a short man, with white hair, snuff-coloured clothes, and a walking stick'. Godwin 'spent a most delightful day' with Bage and found him to be a materialist whose favourite book was Holbach's 'Systeme de la nature', and who was 'uncommonly cheerful & placid, simple in his manners, & youthful in all his carriage' ('Godwin and Mary', 100, 101). In March 1799 Bage thanked William Hayley for a copy of a new edition of the latter's 'The Triumphs of Temper'; Bage heard through a friend that Hayley had read part of 'The Fair Syrian' to his sister, drawing tears from her (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. c. 19, fol. 38). Bage managed his paper business almost until his death on 1 September 1801. Four months later William Hutton eulogized him in the liberal 'Monthly Magazine': 'Trade, which is thought to corrupt the mind, made no such impression upon his. Though he laid no stress upon Revelation, his dealings were stamped with rectitude; he remarked to me, 'Fraud is beneath a man.' He had no other love for money than to use it, or he might have left a much larger property than he did. (W. Hutton, 478)' Hutton praised Bage's 'rich 'talents' and rare endowments', but even more the fact that 'he was mild in the extreme; an enemy to no man, and, I believe, never had one himself'. 'His humanity will appear from his treatment of his servants, and even his horses, who all loved him, and whom he kept to old age.' Bage's novels were as well liked as he was; reviewers welcomed them from the first and continued to do so, the Godwin circle admired them, and despite increasing political intolerance in the 1790s only the rabid 'Anti-Jacobin Review' (5, February 1800, 152) damned them. Barbauld's 'British Novelists' included Bage (vol. 48, 1810, 1820), as did Scott's 'Ballantyne's Novelist's Library' (vol. 9, 1824). Bage's novels were generally recognized as loose in construction but lively and engaging in style and narration and philosophical and moral in outlook, combining elements of Fielding, Smollett, Sterne, Voltaire, Le Sage, and Marivaux. Interest in his novels dwindled after the 1820s, to revive in the later twentieth century with the renewed attention to political and ideological aspects of literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 1029


Bagehot, Walter (1826-1877), political commentator, economist, and journalist, was born on 3 February 1826 at Langport, Somerset, the second son of Thomas Watson Bagehot (1795-1881), banker, and Edith Stuckey (1786-1870), a niece of Samuel Stuckey, founder in 1772 of Stuckey's Bank, which issued its own banknotes and enjoyed considerable prominence and respect in the west country. The first born, Watson Bagehot, died at age three; Walter's mother, by an earlier marriage to Joseph Estlin of Bristol, had three sons, of whom two had died and the third was mentally handicapped. 
From an early age Bagehot's attention was directed to the world beyond Langport. His uncle, Vincent Stuckey ['see under 'Stuckey family], had ties to London politics, was acquainted with the politicians William Huskisson and Lord Althorp, and testified before parliamentary committees. Walter also was made acquainted with the republic of letters by his bookish father, who maintained a well-stocked and up-to-date library of French as well as English works on literature, philosophy, and history. He was thus exposed to the two kinds of activity that would occupy him during adult life -- practical politics, including the making of economic policy, and reflective intellectual inquiry, especially about literature and history. 
Bagehot's family life was distinguished by a warm, affectionate relationship with his mother, who possessed beauty, wit, vitality, and charm, but also a tendency to psychotic episodes, perhaps related to the fates suffered by the three sons of her first marriage and the first-born of her second. Her illness clouded Walter's otherwise bright temperament, but it also intensified his devotion. With his father he enjoyed companionship based on their shared intellectual interests. 
Bagehot's education began with the appointment of a governess when he was five. At nine he became a day scholar at Langport grammar school, where he remained for four years. In 1839, when thirteen, he attended Bristol College and performed brilliantly in classics, mathematics, German, and Hebrew. In 1842, age sixteen, he began at university, which meant residing a considerable distance from Somerset for the first time. Since Oxford and Cambridge were objectionable to Walter's Unitarian father because of their doctrinal tests, he entered University College, London, where he enjoyed the stimulation provided by this young, vigorous institution and by the surrounding metropolis. His explorations in London included attendance at Anti-Corn Law League meetings, where he heard Cobden, Bright, and W. J. Fox. His studies emphasized classics, Roman history, mathematics, and poetry. He formed close friendships, particularly with Richard Holt Hutton (1826-1897) and William Caldwell Roscoe (1823-1859), and with them founded a debating society in which he took a leading part. After a one-year interruption caused by ill health, he took a first-class degree in classics in 1846; he stayed on for an additional two years studying political economy, metaphysics, and philosophy, earning the MA degree and a gold medal in philosophy in 1848. 
It was time to choose a career. Bagehot considered law and banking, but also felt the lure of authorship. He began reading law in chambers with Charles Hall and Mr Quain, but without enthusiasm; persisting, however, he was called to the bar in 1852. Recognizing that his fluid, expansive mind was not suited to the law, he acknowledged his distaste for it and was happy to abandon it when his father suggested that he consider banking in Langport. This also was tempting because it allowed him to be near his ill mother. Thus barely weeks after qualifying he announced his determination to give up law 'utterly and forever'. 
This decision was made easier for Bagehot by a transforming experience only a few months earlier. He was in Paris on vacation and witnessed Louis Napoleon's 'coup d'etat' in December 1851. Unsettled by the threat of anarchy on the Parisian streets, he concluded that the coup was justified, and he sent a measured defence of it to 'The Inquirer', a Unitarian journal with which his friends Hutton and Roscoe were connected. Although the editor disagreed with Bagehot's views, the article appeared; others followed, and altogether seven were published early in 1852. Many readers, including some of Bagehot's friends, were outraged, for liberal opinion tended to be critical of Louis Napoleon even if not sympathetic to the republicans. In defending Louis Napoleon, Bagehot anticipated themes in his subsequent work -- that social order had to be defended against riot and convulsion; that French circumstances did not yet allow for constitutional liberty; and that liberty and representative government, valuable as they were, might be sacrificed to avoid revolution. He did not sympathize with Louis Napoleon's Caesarism, but he argued that French circumstances did not allow for the liberties he preferred. The articles gave Bagehot the gratification of confronting commonplace opinions with the conclusions of his independent mind -- and he relished being provocative. He had gone to Paris deeply troubled about his uncertain future, but while there he discovered that he had a distinctive perspective, a voice of his own: the attractions of authorship were to become irresistible. 
On leaving Paris Bagehot began working in the family bank, but with an eye on a career as a writer. Yet he continued work at Stuckey's Bank for the next nine years, at first in Langport and then in Bristol, but his heart was no more in banking than it had been in law. He disliked the need for precision, complaining that 'sums are matters of opinion' (Barrington, 213). The counting-house routine was dull, but at least it left time for reading and writing. Though in charge of the large Bristol branch from the late 1850s, the calling to which he devoted himself was literature. Thus, less than a year after returning from Paris and abandoning London and the law, he founded (with Hutton) the 'National Review'. During the following nine years he served as co-editor and contributed twenty-nine articles, including 'The first Edinburgh reviewers', 'Parliamentary reform', and pieces on Shakespeare, Cowper, Shelley, Dickens, Gibbon, Scott, Macaulay, and Peel. 
A significant turning point came early in 1857 when, eager to contribute to 'The Economist', Bagehot was put in touch with the proprietor, James Wilson (1805-1860), formerly an organizer for the Anti-Corn Law League, and now member for Devonport, privy councillor, and financial secretary to the Treasury. Bagehot quickly gained Wilson's confidence and was engaged to write a series of letters on banking. His connection with Wilson, who had six daughters, soon became even closer. Walter, with high spirits and tall good looks, was much appreciated, especially by Elizabeth (Eliza), the eldest. After several extended visits, they were engaged on 7 November 1857, and marriage followed on 21 April 1858. After a wedding trip through Devon and Cornwall, they settled in the Somerset countryside, near Clevedon, close to Bristol and not too far from Langport. 
Bagehot wrote for 'The National' and 'The Economist' while continuing in the family bank, but this soon changed. Wilson went to India in 1859 as financial member of the supreme council of India, but died less than a year later. He had made Walter a director of the paper, and, with Hutton as editor, Bagehot actively managed it. His responsibilities increased when Hutton resigned in 1861, and he became editor, a post he held until his death sixteen years later. During this period he wrote articles -- one almost every week and sometimes more than one -- on a wide variety of political and economic subjects. He had been travelling to work from Somerset, but at this time he moved from the Bristol branch of Stuckey's Bank to London, where he supervised the London office. However, this was subordinated to his journalism as he was drawn into the larger metropolitan world, where he became a 'literary lion in the world of political magnates' (Barrington, 272). He became acquainted with major figures, including Gladstone, was a member of Brooks's and Windham's, and took up residence in Belgravia. 
As a close observer and analyst of public life, Bagehot wrote about all aspects of politics -- the state of parties, the character of leaders, the fate of governments, the composition and reform of parliament, foreign policy, political events, leading figures, and crises in other countries. On whatever he wrote, however, his distinctive mode of analysis was to look beneath the surface to the underlying realities, where he identified problems and developments not noticed by conventional observers. He sought the 'living reality', which often was concealed by 'the paper description' or by myths or conventional wisdom. This made him aware of hardly visible changes that were disguised by 'outward sameness', and it led him to abandon old maxims that relied on what once might have been true but which were true no longer. Beneath the surface he discerned the 'practical machine' that produced the real outcomes. 
This approach was nowhere more evident than in Bagehot's most famous book, 'The English Constitution' (1867), in which he analysed the major institutions of British government. It was initially published as nine essays in the 'Fortnightly Review' between 15 May 1865 and 1 January 1867, a time of intense discussion of parliamentary reform, including an extension of the suffrage. Bagehot rejected the conventional account which held that the most important functions of government were performed by the legislative, executive, and judicial powers, and that each of these was separate from and checked the expansion of the others. A look at the realities, Bagehot argued, would show that the constitution consisted of two parts, the dignified and the efficient. The dignified part, mainly the monarchy, but including, in some respects, the House of Lords, was important, not because it governed, but because it attracted the attention and gained the reverence and obedience of the multitude, thus giving legitimacy to government. The dignified part sustained the authority of government but had little role in exercising that authority. 
Real authority was located in parliament, especially the House of Commons, where executive and legislative functions were intricately combined. The House of Commons had many functions -- to express the mind of the nation, to teach, to inform, and of course to legislate. Its most important function, however, was to appoint the cabinet, which Bagehot described as a committee of the legislature selected to perform the executive function. This reality was ignored by the traditional language of politics, in large part because the highly visible dignified part of the constitution disguised the realities of power located in the efficient part. 
Bagehot is especially well known for his interpretation of the monarchy. He emphasized the theatrical dimension of its activities. The uneducated multitude focused on its ceremonies, which were readily comprehended, and this left the cabinet and parliament to exercise authority without excessive intrusion from the uneducated populace. The monarchy also served other purposes: it headed the nation's morality -- with the head of a family on the throne, sovereignty was made acceptable in a family-oriented nation -- and it stifled rebellion, as even the discontented hesitated to rebel against a government of which a revered monarch was a part. But above all, the monarch generated reverence and thus strengthened government with something like the strength of religion. This understanding influenced interpretations of the monarchy well into the twentieth century. George V studied 'The English Constitution' and believed himself to have been influenced by Bagehot's interpretation of the monarchy. 
This interpretation was the occasion for Bagehot to introduce the concept of deference as a category of political analysis. It described the conduct of the multitude which made it possible for the efficient part of government -- the executive -- to exercise authority without being hampered by democratic pressures. Deference was given not to the real rulers but to the theatrical show of society with its display of wealth and enjoyment, headed by the monarch. 'The apparent rulers... are like the most imposing personages of a splendid procession: it is by them the mob are influenced; it is they whom the spectators cheer. The real rulers are secreted in second-rate carriages; no one... asks about them, but they are obeyed implicitly and unconsciously by reason of the splendour of those who eclipsed and preceded them' ('Collected Works', 5.379-80). The spectacle overwhelmed the imagination of the populace, and it reflected a tacit agreement that the numerous, unwise part of the country would be ruled by the less numerous, wiser part. It was an abdication in favour of an elite which consisted of perhaps 10,000 persons -- in effect, the educated part of the middle-class. This understanding reflected Bagehot's assumption that society was divided (but without the necessity for class conflict) between its tiny elite and the remainder of the populace, which without embarrassment he called uncultured, rude, narrow-minded, unintelligent, and incurious. His concept of deference reflected his insight into the relation of social structure to political institutions. It was still invoked in the mid-twentieth century to explain why substantial segments of the working-class electorate voted for tories. 
Bagehot's interpretation of politics reflected his living in a pre-democratic age. Consequently, with increasing democratization and mass education, his interpretation has become implausible. Some critics, however, have denied that it was valid even when Bagehot wrote. His reliance on the concept of deference to explain political loyalties has been implicitly questioned by E. P. Thompson, whose hypothesis that in nineteenth-century England there was working-class consciousness, class enmity, and great potential for revolution made it necessary for him to deny a strong presence of deference among the working classes. Bagehot's interpretation of the monarchy has been disputed by historians with republican sympathies who regret the late nineteenth-century elaboration of the ceremonial role of the monarch and the great increase in the popularity of the monarchy during the century since Bagehot wrote. Some have even held Bagehot responsible for these developments, suggesting that he encouraged them to forestall the emergence of democratic forces and republican sentiment. 
Bagehot disapproved of democracy on the grounds that it would give superiority to the uneducated; it would encourage demagogues who would mislead the poor, and thus he regarded it as pernicious. Yet he recognized a tendency in all modern societies to raise the average and lower those at the summit, and he understood that deference would disappear once democracy was established. He became pessimistic in the face of the difficulties of stemming the democratic tide. The only long-term remedy was to ensure that the working classes had education, morality, and comfort. Meanwhile concessions to democratic demands had to be made. The parliamentary reforms he was prepared to accept were modest: the influence of landed wealth was to be reduced; the more sensible representatives of new business wealth were to be incorporated into the ruling elite; and parliament was to be made more responsive to the needs of the working classes. His principle was to allow each person as much power and influence that could be exercised without reducing the power of those who were more fit to exercise it. In practice this meant he defended a property qualification, as he regarded property as an approximate indicator of political intelligence, education, and ability. He was prepared, however, to experiment with ways to increase representation for the working classes; reversing an earlier view, he came to the conclusion that women should be allowed to vote, subject to the same restrictions as men. 
Bagehot's judgements of political figures, both contemporaries and those of an earlier generation, reflected his general political perspective. He greatly appreciated those, such as Sir Robert Peel, who worked effectively to make the efficient part of government run smoothly. These were the ones who engaged in politics as a profession -- as 'political business'. He also approved of those, such as Edmund Burke, who shared his understanding of the need for the conciliation of discontents, but also for the preservation of liberty and stability. And he was critical of advocates of democracy, such as John Bright, who seemed indifferent to these considerations. Dullness he did not mind (provocatively, he called it stupidity), for it was essential for the preservation of liberty; its opposite, found in speculative minds, was dangerous, as it led to unnecessary political experiments. Thus he criticized intellectuals, the 'too clever by half' people, who were out of touch with public opinion. 
In Bagehot's appreciative description of the English constitution he frequently pointed to contrasts with government in America, and this became a comparison of parliamentary and presidential types of government. The parliamentary type fixed ultimate power of decision in one place, in a newly elected House of Commons; it made government by discussion possible; it placed the choice of leaders among members of parliament, who were competent to judge the qualifications of the candidates; and it was capable of responding to a crisis. In contrast, the American constitution, by establishing checks and balances, divided power; it placed too much power in the hands of an incompetent populace and it was disabled in a crisis. Bagehot wrote many articles about the American Civil War, its origins, progress, and aftermath, and he often pointed to that calamity as a vindication of his preference for parliamentary government. 
Giving political labels to Bagehot is difficult, for he sometimes leaned left, sometimes right, and never very far in either direction. Nominally he was a Liberal -- when he stood for parliament it was as a Liberal, and his affiliation with 'The Economist', which had been linked with the free-trade movement, re-enforced this connection. This affiliation was combined, however, with conservative tendencies, evident in his criticisms of democracy and John Bright, in his concern about symptoms of instability, in his critique of intellectuals, whom he also called 'enthusiasts', and in his affinities with Burke's political outlook. He preferred middling governments, dominated by either liberal conservatives or conservative liberals. He is most appropriately labelled a centrist, for he saw dangers in the doctrinairism of the right which resisted change and of the left which was eager to accelerate it. Bagehot, always cautious, sought a balanced combination of tradition and innovation. In this he displayed a similarity to Macaulay. He has been called a crossbencher by nature, and he famously said he was 'between sizes in politics' (Barrington, 11). 
Bagehot's appreciation of both conservative and liberal values was reflected in 'Physics and Politics' (1872), in which he acknowledged the usefulness of custom, stability, and cohesion, while also recognizing that such things could be obstacles to discussion, progress, trade, and increased abundance. He put forward a hypothesis about social development which was based on historical study as well as writings about anthropology, and the book reflected the influence of Henry Sumner Maine, the jurist who emphasized the importance of historical study of legal concept, as well as Charles Darwin and other writers on evolution. Bagehot assumed a pre-political era, from which mankind emerged when it established nations with fixed rules -- laws and a 'cake of custom'. The resulting society was unified but also stationary, isolated, status-ridden, hostile to trade, and unable to change -- that is, to improve itself. With great difficulty and very slowly, and in very few places, this changed. Where discussion was allowed, variant customs were examined and natural selection took place; intelligence and originality were encouraged, human nature sprung forth, and the yoke of custom was thrown off. Thus a shift occurred from stationary conditions to an age of choice, trade, liberty, and economic growth. He was not recommending that custom be abandoned in pursuit of progress, but rather that a useful combination of features of both types of society be found. This was Bagehot's attempt to examine scientifically the political prerequisites of progress. His categories, historical claims, and assumptions later came to be regarded as obsolete, and this book has had less claim on the attention of posterity than some of his other works. 
Although on three occasions Bagehot failed to win election to parliament (for Manchester, 1865; Bridgwater, 1866; University of London, 1867), he gained great influence by virtue of his forceful writing, his intimate knowledge of the City and Westminster, and his acknowledged authority as editor of a prestigious weekly. He realized that 'effective articles in great journals' could be decisive, especially in times of crisis, and though modesty prevented his claiming such influence, when writing these words he knew they described some of his own journalism. He confessed to his fiancee, 'I covet 'power', influence,' and he certainly achieved it (St John-Stevas, 'Walter Bagehot', 25). 
As an economist Bagehot is best known for 'Lombard Street' (1873), which J. M. Keynes called 'an undying Classic' (Buchan, 242). It analysed the actual working of the banking system and was based on personal experiences and close observation. He focused on the role of the Bank of England, pointing out that since it served as a banker's bank, was the repository of monetary reserves for the entire nation, and had immense influence on the country's financial health, it ought to acknowledge that it functioned as a central bank. He proposed changes that would allow it to perform this role more effectively. To allow it to reduce the impact of trade cycles, he recommended that the bank increase gold reserves in prosperous times, and that in depressed periods, as a matter of policy, it advance a large amount of credit to sound businesses. The book had great influence and several of its recommendations ultimately were adopted; it was regarded as authoritative well into the twentieth century, and it made a significant contribution to the theory of central banking. 
In 'Lombard Street', as in 'The English Constitution', Bagehot sought to describe and explain arrangements already in place which, while imperfect, served many useful purposes. He demonstrated great insight, but not the explanatory power claimed by classical economists with a universalistic perspective. This was in keeping with his belief (reflecting the influence of evolutionary theory) that political economy ought to recognize that different economies require different explanations, depending on the extent of their development and cultural circumstances. Consequently, when in the mid-1870s he set out to write a major treatise on political economy, he aimed to make his analysis concrete and empirical and to avoid claims to universal validity. By criticizing abstraction in economic theory, he anticipated behaviourist theories that explain economic events in terms of actual behaviour, including the motives, hopes, and fears of those whose conduct affects the economy. This work was not completed; the first part was published as 'Postulates of Political Economy' (1876), and the remaining fragments were included in his posthumous 'Economic Studies' (1880). 
Bagehot's views also appeared weekly in 'The Economist', where he addressed many issues of economic and financial policy. He favoured free trade and competition, criticized protection and monopoly, and was sceptical about imperial expansion. On the whole he advocated 'laissez-faire' policies, though without dogmatism, for he allowed many exceptions. He supported the income tax, favoured nationalization of the railways, and approved proposals for a universal coinage and decimalization. He recognized that the 'Factory Acts' were beneficial, and while critical of organized labour he accepted that labour ought to have a right to organize. Always attentive to swings in the trade cycle, he often warned about overconfidence in the business community, reminding his readers, 'All people are most credulous when they are most happy' (W. Bagehot, 'Lombard Street', 1915, repr. 1931, 151). Bagehot's economic journalism was taken seriously in the City, by businessmen, and in Whitehall. 
Bagehot's views have been criticized by twentieth-century economists, but the standing he once had is indicated by acknowledgements of his influence on central bankers in Britain and America in the 1920s. In his own time he testified before select committees and was elected to the Political Economy Club in 1864. He often was consulted by ministers and civil servants, and in response to a request from the chancellor of the exchequer (Sir Stafford Northcote) in 1876 for suggestions about how to raise short-term money, he invented the Treasury bill. Gladstone called him 'a sort of supplementary Chancellor of the Exchequer' (Buchan, 246). 
As Gladstone's observation indicates, Bagehot was much more than a journalist, though in that capacity he stood out as one whose accounts of events provided a rich understanding of how political and economic developments unfolded in the world of practice. His quest for understanding of the underlying structure and principles that shaped surface reality led to his recognition of the importance of non-rational dimensions of political and economic conduct, and to his development of explanatory concepts, such as 'deferential community' and dignified and efficient parts of the constitution, which have been continuously useful to political analysts. 
Bagehot also wrote about literature, both historical and contemporary, mainly British, and also about a few French writers. His interest in literature had begun early, and his enthusiasms and negative reactions were highly personal; they were reflected in his published criticisms, in his appreciation of Scott, for example, and in his doubts about Shelley and Dickens. While his essays were often illuminating, his judgements did not reflect a theoretical perspective, and his attempt to establish a typology has proved disappointing. As a result of this absence of a coherent theory about literature, he has no enduring place in the history of literary criticism. As Rene Wellek has concluded, 'Bagehot seems not very important today, though he is sane, representative, and symptomatic enough to deserve some attention' (Wellek, 4.180). At most, his discursive articles provide insights and arresting observations, as when he said Dickens 'describes London like a special correspondent for posterity' ('Collected Works', 2.87). 
Religion played a part in Bagehot's life, but its demands on him were not insistent. His parents were deeply religious but worshipped differently, his mother accepting the Church of England orthodoxy, while his father, like some of his ancestors, became Unitarian. Bagehot did not follow his father's example, though he was less than orthodox, as he had doubts about some historical claims of Christianity, which, however, did not prevent him from defending revelation. Although influenced by Darwinian ideas, he did not regard evolutionary theories as incompatible with belief in a deity. He was sufficiently interested in religious questions to take part in discussions at the Metaphysical Society, where leading representatives of all branches of Christianity, including Catholicism, as well as positivists, agnostics, and freethinkers, explored their differences. As in politics, Bagehot occupied a middling position. He rejected atheism and agnosticism, and while he admired J. H. Newman, he was not tempted by Catholicism. He was untroubled by religious diversity, and in the debating society he helped found while an undergraduate he spoke in opposition to government suppression of blasphemous publications. In papers read at the Metaphysical Society in 1870 and 1874, he revealed a suspicion that there was a widespread wish to persecute -- sceptics by believers and believers by some sceptics -- which he deplored. 
Bagehot's physical appearance was striking: tall, slender, a mass of wavy black hair (and in a surviving portrait, a heavy black beard), a ruddy complexion, and fiery eyes -- if not handsome, he was not easily ignored. In temperament he struck others as high-spirited, buoyant, vivacious, imaginative, and playful, but also as modest and self-deprecating. In his own description, he was cheerful but not sanguine, this perhaps reflecting what he called life's 'dark realities' -- an allusion to his mother's illness. His conversation displayed acuity, liveliness, and whimsical humour, and was said to be racy. He impressed a sister-in-law as a man in whom 'life and thought and fancy abounded' (Barrington, 231). It was said that one seldom asked Bagehot a question without the answer making one think, or laugh, or both together. His lively mind was reflected in his original phrase making, for example, 'animated moderation', 'removable inequalities', 'blind money', and 'the cake of custom'. He was the first to use 'padding' as applied to writing. 
Bagehot's interests and activities were varied. He loved the countryside, especially in Somerset. A dashing rider, he was fond in early life of hunting: 'There is as much variety of pluck in writing across a sheet as in riding across a country'. An avid reader, especially of literature, he greatly admired George Eliot and was a regular visitor at her Sunday at homes. Among his closest friends, in addition to Richard Holt Hutton and William Roscoe, were James Bryce (1838-1922), Lord Carnarvon (1831-1890), Matthew Arnold (1822-1888), and Arthur Hugh Clough (1819-1861). He was excellent at chess and often relaxed over a game with Hutton at the Athenaeum after sending 'The Economist' to the printer; his election to membership at the Athenaeum in 1875 was an acknowledgement of intellectual eminence. He succeeded his father as vice-chairman of Stuckey's Bank and was continually occupied in managing the investments of his ageing father and the Wilson family. His last residence, at 8 Queen's Gate Place, was decorated and furnished by William Morris's firm, and Morris himself designed the drawing room. But for all the variety in his life (which did not include children of his own), work was all. He claimed there never was a week without doing some business, which meant some writing. 'As to holidays', he advised Hutton, 'it is one of the lessons of life to learn to be independent of them' ('Collected Works', 13.673). 
Bagehot's personal life was less than happy. His sadness about his mother's illness deepened in the mid-1860s when she became worse and needed continuous surveillance during the years before her death in 1870. From his marriage he may not have received much solace. Although it began with intense passion and evident happiness -- Walter and Eliza's surviving love letters testify to it -- after a few years some distance between them seems to have developed as Bagehot devoted long hours to his busy life away from home. His wife continually complained of many small symptoms and often retreated to her room with headaches. She became irascible and also withdrew from much of Bagehot's social life, leaving him to attend dinners and other events by himself or in the company of a sister-in-law. His wife was devoted to him but could not share his intellectual interests. On the other hand, he was not the easiest of husbands, as he was always working to a deadline. After his mother's death, his devotion to writing became even more frantic, leaving little time for domestic life. Financially, Bagehot was well off, and could have expected considerable wealth; had he lived longer, he would have inherited a substantial part of the family investments. These included the bank as well as fleets of barges and ocean-going ships. His wife could also have expected a considerable legacy from her father's estate. 
Although quite vigorous and fond of exercise, Bagehot tended to get respiratory infections, which became especially frequent during the 1870s. He also had poor vision and a weak heart, and he suffered from migraine. In March 1877 in London he came down with a cold which turned into 'congestion of the lung'. Having promised his father he would visit over Easter, he travelled to Herd's Hill, Curry Rivell, near Langport, where he died, apparently of pneumonia, on 24 March 1877. He was buried in the family vault at All Saints' Church, Langport, Somerset. 


@@@@@


doc= 1030


Bagford, John (1650/51-1716), bookseller and antiquary, was born in Fetter Lane, London, the son of John Bagford. Very little is known about his early life and family background. He was trained and worked as a shoemaker and wrote a little tract about this trade (BL, Harley MS 5911), but beyond some schooling he did not receive any academic education. Bagford married his wife, Elizabeth, probably in the early 1670s; their son John was born in 1675. From 1686 Bagford was engaged in the book trade around Holborn, collecting and trading books for the great collectors of his day, such as Bishop John Moore of Ely, Robert and Edward Harley, Samuel Pepys, John Woodward, and Sir Hans Sloane. Bagford enjoyed a reputation as a knowledgeable and reliable book runner and formed important friendships with such scholars as Humfrey Wanley, Thomas Baker, and Thomas Hearne. Thus Bagford developed into one of the pioneer bibliographers of the early eighteenth century. 
Bagford played a considerable part in a number of antiquarian pursuits of his day. He contributed, for example, to Edmund Gibson's edition of Camden's 'Britannia' and John Strype's edition of John Stow's 'Survey of London'. In 1707 Bagford was part of a group together with Wanley, William Stukeley, and others who attempted to refound the Society of Antiquaries. In those years Bagford met the antiquary Thomas Hearne at Oxford, and the two developed a close friendship and collaboration. Bagford also wrote antiquarian studies of his own, among them a well-received essay on London antiquities published by Hearne in his edition of Leland's 'Collectanea' (1715). Bagford supplied Hearne with a considerable amount of material both for his publications and private collections. Both were involved in John Urry's edition of Chaucer (1721). In his 'Robert of Gloucester' (1724), Hearne published a letter-essay he had written to Bagford earlier about Chaucer editions. 
Bagford collected early printed books and ballads mainly for his planned history of printing and the printed book. In search of books, he made a number of trips to the Dutch towns of Haarlem, Leiden, and Amsterdam, where his friend and agent John Bullord had settled as a bookseller. In 1707 proposals for Bagford's work were published as was his essay on the invention of printing, which appeared in the 'Philosophical Transactions' together with Wanley's account of Bagford's collections. Apparently the work itself did not attract enough subscribers and it was never completed. Not all his friends were confident that the autodidact Bagford could produce such a study. Wanley, however, admired Bagford's skills in 'the different sorts of Ink, Illumination, Binding, Hands, parchment, Papers, or almost any sort of Workmanship' (Levine, 139). To Hearne 'there appeared in him such a plain, unaffected, honest simplicity, & at the same time such an unusual skill in the History of Printing & in our own History & Antiquities, that I immediately concluded him to be a valuable Man, as he most certainly is ('Remarks and Collections', 5.74)' Hearne published an account of his friend in 'Hemingi chartularium' (1723). Eventually Bagford's collections were consulted by Joseph Ames for his 'Typographical Antiquities' (1749). 
Today Bagford is known most as a collector of ballads. A great number of the ballads in the famous Roxburghe collection were originally gathered by Bagford for Robert Harley. The 'Bagford Ballads', finally edited and published by J. W. Ebsworth in 1878, represent Bagford's private collection of mainly Restoration ballads. His reputation was tarnished by later critics such as William Blades and T. F. Dibdin, who explained the presence in his collections of great amounts of title-pages, fragments, and scraps by accusing him of 'biblioclasm'. None of Bagford's contemporaries commented on Bagford tearing title-pages from books. Important work has been done since to rectify this image and to prove in more than one instance that Bagford preserved important fragments rather than mutilated books and manuscripts. 
Bagford possibly remarried in 1703, but in his latter days he lived as a pensioner in the Charterhouse, where a place had been procured for him by Bishop Moore. He died in lodgings at Islington on 5 May 1716, the cause of his death unknown. He was buried on 7 May within the precincts of the Charterhouse. After his death, his collections were bought by Edward Harley and a small part of them came to Hearne. 


@@@@@


doc= 1031


Baggallay, Sir Richard (1816-1888), judge, was born in Stockwell, London, on 13 May 1816, the eldest son of Richard Baggallay (died 1870), a merchant of Kingthorpe House, Upper Tooting, London, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Owen Marden. He was a contemporary of William Baliol Brett, Viscount Esher, at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA (as fourteenth wrangler) in 1839 and MA in 1842. He was Frankland fellow of Caius College from 1845 until his marriage on 25 February 1847 to Marianne, youngest daughter of Henry Charles Lacy of Withdean Hall, Sussex, with whom he had six sons and six daughters. He was honorary fellow of Caius from 1880 until his death. 
Baggallay joined Lincoln's Inn on 23 March 1837, was called to the bar on 14 June 1843, and elected bencher on 13 March 1861 and treasurer in 1875. He practised at the equity bar in the rolls court and became queen's counsel in 1861. He was counsel to Cambridge University from 1869 to 1875. 
Baggallay was elected member of parliament for Hereford on 14 July 1865 as a Conservative reformer, and succeeded Sir W. B. Brett as solicitor-general on 16 September 1868. He was knighted on 14 December 1868 after the government went out of office. He had meanwhile lost his seat, and only re-entered parliament on 17 October 1870 when he was returned for Mid-Surrey. On the Conservative Party's return to power, he once again became solicitor-general (27 February 1874), becoming attorney-general two months later on 20 April on the early retirement of Sir John Karslake. 
As attorney-general Baggallay piloted the 'Judicature Act' of 1875 through committee, and by that act he was created in turn justice of appeal (29 October 1875) and later lord-justice of appeal, and joined the privy council. 
Much of the burden of construing the 'Judicature Acts' and determining procedure under the new system fell upon Baggallay. In the summer of 1882 his health broke down, and a prolonged rest failed to restore it. He retired from the bench in November 1885, but occasionally attended privy council meetings until shortly before his death from heart disease on 13 November 1888 at 10 Brunswick Square, Hove, Sussex, where he had gone to convalesce. 


@@@@@


doc= 1032


Baggerley, Humphrey (fl. 1648-1654), army officer and supposed biographer, was among the troops who on 9 October 1648 surrendered at Appleby, Westmorland, to superior parliamentarian forces under Colonel Assheton. The royalist soldiers were granted very generous terms and, having been allowed his freedom, Baggerley probably travelled directly to the Isle of Man in the company of Sir Thomas Tyldesley. On 12 August 1651 he supervised the embarkation of the invasion force of James Stanley, seventh earl of Derby, from Castletown harbour, and -- despite contrary winds -- effected a landing on the Lancashire coast, at Preesall Sands, three days later. It seems more than likely that he fought at the disastrous battle of Wigan Lane on 25 August 1651, and that he was among the '4 Captains' taken there, following the royalist rout (Lilburne, 3). He was certainly held prisoner at Chester Castle but doubt arises as to whether he was the same gentleman who, on 13 October 1651, was given permission by the authorities to attend the earl after a court martial had passed a sentence of death upon him. 
A detailed, highly partisan, and emotive account of the last three days of Derby's life exists, and is credited to the 'Rev. Humphrey Baggerley' (Seacome, 120-28). It is probable that the editor of these papers wrongly attributed them. However, it is just conceivable that there were two entirely different individuals who shared the same name; or that Baggerley was ordained after the Restoration (Draper, 217-18; Ormerod, 2.196, 316, 338). The author of the account was clearly closely connected to the Stanley household, knew the Manx clergy well, and provided the earl of Derby with companionship and spiritual solace on his journey to execution at the market square in Bolton on 15 October 1651. Before the axe fell he was entrusted with delivering the earl's last letter to his wife, who still held the Isle of Man for the king, and with returning his Order of the Garter to his son and heir. Nothing more is known of the 'Reverend' Humphrey Baggerley, but his military namesake was implicated in John Gerard's plot, of May 1654, to murder Oliver Cromwell. 
The sudden decision of the lord protector, on Saturday 14 May, to abandon his normal routine and take a barge -- instead of a coach -- to his residence at Hampton Court caused the assassination attempt to be aborted and threw the plotters into confusion. Baggerley fled the City and went into hiding in Highgate village, but he was apprehended on 21 May 1654 and was escorted back to London under heavy guard. Charged with high treason, he was kept under especially 'close custody' in the Tower of London throughout the summer months. On 7 August 1654 he pleaded his innocence, complained that prison life was ruining his health, and urged that the authorities should quickly decide whether or not to try, acquit, or release him. His petition to the lord protector seems to have been heeded, for on 1 September 1654 he was banished from the land on giving his word that he would not 'act to the State's prejudice, nor return without leave' ('CSP dom.', '1654', 353). Thereafter he disappears from the records and returns to the obscurity which shrouds both his actions as a royalist agent and the claims to his authorship of a significant work of cavalier hagiography. 


@@@@@


doc= 1033


Baggs, Charles Michael (1806-1845), college head and vicar apostolic of the western district, was born at Belville, in co. Meath, Ireland, on 21 May 1806. He was the eldest son of a protestant barrister of Dublin, Charles Baggs, afterwards judge of the court of vice-admiralty in Demerara, and his wife, Eleanor, fourth daughter of John Howard Kyan, of Mount Howard and Ballymurtagh in the county of Wicklow. His father being a member of the established church of Ireland, Baggs's early education was at a protestant academy kept by a Mr King at Englefield Green in Surrey. Early in 1820 his father died suddenly at Demerara, three days after hearing of the death of a friend for whom he had become security for $60,000. Upon the news of this double calamity Charles Baggs was removed by his mother from Englefield Green to the Catholic school of Sedgley Park in Staffordshire, and from this time he was a member of the Roman Catholic church. He remained at Sedgley Park until June 1821, when, at the suggestion of William Poynter, vicar apostolic of the London district, he was transferred as an ecclesiastical student to St Edmund's College near Ware, Hertfordshire, where he remained for three years. 
In the summer of 1824 Baggs was sent to the English College at Rome, which, from the date of his arrival on 9 June, became his home for nearly twenty years. His reputation as a student was always excellent. He took first prizes in Hebrew, mathematics, physics, and scripture, and was highly commended in theology. His remarkable ability was exhibited on 25 September 1830 when, in the presence of a distinguished audience presided over by Cardinal Zurla, he held his ground defending his theological theses in Latin. This display won for him his doctor's cap at the early age of twenty-four. 
Baggs was ordained priest in December 1830. For several years he occupied the chair of professor of Hebrew at the English College. His knowledge of French and Italian in particular, as well as of Spanish and German, was remarkable. As a pulpit orator he soon became well known outside the walls of the college. His earliest published discourse was 'On the Supremacy of the Roman Pontiffs', delivered on 7 February 1836 in the fashionable church of Gesu e Maria in the via del Corso, and was issued from the press immediately afterwards, with an appendix in which he challenged some of the arguments of contemporary Anglican divines. The work was dedicated to Cardinal Weld. On 8 March 1836 his 'Letter Addressed to the Rev. R. Burgess, Protestant Chaplain at Rome' appeared. This was a controversial piece, which in the same year was translated into Italian by Baggs himself. 
His skill in languages, interest in controversy, and immersion in the Roman scene recall Wiseman's early career, and it is not surprising that in 1834 Wiseman made Baggs vice-rector of the college. Throughout the pontificate of Gregory XVI Baggs was 'cameriere d'onore', a member of the papal household. Upon him devolved the duty of presenting all the English visitors, both Catholic and protestant, who were admitted to a private audience with the pope. In this capacity Baggs enjoyed a high degree of popularity, not only among his co-religionists but among his compatriots generally. 
Baggs's monograph entitled 'The Papal Chapel Described and Illustrated from History and Antiquities' appeared at Rome in 1839, inscribed to Charles (later Cardinal) Acton. It was at one time popular as a handbook for English-speaking visitors, as was his larger work, 'The Ceremonies of Holy Week at the Vatican and S. John Lateran's: Described and Illustrated from History and Antiquities', published almost simultaneously. It was Baggs's practice to dedicate his publications to persons of influence in England or Rome and the last named was addressed to Hugh Charles, Lord Clifford of Chudleigh. It is dated 16 March 1839. During the following year Baggs published another work of ecclesiastical antiquarianism, 'The Pontifical Mass sung at St Peter's Church on Easter Sunday, on the Festival of SS. Peter and Paul, and Christmas Day, with a Dissertation on Ecclesiastical Vestments'. This work was dedicated to Cardinal James Giustiniani, bishop of Albano and protector of the English College. These liturgical and antiquarian writings reflect the interests at this time of many catholics in England, where, following Catholic emancipation, many new churches were being built. The great patron of A. W. Pugin and the Gothic revival was John, sixteenth earl of Shrewsbury; when his daughter Lady Gwendoline Talbot, the Princess Borghese, died in Rome it was Baggs who preached the funeral oration at San Carlo in the Corso on 23 December 1840. She was a cousin of Baggs and when the panegyric was printed he inscribed it to the father of the young princess. 
Four months before this, Baggs became rector of the English College when his predecessor, Wiseman, was consecrated as bishop of Melipotamus on 8 June 1840. During the last ten years of his sojourn in Rome, Baggs continued to distinguish himself as a controversialist. On 30 June 1842 he read to the Accademia di Religione Cattolica his dissertation on the Puseyites. This was written in Italian to explain to a Roman audience the situation in the Church of England and the differences between the evangelicals, the high-church party, and the followers of Pusey. It is of special interest because it was composed before J. H. Newman joined the Church of Rome. Together with another treatise in Italian, 'On the Present State of the Church of England', it was subsequently published in the 'Annali delle Scienze Religiose' (vol. 40, 1842, 60-92, and vol. 42, 1843, 94-117). It was during Baggs's rectorship that the English College was honoured by the visit of Pope Gregory XVI on 25 February 1843. His career at Rome was closed by his elevation to the episcopate. On 28 January 1844, in the church of San Gregorio on the Caelian Hill, he was consecrated bishop of Pella 'in partibus infidelium' by Cardinal Fransoni, assisted by George Brown, then bishop of Tloa and afterwards of Liverpool, and by Dr Collier, the bishop of Port Louis in Mauritius. 
In England the sudden death of Bishop Peter Augustine Baines had left vacant the office of vicar apostolic of the western district; Gregory XVI selected Baggs to fill it. He was the only secular priest to occupy that position in the 162 years of its existence. It was a surprise appointment and although Baggs's name had been put forward in 1840, he was not considered then to be a suitable candidate for the episcopate because of his lack of experience. On his departure from Rome the pope made him a present of books, while the students of the English College gave him a costly pectoral cross, and even the English protestants in Rome subscribed to buy him a crucifix. He formally took possession of his diocese on 30 May 1844, when he was welcomed by a large gathering of the clergy and laity at Prior Park near Bath. Here, two days afterwards, he held his first ordination. He visited his extensive diocese during the course of that summer, and reorganized it into four deaneries on 2 October. Shortly after taking up his residence at Prior Park, Baggs delivered a course of lectures on the supremacy of the pope in the church of St John the Evangelist at Bath. In August 1845 he suffered a nervous breakdown and spent some time convalescing at Lord Clifford's seaside residence. He returned to Prior Park, but died there on 16 October 1845 at the early age of thirty-nine. He was buried in the partially completed new church of Prior Park College on 23 October; his remains were removed a few years later to the nearby Midford Chapel and subsequently to Holy Souls cemetery, Arnos Vale, Bristol. 
Some contemporaries attributed Baggs's early death to his inability to adapt to the English climate after so many years in Rome -- 'climate' being understood in more than a meteorological sense. Among the papers relating to the choice of his successor there is a submission from England to Rome that passes the following verdict on Baggs's brief episcopate: 'Never perhaps was there a man less fitted for the situation of vicar apostolic in England than Dr Baggs, and had it not pleased God to take him to himself he would in a short time have thrown the District into irremediable confusion. The chief cause of Dr Baggs' unfitness for the office of vicar apostolic arose from his being taken immediately from a College. He knew nothing of the duties of a missionary priest, he was quite ignorant of the peculiar difficulties of their situation and was always expecting everything to be done as if we were living in a catholic country. Dr Baggs having always been at College where everything, food, clothes etc were supplied him, had no idea of the value of money and consequently spent money most recklessly and imagined that his priests could do the same. In fact he never had been a missionary and a vicar apostolic in England will never be any good except he has been a missionary. (Archives of the Congregatio de Propaganda Fide, Rome, MS Anglia 10, fol. 845)' 



@@@@@


doc= 1034


Bagenal, Sir Henry (c.1556-1598), soldier, was the son of Sir Nicholas Bagenal (d. 1590/91), marshal of the army in Ireland, and Eleanor (died 1573), daughter and coheir of Sir Edward Griffith of Penrhyn in north Wales. Named after his godfather Sir Henry Sidney, Bagenal probably matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, in 1572 or 1573, aged sixteen, but left without a degree to serve in Ireland with his father, marshal of the army since 1566; Henry obtained a reversion of that post on 26 August 1583. The Bagenals had a vested interest in developing their Newry headquarters and sought extensive immunities from Sir Henry Sidney, the lord deputy. Sidney refused these but appointed Sir Nicholas as chief commissioner of Ulster and Henry as his assistant in May 1577. Henry was knighted the following year. It may have been the government's intention that this commission would lead to a lord presidency of Ulster similar to the presidencies set up in the provinces of Connaught and Munster. In reality this jurisdiction became restricted to those areas under the Bagenals' military control. Hugh O'Neill was asserting traditional claims of overlordship in the territories of Magennis and O'Hanlon, into which the Bagenals had encroached; he once famously told Bagenal to put his commission in his pocket. 
Sir Henry became associated with a series of military disasters. In August 1580 he commanded the rear with Sir William Stanley when Lord Grey of Wilton led his forces, many of them raw recruits, into the Wicklow mountain passes; they were defeated by Feagh McHugh O'Byrne's and Viscount Baltinglass's men at Glenmalure on 25 August. As chief assistant to his father on the commission for Ulster, Henry was active in taking musters and surveying lands. He was also associated with the various divide-and-rule schemes of Lord Deputy Perrot in his efforts to contain the rival ambitions of New English and Gaelic lords. In 1584 Sir Henry was stationed as colonel of the garrison at Carrickfergus to contain and repulse the incursions of Sorley Boy MacDonald's Scots, but in September about 1300 of them landed on Rathlin Island under Angus MacDonald. Bagenal went on the attack but was ambushed in a narrow defile at Glenarm in the Glens of Antrim and had to make a precipitate retreat to Carrickfergus. 
Bagenal was frequently in dispute with other English officials and military men. In February 1585, during a disagreement with Sir William Stanley, his brother Dudley Bagenal, then captain of a band in south Clandeboye, Antrim, came to blows with Stanley. The steward of Clandeboye, Nicholas Dawtrey, alleged it was Bagenal's ambitions that drove O'Neill into open warfare. In May 1586 Sir Nicholas sent Sir Henry to the court to report on the troubles in the Dublin council with Lord Deputy Perrot. He went equipped with references and petitions to Lord Burghley demanding changes in government policy on Ulster. One of these, 'The Description and Present State of Ulster' (1586), is an edited extract from one of the many contemporary accounts of Ireland then in circulation. Possibly the source was Sir Edward Waterhouse, a friend of both the lord deputy and of the Bagenals. Bagenal's tract was much concerned to point out the crown's weakness in Ulster, where O'Neill was becoming more powerful and was bringing in Scottish mercenaries, and at a time when the Spanish Armada was more than a rhetorical threat. Bagenal recommended a division of O'Neill's lands in Tyrone, a restraint on O'Neill's control over the petty chiefs in co. Down, the enhancement of his own role as marshal, and a presidency for Ulster with a shire hall and a provincial gaol to dispense royal justice. Other proposals were more obviously self-interested, such as his application to develop Newry, and to tax local lords to build walls and a college where the sons of Ulster lords could be educated in civility and concurrently kept hostage. Finally, he wanted a similar commission to that held by Sir Richard Bingham in Connaught. 
At first the queen endorsed many of Bagenal's demands including the grant of a commission similar to Bingham's, but her letter of April 1587 was never enrolled as a patent in the Irish chancery. Hostilities between the Bagenals and Perrot reached crisis point when the latter claimed he had been defamed by a letter purportedly from Turlough Luineach O'Neill to the queen, but actually forged 'by means of Sir Henry Bagenal and other of that Machiavellian device' ('CSP Ire.', '1586-8', 277). In the council chamber in Dublin Sir Nicholas demanded that Perrot clear his son's name of military incompetence -- allegations made by Henry Wallop, the treasurer-at-war. They accused each other of being liars, drunkards, and cowards and came to blows. Nicholas Dawtrey, who had been commissioned by Burghley to evaluate plans for Ulster, also attacked Bagenal's covetousness and avowed that 'Mr Marshal hath neither agreed with English or Irish that hath had as much or more discretion in governing of Ulster than himself... [or with]... any commissioners that hath been employed in that province, except his sons' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/129/nos. 3, 20). 
Sir Henry's visit to England was not a total failure. He wrote on 16 September 1586 to Edward Manners, third earl of Rutland, whose cousin Eleanor, daughter of Sir John Savage of Rock Savage, in the Wirral, Cheshire, he had married, inquiring if the earl had a parliamentary borough to spare; on 29 September he was returned at Grantham and in the event also returned for Anglesey, which he preferred. His marriage to Eleanor produced three sons: Arthur, mentally handicapped, became a ward of his uncle Sir Patrick Barnewell; Dudley, who founded the co. Carlow branch of the family (not to be confused with Henry's brother Dudley, killed by the Kavanaghs in May 1587); and Ambrose. Their six daughters married into the families of wealthy palesmen. 
In September 1587 Bagenal went back to Ireland to deputize for his father, Sir Nicholas, and Perrot was commanded to allow him to do so 'without any trouble, molestation or impeachment' ('APC', '1587-8', 169-70, 226-7). With the active co-operation of the new lord deputy, Sir William Fitzwilliam, he led the invasion in 1588 against Sir Ross McMahon in Monaghan who, at O'Neill's behest, had refused to have a sheriff appointed there. In the final settlement of Monaghan, Bagenal received substantial termon (ecclesiastical) lands nominally outside the control of the McMahons. In October 1590 Sir Nicholas Bagenal formally resigned his office of marshal of the army provided his son succeeded him; Henry did so on 24 October and on the same day was sworn of the privy council. On 18 May 1591 he succeeded his father as chief commissioner for the government of Ulster, in effect an empty title. In the following year he wrote to Lord Burghley with a detailed analysis of his situation: 'The chiefest, or rather the only means to reduce these barbarous people to obedience is to so disunite them as all may be enforced to depend of the queen' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/163/no. 29). His proposals were little heeded; Burghley and the privy council had by then adopted a conciliatory attitude to Hugh O'Neill, even to the extent of exempting the earl's country from Bagenal's jurisdiction. Following the death of his second wife, Joanna O'Donnell, O'Neill asked Bagenal for the hand of his sister Mabel in marriage. This approach was repulsed with contempt; Sir Henry had Mabel removed to live with her sister Mary at Turvey, co. Dublin. Mabel's subsequent elopement and marriage to O'Neill so deepened the feud between the two men that she became 'the Helen of the Irish War' (Bagwell, 3.223). They were married in August 1591; Bagenal vainly attempted to prove that O'Neill was not properly divorced from his first wife and consistently refused to pay the $1000 dowry to O'Neill. 
Bagenal kept a journal of the military campaign of the autumn of 1593. In September he led his soldiers into Monaghan again, attacking the McMahons 'en route' for Fermanagh to repulse Hugh Maguire, whose forces had recently defeated Sir Richard Bingham. Maguire's defences at the Erne fords near Beleek were broken. Bagenal left troops under Captain Dowdall to consolidate his hold over Enniskillen, captured on 2 February 1594 after a nine-day siege. Bagenal and O'Neill gave conflicting accounts of their service against Maguire. A war of words preceded open hostilities; Bagenal reported to Dublin that O'Neill was in touch with Spain and was recruiting and arming his lordship, while O'Neill claimed that the real beneficiaries of his services to the crown were his enemies. The struggle for power in Ulster was personalized, and may have been overdramatized by historians. By May 1595 the relief of the Monaghan garrison had become crucial. Bagenal led out an army of 1750 men from Dundalk and Newry on 24 May; O'Neill had besieged the garrison and his forces attacked Bagenal at Clontibret near Monaghan, inflicting heavy losses. Bagenal's defeat, reported as a tactical withdrawal to Newry, was the first of O'Neill's victories. Bagenal had to be reinforced and revictualled at Newry by sea, sending back his wounded to Dublin by that route, because O'Neill had blocked the Moyry Pass -- the famed Gap of the North. By July 1596 he had raided Bagenal's lands right to the gates of Newry. 
In December 1596, and again in June 1597, Bagenal successfully revictualled the garrison at Armagh, but by 1598 the more northerly fort on the Blackwater was in dire straits. Bagenal went to relieve the fort. He knew the terrain well as far as Armagh and had good guides, but his army was stalked by ill luck and outmanoeuvred by O'Neill's forces. On 14 August 1598, on the field of battle at the Yellow Ford, Bagenal raised the visor of his helmet and was mortally wounded. Some dispatches say that his body fell into O'Neill's hands, others that it was brought off the field with those who sought refuge in Armagh Cathedral and was buried there, but in all probability it was buried in his father's church, St Patrick's in Newry. The Irish historian C. P. Meehan cites an almost contemporary character description of Bagenal: 'He was in sooth, a greedy adventurer, restless, rapacious, unscrupulous; in a word, one who deemed it no sin or shame to aid in any process by which the rightful owner might be driven from his holding provided he got share of the spoil. (Meehan, 29-30)' Bagenal is also given a certain literary immortality in Sir Walter Scott's romantic ballad 'Rokeby'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1035


Bagenal, Sir Nicholas (d. 1590/91), soldier, was the second son of John Bagenal (died 1558), a tailor by trade and mayor of Newcastle under Lyme on several occasions, and Elinor, daughter of Thomas Whittingham of Middlewich, Cheshire. Nothing is known about his early life until 1539 when Bagenal was responsible for the murder of a man in a brawl with 'certain light persons', and fled the law in England to the north of Ireland. There he came under the protection of the paramount chieftain of central Ulster, Conn O'Neill, who shortly thereafter made a compact with the crown under the 'surrender and regrant' programme. On 7 December 1542, after O'Neill's ennoblement as earl of Tyrone, the Irish council conveyed a petition to the court of Henry VIII for the pardon of Nicholas Bagenal for murder, at the earl's request. The pardon was granted in 1543. 
In 1544 Bagenal requested and was granted permission from the Irish council to be sent to fight in the campaign of the English army in France. Returning to Ireland as a seasoned soldier, he was appointed by Edward VI as marshal of the army there in March 1547. In 1548 he campaigned in Leinster with the lord deputy, Sir Edward Bellingham, who was determined to pacify the midlands and southern highlands. Bagenal participated in the defeat of Cahir O'Connor and the slaughter of many of his kerne. In the early 1550s he was engaged primarily in martial activities in Ulster: he was sent in November 1551 by Lord Deputy Croft to expel the Scots from the Dufferin, and raided the lands of Shane O'Neill in Tyrone on behalf of Shane's half-brother Matthew O'Neill, baron of Dungannon, who represented the English interest in the region. Bagenal was knighted in the same year, and on 22 April 1552 was granted the lands of St Patrick's and St Mary's abbeys in Newry, the lordship of Mourne, and the manor of Carlingford. 
On the accession of Queen Mary in 1553 Bagenal lost the office of marshal which was then conferred on Sir George Stanley. He does not appear to have offered any overt opposition to Mary's government, but he may have shared in the odium elicited by the radical protestant views of his elder brother who was also serving in Ireland. Sir Ralph Bagenal protested against the reconciliation with Rome and fled to France, where he was implicated in Henry Dudley's conspiracy. Nicholas, who had also left Ireland, was fearful of returning in the political climate of Mary's reign and was in 1556 bound over in a recognizance of $1000 to attend on the Irish councillors and assume responsibility for his bailiwick in Ulster. Meanwhile he maintained his connection with Staffordshire for which he was elected knight of the shire in 1559. He had about four years earlier married Eleanor (died 1573), daughter of Sir Edward Griffith of Penrhyn; they had five sons, including Sir Henry Bagenal (c.1556-1598), and six daughters. 
Much to Bagenal's annoyance on his return to Ireland, Stanley was maintained as marshal by Queen Elizabeth while Sir Nicholas had to be content with a mere captaincy. On 23 April 1562 he wrote to the queen, complaining that his lands in Newry brought him in nothing owing to the depredations of Shane O'Neill, whereas while he was in office they were worth $1000 a year. When Sir Henry Sidney became deputy with the backing of the earl of Leicester (who had always been a patron of Bagenal) Sir Nicholas was reappointed as marshal in a patent dated 5 October 1565. Scarcely had he taken up the office when, early in 1566, he entered into an agreement to sell it and his lands to the adventurer Thomas Stucley for $3000. Sidney was supportive of this proposal, but the queen was justifiably suspicious of Stucley and Bagenal remained marshal. 
In this capacity Bagenal continued to serve the crown in Ireland for a quarter of a century. His successful proprietorship of the town and vicinity of Newry made it a bastion of English civility in southern Ulster, and from there Bagenal exercised overlordship of some of the Gaelic rulers of the region. Sidney praised the marshal's settlement of Newry, with its new mansion house and church, as a model of Anglicization, and it was proposed that the town should become the seat of a presidency of Ulster in 1586. Already Bagenal had been appointed chief commissioner for Ulster in 1584, and in the following year he was elected to parliament to represent County Down. 
Besides being active in the north, Bagenal was engaged in campaigns elsewhere under successive chief governors. His aggressive forays into southern Leinster exacerbated the cess controversy with the local gentry in 1576, but Bagenal was exonerated of any wrongdoing. His experience and knowledge of Ireland were respected by officials in Dublin and London, but in 1586 a bitter feud developed between Bagenal and Sir John Perrot which lasted until the lord deputy was recalled in 1588. The latter objected to the role of Bagenal and his sons as power-brokers in Ulster, while the marshal was a member of the faction of the Irish council that vehemently opposed the lord deputy's policies. On 15 July 1587 an affray occurred between the two men in Perrot's house as a result of which the aged marshal was knocked to the ground. 
On 20 October 1590 Bagenal resigned the office of marshal on grounds of age and ill health, and on condition that it be conferred on his son Sir Henry. He died shortly thereafter, and was buried at Newry on 7 February 1591. Sir Henry succeeded to both the estates and the marshalship. 


@@@@@


doc= 1036


Bagnall, Gibbons (1719-1800), Church of England clergyman and poet, was the only son of Gibbons Bagnall (1688-1743) of Windsor, vintner, and his first wife, Elizabeth Harries. He was admitted to Balliol College, Oxford, on 12 July 1738, and gained his BA on 30 April 1741. He afterwards went to King's College, Cambridge, where he took his MA in 1760. After taking holy orders Bagnall became vicar of Holm Lacy in Herefordshire, and headmaster of the free school at Hereford. He had married Sarah Reeve of Windsor in 1757. 
Bagnall was collated on 27 May 1760 to the prebend of Piona Parva in Hereford Cathedral, and on 1 August 1767 to the prebend of Barsham in the same cathedral establishment. He also held for some time the rectory of Upton Bishop, Herefordshire; and in 1783 he was presented to the nearby vicarage of Sellack. He died on 31 December 1800, in his eighty-second year. 
Bagnall's most important published works were in verse. The first was 'Education: an Essay' (1765). A more ambitious literary work was a verse translation, in two volumes, of F. de Salignac de La Mothe Fenelon's account of the adventures of Telemachus, son of Ulysses. However, this failed to capture the 'cadenced prose' of Fenelon, according to a contemporary critic ('A New Catalogue', 1799). 


@@@@@


doc= 1037


Bagot, Sir Charles (1781-1843), diplomatist and governor-in-chief of British North America, was born on 23 September 1781 at Blithfield Hall, Staffordshire, the second surviving son of William, first Baron Bagot (1728-1798), and Elizabeth Louisa (died 1820), the eldest daughter of John St John, second Viscount Bolingbroke. William Bagot and Richard Bagot were his brothers. Bagot was educated at Rugby School and Christ Church, Oxford, and received his BA in 1801 and his MA in 1804. In November 1801 he entered Lincoln's Inn, but he abandoned his legal studies within a year. On 22 July 1806 he married Mary Charlotte Anne Wellesley-Pole (died 1845), the daughter of William Wellesley-Pole, the future third earl of Mornington, and a niece of the future duke of Wellington; they had four sons and six daughters. 
In June 1807 Bagot entered the House of Commons for Castle Rising, a rotten borough in the gift of his uncle Richard Howard. In August 1807 he became under-secretary for foreign affairs, and formed a close friendship with his superior, George Canning. Later that year he abandoned his parliamentary seat in favour of a sinecure as steward of the Chiltern Hundreds. In October 1809 he followed Canning out of the Foreign Office but in 1814 briefly served as minister-plenipotentiary to France. On 31 July 1815 he became minister-plenipotentiary and special envoy to the United States and on 4 December was appointed to the privy council. In March 1816 he arrived in Washington, where, despite his youth and inexperience, he proved an able diplomat. He enjoyed neither Washington's climate nor its society, but he held his tongue and became popular and respected. He successfully resolved a number of the frictions arising out of the Anglo-American War of 1812-14. His greatest success was an agreement to limit naval forces on the Great Lakes, which was formalized in an exchange of diplomatic notes with the American secretary of state, Richard Rush, in April 1817, and became known as the Rush-Bagot agreement. Bagot was also involved in efforts to settle disputes over American access to the Atlantic fisheries and over the boundary from Lake of the Woods, in the far west of Upper Canada, to the Pacific, both of which were formally resolved by the convention of 1818 which was negotiated in London. Bagot thus helped to create what would eventually be the longest undefended border in the world. 
Bagot returned to England in 1819. On 20 May 1820 he was created a GCB and on 23 May was made ambassador to Russia. He found St Petersburg more congenial than Washington, and formed a close and friendly relationship with the tsar, whom he sought to restrain from aggressive actions in Turkey. In 1821 he negotiated an end to Russian efforts to make the north Pacific a closed sea, and he began the negotiations which resulted in the Anglo-Russian treaty of 1825 defining the boundary between Alaska and British North America. In the autumn of 1824 Bagot persuaded Canning to transfer him to The Hague so that he could reduce the heavy expense of maintaining family homes in both London and St Petersburg. Until 1831 he served as ambassador to the Netherlands, and he played a minor part in the negotiations which established the independence of Belgium. In 1828 he declined appointment as governor-general of Bengal, but he was identified with the Conservatives, and the only diplomatic post he held after 1831 was a short mission to Vienna to congratulate Francis I on his accession in 1835. 
When the Conservatives returned to power in 1841 Sir Robert Peel and Lord Stanley, the secretary of state for the colonies, persuaded Bagot to become governor-in-chief of British North America (27 September 1841). Bagot was selected partly because it was presumed his appointment would be welcomed in the United States, but also because the Conservatives were concerned to halt the trend towards responsible government in British North America. In the aftermath of the abortive rebellions of 1837, the whigs had accepted Lord Durham's recommendation that Upper and Lower Canada be amalgamated into the united province of Canada, thus placing the French Canadians in a minority, but they had also accepted Durham's recommendation that the colonial government must obtain the consent of the majority in the assembly, thus opening up the possibility that the French-Canadian party might have to be admitted to power on their own terms. Bagot's instructions were to continue the policies of his whig predecessor, Lord Sydenham, and to promote gradual assimilation of the French Canadians while governing through the non-party coalition which Sydenham had constructed in the assembly of the united province. Shortly after arriving at the capital in Kingston, Upper Canada, on 10 January 1842, and taking office two days later, Bagot realized that the non-party coalition was disintegrating and that he would have to conciliate the French-Canadian reformers led by Louis-Hippolyte LaFontaine. Bagot sought to win French-Canadian support by appointing to office a number of French Canadians, including Denis Benjamin Viger, who had been implicated in the rebellion of 1837 and whose appointment to the legislative council Stanley refused to confirm. To Stanley's horror Bagot also reported that many of the measures introduced by Sydenham to accelerate assimilation of the French Canadians were not working and ought to be abandoned and that the large civil list embodied in the 'Union Act' of 1840 ought to be reduced. Bagot did persuade a moderate reformer, Francis Hincks, to join the executive council, and he opened negotiations with LaFontaine, but he was unable to break the solidarity of the French-Canadian bloc or to undermine their alliance with the English-Canadian reformers led by Robert Baldwin. 
When the assembly of the united province met in September 1842 Bagot's conservative ministers could no longer command a majority. Bagot reluctantly accepted their resignations and negotiated an agreement which allowed the Baldwin-LaFontaine coalition to take office on 14 September 1842. He retained several executive councillors not directly identified with any party, but he gradually came to develop a healthy respect for LaFontaine and Baldwin, and, as his health deteriorated, the reformers dictated policy and controlled patronage. As Bagot admitted, the principle of responsible government which the British government had previously refused to acknowledge had in effect been conceded and the policy of assimilating the French Canadians abandoned. Bagot's actions not only earned him the animosity of Canadian Conservatives, but created consternation in London, where Peel, Stanley, and Prince Albert had all made clear their opposition to a surrender of the prerogative to the Canadian reformers whose loyalty to the crown and the imperial connection seemed suspect. When Bagot submitted his resignation late in 1842 because of poor health, the Conservatives enthusiastically accepted it and appointed as his successor Sir Charles Metcalfe in the hope that he could undo the harm they felt Bagot had done. 
When Bagot died in Kingston on 19 May 1843, after having been replaced by Metcalfe as governor on 30 March that year, reformers throughout the united province of Canada mourned his death. His body was transferred to England for burial. It was his short Canadian administration which established his reputation: in fact, Bagot's actions may well have saved the imperial connection, for they helped to convince the reformers, particularly the French-Canadian reformers, that they could achieve their goals through constitutional means, and he had established the principle of responsible government so firmly that there was no going back. Bagot was not as able a politician as his predecessor in Canada, Lord Sydenham, nor as capable an administrator as his successor, Sir Charles Metcalfe. He owed the series of offices he held to his family connections and to influential friends, and he was deeply conservative, if not reactionary, in his political views. But he was a capable diplomat, who happened to be placed in Canada at precisely the moment when diplomatic skill was required. Bagot did not go to Canada to introduce a new political system. Initially he did everything he could to avoid surrendering power to the reformers. But in the end he was shrewd enough to make a virtue of necessity, thus earning a permanent place in the pantheon of great imperial statesmen. 


@@@@@


doc= 1038


Bagot, Lewis (1740-1802), bishop of Bristol, Norwich, and St Asaph, was born on 1 January 1740, the fifth son of Sir Walter Bagot, fifth baronet (1702-1768), of Blithfield, Staffordshire, and his wife, Lady Barbara Legge (died 1765). He was a younger brother of William, first Baron Bagot. Educated at Westminster School, he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 8 March 1757. His verses on the death of George II and accession of George III were printed in the 'Oxford Poems' in 1761. He graduated BA in 1760, but his education was interrupted by ill health, which obliged him to live in Lisbon until 1764, when he proceeded MA on 23 May. Bagot was subsequently appointed a canon of Christ Church in 1771 and in the same year married Mary Hay (died 1799), daughter of the Hon. Edward Hay, niece of the earl of Kinnoul, and sister of his predecessor in the canonry of Christ Church. There were no children from the marriage. In 1772 he was made DCL and was also presented by Lord Northampton to the livings of Jevington and Rye in Sussex. 
Bagot quickly gained a reputation as a high-churchman and a defender of the religious character of university education. In 1772 he wrote a tract claiming that a university education was inherently a process of religious instruction, and the following year he opposed any change to the subscription by Oxford graduates to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. In 1777 Lewis Bagot was installed as dean of Christ Church. He continued his defence of the Anglican monopoly at Oxford by protesting that those who sought relief from the subscription would not give any guarantee that they only sought it for protestants. In this he was an ally of Sir Roger Newdigate. 
On 23 February 1782 Bagot was consecrated bishop of Bristol, which he held together with the deanery of Christ Church, Oxford. He remained at Bristol for only fifteen months before translation to Norwich in May 1783. In 1790 he was translated to St Asaph, where he rebuilt the bishop's palace and declared his intention of spending most of his time in the diocese. His visitation queries asked detailed questions about the residence of clergy and the position of curates in the diocese. His later years were marked by ill health, and he was wasted almost to a skeleton when he died at London on 4 June 1802. He was buried at St Asaph Cathedral, which he regarded as his home. 
Bagot's high-church views led him into disputes with dissenters, and in 1776 he published a tract entitled 'The Dangerous Errors of the Anabaptists'. He was a staunch and intolerant anti-Unitarian, and the strength of his views brought him much vilification. His Warburton lecture on the 'prophecies' was published in 1780. His 'Letter to the Revd William Bell', published in 1781, advanced a high view of the eucharist akin to the views of bishops Atterbury and Horne. In the same year he gave fifty copies of Isaac Barrow's 'Doctrine of the Sacraments', which he had reprinted, to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. An important ingredient in Bagot's thought was a strongly providential view of society, which rejected ideas that progress from savagery to civilization had been the work of human agency alone. But Bagot's social ideology offered no special place for the poor, though he advocated the expansion of church schools, and argued that people should willingly pay their rates to support the poor. 
At the root of Bagot's ideas lay a strong conservatism; his 1784 visitation charge -- described by Parson Woodforde as a very long but a very good charge -- proposed church reform and censured neglect of duty in order to prevent greater social change. Bagot earned for himself a strong reputation as a bishop of 'thorough goodness' (Abbey). The poet William Cowper, who had been at Westminster School with Bagot, excoriated the English bench of bishops but concluded: '
... Still [Providence] keeps a seat for worth and grace 

And therefore 'tis that though the sight be rare 

We sometimes see a Lowth or Bagot there. 
(Cowper, 282)' 



@@@@@


doc= 1039


Bagot, Richard (1782-1854), bishop of Bath and Wells, was born at Daventry, Northamptonshire, on 22 November 1782, son of William, first Baron Bagot, and his wife, the Hon. Elizabeth Louisa St John (died 1820), daughter of the second Viscount Bolingbroke. William Bagot, second Baron Bagot, and Sir Charles Bagot were his brothers. Richard was educated at Rugby School from January 1790 until 1799, when he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, graduating BA in 1803 and MA in 1806. He was awarded a DD (by diploma) in 1829. In 1803 Bagot was elected to an All Souls fellowship, which he resigned when he married Lady Harriet Villiers, daughter of George Bussey, fourth earl of Jersey, on 22 December 1806. They had eight sons and four daughters, all of whom survived their father. Ordained in 1806, Bagot was presented by his father to the rectory of Leigh, Staffordshire, and in 1807 to the rectory of Blithfield, the family seat. Family connections -- his uncle Lewis Bagot was bishop successively of Norwich and St Asaph -- ensured further preferment. In 1812 he became a prebendary of Lichfield Cathedral, and in 1817 was elected to a canonry of Worcester. Bagot was appointed dean of Canterbury in 1827, and in 1829 he was elevated to the bishopric of Oxford, holding the deanery 'in commendam'. 
Bagot was of a modest, retiring, and nervous disposition; his nerves never recovered from an accident while dean of Canterbury in which he swallowed cotton wool used to stop a tooth. He utterly refused the bishopric of Oxford when it was first offered him by the duke of Wellington, and accepted it only on the assurance of William Howley that the diocese would 'never give him trouble' (Paget to Eden, 22 Jan 1879, Ollard MSS). It was Bagot's misfortune that the rise of the Oxford Movement and all its consequences proved Howley wrong, and exposed the bishop to a limelight which by nature he would have shunned. 
The bishop of Oxford stood in an anomalous position in relation to the university: he was not ordinary within the colleges, though he ordained for some. Bagot's difficulties were compounded because, unlike his predecessor, Charles Lloyd, he lacked academic standing within the university and did not have a reputation for scholarship. The diffident bishop, nicknamed King Log on account of an undeserved reputation for lack of activity, seemed a most unlikely candidate for Tractarian reverence as an episcopal specimen successor of the apostles. Yet the Tractarians were to have few more genuine friends on the episcopal bench. 
Bagot's birth and tory family background gave him the credentials of a moderate high-churchman of the old school; he attempted to tighten church discipline and episcopal authority in the diocese. In 1831 he deprived the Calvinist H. P. Bulteel from his curacy at St Aldates for preaching antinomianism, while in the last year of his episcopate, in 1845, Bagot took the Revd James Hawker Langley, perpetual curate of Wheatley, to the ecclesiastical courts for extempore preaching. His first episcopal charge in 1834 was distinctly high church in tone, and indeed his personal regard for Newman and Pusey was great. His forbearance, sympathy, and trust earned the respect of many Tractarians. In 1836 he took delight in Newman's new church at Littlemore, despite its supposedly 'papistical' features. In 1838 Newman dedicated his 'Lectures on Justification' to the bishop. According to his private chaplain and nephew, Francis Paget, Bagot was able to retain a larger degree of personal influence with the Tractarian divines than an abler man might have attained. 
Bagot consistently resisted intense low-church and evangelical pressure to act firmly against the Tractarian movement. The bishop's charge of 1838 restated the high-church themes of his earlier charge and vigorously denounced the ecclesiastical commission. In spite of some mild words of caution, which an over-sensitive Newman misinterpreted as evidence of coldness and rebuke, the tenor of the charge was broadly favourable to the authors of the 'Tracts for the Times', who were praised for recalling forgotten truths such as the authority and discipline of the church. Subsequently the bishop went out of his way to reassure Newman that he had not meant to censure the tracts. Bagot did not agree with the Tractarians 'tout court'; his main concern was to check the rise of party division within the diocese, and he blamed opponents of the Tractarians primarily for fostering party spirit. When anti-Tractarians such as C. P. Golightly sought to establish a protestant martyrs' memorial in Oxford in 1838, partly as a deliberate hit at the Tractarians, Bagot attempted to defuse the situation by persuading Pusey to subscribe to the memorial, though he had no such success with Newman. On other occasions Newman's almost exaggerated respect for his diocesan as 'my pope' raised difficulties and caused the bishop embarrassment. Bagot privately pleaded with Newman to check the extravagances of his younger followers, because they tended 'to retard the progress of sound and high Church principles which you would inculcate' ('The Letters and Diaries of John Henry Newman', ed. C. S. Dessain and others, 31 vols., 1-10, 2nd edn, 1978-, 7.190). 

'Tract 90' (1841) and the subsequent excesses of the movement put an increasing strain on Bagot's friendly relationship with the Tractarians. Always dependent on the counsel of Archbishop Howley, he was vulnerable to Lambeth pressure to take a somewhat firmer line with the Tractarians. The bishop's chaplain, Francis Paget, later likened Bagot's position between 'Blomfield's on the one side, and Golightly and such like cattle on the other' as akin to that of 'a railway servant, caught and pressed... between the buffers of two engines' (Paget to Eden, 24 Jan 1879, Ollard MSS). In the period 1841-2, Bagot showed extreme deference to the advice of other bishops and clergy. He requested Newman to bring the series of 'Tracts for the Times' to an immediate close and to state more clearly his view of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. In a published letter to the bishop Newman appeared to comply with this request, having persuaded Bagot to yield from his original intention of getting Newman to 'suppress' 'Tract 90'. While Bagot appeared satisfied and Howley congratulated him on his handling of the affair, others complained that the bishop had been 'hoodwinked': that Newman not only did not withdraw 'Tract 90' from circulation but, in opposition to the bishop's wishes, had a new edition printed. Low-church critics accused Bagot of 'swelling the sails of Puseyism' (Mead, 129). 
Bagot struck a more critical note in his 1842 charge, which criticized theories by which 'the Articles may be made to mean anything or nothing', expressing fears and warnings for the disciples rather than leaders of the movement. In his later dealings with the Tractarians, over the poetry professorship contest in late 1841 and the controversy over the suspension of Pusey from preaching in 1843 for an unsound sermon on the eucharist, Bagot acted notably less sympathetically towards them. Although he could please neither side in the controversies, Bagot's careful line won the plaudits of high-church supporters of the movement such as William Palmer of Worcester, who dedicated his 'Narrative of Events Connected with the Publication of the 'Tracts for the Times'' (1843) to the bishop. 
Bagot's nervous character was a family trait, but whereas his elder brother gave way to nervous breakdowns, the bishop 'struggled to conceal the infirmity with all his power' (Ollard MSS). The strain of the Tractarian controversy, 'an ever present source of inward misery', finally took its toll. Bagot was for some years eager to be transferred from the Oxford diocese. The more candid among the Tractarians recognized that his going away would be perilous for them, and they hoped to avert it. By 1845, after pleading with the prime minister, Sir Robert Peel, and satisfying himself on the situation of the episcopal residence and the local climate, Bagot was translated to the see of Bath and Wells. He then suffered a complete nervous collapse. For a time his diocese was administered, in accordance with a special act of parliament, by the bishop of Gloucester and Bristol, Henry Monk. Bagot recovered, but the theological turmoil associated with the Oxford Movement pursued him to the last. In 1853-4 Bagot was caught up in the controversy involving one of his archdeacons, George Anthony Denison, whose teaching on the real presence in the eucharist was deemed inconsistent with Anglican formularies. Bagot differed from Denison in his interpretation of the church's eucharistic doctrine, but feared that low-church views of the sacrament would be sanctioned by any legal adjudication. Just before his death, the bishop put his hand to a quasi-censure or admonition of Denison; later, to the dismay of Bagot's family, Denison published his correspondence with Bagot, in which the bishop lamented Denison's speculations as to the eucharist. Latterly in failing health, Bagot died at Brighton on 15 May 1854, through 'a complication of disorders'. His wife survived him, and died on 18 October 1870. Newman offered a mass for the repose of her soul. 


@@@@@


doc= 1040


Bagot, Sir William (d. 1407), administrator, came from a Staffordshire family, and was perhaps a younger brother of Sir John Bagot of Blithfield. He established himself as a landowner in Warwickshire by purchasing Baginton and two other manors in the 1380s, and by leasing Morehall from Stoneleigh Abbey. He also built up landed interests in Cheshire, in part by using a contrived pedigree. His wife, Margaret (died 1417), was the sister and heir of Robert Whatton of Nottinghamshire, but she may not have come into her inheritance until after Bagot's death. 
Bagot owed his early political rise and growing influence in Warwickshire largely to the patronage of Thomas Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1401), and in 1377 he was admitted with the earl to the confraternity of St Albans Abbey. However, he was also retained by John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster (died 1399), from before 1379, and when in 1384 he began a long dispute with one of Warwick's legal advisers, both Gaunt and Warwick arbitrated between them. While Gaunt was in Spain in 1386 Bagot became attached to his son, Henry Bolingbroke, earl of Derby (the future Henry IV), from whom he received livery. He had also formed a close relationship with the Mowbray earls of Nottingham. Before 1383 John (IV) Mowbray granted him for life the manor of Crick, Northamptonshire, worth $20 per annum, and he also enjoyed the lifelong confidence of Earl Thomas (died 1399). Bagot was probably instrumental in persuading these young lords, Bolingbroke and Mowbray, to join the older lords appellant (Gloucester, Arundel, and Warwick) in their attack on Richard II's favourites in December 1387, and the first of the eleven parliaments in which he represented Warwickshire was the Merciless Parliament of February 1388. Nevertheless, the king soon set about cultivating his support. He granted him the lordship of Middlewich, Cheshire, in 1389, and the keeping of Caernarfon Castle in 1390, and further signs of favour included valuable wardships and the stewardship of the manor of Cheylesmore, situated in the area of Warwickshire where Bagot was increasingly dominant. 
A supreme opportunist, Bagot now allied himself more closely with the younger former appellants rather than with Warwick, who in 1391 brought a lawsuit against him for land at Walsall. He did not need to look to aristocratic influence to secure repeated election to parliament, and there were few who dared challenge his local interests. He emerged unscathed in 1395 when his disputes with the authorities at Coventry provoked an uprising, confounding an attempt to bring him to justice at the assizes at Warwick in 1396 by arrogantly riding into town at the head of his armed retainers. Indicted of several crimes, including homicide and maintenance, he was tried in king's bench but eventually acquitted. Bagot continued to serve Mowbray as his chief steward, general attorney, and lieutenant at the Marshalsea, and was named as his executor. Similarly, he preserved good relations with Bolingbroke, despite serious discrepancies in his accounts (for which he was temporarily imprisoned in Kenilworth Castle). He was still being paid as a member of Bolingbroke's entourage in June 1397. 
In July 1397, when Gloucester, Arundel, and Warwick were arrested on Richard II's orders, Bagot was instructed to take possession of Warwick's goods, and in August the king granted him the substantial life annuity of $60. In the parliament assembled a month later he joined the speaker, Sir John Bussy (died 1399), and Sir Henry Green, in formally requesting the annulment of the charters of pardon previously granted to the appellants, thus driving Richard's policies through the house. On 22 September, the day after Arundel's execution, he was appointed steward of the earl's confiscated lordships in the Welsh marches and constable of his castle at Holt. Furthermore, he was assigned a prominent place on the king's council to induce recalcitrants to pay fines. The subsequent quarrel between Mowbray and Bolingbroke cast doubt about where Bagot's loyalties lay. To dispel allegations of his involvement in a plot against Bolingbroke and his father, in March 1398 he entered bonds for $1000, payable in the event of his ever seeking to disinherit Gaunt or his progeny, and insisted that if he was ever proved party to the murder of one of them he should immediately be put to death without trial. In September Richard II lodged at Bagot's home, conveniently sited near Coventry where the duel between Mowbray and Bolingbroke was planned to take place, and in March 1399, following their exile, he retained Bagot as a councillor with a fee of $100 per annum. 
When Richard II sailed for Ireland that spring Bagot was left behind with Bussy and Green to assist the duke of York in administering the kingdom. On receiving news of Bolingbroke's landing in Yorkshire they advised the removal of the government to St Albans, and safeguarded the queen at Wallingford Castle. Bagot raised 140 men to resist Bolingbroke, but retreated to Bristol at his approach, and although Bussy and Green were seized and executed he managed to escape by sea. Captured in Ireland, he was imprisoned in Knaresborough Castle and then in Newgate, before being sent on 16 October before the first parliament summoned by Henry IV. Bagot successfully defended himself against charges of plotting to kill Gaunt, and established through witnesses that during Henry's exile he had sent him intelligence about Richard II's plans, warning him of the confiscation of his Lancastrian inheritance. He staunchly defended Mowbray's reputation by exonerating him from any responsibility for the death of the duke of Gloucester. Henry showed leniency towards him by authorizing payment of an annuity of $100, although, wary of arousing popular feeling through any swift expression of clemency, he kept him incarcerated in the Tower of London for a year. Bagot was loosed from his chains in April 1400, and released seven months later. The Commons of February 1401 successfully petitioned for his restoration to law and property on the grounds that he had been falsely accused. Bagot again represented Warwickshire in parliament in 1402. He died on 6 September 1407 and was buried at Baginton church. The brass on his tomb showed him wearing the SS collar of Lancaster. About 1399 he had arranged the marriage of his only surviving child, Isabel, to Thomas Stafford, the nephew and heir of the chancellor, Edmund Stafford, bishop of Exeter (died 1419). When she failed to bear children his estates were sold. 


@@@@@


doc= 1041


Bagot, William, second Baron Bagot (1773-1856), antiquary, was the third son of William Bagot, first Baron Bagot (1728-1798), and Elizabeth Louisa St John (died 1820), daughter of the second Viscount Bolingbroke. His brothers included Sir Charles Bagot and Richard Bagot. He was born in Bruton Street, London, on 11 September 1773. He was educated at Westminster School, and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1791, but did not graduate. He received the honorary degree of DCL from the university in 1834. As the eldest surviving son, he succeeded to his father's title in 1798. Lord Bagot took an active interest in agriculture, natural history, and archaeology. He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and of the Linnean, Horticultural, and Zoological societies. In 1824 he published 'Memorials of the Bagot Family', containing a sketch of his ancestors, who had been Staffordshire landowners since the Norman conquest. He did not take an active part in politics, but gave consistent support to the tories, voting against reform in 1832. Lord Bagot was twice married. On 1 May 1799 he married the Hon. Emily Fitzroy, fourth daughter of Charles, first Baron Southampton. She died of consumption on 8 June 1800, having borne a daughter who died in infancy. On 17 February 1807 he married Lady Louisa Legge, eldest daughter of his cousin the third earl of Dartmouth; they had three sons and three daughters. After the death of his second wife, of typhus fever on 13 August 1816, Lord Bagot remained a widower until his death on 12 February 1856 at his home, Blithfield House, Abbots Bromley, Staffordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 1042


Bagshaw, Christopher (1552-1625?), Roman Catholic priest, was the son of George Bagshaw, a prosperous innkeeper in Lichfield, who came from a Derbyshire gentry family. His mother was Joanna, daughter of Richard Parsons. He seems to have matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1566, and then to have migrated to Balliol College, Oxford, where he became a probationer fellow in 1572, graduating BA in the same year and MA in 1575. While at Balliol he quarrelled with, and helped secure the ejection of, another fellow, Robert Persons, later the famous Jesuit. Balliol was noted for its Catholic tendencies, but Bagshaw was orthodox at this time and in 1579 he became principal 'or at least deputy for a time' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.390) of Gloucester Hall. He was also appointed a prebendary at Lichfield Cathedral, where his elder brother, a Church of England clergyman all his life, held a similar position. In 1582 Bagshaw left Oxford, travelling to the English College at Rheims, where in 1583 he was ordained as a Catholic priest. He was then sent to the English College at Rome, but was expelled from that institution in 1585. There is sufficient evidence that he was a difficult, irascible character who, being forced to live a collegial life in various places, found it almost impossible to do so without quarrelling with his fellows. It is fair to say, though, that much of the evidence for his love of faction and quarrels comes from his enemies, who seemed to be prepared to give as good as they got. He returned to Rheims from Rome, stopping briefly at Padua on the way, where he was awarded a doctorate of theology, presumably on the strength of his studies elsewhere. 
Bagshaw then set out immediately in that same year of 1585 for England and was arrested within a very short time of his arrival in the country. He seems to have been carrying a letter to Scotland, sent by two agents of Mary, queen of Scots, in Paris, Charles Paget and the bishop of Ross. He was imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he stayed for about two years. He was a co-operative prisoner, and one of whom the government decided not to make an example. He was released, at least temporarily, in early 1588 and returned home to Lichfield. Then in March 1588 he was committed again to prison by the government, and sent to Wisbech Castle, Cambridgeshire, where he was to stay for the bulk of the next thirteen years. There were a number of Catholic priests interned at Wisbech, where they formed perforce a sort of college. At Wisbech there developed a quarrel between a group led by Bagshaw and one under another difficult character, the Jesuit William Weston. The 'Wisbech stirs' came to a head in 1595 and grew out of a series of disputes which had been brewing among English Catholics for at least fifteen years, and which were a matter of personalities, factions, strategy, and politics. 
In 1598 Bagshaw became involved in the movement to overturn the appointment by the pope of the pro-Jesuit George Blackwell as archpriest. Bagshaw co-operated with the government to some degree in this, which may account for his being summoned to the Tower for a time in 1598, although it was also because he had been implicated in the Squire plot by an informant. Bagshaw was a leading figure among the opponents of Blackwell, who were known as appellants from their appeal to Rome against the appointment. He helped to concoct many of the memorials produced by the affair and composed or contributed to a number of the controversial pamphlets which the appellants published. His writings were characterized by extreme hatred of the Jesuits, especially of the leading English member of the society and erstwhile colleague of Bagshaw's at Oxford and Rome, Robert Persons. 
Bagshaw was described in 1600 as being 'red-headed, gross and of low stature' (Anstruther). It was fitting that in 1601 he should be allowed by the government to be one of the party of four priests who set out to go to Rome on a second mission to appeal against Blackwell's appointment. Bagshaw got no further than Paris. Here he settled for the rest of his life, although there is a report that he was in Derbyshire in 1610. In 1612 he was involved in a public religious disputation with the English ambassador's chaplain in Paris, and, even according to the latter's report, gave a good account of himself. He is reported as having died in 1625. 


@@@@@


doc= 1043


Bagshaw, Edward (1589/90-1662), lawyer, was born in London, the second son of the London vintner Edward Bagshaw, whose family originated in Derbyshire, and his wife, probably named Mary Heming. Bagshaw's father died in 1597, and his mother then married the prominent Northamptonshire lawyer Augustine Nicholls. Although 1584 was traditionally given as his date of birth, Bagshaw was said to be fifteen in 1605 when he matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he was greatly influenced by his puritan tutor Robert Bolton. After proceeding BA in July 1608 Bagshaw was admitted to the Middle Temple and subsequently called to the bar in January 1616. His legal career prospered: in 1639 he was chosen a bencher of his inn, and that same year was appointed Lent reader. As his subject Bagshaw chose the medieval statute 'Pro clero', but his words attracted the attention of Archbishop Laud, who suspected a veiled attack upon the church. Despite Bagshaw's protestations, and his success in convincing Lord Keeper Finch of his sincerity, the readings were suspended after a threat of prosecution in the court of high commission. 
Bagshaw sat for Southwark in the Long Parliament, in which he was a keen participant in ecclesiastical debates, condemning the canons of 1640 as 'praemunire', denouncing the 'ex officio' oath, and complaining about the import of Catholic books. His eagerness to lard his speeches with details of ecclesiastical law and history was not always appreciated by his fellow MPs: D'Ewes described one as 'verie long, using discourse nothing pertinent to the matter in question' ('Journal', ed. Notestein, 425). An orthodox Calvinist, Bagshaw rejected the defence of episcopacy 'jure divino', blaming the current problems upon certain bishops who had 'perverted the ways of godlinesse' (E. Bagshaw, 'A Speech... Concerning the Triall of the Twelve Bishops', 1642). Yet he defended true episcopacy, arguing that presbyterianism was incompatible with the common law. Already critical of the Scots, as the political crisis worsened Bagshaw moved towards the king's camp: in November 1641 he joined Hyde in speaking against the grand remonstrance and eventually he abandoned Westminster for Charles's parliament at Oxford. In June 1644, however, he was captured as a traitor and incarcerated in the king's bench prison, where he devoted his time to writing. 
During the 1630s Bagshaw completed a biography of Robert Bolton and edited a number of his works, and he later published many of his own parliamentary speeches, together with a defence of his aborted Lent readings. Bagshaw set out his royalist political views in 'The Rights of the Crown of England, as it is Established by Law' (1660), drafted in prison in 1644 but not published until the Restoration. In it he maintained that the crown's powers derived from God, but were assented to by the laws of England. No absolutist, Bagshaw reflected upon the experience of the 1640s and struggled to reconcile his high regard for the common law with the acknowledged powers of the king, 'inasmuch as the safety of the one, is the safety of the other' (pp. 116-17). In April 1645 he was released on bail, and soon thereafter returned to Northamptonshire, where he remained until his death in 1662 at Moreton Pinkney, where he was buried. Edward Bagshaw (1629/30-1671), a prominent nonconformist minister, and Henry Bagshaw, a Church of England clergyman, were his sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 1044


Bagshaw, Edward (1629/30-1671), Independent minister and religious controversialist, was born at Broughton, Northamptonshire, the son of Edward Bagshaw (d. 1662). After education at Westminster School, on 1 May 1646 he was elected to a studentship at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 1 February 1647, aged seventeen. He graduated BA in 1649 and MA in 1651 (incorporated at Cambridge in 1654). Anthony Wood gives an account of his having been an unruly, intemperate, and provocative undergraduate, showing scant regard for authority or tradition, and of his having 'a turbulent and domineering' manner after graduation, addressing the vice-chancellor, John Owen, with his hat on (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.944). Owen seems not to have taken offence, for through his good offices in 1656 Bagshaw was appointed second master at his old school, Westminster, under his old headmaster, Richard Busby. However, Bagshaw's habit of 'sitting with my Hat on at Church [i.e. in the abbey]' and his 'not overvaluing' Busby's Greek grammar (Bagshaw, 2) fuelled a quarrel with his superior over duties and responsibilities. Bagshaw was suspended by the governors, and finally expelled in May 1658. The episode prompted his apologetic 'A True and Perfect Narrative of the Differences between Mr. Busby and Mr. Bagshawe' (1659). 
After this disappointment Bagshaw returned to Oxford, 'propagating his Commonwealth Principles' according to Walter Pope, his 'Schoolfellow and intimate Friend', who describes Bagshaw as the ringleader of a move to abolish caps and hoods 'as Reliques of Popery' (Pope, 37, 40). On 25 August 1659 Bagshaw was presented to the vicarage of Ambrosden, Oxfordshire; on 3 November, rather surprisingly in the light of his later career, he was ordained by Ralph Brownrigg, bishop of Exeter. By 1661 Bagshaw had withdrawn from the established church and the living was vacant; in that year, too, he was deprived of his Christ Church studentship. In 1661 he became chaplain to Arthur Annesley, first earl of Anglesey, whom he accompanied to Ireland in July 1662. Prohibited from preaching by the archbishop of Dublin, James Margetson, and harassed for holding conventicles in his lodgings, he was released from Anglesey's service and returned to England in September 1662. In October he was reported as saying that 'the King only minded his mistresses', that 'popery was coming in', that London was 'much discontented' at the Bartholomew day ejections, that the Long Parliament was not lawfully dissolved, and that people would rather be governed by it than by the restored regime ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 531-2). On 30 December a warrant was issued for him to be sent in custody to Secretary Henry Bennet. He was then living at Moreton Pinkney, Northamptonshire, presumably in the paternal home. Imprisoned first in the Gatehouse, Westminster, he was committed to the Tower for 'treasonable practices' on 16 January 1663, where, at the end of the month, a search of his room by the surveyor of the press, Roger L'Estrange, uncovered a manuscript in defence of a fellow prisoner named John Davis. This led to an interview with the king, 'who examined him of whom he had that Paper'. The boldness of Bagshaw's manner 'much offended' the king, 'whereupon he was sent back to the Tower, and laid in a deep, dark, dreadful dungeon' on 3 February 1664, whence, three days later, he was removed upon the intervention of his brother, the conformist minister Henry Bagshaw ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.378). On 31 March 1664 a warrant was issued for his removal to Southsea Castle, Hampshire, 'an unwholesome place in the Sea by Portsmouth' (ibid.), where he arrived on 17 April. There his fellow prisoners included Vavasor Powell. In January 1666 it was reported that he refused to sue for pardon, but on 9 November 1667 a warrant was issued for his discharge. In 1669 a man of his name was reported to be preaching at Bicester in Oxfordshire, at Westbury in Buckinghamshire, at Wanlip in Leicestershire, and at Burton Dassett and Priors Marston in Warwickshire. In May 1671 he was sentenced at Middlesex sessions to detention in Newgate during the king's pleasure for refusing to take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy. He was still a prisoner, though not confined, when he died on 28 December 1671 at a house in Tuttle (Tothill) Street, Westminster. He was buried in Bunhill Fields; according to Wood, the inscription for his tombstone was composed by John Owen. 
The intemperance which marked Bagshaw's encounters with superiors and with institutional authorities was a feature also of his literary career. He was a heated controversialist on behalf of nonconformist principles of an extreme congregational, even separatist, stamp. This brought him into conflict with Richard Baxter. In the tract which provoked the archbishop of Dublin to prohibit his preaching, 'A Letter to a Person of Quality' (1662), Bagshaw had in fact intervened on Baxter's behalf in a controversy with Baxter's diocesan, George Morley, drawing upon himself the ire of Roger L'Estrange in 'A Whipp, a Whipp for the Schismatical Animadverter' (1662); nevertheless, Bagshaw had none of Baxter's desire to minimize the nonconformists' separation from the established church nor his hope for eventual comprehension within the Church of England. On the contrary: Baxter's 'The Cure of Church Divisions' (1670) drew from Bagshaw an 'Antidote Against Mr. Baxters palliated Cure of Church Divisions' (1670) and, alternating with replies from Baxter, 'A Defence of the Antidote' (1671) and 'A Review and Conclusion of the Antidote' (1671), in which Bagshaw mocked what he took to be the inconsistencies of Baxter's 'middle way', rejected the legitimacy of parish churches, and refused to allow that occasional conformity to the episcopal church could be practised with integrity. In the 'Review', dated from Newgate 9 June 1671, he accused Baxter of having deserted 'the 'Cause of' 'Christ', and 'Non-conformity'' (E. Bagshaw, 'A Review and Conclusion of the Antidote', 1671, 4). 
Theologically, Bagshaw was an extreme Calvinist with (though he denied this) antinomian tendencies and Fifth Monarchist sympathies. In such tracts as 'A Practical Discourse Concerning Gods Decrees' (1659) and 'The Doctrine of Free-Grace' (1662) he argued strenuously for double predestination and a limited atonement against the 'Arminian' doctrines of free will, conditional election, and universal redemption which he detected in such adversaries as Thomas Pierce. The 'Practical Discourse' was dedicated to the regicide John Bradshaw, whereby, in the view of an episcopalian commentator, Bagshaw had 'unhappily nail'd himself down to a very harsh Doctrine, and to a very odious Patron' (Kennett, 603). Baxter described him as 'an Anabaptist, Fifth Monarchy man, and a Separatist, and a man of an extraordinary vehement spirit, who had been exasperated by many years hard and grievous imprisonment' (R. Baxter, 'Apology for the Nonconformist Ministry', 1681, 162). Though he could not approve that Bagshaw 'sided Tooth and Nail with the Fanatics', Walter Pope acknowledged Bagshaw's 'Natural and acquir'd parts' (Pope, 41). He had 'a great Reputation in the University as a Scholar', says Calamy (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.542), and he managed his controversial prose with pungency and forcefulness. At a date after 1665 Bagshaw had married Margaret (died 1672), the blind second daughter of John Peacock, of Chawley, Cumnor, Berkshire, 'who fell in love with him for his preaching' (Pope, 41). There were no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 1045


Bagshaw, Henry (1631x4-1709), Church of England clergyman, was born at Broughton, Northamptonshire, a younger son of the lawyer Edward Bagshaw (1589/90-1662), an opponent of Laudianism who in the divisions which arose in the early 1640s became a defender of episcopacy and royalist. The noted Independent minister Edward Bagshaw was an elder brother of Henry. The year of Henry's birth remains uncertain, as there is a contradiction between his reported ages at matriculation of seventeen in 1651 and at death of seventy-seven in 1709. 
After attending Westminster School, Henry Bagshaw was elected a student of Christ Church, Oxford, in 1651, graduating BA in 1655 and proceeding MA in 1657. In 1663 he was appointed chaplain to Sir Richard Fanshawe, ambassador to Portugal and then Spain. Bagshaw preached the ambassador's funeral sermon in Madrid and returned to England in the retinue of his widow, Anne, Lady Fanshawe, and became chaplain to Richard Sterne, archbishop of York. He was collated in turn to the prebends of Barnby in York Minster in August 1667 and Fridaythorpe in May 1668, and resigned the latter in July 1670. Thanks to Sterne's influence he was also made a prebendary of Southwell Minster in 1668 and rector of Carlton in Lyndrick, Nottinghamshire. He was created BD in 1668 and DD in 1671. 
In 1672 Bagshaw was made chaplain to Lord Treasurer Danby and rector of St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London. In April 1674 he married Mary Nicholls ('b'. 1647/8), the daughter of Sir Edward Nicholls, baronet, of Foxton, Northamptonshire. Two of his children were baptized at St Botolph without Bishopsgate, in 1676 and 1677. In the latter year he exchanged his London parish for Houghton-le-Spring, co. Durham, and in 1680 he was appointed a prebendary of Durham. Further children were baptized in Durham Cathedral (in 1684, 1688 and 1690), Houghton-le-Spring (1685), and (perhaps) St Andrew's, Holborn (in 1682). However, of the children known to have been born, nothing is known of the fate of the two or three daughters; only one of the four sons, Edward Bagshaw, seems to have survived. 
Bagshaw was renowned for his pulpit oratory and published a number of sermons. In 1673 he preached before the lord mayor 'The Excellency of Primitive Government', which -- suitably enough for a sermon upon the mayor's election -- expounded the duty of the magistrate to create a faithful and righteous city. In 1676 he published 'A Sermon Preached before the King at Whitehall' on 'Psalm 37', and in 1680 his 'Diatribae, or, Discourses upon Select Texts', in which he discussed what were in his view the 'two great enemies to Christianity,... the Papist and the Socinian' (epistle dedicatory). Bagshaw died at Houghton-le-Spring on 30 December 1709, and was buried in the chancel of the church. 


@@@@@


doc= 1046


Bagshawe, William (1628-1702), Presbyterian minister, was born on 17 January 1628 at Litton in the parish of Tideswell, Derbyshire, and baptized on 19 January at Tideswell, the eldest son of William Bagshawe (died 1669), yeoman of Litton, and his first wife, Jane, daughter of Raphe Oldfield of Litton. Educated at a number of local schools, his religious development was greatly influenced by two local clergyman, John Rowlandson, vicar of Bakewell, and Immanuel Bourne, vicar of Ashover. By the age of fifteen Bagshawe believed that he had a call to the ministry. Although his father, who eventually became a wealthy landowner in the Peak and took the title of gentleman, had communicated his own puritan beliefs to his son, he sought to dissuade him from a clerical career. When the elder Bagshawe's efforts failed he partially disinherited his son. William matriculated in 1646 as a sizar from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. In 1648 he preached his first sermon and served as a probationer at Wormhill, Tideswell, for several months. At the age of twenty-one he was appointed as an assistant minister to James Fisher at Sheffield and also served as a domestic chaplain to Colonel John Bright at nearby Attercliffe. Bagshawe was ordained at the Chesterfield classis on 1 January 1650 with his former spiritual mentor Bourne serving as temporary moderator. On 11 June 1650 he married Agnes (died 1701), daughter of Peter Barker of Darley, Yorkshire, with whom he had two sons, John ('b'. 1654) and Samuel ('b'. 1656). 
Admitted to the living at Glossop, Derbyshire, on 31 December 1651, Bagshawe was to remain in the parish for nearly twelve years. On 20 March 1654 he was voted assistant to the Classical Assembly, representing the hundred of Low Peak. During his ministry at Glossop he wrote at least three works, two of which are no longer extant. The most significant of these was probably his 'Brief Directions for the Improvement of Infant Baptism' (1658), which contemporaries claimed showed that Bagshawe limited baptism to the children of believers and performed the ordinance in public worship, preceding it with a sermon. Edmund Calamy wrote of Bagshawe that 'His Administration of the Sacraments, especially that of the Lord's Supper was with great solemnity and care' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.198). Over this period he also acquired a reputation locally for being a considerable theologian and conscientious pastor. 
Unable to conform at the Restoration, Bagshawe was ejected from his living in 1662 and retired to his father's estate at Ford Hall, Chapel-en-le-Frith, Derbyshire. Though a committed presbyterian, he was also a partial conformist and for 'several years attended the Publick Worship in his Parish-Church, both parts of the Lord's Day' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.199). At the same time he continued his preaching activities, often travelling over huge tracts of sparsely inhabited Pennine moorland to be present at conventicles, earning for himself the name the Apostle of the Peak. In 1669 Bagshawe's father died and although his inheritance had been considerably reduced on entering the ministry he did come into possession of the Ford Hall estate. From 1670 he enjoyed a greater degree of financial independence and Ford Hall became a focus for presbyterian activity in the Peak region. At the declaration of indulgence in 1672 Bagshawe took out a licence to preach as a presbyterian at any licensed building and regularly conducted worship at Glossop, Ashford, Malcoffe, Middleton, Bradwell, Chelmorton, Hucklow, and Ford Hall. During the late 1670s several warrants were issued against him, but he managed to avoid arrest and appeared to enjoy a degree of protection from sympathetic local magistrates. 
Between 1672 and 1702 Bagshawe wrote a further sixteen works, although only eight of these were published during his lifetime and seven were never published. His literary output was considerable and at his death he left an enormous mass of manuscripts that amounted to fifty volumes, folio, quarto, and duodecimo. The most significant of his later publications were 'De spiritualibus pecci' and his 'Essays on Union to Christ', which was published posthumously. The former provided an account of the development of protestantism in north Derbyshire, and gives an insight into Bagshawe's attitude towards his flock. While he praised the godly clergy and gentry of the Peak he also noted the 'scarcity paucity & scarceness' of his co-religionists among other groups, singling out the local lead miners for particular condemnation (Wood, 191). Nevertheless presbyterian strength in Derbyshire owed a great deal to his evangelistic endeavours. From the 'Act of Toleration' (1689) until his death, he preached regularly to ten congregations. During this period Ford Hall was used over the summer months as a centre for study and prayer for Derbyshire presbyterians. Early in 1688 Bagshawe allowed the hall to be used as an academy for training presbyterian ministers and appointed Samuel Ogden to serve as a tutor alongside himself. When the better-equipped academy at Attercliffe became established, Bagshawe felt no qualms in closing down and sending his students there. 
From 1698 Bagshawe's health began to deteriorate and his preaching activities became increasingly focused upon Ford Hall, though he continued to visit his congregations as often as he could. On 15 October 1701 he had his will drawn up and in November that year his wife, Agnes, died. Bagshawe died on Wednesday 1 April 1702 after a brief illness and was buried in the chancel of Chapel-en-le Frith parish church on 5 April. On his deathbed, hearing those around him lament that he could not preach to his congregation as usual he replied 'my silence is a sermon'. His nephew, the Revd John Ashe of Ashford, who subsequently published a life and character of Bagshawe in 1704, preached his funeral sermon. This work is the main source of information about the Apostle of the Peak. In his will, Bagshawe made charitable bequests to four Derbyshire parishes. The inventory of his goods amounted to $268 8's'., of which his considerable library was valued at $152 10's'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1047


Bagster, Samuel, the younger (1800-1835), printer and author, was born in the Strand, London, on 19 October 1800, the eldest surviving son of Samuel Bagster (1772-1851) and his wife, Eunice, 'nee' Birch (1777-1877). His two elder brothers died in infancy. He was educated at a school in Oxford, led by the Revd James Hinton, and was articled to his father's publishing business in 1815. He showed a keen interest in religion from an early age and in October 1822 became a member of Blackfriars Baptist Church. After acquiring technical training in his father's publishing house Bagster started his own printing business in Bartholomew Close in 1824. After a brief courtship he married Elizabeth Hunt (died 1879) on 22 June 1825. 
Bagster divided his time between printing, writing, social causes, and hobbies. He was a keen bee-keeper and poultry breeder. In 1831 he wrote and printed 'The Management of Bees', with forty wood-engravings. Published jointly by his father and William Pickering, the work was popular and highly thought of. Two further editions were published in 1838 and 1865. Bagster had been given the idea from a work by Samuel Purchas, son of the author of 'Purchas, his Pilgrimes' (1624-5), entitled 'A Theatre of Politicall Flying-Insects' (1657). Published in two parts, it described the history and management of bees and provided 'meditations and observations, theological and moral' upon the subject, which were reprinted by Bagster at the same time as his own work on bees. 
Bagster contributed to his father's polyglot series 'The Treasury of Scripture Knowledge' ['c'.1833/4]. This consisted of 'a rich and copious assemblage of more than 500,000 scripture references and parallel passages from Canne, Brown, Blayney, Scott, and others'. He also projected and planned to produce a series of questions on the gospels for Sunday school children, but the manuscript remained unfinished. Initially concerns about business worried Bagster, but within a few years he had established himself with many of the polyglot bibles and various other publications that came from his press. 
Continued poor health induced Bagster to move to Aldine Cottage in the then rural Shepherd's Bush, where he continued his bee-keeping and poultry breeding. The Bagsters were active in the work of the local Baptist chapel. Bagster campaigned against the slave trade and for temperance, and wrote a number of pamphlets on the latter cause. 
Bagster's health deteriorated during 1835; by early June he was extremely weak and was nursed by his wife at Aldine Cottage. Bagster sought to comfort his aged father with the words: 'I shall be in heaven before you'. On 1 July 1835, at the age of thirty-four, he died at his home; he left no children. He was buried at Tottenham Court Chapel, London. 
In 1837 the Revd John Broad published a 'Memoir of the Life and Christian Experience of Samuel Bagster, Junr.'

Bagster's remains were reinterred in 1843 in the family vault at Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 1048


Bagster, Samuel, the elder (1772-1851), publisher and author, was born in Eagle Street, Red Lion Square, Holborn, London, on 26 December 1772, the second eldest of the five sons and two daughters of George Bagster (1739-1819), a businessman, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Denton (1738-1823). He was educated from 1779 to 1783 at the Revd John Ryland's Northampton school, moving in 1783 to a day school at Hammersmith, run by Dr Morgan Jones. After three years he was apprenticed to William Otridge at 134 Strand. 
Bagster was overjoyed when on 8 February 1794 his father bought the lease of a confectionery and pastry shop that was closing down at 81 Strand. He commenced business there as a general bookseller on 19 April 1794 and within an hour had sold a forty-five-volume set of Johnson's 'Poets'. On 19 December 1797 he married Eunice Birch (1777-1877) whom he had met at a preaching rally led by William Romaine. They had nine sons, including Samuel Bagster the younger, and three daughters; six of the children survived infancy. 
Business at the Strand was brisk. In 1813 a humorous incident occurred with the publisher John Murray. Murray had contacted Bagster by letter, with a detailed proposition about some books. Bagster then called on Murray at Albemarle Street to explain why he would not be able to take on the venture. Murray was out, so Bagster left a note: 'Finding you out -- I decline your offer, S.B.' A few hours later a distraught Murray rushed in to see Bagster, spluttering, 'Pray Sir! What have you found me out in doing?' After Bagster explained, the two laughed at the misunderstanding. 
Bagster was determined to meet the need for inexpensive polyglot bibles. A Hebrew 'Bible' and 'Septuagint', both in foolscap octavo, soon appeared, but the production of English bibles was a monopoly in the United Kingdom, confined to the king's printers in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and to the universities of Oxford and Cambridge. However, the patent did not apply to bibles with printed notes. In 1816 Bagster produced 'The English Version of the Polyglot Bible' with a preface by T. Chevalier and over 60,000 parallel references, most selected and all verified by Bagster. He also attended to the minutest detail, even down to the choice of thread for sewing the sheets together. 
In 1816 Bagster moved his premises to 16 Paternoster Row. The following year saw the issue of the 'Biblia sacra polyglotta Bagsteriana', which was completed in four volumes. It was a very thorough production and included the prolegomena of Dr Samuel Lee, the Hebrew 'Old Testament', the Samaritan 'Pentateuch', the 'Septuagint' Greek version of the 'Old Testament', the Latin 'Vulgate', the authorized English 1611 version, the Greek 'textus receptus' of the 'New Testament', and the Peshito or ancient Syriac version. Two other forms of the English 'Bible' were issued, beginning the 'Facsimile Series'. The publication of the polyglot was followed in 1821 by an octoglot edition of the liturgy of the Church of England; this Bagster presented to George IV in the year of its publication. In 1828 the archbishop of Canterbury, William Howley, presented Bagster to William IV. 
A two-day fire destroyed the building at Paternoster Row on 1 and 2 March 1822. The stock, too, was all but ruined. Only the deeds and twenty-three copies of the 'New Testament' were preserved. Inadequate insurance cover with the Sun Fire company raised $500 and a further $140 was gained by selling 20 tons in weight of ruined papers. To recover from the shock of the fire Bagster and his wife travelled around Europe in 1823, returning in September. 
A friendship and working relationship with the self-taught orientalist William Greenfield began in 1822. In 1827 Bagster's 'Comprehensive Bible', edited by Greenfield, with 4000 illustrative notes, 500,000 marginal references, and a general introduction, was published. A number of other scholarly biblical works, all edited by Greenfield, were printed by Bagster. When Greenfield died Bagster wrote an account of his life in the 'Imperial Magazine' (1834). The firm's motto, 'Multae terricolis linguae, coelestibus una' ('Many tongues for those on earth, one for those in heaven'), believed to be by Greenfield, was inscribed in both Greek and Latin on Greenfield's tomb. 
In 1837 Bagster encouraged Isaac Pitman (1813-1897) to invent a new shorthand system. 'Stenographic Sound-Hand' was the result, and established Pitman's reputation. Other notable works published by Bagster include 'The English Hexapla' (1841) containing six translations of the 'New Testament': those of Wyclif (1380), Tyndale (1534), and Cranmer (1539), and the Genevan (1557), the Anglo-Rhemish (1582), and the King James (1611) versions. They were arranged side by side for easy comparison and reference. Also included was a Greek version and an account of the English translations. This led to Bagster's publishing an account tracing the history of the English version of the scriptures from the Anglo-Saxon to the 1611 translation. His 'Daily Light on the Daily Path, a Devotional Textbook' (1841) proved popular. 
Samuel Bagster died at his home at Old Windsor, Berkshire, on 28 March 1851 and was buried in April in the family vault at Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington, Middlesex. His wife survived him by some twenty-six years, reaching the age of 100. Jonathan (1813-1872), his tenth child, followed him as senior member of the firm. 


@@@@@


doc= 1049


Bagwell, William (b. c.1593, d. in or after 1664), merchant and writer on astronomy, was, according to his own account, 'bred a merchant in good quality, skilfully furnished with knowledge in all things necessary, and having seen the world abroad' (Bagwell, 'Mystery', introduction). For several years he had carried on an extensive trade, when losses overseas led to his being sent to prison for debt. By 1654 he had been in and out of prison for twenty years. He relieved the tedium of imprisonment by writing 'An arithmetical description of the celestial and terrestrial globes' (BL, Sloane MSS 652, fols. 141-4), a treatise which he did not publish, believing it to be too abstruse for general use but nevertheless worthy to be placed in a university. After being set at liberty and found employment by some friends he published a simplified version of this treatise as 'The Mystery of Astronomy Made Plain to the Meanest Capacity' (1655). This work is a natural philosophical text concerning geography, topography, and astronomy, which is mainly of interest in propounding the Aristotelian view of the universe at a relatively late date. 
Bagwell was so affected by the discipline of his confinement that he published, in poetical form, 'The Distressed Merchant, and Prisoner's Comfort' (1645); this was caricatured by the royalist Edmund Gayton in his 'Wil Bagnal's ghost, or, The merry devill of Gadmunton in his perambulations of the prisons of London' (1655), and also in 'Wil Bagnalls Ballet' included in the collection entitled 'Wit Restor'd' (1658). In 1660 Bagwell published another short poem, 'An Affectionate Expostulation for the Pious Employment both of Wit and Wealth'. He is last heard of in 1664 when his collection of riddles and aphorisms entitled 'Wit's Extraction' was published. This contains his portrait, engraved in 1659 and with an inscription giving his age as sixty-six. 
Bagwell's name appears to be associated with 'A concealement discovered for the publique advantage... the effect of a petition directed to the... Councell of State for the Common-wealth of England, by Will. Bagnell and John Brockendon, discoverers and plaintiffs in the behalf of the said Common-wealth' (1652), but it is possible that this William Bagnell was another person. 


@@@@@


doc= 1050


Baikie, William Balfour (1825-1864), traveller and surgeon, eldest son of Captain John Baikie RN, was born in Kirkwall, Orkney, on 27 August 1825 and educated privately and at the grammar school there. After taking his degree in medicine at Edinburgh, he entered the Royal Navy in 1848 as assistant surgeon. He served on the 'Volage', 'Vanguard', 'Ceylon', 'Medusa', and 'Hibernia' in the Mediterranean, and then as assistant surgeon at the Haslar Hospital, Portsmouth, from 1851 to 1854. In 1852 he won the support of Sir Roderick Murchison for a South American expedition up New Granada's Magdalena River, which, however, never came to fruition. Murchison later procured for him the post of surgeon and naturalist to the Niger expedition of 1854, which tried to ascend the Niger in a purpose-built steamer, the 'Pleiad', and form a trading settlement in the interior. On the death of John Beecroft at Fernando Po, Baikie took command of the expedition. He demonstrated the navigability of the Niger and the value of quinine as a prophylactic against malaria. He clarified the topography of the area, providing information for a map by John Arrowsmith. His 'Narrative of an Exploring Voyage up the... Niger and Isadda' (1856) gives a good account of his journey, but was criticized for understating the importance of the Royal Geographical Society in the expedition, an oversight which Baikie was careful to correct in his later publications. 
The expedition returned to England in February 1855. Murchison and Baikie, who had returned to the Haslar Hospital, immediately began a successful campaign for a second expedition, which set off in 1857. Baikie had particular instructions to investigate the geology of the area for scientific and commercial ends. He went up the Niger in the iron steamer 'Day Spring', but was shipwrecked at the Bussa rapids. However, he bought land at Lokoja at the confluence of the Kwora and Chadda or Benue and soon had a considerable settlement there, which remained under his authority after the abandonment of a scheme to bring it under government control as part of a drive to secure cotton supplies. He explored the surrounding countryside and persuaded the king of Nupe, the next powerful sovereign to the sultan of Sakatu, to help the passage of traders by land and river to Lokoja. He opened up the navigation of the Niger, made roads, and established a regular market. The more ambitious schemes for exploiting the Niger came to nothing, however, and Baikie was called home for health reasons, but died 'en route' at Sierra Leone on 12 December 1864. Baikie was far more scholarly than most African travellers, and his numerous books and articles in the journals of learned societies, published in his lifetime and posthumously, cover a wide range of topics; he wrote on the history and natural history of Orkney, and works on and in African languages, in which he had become interested on his second visit to the continent. 


@@@@@


doc= 1051


Bailey, James (1791-1864), classical scholar, was born at Otley, Yorkshire, where he was baptized on 16 November 1791, the son of James Bailey. He had at least four younger sisters, and was the grandson of James Bailey, master of the village school at Gargrave, Yorkshire, and later headmaster of the free school at Guiseley. Bailey is known to have been a boarder at Giggleswick School, from which he ran away, before being sent to Richmond grammar school under the headmastership of James Tate. To Tate he owed his love of classical scholarship. He was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1808 as a sizar, gaining a scholarship in 1813. He obtained the university Browne medals for Greek ode and epigram, and the members' prizes in 1815 and 1816, the latter for an essay on hieroglyphics (reprinted in the 'Classical Journal', vols. 16 and 17). He graduated BA in 1814 and MA in 1823, but did not gain the fellowship for which his talents might have recommended him. 
Bailey decided against entering the church, choosing instead to pursue literary ambitions, despite friendly warnings from Walter Scott, with whom he corresponded from 1812, and from whom he received encouragement and financial assistance, that letters provided an uncertain living. He seems to have remained in Cambridge, contributing in 1817 classical articles to John Ballantyne's 'Sale Room', and assisting John Richardson Major in his new edition of J. Scapula's 'Lexicon Graeco-Latinum' (1820). In the early 1820s he married and had a son. At the same time he was preparing his edition of Forcellini's Latin dictionary (2 vols., 1826), the work for which he was best known. In this he translated the Italian explanations into English, incorporated Forcellini's appendices within the main work, and added an extensive 'auctarium' of his own. 
In 1825 Bailey was appointed headmaster of the Perse Grammar School, Cambridge, at a salary of $125 a year; gradual increases to $400 a year testify to his effectiveness in raising the number of pupils. He resigned in 1833 owing to ill health, probably exacerbated by a chancery action brought by Cambridge townspeople challenging his policy of reducing the number of free places provided by the Perse trust from 100 to 16. Thereafter he lived on a pension of $100 and pursued his literary interests. Part 1 of his 'Comicorum graecorum fragmenta', with English translations by Francis Fawkes, Francis Wrangham, and Richard Cumberland, appeared in 1840, but there was no sequel. Troubled by debts -- his books were sometimes in pawn -- he moved in 1841 to Peckham, where the burden of supporting his son, who unsuccessfully claimed talents to poetry, increased his difficulties. On the recommendation of John Kaye, bishop of Lincoln, and Edward Maltby, bishop of Durham, both of whom were accomplished Cambridge-educated classicists, Bailey received a civil-list pension of $100 a year. He had married in the early 1820s, but by 1851 he was a widower. He died, in poverty, of chronic bronchitis at 1 Isabella Cottages, Arthur Street, Old Kent Road, London, on 13 February 1864. 


