@@@@@


doc= 13073


Herewald (d. 1104/1107), bishop in south-east Wales and the border, had jurisdiction over an area that by the early twelfth century had been assimilated to Llandaff. No certain details are known about his consecration. In the twelfth-century 'Book of Llandaff', he is treated as the successor to Bishop Joseph (died 1045) and called bishop of Llandaff, but the title is anachronistic and the statements as to the personnel present at his consecration, and its date and place, are contradictory and formulaic. There survives, moreover, a claim originating from St David's that he was consecrated neither by Archbishop Cynesige of York, nor by Archbishop Lanfranc of Canterbury (as the 'Book of Llandaff' variously states), but by Joseph of St David's. All three versions may belong to the context of the dispute between St David's and Llandaff over episcopal jurisdiction in the twelfth century. It is possible that Herewald did not, in fact, succeed Joseph. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' records the death of a Welsh bishop Tremerig in 1052, who also seems to have been active in south-east Wales. He may have been Herewald's predecessor. Circumstances on the Herefordshire-Wales border at this time, particularly the death in battle of Bishop Leofgar of Hereford in 1056, make the involvement of Cynesige in Herewald's consecration more plausible, as the bishop of Worcester, who administered Hereford for four years after Leofgar's death, was traditionally subordinate to York rather than Canterbury. 
Very little is known of Herewald's career, outside his temporary suspension by Archbishop Anselm between 1093 and 1100, for reasons now obscure. His name suggests that he may not have been Welsh by birth, or at least that he had partly English ancestry. Accounts of his actions described in the narrations of charters in the 'Book of Llandaff' cannot be taken as completely reliable. It may be that the attempt in these charters to associate him with all the overlords of Morgannwg in the later eleventh century, from Gruffudd ap Llywelyn (died 1063/4) to Roger de Breteuil, is particularly suspicious, as it has the effect of associating him not only with the whole range of territory claimed by Llandaff in the twelfth century, but also with almost all the secular sources of power. A list of churches consecrated by him, found in the same volume, appears, interestingly, to locate him mainly in the border area of Ergyng. Again, however, the reliability of this material cannot be assumed: it might represent an attempt to promote Llandaff's claims against the see of Hereford. The 'Book of Llandaff' credits Herewald with two sons, Mai and Lifris. The latter is associated with the church of Llancarfan, and is probably the author of the life of Cadog. The former may perhaps be identifiable with the Maius who testified to Pope Honorius II regarding the extent of the diocese of Llandaff 'c'.1129. It may be, therefore, that one or both of Herewald's sons were involved in promoting Llandaff's claims (and contributed, therefore, to the problems surrounding the evidence for their father's career). 
Herewald died on 6 March 1104, according to the 'Book of Llandaff'; an interpolated entry in 'Brenhinedd y Saesson' places his death in 1107. The former is more likely. 


@@@@@


doc= 13074


Hereward (fl. 1070-1071), rebel, is a figure on whom there is little reliable, and much suspect, information. It has been suggested that his epithet, the Wake, signifies 'the wakeful one'. It is, in fact, late, first appearing in the mid-thirteenth-century chronicle of John of Peterborough without gloss, and is more likely to be derived from Hereward's supposed relationship with the manor of Bourne in Lincolnshire, which from the mid-twelfth century was held by the Wake family. 
Contemporary or near-contemporary sources for Hereward's life with some claim to unimpeachable authority are confined to the D version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' and to 'Domesday Book'. They are sufficient to demonstrate his existence and a celebrated role in the English resistance to Norman rule in and around the Isle of Ely in 1070-71, but little more. The more detailed accounts of his life are all later and of equivocal value. An early twelfth-century interpolation into the E version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', a closely related passage in Hugh Candidus's history of Peterborough Abbey dating from the mid-twelfth century, and the twelfth-century 'Liber Eliensis', expand on Hereward's resistance and clearly encapsulate the traditions of the two foundations of Peterborough and Ely at the time. But neither is uninfluenced by a contemporary chanson cycle inspired by Hereward's renown. Elements of this cycle survive in Gaimar's 'Lestoire des Engles' dating from the 1140s, and in the late medieval 'Historia Croylandensis' from Crowland. It is, however, most fully represented in the early twelfth-century 'Gesta Herewardi'. An elaboration of the 'Liber Eliensis', this deals with Hereward's birth and early career as well as his resistance to the Normans. It manifestly draws on literary devices and heroic topoi, and, seemingly contradicting the few details afforded by the contemporary sources, it has been almost universally execrated. Nevertheless, it may embody some authentic detail. 
It is impossible to determine Hereward's family background with any certainty. The chanson tradition identifies him as the son of a Leofric of Bourne (variously said to be a kinsman of Ralph the Staller, Ralph, earl of Hereford, and Brand, abbot of Peterborough) and of an Eadgyth, the great-great-great-niece of Oslac, earl of Northumberland. None of these assertions can be substantiated. Nevertheless, it seems likely that Hereward was of high social status. 'Domesday Book' seemingly reveals that he held only a small estate in Laughton in his own right (there is no reason to believe that the Hereward who held lands in Warwickshire and Worcestershire in 1066 and 1086 was the same man), but he was otherwise a tenant of Peterborough Abbey in Witham on the Hill and Barholme and Stowe, and of Crowland Abbey in Rippingale, all in a small area of Kesteven in southern Lincolnshire. Nevertheless, the annual rent which he paid for Rippingale was a kind of tenure more typical of a political ally than of a subordinate. There are, moreover, indications that Hereward conferred title on Oger the Breton for much of his lands in 1086, and he can therefore probably be identified as a king's thegn. Whether he ever held Bourne is unclear; 'Domesday Book' ascribes the manor to Earl Morcar in 1066, but much of Morcar's estates in south Lincolnshire was apparently forfeitures held by him as earl or by his representative. 


According to the 'Gesta Herewardi', Hereward was a quarrelsome child and youth; and at the age of eighteen he was exiled for his unruliness at the petition of his exasperated father. He is then said to have wandered in Northumberland, Cornwall, Ireland, and Flanders. On his return to England, Hereward found that his brother had been murdered and his patrimony seized by Normans. Revenge quickly ensued, and he gathered around him a small band of discontented Englishmen. He was knighted 'in the English manner' by Abbot Brand of Peterborough; and he then encountered and slew a certain Frederick, before returning to Flanders. After a further adventure there he returned to England for good. Much of this must be romance, although an account of an expedition into 'Scaldimariland' (that is, Zeeland) by Manasses (I), count of Guines, can be placed in a contemporary historical context; and Hereward's murder of Frederick, who can be identified as the brother of Gundrada, wife of William (I) de Warenne, is, in a seemingly independent source, substantiated by the Hyde chronicle. 
Hereward comes into focus as a historical figure with the siege of the Isle of Ely as recorded in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. In the spring of 1070, a Danish fleet arrived in the Humber and roused the country to revolt against the Normans. At the same time the abbey of Peterborough was plundered 'by the men that Bishop AEthelric had excommunicated because there they had taken all that he had' ('ASC', s.a. 1071, text D). In the following year earls Eadwine and Morcar rebelled against Norman rule and retreated into the fenland with various discontented Englishmen. In reply King William dispatched a fleet and land force and besieged the Isle of Ely. The rebels were forced to submit 'except Hereward alone and those who could escape with him and he led them out valiantly' ('ASC', s.a. 1072, text D). 
The later sources are more fulsome, but there is no reason to doubt the essential veracity of the account they give. All are in agreement that Hereward led the assault on Peterborough Abbey as the leader of the abbey's tenants who resented the appointment of the Norman Turold to the house. Hereward at this time seems to have been in alliance with the Danes, and Peterborough tradition saw the action as one motivated by pure greed. There is, however, perhaps some truth in Hereward's concern, reported by Hugh Candidus, for the well-being of the foundation; as a prominent tenant of the abbey he may well have considered that he was acting in its best interests. Nevertheless, much of the treasure of the abbey was taken by the Danes after Hereward retreated to Ely. 
There is no information on Hereward's activities in the next few months, but after Eadwine and Morcar's resort to the Isle, he is portrayed as a principal actor in the opposition to the besiegers by the author of the 'Liber Eliensis' in an account that apparently draws on local knowledge. The monks of Ely are said to have feared that their abbot, Thurstan, was to be replaced by a foreign cleric and called upon Hereward to defend them. However, given the high status of the rebels, it seems unlikely that Hereward was the actual leader. His valiant escape, though, must suggest that he was a daring soldier who impressed the rebels with his courage and ingenuity. 
There is no contemporary evidence for Hereward's fate after his escape from the Isle of Ely. The later sources all agree that he was reconciled with William the Conqueror and regained his patrimony. Gaimar asserts that he was subsequently killed by a band of Englishmen, but the 'Gesta Herewardi' and the 'Historia Croylandensis' imply that he died in his bed. He is said to have been buried at Crowland. According to the 'Historia', he was succeeded in his estates by a daughter. Hereward had married an aristocratic Flemish woman called Turfrida before his return to England (Gaimar alone reports a second marriage -- to Alftruda). Their daughter is not named, but she is said to have married Hugh d'Evermue, and they in their turn were succeeded by a daughter who married Richard de Rullos. This descent is not wholly consistent with the known history of the barony of Bourne which incorporated Hereward's lands. However, title thereto continued to inform a dispute between the lords of Bourne and Peterborough Abbey into the mid-twelfth century, and it might therefore be suspected that the story contains a germ of truth. 
The legend of Hereward developed at an early period. The laconic reference to him in the D version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' suggests that within a few years of the event his daring escape was so famous that it required no further explanation. More clearly, the E version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' and Hugh Candidus's history drew on an English source written before 1121, and one of the three sources employed in the 'Liber Eliensis' appears to have been written in English. The audience was probably always local in the middle ages, but by the early twelfth century it was not exclusively English; Gaimar's history was written for an Anglo-Norman audience that could celebrate its English antecedents. The legend remained alive and probably vital into the later middle ages, as attested by the 'Historia Croylandensis', and as late as 1407 a genealogy was drawn up tracing the supposed descent of Edmund Holland, earl of Kent, from Hereward. Hereward owes his current popularity as an archetypal English hero in the mould of Robin Hood to the publication of the 'Gesta Herewardi' in the nineteenth century and to Charles Kingsley's novel 'Hereward the Wake' (1866) which is largely based upon it. 


@@@@@


doc= 13075


Herfast (d. 1084), administrator and bishop of East Anglia, was a Norman. He appears first as chaplain to William, duke of Normandy. The only anecdote from his early career is William of Malmesbury's, probably apocryphal, story of a humiliating clash with Lanfranc, prior of Bec (before 1063). After the Norman conquest of England, Herfast subscribed royal charters as chancellor in 1068-9; and after papal legates had deposed the English bishops unacceptable to the Conqueror, at Easter 1070, he was at Whitsun rewarded with the diocese of East Anglia, replacing the married AEthelmaer, Archbishop Stigand's brother. He was consecrated by an unknown prelate before Lanfranc's consecration (at which he assisted) to Canterbury on 29 August. 
Herfast's large and binary diocese, comprising the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, had had a chequered history and no settled ecclesiastical centre; and in 1070 it was disturbed by a Danish invasion and Hereward's rebellion. Herfast seems to have called himself indifferently bishop of Elmham, Thetford, or Norwich. None had a church grand enough for one of the new bishops, and Herfast from the start had two major ambitions: to establish his see in a more suitable church and to enforce his spiritual authority over the abbeys. His attempt to enter Bury St Edmunds, ruled by the distinguished Baldwin, was, however, implacably resisted. Baldwin visited Rome and obtained in 1071 a protective bull from Alexander II; he commissioned the fabrication of useful royal charters, promoted the cult of St Edmund, and even exploited his medical skill. When the bishop badly damaged his eyes on a branch while riding through a wood, the abbot offered treatment in return for Herfast's renunciation of his scheme. And at Easter 1081, in a court summoned to London, after Herfast had produced his predecessor's kennelman as witness and Baldwin an abbot and some doctored charters, the king decided in Baldwin's favour and imposed a heavy financial pledge for Herfast's compliance. Still grieving at this defeat, Herfast died in 1084 and was remembered at Norwich on 27 January. 
Monks inevitably regarded Herfast unfavourably. Lanfranc charged him with disrespectful behaviour and days spent in dicing, 'to name nothing worse' ('Letters of Lanfranc', no. 47). He recommended study of the scriptures and canon law. William of Malmesbury thought him both unintelligent and uneducated and reported the prognosticon at his consecration as: 'Not this man, but [the robber] Barabbas' ('John' 18: 40), doubtless 'bene trovato'. Although Herfast was unversed in that literary culture which these two monks so prized, as a ducal and royal chaplain he is unlikely to have been illiterate, and his having sons -- in 1086 two or more were in possession of St Mary's, Thetford, while possibly another, Richard fitz Erfast, possessed churches near York -- was no disqualification for episcopal orders. His servant Hermann, who wrote kindly of him in his miracles of St Edmund, thought him, by the standards of his time, a man intent on doing good, but led astray, as regards St Edmunds, by bad counsel. Indeed, he would seem to have attempted the reform of an ill-organized and distracted diocese, only to collide with an immoveable obstruction. 


@@@@@


doc= 13076


Herrick, Sir William (bap. 1562, d. 1653), moneylender and royal official, was baptized on 9 December 1562 at St Martin's, Leicester, the fifth and youngest son of John Herrick or Heyricke (1513-1589) of Leicester and Mary, daughter of John Bond. He was born into a successful business family in Tudor Leicester, and was apprenticed to an elder brother, Nicholas Herrick, who was a London goldsmith. Having become free of the Goldsmiths' Company in 1587, and taking over the business in 1592, he soon became active as a moneylender on both a large and a small scale. On one occasion the explorer and naval commander Martin Frobisher requested an overnight loan of $5, or even $3 (presumably to pay a gambling debt), but was lent only $2. By 1595 Herrick was able to buy the country house and estate of Beaumanor, near Leicester, from the financially embarrassed royal favourite, Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. On 6 May 1596 he married Joan, daughter of Richard May of Mayfield Place, Sussex; they had twelve children, of whom eight survived infancy, including Richard Heyrick (1600-1667), the Presbyterian minister. 
Elected MP for the borough of Leicester in the last Elizabethan parliament, Herrick was also to sit in the first and third parliaments of James I (on a vacancy from 1605 to 1610, and in 1621). Soon after the new monarch's accession he was knighted, became one of the king's jewellers, gained exemption from civic office, and secured a reversion to a tellership in the exchequer of receipt. The latter grant was confirmed in 1611 and he succeeded to the office in 1616. By then he had, perhaps unavoidably, become a large-scale lender to the crown. His papers, which have survived in considerable bulk, are a potential source for the workings of the Jacobean exchequer. They include a series of begging letters from his nephew, Robert Herrick, the poet, then a student at Cambridge, as well as the portage book of Herrick's exchequer fees during his tellership, from which can be derived approximate totals of his earnings, over and above any stipendiary fees from the crown; in a good year the sum was as large as $400, but often less than that. His so-called 'account book' (Leics. RO, MS DG 9/2049) spans the 1590s to 1630s, but is only a ledger of in and out payments in his capacity as a goldsmith and moneylender during the years 1610-19. It shows that very considerable sums were being deposited with him by other wealthy individuals, as well as recording a wide variety of loans and payments large and small. In the way in which he borrowed as well as lent, Herrick could be said to have anticipated the scrivener and goldsmith bankers of the mid- and later seventeenth century who kept 'running cashes'. 
It has been suggested that Herrick's criticism of royal patents granting monopolies, such as that for gold and silver thread, during the 1621 parliament was unacceptable to the court, and that this led to his loss of office. He was, however, allowed to sell the tellership and (though on worse terms) his post as jeweller, and vacated both in the course of 1623-4. There is evidence earlier than this of his having been in financial difficulties, probably because his loans to the crown had not been repaid. He had begun to sell property, rather than buying more, even before the 1620s, parting with a Northamptonshire rectory and its associated rights for $1700. His role as executor to the master of the great wardrobe, Sir Roger Aston (died 1612), proved vexatious; Herrick was still being harassed over this more than twenty years later, causing him to minute on a letter 'that I have not a peny of Sir Roger Aston's estait in my handes' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. c. 480, fol. 288). 
By the early 1630s Herrick had fallen into real impoverishment. This may have been worsened by his wife's extreme outspokenness and involvement in potentially slanderous disputes over religion. Lady Herrick was the sister of Sir Humphrey May (1573-1630), chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, and a privy councillor, a connection which had been an asset earlier in the century. As against Lady Herrick's iconoclastic removal of a painted church window, and Sir William's later refusal to pay ship money on a holiday home in East Anglia, he had, however, subscribed to the forced loan of 1627 and did pay ship money on his main midland property. Yet in 1638 two of the more constitutionalist and anti-Laudian of the judges ordered a stay of any proceedings against Herrick and his eldest son for unpaid taxes -- an echo perhaps of the famous Hampden ship money case decided earlier in that year. Meanwhile Sir William had surrendered his rights to the woodlands on and around the Beaumanor estate, and seems in effect to have made the management of his affairs over to trustees. The alleged plundering of his property by royalist soldiers in 1644 and 1645, because he and his wife were regarded as 'rebels' (parliamentarians), may have been, as it were, the last straw but is unlikely to have been of decisive importance. The family kept Beaumanor and a town house in Leicester, though they were still in difficulties during the later seventeenth century. 
Uncertainty surrounds some aspects of Herrick's life. He died on 2 March 1653 and is sometimes said to have lived to the age of ninety-six; this would place his date of birth in 1556 or 1557 and make him nearly six when he was baptized, which, though not impossible, is extremely unlikely. The statement of his age at death is probably the result of a misreading of the inscription on his tombstone (in St Martin's, Leicester), which properly interpreted indicates that he died at the age of ninety. Obscurity also surrounds the cause of the belief, held by his family and some local historians in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, that he had been sent on a mission from Queen Elizabeth I to the sultan of Turkey. The state papers foreign and the records of the Levant Company reveal no trace of him; unfortunately, the portrait, said to have been of Herrick with a lady companion, both in oriental dress, which might have confirmed this story, has not survived. 
More important questions concern his wealth and the reasons for his straitened circumstances and decline. He was probably never rich on the scale of his wife's brother-in-law, Baptist Hicks (1551-1621), later Lord Campden, or the greatest London tycoons of the time, such as Sir Paul Pindar (1565-1650), or some of the other farmers of the customs duties. Over-involvement in crown finance seems a likelier reason for his decline than loss of office, due to political and religious opposition to royal policy. With little evidence save the handwriting and certain entries in his papers, a decay in his mental faculties cannot be ruled out. The final picture is of an old man cajoled, possibly even swindled, out of his property rights by his own and his wife's families, and then the victim of looting by the cavalier army. At very much the same time, Herrick's poetical nephew lost his Devon church living at the hands of the victorious puritans. 


@@@@@


doc= 13077


Hering, George Edwards (1805-1879), landscape painter, was born in London, the younger son of Charles Ernest Christian Hering, a German bookbinder who belonged to the baronial family of von Heringen in Brunswick and who died when George was young. He was probably the child of that name baptized on 19 May 1805 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, the son of Charles and Eliza Hering. He first worked in a bank but was soon permitted by his family to adopt art as his profession, and in 1829 he studied at the Akademie der Bildenden Kunste in Munich. His patron, Lord Erskine, travelled with him in the Tyrol, and sent him to Venice. After staying there for about two years, he travelled in Italy, and round the Adriatic Sea to Constantinople and Smyrna. 
On his return to Rome, Hering became acquainted with John Paget and a Mr Sanford; together they toured the Carpathian mountains. While living in Rome, Hering met Bertel Thorvaldsen and Horace Vernet, and was able to bring together the antagonistic colonies of German and English artists in that city. Hering returned to England in 1836 and published 'Sketches on the Danube, in Hungary and Transilvania' in 1838. He also illustrated Paget's 'Hungary and Transylvania', published in 1839. He settled in London, where for the rest of his life he practised as a landscape painter, though he continued to pay occasional visits to Italy. On 6 July 1839 he married Catherine, daughter of William Bromley, a solicitor. She was also an artist, and exhibited, as Mrs G. E. Hering, at the Royal Academy between 1840 and 1853. About 1850 the couple adopted a young girl, Marion Hamilton ['see 'Acton, Marion Jean Catherine Adams-], whose mother gave her up for adoption to the Herings to improve her material and social position. 
Hering habitually painted Italian landscapes with bright, cloudless skies, often highly finished. In 1836 he first exhibited at the Royal Academy, sending 'The Ruins of the Palace of the Caesars, Rome', and was a regular contributor thereafter to the academy and the British Institution, exhibiting landscapes of Rome, Naples, Genoa, Venice, La Spezia, Como, Piedmont, and Monte Rosa. In 1841 he exhibited a painting of Amalfi, which, through the agency of Samuel Rogers, was purchased by Prince Albert; it was engraved by Edward Goodall for the 'Art Journal' in 1856. He occasionally showed scenes of England, the Austrian Tyrol, and Greece, and Scotland became a frequent subject in the 1870s. In 1847 he published a set of twenty coloured lithographs, 'The Mountains and Lakes of Switzerland, the Tyrol and Italy'. 
George Edwards Hering died at his home, 45 Grove End Road, St John's Wood, London, on 18 December 1879; he was survived by his wife. Two sales of his works were held at Christies, London, on 7 May 1880 and 25 April 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 13078


Heriot, George (1563-1624), jeweller and philanthropist, was born in Edinburgh on 15 June 1563, the eldest son of George Heriot (1539/40-1610), goldsmith and MP, of Edinburgh and his first wife, Elizabeth Balderstone. Heriot was apprenticed to his father's trade, and on 14 January 1586 he was contracted to marry Christian, daughter of Simon Marjoribanks (died 1603?), an Edinburgh merchant. They had two sons who were drowned at sea (possibly on their way to England in 1603). Heriot's father gave him 1500 merks (about $80) to set up business as a goldsmith and moneylender, allowing him to open a small booth or shop attached to St Giles's Cathedral. On 19 January 1588 he was admitted a burgess of Edinburgh, and on 28 May 1588 he was admitted a member of the guild of Edinburgh goldsmiths. In 1590 Heriot was living in Fishmarket Close in Edinburgh. By January 1594 he was 'deacon convener' ('Reg. PCS', 6.314) of the incorporated trades of Edinburgh, and on 17 July 1597 James VI appointed Heriot goldsmith to Queen Anne. In this role he lent money to the queen, often using her jewels as security, having supplied the jewels in the first place. Between 1593 and 1603 Heriot's business dealings with the queen may have amounted to $50,000. On 4 April 1601 Heriot was appointed jeweller to James VI. In December that year he was a member of a syndicate commissioned by the government to issue a replacement Scottish coinage. In January 1603 he was a farmer of the customs. 
Heriot's entrenched position in the Scottish crown's financial affairs was threatened by James VI's accession to the English crown as James I in March 1603. Heriot duly followed the king to London, dwelling at the New Exchange. On 9 November 1603 he received a patent as one of three jewellers to the king, with a salary of $150 per annum. On 24 August 1609 Heriot married in Edinburgh Alison (1591/2-1612), eldest daughter of James Primrose of Carrington, clerk to the Scottish privy council, with a portion of 5000 merks. According to the marriage contract of 26 September 1608, 20,000 merks were to be laid out on land. They had no children before his wife died on 16 April 1612. By 1609 Heriot was receiving 10 per cent interest on his loans to the queen, which totalled $18,000, although he seems to have had some difficulty recovering the capital. However, his position at court saw him sell jewels to other members of the royal circle such as the first duke of Buckingham and the earl of Somerset. In November 1620 he was granted the imposition on sugar for three years. Heriot was now living in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, and had an estate at Roehampton, Surrey. 
Heriot had no legitimate children, and on 3 September 1623 he executed a 'disposition and assignation' ('Inventory', 2) to Edinburgh council announcing his intentions to found a hospital in the city. Heriot died in London on 12 February 1624, and was buried on the 20th in St Martin-in-the-Fields, the funeral oration being delivered by Walter Balcanquhall. Heriot provided for two illegitimate daughters, aged about ten and four, by his will of December 1623. He also left bequests to his stepmother, Christian Blawe, and his half-brothers and -sisters, as well as his nieces and nephews, especially the daughter of his deceased brother, Patrick, whom he feared would challenge his will and its main beneficiary. Heriot left the residue of his estate to the 'provost, bailiffs, ministers and council' of Edinburgh, 'for and towards the founding and erecting of an hospital', and for purchasing lands for the 'maintenance, relief bringing up and education of so many poor fatherless boys freemen's sons' as the funds allowed (will). In all $23,625 was bequeathed to the hospital and school which bears his name, as does Heriot-Watt University, formed from part of the George Heriot Hospital and trust. 


@@@@@


doc= 13079


Heriot, John (1760-1833), newspaper editor and writer, was born on 22 April 1760 in Haddington, East Lothian. His father was sheriff-clerk of East Lothian and he had an older brother, George (1759-1839), later postmaster-general in Canada and travel writer. The family moved to Edinburgh in 1772, and Heriot attended Edinburgh high school. He began studying at Edinburgh University but had to leave in 1777 when his father's business failed. The family dispersed, and Heriot travelled to London, seeking a military commission. The army lists show that he was appointed second lieutenant in the marines on 13 November 1778 and was promoted to first lieutenant of the Plymouth division on 15 August 1781. He served on board the 'Vengeance', the 'Preston', and the 'Elizabeth' off the coast of Africa and the West Indies. In the 'Elizabeth' he was wounded in a battle on 17 April 1780 between the English fleet under Sir George B. Rodney and the French fleet under Admiral De Guichen. He transferred to the 'Brune' frigate in July 1780 and was exposed to the hurricane that devastated Barbados on 10 October 1780. During the peace of Versailles in 1783 Heriot was put on half pay, which he mortgaged to help his parents, leaving him destitute. 
Heriot turned to authorship, and wrote 'The Sorrows of the Heart' in 1787 and a semi-autobiographical novel, 'The Half-Pay Officer', in 1789. He lived on the proceeds of these works for two years. At twenty-eight, on 29 May 1788 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, he married Alison Shiriff. The 'Annual Biography' describes this as 'apparently a very imprudent step; but... a step of which he never had occasion to repent' ('Annual Biography', 44). They had two daughters, and Heriot is described in this article as 'a kind and affectionate husband and father' (ibid., 50). 
In 1788 Heriot was employed by Thomas Steele, secretary of the treasury, to write pamphlets and articles for 'The Times' in support of the government. By 1791 he was one of the principal treasury writers and was awarded an annual salary of $200. He was for a while on the staff of other treasury newspapers: 'The Oracle' newspaper and then 'The World'. In 1792, at the suggestion of Edmund Burke, and with the support of Pitt's ministry, Heriot established a newspaper designed to counteract 'the mischievous principles of revolutionary France' (Rose, 8.291). 'The Sun', a daily evening journal, appeared on 1 October 1792. It was covertly funded by the government ministers James Bland Burges and Charles Long. Within months it had a circulation of over four thousand copies daily, making it second only to 'The Times'. This success has been attributed to the hundreds of copies bought and freely distributed by government. Heriot was then invited by George Rose, clerk of parliaments, to start the 'True Briton', a daily morning newspaper, on 1 January 1793. This paper took over the presses of the radical newspaper 'Argus' after its closure by the government in December 1792. In this capacity Heriot's salary reached a height of $2000. The 'True Briton' continued for eleven years, and then suffered a 'financial crash' (Dean, 270). Heriot continued his literary career in these years. In 1792 he wrote 'An Historical Sketch of Gibraltar', a narrative to accompany the artist Poggi's drawing of the rock. Heriot's manuscript journal entry describing his presentation of this book to George III and Queen Charlotte is quoted in the 'Annual Biography'. In 1798 he edited an 'Account of the Battle of the Nile' from the notes of an officer present at the battle, which went through several editions. 
In 1806 Heriot left the newspapers to accept the role of commissioner of the lottery. One biographer records this as an apt position for a 'born gambler' (Dean, 270). This contrasts with the character description in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of 'a straight-forward, honourable character, warm and zealous in his political principles and attachments' ('GM', 1st ser., 103/2, 1833, 184). In 1810 Heriot was made deputy paymaster-general of the troops in the Windward and Leeward Islands, and was stationed at Barbados. In 1816 the duke of York appointed him comptroller of Chelsea Hospital. Heriot died there from sudden paralysis on 29 July 1833, three days after his wife's death and a month after his daughter, who died in Trinidad on 30 June 1833. He was buried next to his wife in the burial-grounds of Chelsea Hospital, London, on 2 August 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 13080


Herle, Charles (1597/8-1659), Church of England clergyman and political theorist, was born at Prideaux Herle, near Lostwithiel, Cornwall, the third of six sons of Edward Herle of Prideaux and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Treffry. On 23 October 1612, aged fourteen, he matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford. He graduated BA on 7 July 1615 and proceeded MA on 10 June 1618. Perhaps owing to ancestral connections with Lancashire, he subsequently became a tutor to James Stanley, Lord Strange. In 1625 he was instituted rector of Creed, Cornwall, but on 27 June 1626, following presentation by Sir Thomas Stanley, he was instituted rector of Winwick, Lancashire. It is not clear how soon he took up residence in this potentially rich benefice: the parsonage was still in the occupation of the widow of his predecessor, who had been locked in long-running litigation over some of its income, and Herle too became embroiled in this until the dispute was resolved two or three years later. In the meantime, while serving as chaplain in the household of Elizabeth Stanley, countess of Derby, he wrote her will, dated 19 February 1627; she died at Richmond, Surrey, on 10 March, and was subsequently buried at Westminster Abbey, so it seems likely that Herle spent some time in and around London at this period. 
A 'long and hopelesse sickness', and 'the weary houres' of recuperation, gave rise to Herle's first publication, 'Contemplations and devotions on the severall passages of our blessed Saviours death and passion' (1631). In dedicating the work to Strange, to whom he attributed his recovery, Herle explained that his aims were to vindicate protestantism from the Catholic charge that 'she spends all her devotion on the Pulpit, and keepes none for the Closet' (sig. A5'v'). The meditations, arranged in twenty-seven sections, ran from Jesus's 'bloudy sweat in the Garden' to the involvement of Joseph and Nicodemus with the burial of his body, in a manner resembling the stations of the cross. By this time Herle had married and was living in Winwick; his wife was possibly called Margaret. He had ten children, including Edward ('b'. 1632), Henry ('b'. 1633), Charles, and Anne, who in 1652 married John Dubois and was the mother of Charles Dubois. 
In 1642 Herle and his three curates took the protestation oath, and on the outbreak of war found themselves in opposition to Derby's and Strange's powerful local interest. When Warrington was garrisoned for the king, Herle took refuge in London; in his absence his parsonage was fortified by Sir John Fortescue, a Catholic, though it subsequently changed hands according to the fortunes of war in the area. Apparently on the initiative of John Moore, MP for Liverpool, who that spring had helped organize resistance to Strange in Lancashire, on 26 October the Commons voted to invite Herle to preach before them at St Margaret's, Westminster. The resulting fast sermon, delivered on 30 November, and published as 'A Payre of Compasses for Church and State' (1642), revealed high approval for the institution he addressed: 'good Parliaments have alwayes beene observ'd to be like sharpe searching Frosts, which sound bodies like, as the healthiest weather; but such as are rotten, feare as too subtle and searching for their conscious prognosticke bones' (p. 10). His theme was truth and peace. Since 'that iron chayne of meere necessity is too short' and 'men's lives are God's, and may not be adventured upon any other warrant or end then God's' (p. 41), war was not to be undertaken lightly, but without truth, 'true peace cannot be had' (p. 14). Rejecting the Machiavellian counsel of balancing threats and divisions, he advocated concerted action against three categories of errors of ascending seriousness: the diversive errors of the 'Inconformists' or separatists, the perversive errors of the Arminians, and the subversive errors of the papists. The first were to be dealt with by argument, the second by burning their books, and the third by securing their persons. 
Herle was soon engaged in pamphlet controversy. Taking up the themes in Charles I's 'Answer to the Nineteen Propositions' of June 1642, royal chaplain Henry Ferne published in November as 'The Resolving of Conscience' a defence of the king's position. By 29 December, when George Thomason obtained a copy and named its author, Herle had issued anonymously 'A Fuller Answer to a Treatise Written by Dr Fearne'. In it he advanced three propositions: that a 'Parliament of England may with good conscience, in defence of King, Laws, and Government establisht, when imminently endangered... take up Armes without, and against the Kings personal commands, if he refuse'; that the final arbiters of whether such a situation had arisen were the two houses of parliament; and that the people were 'to rest' with parliament's judgement 'and in obedience thereto may with good conscience, in defence of the King, Lawes, and Government, beare and use Armes' (p. 2). Explaining that 'Englands is not a simply subordinative, and absolute, but a Coordinative, and mixt Monarchy' (p. 3), Herle went further than contemporary theorist Philip Hunton, whose position was in many respects similar, in exploring what would happen if co-operation between king and parliament, ideally equals in law making, broke down. Drawing on the idea of the king's two bodies, he propounded 'the ingenious formula of the king's virtual presence at Westminster' (Weston and Greenberg, 56) to cover his assent to parliamentary legislation. Herle complemented this in the second week of January 1643 with 'An Answer to Mis-Led Dr Ferne According to his Own Method', an extremely allusive point-by-point refutation drawing on wide historical precedent. Ferne's rejoinder, 'Conscience Satisfied', appeared in mid-April, and Herle's 'An Answer to Dr Fernes Reply' by 17 May. Developing his theory of co-ordination to a position nearer to William Prynne's than Hunton's, Herle awarded parliament 'close to a monopoly' (ibid., 55) in the making and execution of laws. 
On 17 February the Commons approved Herle as a Thursday afternoon lecturer in a new church at Tothill Fields, Westminster; he also gave a regular morning lecture at the abbey church and some time between 1642 and 1644 was a minister at St Olave, Southwark. Gaining in eminence, by the summer he was being spoken of in the same breath as Edmund Calamy and Stephen Marshall, and like them appeared to have gained the trust of the men around John Pym in parliament. On 15 June he encouraged the house with a fast sermon published as 'Davids Song of Three Parts' (1643); five days later he was named with Calamy and Obadiah Sedgwick to license books of divinity. Nominated with William Heyrick to represent Lancashire in the Westminster assembly, he was placed on its grand committee on 29 September. Active, influential, and apparently clear-thinking, he soon emerged as one of the leading presbyterians but, although he consistently adopted a Reformed position in both doctrine and ecclesiology, his approach in debate was generally conciliatory. Earlier that year in 'The Independency on Scriptures of the Independency of Churches' he had argued 'temperately' not against the Independents' contention that church government should be biblically based, which he entirely shared, but against their interpretation of what that government should be. In the assembly he supported a full exploration of their arguments, and sometimes ranged himself on their side in discussion, while in due course he authorized the publication of the Independent 'An Apologeticall Narration'. 
His political commitment was uncompromising, however. In 'The Convinced Petitioner', issued on 13 January 1644, he rejected a return to pre-war policy: 'when absolute prerogative gets upon the Throne, and the Pope upon the Church, what subjects then but slaves? what Christians but Papists?... no peace is to be had, but either we must fight for it in hope of victory, or purchase it by perpetuall slavery. (p. 15)' The undoubted sacrifice demanded in prosecuting the war further, and the reward from God, was outlined in 'Abrahams Offer Gods Offering' (1644), preached before the lord mayor on Easter Tuesday. In the preface to 'Ahab's Fall by his Prophets Flatteries' (1644), a collection of three sermons on the same text, including one at the abbey church, 'where it was much acquarrelled by some', Herle rather unsuccessfully disclaimed his critics' construction that 'what is spoken of King Ahab and Jezebel' was 'any way to be meant of our dread Soveraigne and his Consort' (sig. A2'v'), although he placed much emphasis on legality. Implicit in an appendix, 'A Short Answer, by Way of a Postscript, to Dr Ferne's Last Reply', was again the power invested in parliament to act without the king. 'Davids Reserve and Rescue' (1645), preached to the Commons on 5 November 1644, celebrated freedom from tyranny. 
On 22 July 1646 Herle was elected prolocutor of the assembly in succession to William Twisse, but by this time, his parish being securely in parliamentarian hands, he seems to have been periodically in Lancashire. His ties had never been entirely broken: in autumn 1644 he had administered collections made in London for the relief of distress caused by war in the county, while in December that year a parliamentary ordinance enabled him and other ministers to conduct ordinations there. When on 2 October 1646 Lancashire was divided into nine classical presbyteries, Herle's name headed the list of those in the fourth classis. On 25 December Robert Baillie, who as one of the Scottish commissioners at the assembly had not always approved Herle's contribution, perhaps surprisingly placed him first in a list sent to the earl of Loudoun of the ablest English clergy suitable to serve as royal chaplains. In 1647 Herle, with Marshall, accompanied the parliamentary commissioners on their mission to Scotland. In January that year one Margaret Herle was buried in Westminster Abbey; if this was his wife, Herle married again within a few months, for his daughter Mary was baptized at Winwick on 3 September 1648. 
The king's execution in January 1649 seems to have been a watershed, however, and the event which persuaded Herle to leave London permanently and perhaps to alter his political stance. Retiring to Winwick, he faced two years of litigation with Fortescue. He cannot initially have enjoyed easy relations with the earl of Derby, who claimed to be the patron when tithes were calculated in 1650, but it seems that the breach was later healed. As the royalist army passed through Lancashire in August 1651 he took some of its wounded soldiers into his house and seems to have been among the local presbyterian ministers who made overtures to Derby while he was occupying Wigan for the king. Rumours were circulating in the Warrington area that Herle and his son had armed themselves and followed the royal forces, and even that Herle was a royalist spy. Probably shortly after the royalist defeat at Worcester on 3 September, Herle was among a group of distinguished Lancashire ministers arrested on suspicion of correspondence with the king and taken to Liverpool. Plague later led to their removal to Ormskirk, but their imprisonment seems to have been relatively short and their rehabilitation fairly rapid. In the summer of 1652 Herle played the leading role in the ordination at Winwick of John Howe, later domestic chaplain to Oliver Cromwell, and in 1654 he was appointed an assistant to the Lancashire commission of triers and ejectors. 
Herle's final publications indicate a detachment from political matters. 'Wordly policy and moral prudence, the vanity and folly of the one, the solidity and usefulnesse of the other' (1654) was a self-proclaimed 'moral discourse' advancing different aspects of personal integrity. 'Wisdomes Tripos' (1655) added a third discussion, on Christian wisdom; conventionally pious, its only engagement with topical issues was to lament the 'Academy of Atheisme' which 'goes up apace... in these times' (p. 52). Herle died in late September 1659, and was buried on 29 September in the chancel of his church at Winwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 13081


Herle, Sir William (b. in or before 1270, d. 1347), justice, was probably born some time before 1270, since his first appointment as an attorney for litigation in the common bench was in 1291, and he must already then have been of age. His surname is apparently derived from Kirkharle in Northumberland. He may be the William Herle who acquired property there in 1304; he is certainly the William Herle who was granted free warren in his demesne lands there in 1332 and who also acquired lands elsewhere in Northumberland. He may be the William, son of William Herle, who is mentioned as the tenant of one-fifth of a knight's fee at Kirkharle in an inquisition 'post mortem' of 1310, and whose father, another William (grandfather of William the justice), is known to have died in 1307. William and his brother Robert are both known to have acquired extensive properties in Leicestershire from the last decade of the thirteenth century onwards, and Robert was described in a conspiracy case of 1299 as a 'conspirator' active in Leicestershire, Warwickshire, and Staffordshire. It seems possible that the brothers had inherited some connection with Leicestershire, perhaps through their mother. 
William Herle began practising as one of the serjeants of the common bench in Michaelmas term 1299, and seems to have been one of several serjeants called to the common-bench bar at that time. Final concord authorizations and law reports show him in regular attendance in the court until 1320. His success at the bar is also shown by the fact that early in the reign of Edward II he was retained by the city of London as one of its counsel, and that in 1315 he became a king's serjeant. Early in Michaelmas term 1320 he replaced John Benstead as a junior justice of the common bench and around this time he was knighted. For three terms in 1321 he was absent from the court while sitting as a justice of the London eyre, hearing civil pleas and 'quo warranto' cases with the chief justice, Hervey Staunton. Otherwise he served continuously as a junior justice of the common bench, until he replaced Staunton as chief justice of the same court early in Hilary term 1327. He left court after Trinity term 1329 to serve as chief justice of the Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire eyres of 1330-31, but returned to the common bench, as its chief justice, in Easter term 1331; he relinquished this post at the end of Trinity term 1335, though he lived for another twelve years. 
Herle's wife, Margaret, is first mentioned in a final concord relating to their joint acquisition of the reversion to lands at Bourton-on-Dunsmore in Warwickshire in 1311. She was dead by 1339, when William sought a licence to grant property to Garendon Abbey in Leicestershire in return for the provision of a monk to celebrate mass for William, his son Robert, the deceased Margaret, and William's deceased brother Robert. There seems to be no contemporary evidence to support Nichols's suggestion that Margaret was the daughter of Philip Courtney, or other later suggestions which make her the daughter and heir of one William Polglas. Herle died on 26 March 1347. His heir was his son Robert, who died without issue in 1364, when the Herle lands passed to Ralph Hastings, the son of Robert's sister Margaret. 


@@@@@


doc= 13082


Herman, Henry (1832-1894), playwright and novelist, was educated at a military college in Alsace. He later emigrated to the United States, fought in the Confederate ranks during the American Civil War, and lost an eye at the battle of Bull Run in Virginia. He had returned to England by 1875, as on 15 May of that year he produced 'Jeanne Dubarry', a drama in three acts, at the Charing Cross Theatre in London. His name was given as Henry Heydrac D'Arco, son of Charles Heydrac D'Arco, colonel, when he married, at Lincoln, on 25 July 1877 Eugenie Adelaide (1856/7-1947), the only daughter of Frederick Edwards, saddler. She was an actress, and later played in two of Herman's pieces. It was as D'Arco that he was involved in bankruptcy proceedings, in May 1879, Henry Herman being cited as his professional name. Herman's first conspicuous dramatic success, after producing several more plays, was 'The Silver King', a drama in five acts, written in conjunction with Henry Arthur Jones, which opened on 16 November 1882. Disputes regarding which collaborator had done more work on 'The Silver King' ensued. Jones argued at first that Herman 'did not write a line of it' (Jones, 68), though he later acknowledged that Herman had at least written 'the end of the second act' (ibid., 73). Herman also collaborated with Jones on 'Breaking a Butterfly', an adaptation of Ibsen's 'A Doll's House', which opened at the Prince of Wales Theatre on 3 March 1884, and 'Chatterton' (Princess's, 22 May 1884). In collaboration with William Gorman Wills he wrote 'Claudian', a three-act play performed at the Princess's on 6 December 1884. 'The Golden Band', in four acts (Olympic, 14 January 1887), was by Herman and Freeman Wills. Herman is responsible for two untraceable dramas, 'For Old Virginia' (1891) and 'Eagle Joe' (1892), and for 'The Fay o' Fire', a romantic opera, with music by Edward Jones (Opera Comique, 14 November 1885). 
Herman collaborated with David Christie Murray in writing six novels between 1887 and 1891, including the melodramatic 'Bishop's Bible' (1890), and 'He Fell among Thieves' (1891). His name alone appears as the author of more than ten novels, including 'His Angel' (1891), a story which begins vividly with a lynching in New Mexico, and 'Eagle Joe' (1892), 'a Wild West Romance'. His novels were hastily written but exciting, and he wrote stories up to his death. 
Freeman Wills noted that although Herman 'had not a trace of humour himself... he was fertile in invention and teemed with melodrama, and had... an excellent and refined judgment' (Wills, 220), especially regarding the work of others. He observed that Herman was 'an exacting collaborator' and that 'his manner was that of the irritable foreigner, but he was thoroughly kind-hearted and chivalrous in his domestic life, and well maintained the dignity of a literary man' (ibid., 227). 
Herman's choice theatrical library was sold at Sothebys on 23 January 1885, when 234 lots fetched over $16,000. The high prices were due in great measure to the large number of grangerized books, illustrated with prints or engravings taken from other books. He died at Gunnersbury, Middlesex, on 24 September 1894 and was buried at St Mary's Roman Catholic cemetery, Kensal Green, in a plot purchased by his erstwhile collaborator Henry Arthur Jones. 


@@@@@


doc= 13083


Hermann (fl. 1070-1100), Benedictine monk and hagiographer, who may have been rightly named Bertrann, probably came from the Paris region of France. He was secretary to Herfast, bishop of East Anglia (1070-84), and after Herfast's death secretary to Baldwin, abbot of Bury St Edmunds (1065-97/8). He then became a monk of Bury St Edmunds. He wrote the 'De miraculis sancti Eadmundi' ('c'.1100), which includes a few autobiographical details. During Herfast's dispute with Baldwin over his attempts to move his see to Bury he wrote the bishop's letters and read those received. He was with Herfast when he injured an eye on a branch while riding through a wood and, having heard of Baldwin's reputation as a physician, persuaded the bishop to go to him for treatment. 
The identification of Hermann is problematical. No archdeacon named Hermann has been found in the records of Norwich Cathedral, nor can the hagiographer be convincingly identified with any known monk of Bury St Edmunds. The earliest known attribution of the 'De miraculis' to Hermann the archdeacon is in an inscription of 'c'.1370 by Henry Kirkestede, on the first page of the copy (of 'c'.1100) of the 'De miraculis' in the British Library (Cotton MS Tiberius B.ii, fol. 20). Possibly Kirkestede derived this name by misreading a (perhaps damaged) inscription in some now lost copy which attributed the work to Bertrann, the contemporary hagiographer whom Goscelin praises and describes as 'in sua patria ut ferebatur archidiaconus' ('archdeacon, as he was called in his homeland'). 
The 'De miraculis' recounts the miracles ascribed to St Edmund in the eleventh century, set in the framework of the history of St Edmund's church and community. Although Hermann wrote to promote the cult of St Edmund and as a partisan of Baldwin in his struggle with Herfast, the 'De miraculis' is a valuable historical source for the history of Bury St Edmunds Abbey. It also has sidelights on Cnut, who sanctioned the introduction of the Benedictine rule at Bury in 1020, and on the abbey's patrons, Edward the Confessor, William I, and William II, in their contacts with abbot and monks. The author drew on oral information and on written, including documentary, sources, most of which are now lost. He was a conscientious historian, highly educated, and a gifted Latinist. 
The 'De miraculis' survives in two versions, one long, the other short. The long version culminates in 1095, with the translation of St Edmund to Baldwin's new church. The only extant copy known is in the British Library (Cotton MS Tiberius B.ii, fols. 20-85'v'). The short version abbreviates the long version and ends 'c'.1050. It survives in two copies both of 'c'.1100 (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 2621, fols. 84-92'v'; and Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 39, fols. 24-39'v', from Abingdon Abbey). Judging from the dearth of medieval copies, 'De miraculis' itself contributed little to the spread of St Edmund's cult. But the long version was an important source for later hagiographers of St Edmund at Bury. Particularly noteworthy is the amplified, updated version produced in the late twelfth century and associated with Samson, abbot of Bury St Edmunds from 1182 to 1211 (BL, Cotton MS Titus A.viii). 


@@@@@


doc= 13084


Hermann (d. 1078), bishop of Ramsbury and of Sherborne, came from the continent to England early in the reign of Edward the Confessor. His parentage, date of birth, and precise place of origin are all unknown. According to the chronicle of John of Worcester, he came from Lotharingia, although William of Malmesbury in his 'Gesta pontificum' says that he was Flemish by birth. However, Philip Grierson has argued that the name Hermann, common in Lotharingia, is rare in Flanders, and that William may have been misled by the fact that Hermann spent part of his career at the abbey of St Bertin. He became one of Edward the Confessor's chaplains by 1044, and in 1045 Edward appointed him to succeed the deceased Brihtwold as bishop of Ramsbury or Wilton, a diocese corresponding in extent to Wiltshire and Berkshire and with its see based at Ramsbury (a small settlement of no economic or political significance and with a cathedral community which can only have been tiny). In 1050 Hermann, together with Bishop Ealdred of Worcester, was sent to Rome by Edward the Confessor to negotiate with the pope. Edward made the decision to send the two bishops at the mid-Lent council of London in 1050 and the pair arrived in Rome on 14 April. The subject of the negotiations is unclear; claims in twelfth-century Westminster forgeries that Edward was trying to release himself from a vow to go on pilgrimage are unlikely to be valid. None the less it is obvious that Hermann was highly thought of by Edward. 
Hermann himself, however, was frustrated by the limited resources of his diocese, and in 1055 requested that Edward should allow him to take over Malmesbury Abbey as his see church. In this he may have been influenced by Bishop Leofric of Crediton's decision to move his see to Exeter, a move permitted by Edward, whose charter allowing this had been witnessed by Hermann, among others. However, the monks of Malmesbury put up a much tougher fight than the clerks of Exeter had done; Edward refused Hermann's request and the latter decided to leave England for Flanders and to become a monk at the abbey of St Bertin. Meanwhile, Bishop Ealdred of Worcester took over responsibility for Ramsbury. In 1058 Ealdred wished to leave England to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and Hermann was persuaded to return to his diocese. On the death of Bishop AElfwold of Sherborne, who last occurs in a charter of 1059, Hermann was appointed to succeed him and the two sees of Sherborne and Ramsbury were united. He encouraged a young monk of St Bertin, Goscelin, to travel to England and join his episcopal household. Although Goscelin eventually found a more permanent home at St Augustine's, Canterbury, he maintained ties with the diocese of Sherborne until shortly after Hermann's death, when he completed a life of St Wulfsige (Bishop Wulfsige of Sherborne) which Hermann had commissioned, and, shortly afterwards, a life of St Edith of Wilton. Hermann himself had close contacts with Wilton, whose new abbey church he dedicated in 1065 at the request of Queen Edith, who had paid for the rebuilding. 
After the Norman conquest Hermann continued to be held in esteem. He probably attended the Council of Windsor in April 1070, since its decrees were soon afterwards copied into a Romano-Germanic pontifical of French origin used at Sherborne in his day, and on 29 August 1070 he assisted at Lanfranc's consecration. In the following year, however, Lanfranc expressed unease about Hermann's health in a letter to Pope Alexander II in which he stated that Hermann might wish to be released from his diocesan duties to become a monk once more. Lanfranc tried, not quite successfully, to dismiss a rumour that Hermann was weighed down by injuries done to him and by services owed to the king. Lanfranc did not specify Hermann's problems, though they may possibly be the demands placed on him by the king's judges which Goscelin refers to in a miracle story at the end of his life of St Wulfsige: apparently Hermann defended his rights with the aid of Wulfsige's relics. At all events, Hermann decided to persevere as bishop. He attended the Council of Windsor at Whitsun 1072 and in 1075 at the Council of London he won permission to move his see to a more important site: the borough of Old Sarum, now being refortified by William I with a castle. However, little progress could be made in building a cathedral there in the few years that remained to Hermann, who died on 20 February 1078. His place of burial is unknown; a tradition that he was buried at Old Sarum and then moved to Salisbury is almost certainly false, and it is possible that his resting place was Sherborne. 


@@@@@


doc= 13085


Herne, John (c.1593-1649), barrister, was the younger son of Richard Herne (died 1625), alderman, and later sheriff, of London and his wife, Alice, daughter of John Paske. He was subsequently adopted by William Robson, salter of London. He was probably the John Heron who matriculated from Clare College, Cambridge, during Lent 1608. From Cambridge he entered Lincoln's Inn on 27 January 1611, receiving his call to the bar in 1618. On 4 August of that year he married, at St Bartholomew by the Exchange, Susanna ('fl'. 'c'.1600-1660), daughter of John Woodward, grocer of London. On 5 March 1628 he was elected to parliament for Newport, Cornwall, but was unseated on petition. 
During the ensuing two decades Herne assumed a prominent role in a series of important state trials, the most dramatic of which were the proceedings in the Long Parliament in the years 1641-5 against William Laud, archbishop of Canterbury (1633-45), on charges of high treason and misdemeanour. In 1632 he defended the barrister Henry Sherfield, recorder of Salisbury, on a charge in Star Chamber for defacing an offending stained-glass window in St Edmund's Church, Salisbury. In February 1634 he served as counsel for William Prynne, the outspoken barrister of Lincoln's Inn, during his Star Chamber trial for the publication of his controversial work against female players, 'Histriomastix'. During the following year Herne is known to have held the manor of Hendon, Middlesex, paying rent on 32 acres with outbuildings and adjacent land. He became a bencher of his inn in 1637 and in 1640 he was residing in Aldersgate ward, London. In 1641 he acted as one of the counsel for the ship money judges, Sir John Bramston the elder and Sir Robert Berkeley, during proceedings against them in the Long Parliament. 
Herne was one of Archbishop William Laud's original choices for counsel at his impeachment, being named in the prelate's petition of 1 March 1641. Ultimately he shared the archbishop's defence with the Long Parliament's appointee as co-counsel, Sir Matthew Hale. He may also have been the Mr Herne who appeared in defence of the impeached lord mayor Sir Richard Gurney in July 1642. On 11 October 1644 Herne delivered to the House of Lords an argument in law, probably a joint composition with Hale, in which he denied the existence of 'constructive treasons' under the English law as set out in Edward III's statute of treasons (1352). Moreover, Herne's argument recognized that Laud's aggrandizement of the forensic and legislative jurisdictions of the clerical estate during his tenure as archbishop of Canterbury constituted at best a mere 'praemunire'. The charges that Laud had 'subverted the fundamental laws of the land' in maintaining his jurisdiction over and above that of the king closely resembled in substance and language those against Wolsey and Lingham during Henry VIII's reign and rested on the conflation of high treason with the lesser, non-capital cause of 'praemunire'. On 6 November 1644 Herne visited Laud in the Tower and returned his prayer book that William Prynne had possessed since the Long Parliament's seizure of the prelate's papers in May 1643. 
His precise religious convictions are not known but a provision of his will asking that Archbishop Ussher preach his funeral sermon suggests certain episcopal sympathies. Herne died in London in 1649 leaving properties worth $300 per annum but complained that a suretyship for an improvident brother had left him with little to distribute among his heirs. 
Another 


@@@@@


doc= 13086


John Herne (fl. 1636-1660), probably the elder Herne's son, entered Lincoln's Inn on 11 February 1636. He appears to have been the translator from law French of 'The learned reading of John Herne esq., late of the honourable society of Lincoln's Inn, upon the statute of 23 H. 8, cap. 3, concerning commissions of sewers' (1659). He also published a collection of precedents called 'The Pleader' (1657); 'The Law of Conveyances' (8 vols., 1658); 'The Modern Assurancer' (1658); and 'The Law of Charitable Uses' (8 vols., 1660). 


@@@@@


doc= 13087


Herne, Thomas (d. 1722), tutor and religious controversialist, was the eldest son of Francis Herne of Suffolk. He was admitted as a pensioner at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, on 29 October 1711 and elected to a scholarship in 1712. After graduating BA in 1715, Herne was incorporated at Oxford on 21 February 1715. Soon afterwards the duchess of Bedford appointed him tutor to her sons Wriothesley and John, successively third and fourth dukes of Bedford. In 1716 Herne was elected to a vacant fellowship at Merton College, Oxford, and on 11 October 1718 proceeded MA. 
Herne took part in the Bangorian controversy, publishing 'The False Notion of a Christian Priesthood' (1717) under the pseudonym Phileleutherus Cantabrigiensis in response to William Law's high-church rebuttal of Benjamin Hoadly's sermon on the nature of the church. He published further pamphlets that questioned the principle of subscribing to articles of religion imposed by a state church. More particularly he upheld the right of private judgement in the controversy concerning the Trinity, and wrote two pamphlets in reply to an anti-Socinian sermon preached by Dr Thomas Mangey in 1719. In 1719 and 1720 he printed accounts of the principal works on both sides of the Bangorian and Trinitarian controversies. 
Herne did not marry, or take holy orders, and died at Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire, in 1722. 


@@@@@


doc= 13088


Heron, Haly (c.1550-1591), author and soldier, matriculated in November 1565 as a sizar at Queens' College, Cambridge, whence he graduated BA in 1570. At some point in the 1570s he became tutor to John Kaye the younger, whom he perhaps met at Cambridge and for whom he wrote his sole literary effort, 'A Newe Discourse of Morall Philosophie, Entituled, the Kayes of Counsaile' (1579). By 1581 he had entered the service of Sir Nicholas Malby, newly appointed president of Connaught, and he probably began his soldiering career as a member of the armed forces suppressing rebellion in Ireland. Married by 1583 to the widow of George Fitz Garret, he returned from Ireland late in 1585. In December of that year Thomas Randolph, under pressure from his wife, a relative of Heron, grudgingly brought him to the attention of Sir Francis Walsingham, under whose auspices he travelled to the Low Countries. In a letter of 16 February 1587, which he bore to Walsingham, Heron was praised by Sir William Russell, commander of the cavalry under the earl of Leicester and governor of Flushing, as 'a man of very good desert, for his service in these parts' ('CSP for.', '1586-7', 364). In August 1590 Heron, now a captain, was put in charge of a company, which proceeded to Bergen-op-Zoom. Leading an assault in Brittany on 19 or 20 May 1591 he 'was thrust through the throte at the pushe of the pike whereof he died presently' ('Rutland MSS', 1.291-2). 

'A Newe Discourse', described on the title-page as 'not so pleasant as profitable for younge courtiours', is one of the earliest courtly conduct books written by an English author. Heron is, however, critical of life at court; and the advice he provides consists largely of conventional moral guidance on subjects such as 'humilitie', 'company and fellowship', 'talke & communication', and 'self love'. With regard to 'wine and women', he accepts 'the use of them both' as 'very necessarie, pleasant and profitable', condemning only their abuse as 'filthy, tedious, and inconveniente' (Heron, sig. E6'v'). His alliterative, schematic, and ornamented prose style, liberally scattered with classical allusions, elaborate similes, and proverbs, is an early representative of 'euphuism' and was strongly influenced by George Pettie's 'The Petite Pallace of Pettie his Pleasure' (1576). 


@@@@@


doc= 13089


Heron, Sir Richard, first baronet (1726-1805), Treasury official, was the fourth son and youngest child of the six children of Robert Heron (1686/7-1753) of Newark, Nottinghamshire, and Elizabeth (died 1764), daughter of Thomas Brecknock of Thorney Abbey, Cambridgeshire. 
Heron was described by a writer in the 'Hibernian Magazine' as 'rather above the middle size, well made, and of good constitution' ('Hibernian Magazine', 742). He was educated for the legal profession and, through the patronage of the duke of Newcastle, he gained his first government post in 1751 when he was appointed a commissioner of bankruptcy. He ascended through the ranks, first becoming a sworn clerk in the remembrance office and subsequently the lord treasurer's remembrancer in the court of exchequer. In December 1776 he was appointed principal secretary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland, John Hobart, second earl of Buckinghamshire. 
Heron arrived in Dublin on 24 January 1777 and the following day was sworn of the privy council there. His career was a happy one. Despite labouring under the difficulties caused by the English government's attitude towards commercial concessions for Ireland, Heron's affability, integrity, and devotion to duty won him a position of esteem. On 25 July 1778 he was created a baronet and shortly afterwards rewarded with a pension of $700 p.a. as the searcher, packer, and gauger in Cork. 
A severe illness in the spring of 1779 led to Heron's retirement from active politics in 1780, and so complete was his removal from power that he spent 1798, the year of the Irish rising, compiling and publishing a genealogical table of the Herons of Newark. Heron married Jane, 'nee' Hall, the widow of S. Thompson. He died on 18 January 1805 at his house in Grosvenor Square, London. He was survived by his wife and, as they had no children, was succeeded in the baronetcy by his nephew Robert Heron of Stubton, Lincolnshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 13090


Heron, Robert (1764-1807), journalist and author, son of John Heron, a weaver, was born in New Galloway, Kirkcudbrightshire, on 6 November 1764. He was taught privately by his mother until his ninth year, when he was sent to the parish school. He was precocious, and at the age of eleven became a pupil-teacher; at fourteen he was appointed master of the parochial school of Kelton. By the end of 1780 he had saved sufficient money to enable him, with the help of his parents, to enter the University of Edinburgh, with the view of studying for the church. While pursuing his studies he supported himself partly by teaching, but chiefly by working for booksellers. While a divinity student Heron, in the autumn of 1789, paid a visit at Ellisland to Robert Burns, who entrusted him with a letter to Dr Thomas Blacklock, which he failed to deliver. In a rhyming epistle to Blacklock, Burns attributes Heron's faithlessness either to preoccupation with 'some dainty fair one', or to partiality for drink ('The Poems and Songs of Robert Burns', ed. J. Kinsley, 1968, no. 273b). Heron's 'Memoir' of Burns (1797), reprinted from articles in the 'Monthly Magazine' and published the year after Burns's death, was the first such written and was consequently highly influential throughout the nineteenth century. Modern scholarship has, on the whole, found it inaccurate and regrettable, unfairly portraying the poet as degenerating into as drunken, wayward, and profligate a character as Heron himself. 
Heron was for a time assistant to Dr Hugh Blair, the rhetorician, but his habits were already irregular and his interests chiefly literary. Heron's first independent literary venture was a small edition in 1789 of Thomson's 'Seasons', with critical comments on his poetry. A larger edition appeared in 1793. In 1790-91 he announced a course of lectures entitled the 'Law of nature, the law of nations, the Jewish, the Grecian, the Roman and the canon law, and then on the feudal law', intended as an introduction to the study of law, but the scheme was unsuccessful. Borne down by drink and debt, he was thrown into prison by his creditors. On their suggestion he undertook a 'History of Scotland' for Morrisons of Perth. After making some progress he was freed from prison on condition of using two-thirds of his remuneration to paying 15's'. in the pound. The first volume, which appeared in 1794, was nearly all written in gaol. The 'History' was completed in six volumes, 1794-9. In 1798 Heron produced at the Theatre Royal, Edinburgh, a comedy, which was shouted down before the second act. Attributing its failure to a conspiracy against him, he published it as 'St Kilda in Edinburgh, or, News from Camperdown, a comic drama in two acts, with a critical preface, to which is added an account of a famous ass race' (1798). Being returned as a ruling elder for New Galloway, Heron was for several years a member of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, and frequently spoke -- and from time to time preached -- with fluency and ability. In 1799 he moved to London, seeking a new start in literature. There he wrote frequently for the periodicals, was for some time editor of 'The Globe', the 'British Press', and other newspapers, and also acted as a parliamentary reporter. 
Despite personal set-backs, Heron, both in Edinburgh and London, maintained a steady flow of publications on a wide variety of subjects. In 1792, his best year, he translated C. Niebuhr's 'Travels through Arabia' and, from the French, Jacques Cazotte's 'Arabian Tales' and 'Continuations of Arabian Tales' (an important source for R. Southey's 'Thalaba' of 1801), also writing 'Elegant Extracts of Natural History' and 'Observations Made in a Journey through the Western Counties of Scotland in 1792' (still an account of interest). In 1794 he published two works on the war against France and 'General View of the Natural Circumstances of the Hebrides'. He showed an interest in chemistry, translating A. F. Fourcroy's 'Chemistry' (1796) and writing 'Elements of Chemistry' in 1800. He published a four-volume 'New and complete system of universal geography, to which is added a philosophical view of universal history' in 1798, and an edition of the letters of Junius, 1802, in Robert Watt's 'Bibliotheca Britannica'. It is there erroneously credited to John Pinkerton ('N&Q', 6, 1852, 445); however, Pinkerton himself was the author of 'Letters of Literature' by 'Robert Heron' (1784). Heron also published on the slave trade and other topics, and made other translations. He was employed by Sir John Sinclair during his compilation of the (first) 'Statistical Account of Scotland' and contributed to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' and to periodicals. 
In 1806 Heron began a newspaper entitled 'The Fame', which was unsuccessful. Its failure and his improvident habits led to his confinement by his creditors in Newgate prison, where, according to his own statement, he was reduced 'to the very extremity of bodily and pecuniary distress'. From Newgate he, on 2 February 1807, wrote a letter to the Literary Fund, recounting his services to literature, and appealing for aid (printed in Isaac Disraeli, 'Calamities of Authors', 1812), and received a grant of $20, though this was insufficient to resolve his financial problems. Attacked by fever, Heron was moved to the hospital of St Pancras, where he died on 13 April 1807. He left a manuscript, 'Journal of my conduct', which was later deposited in the library of the University of Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 13091


Heron, Sir Robert, second baronet (1765-1854), politician, born at Newark on 27 November 1765, was the only son of Thomas Heron of Chilham Castle, Kent, recorder of Newark (who died on 28 April 1794), and his first wife, Anne, the elder daughter of Sir Edward Wilmot, bt, MD. In childhood he was very feeble. His mother died on 30 April 1767, and he was brought up by strangers. He was educated from the age of eight by the Revd John Skynner, who lived near Stamford, and proceeded afterwards to St John's College, Cambridge, but did not stay long enough to take a degree. For two summers he travelled on the continent with an eccentric tutor, Robert Pedley (afterwards known as Robert Deverell). On 9 January 1792 he married Amelia (died 1847), second daughter of Sir Horatio Mann of Broughton Malherbe. They had no children. He succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his uncle Sir Richard Heron, in 1805. On the death of another uncle, the Revd Robert Heron of Grantham, on 19 January 1813, he succeeded to considerable property, which was augmented by the widow's death shortly afterwards. 
In politics Heron was a whig, though he voted for income tax in 1815 and had little faith in the whig leaders. He abandoned an intention to contest Lincolnshire in 1812 in order to canvass the borough of Grimsby, and was duly returned for that constituency. At the next general election in 1818 he stood for Lincolnshire, but he was in a hopeless minority and withdrew on the third day of the poll. Through Lord Fitzwilliam's interest he was returned in December 1819 for Peterborough, and was re-elected until 1832 without opposition. After that date he was frequently opposed, but continued to sit for Peterborough until his retirement in 1847. Heron was a constant speaker in the House of Commons, supporting slave-trade abolition, Catholic emancipation, and retrenchment in the 1820s; among his later proposals was a motion 'respecting the vacating of seats in parliament on the acceptance of office', on which the marquess of Northampton published a pamphlet of 'Observations' in 1835. A quirky, quixotic politician, Heron embodied the spirit of the independent country gentleman. 
Heron's wife died on 12 December 1847 and he died suddenly at his home, Stubton Hall, near Grantham, Lincolnshire, on 29 May 1854, the baronetcy becoming extinct. A monument to their memory was erected in Stubton churchyard by George Neville, the successor to the property; Heron had built the nave and tower of Stubton church about 1800. A volume of his 'Notes' was printed anonymously for private circulation at Grantham in 1850, and published in 1851. They dealt mainly with politics and social economy, but included observations on natural history, drawn from the curious animals collected together in what was locally known as his 'menagerie'. In one passage he spoke of J. W. Croker as 'one of the most determined jobbers', and in another referred to a 'most malicious article' of that critic in the 'Quarterly Review'. Croker revenged himself by a savage onslaught on the volume in the 'Quarterly' (1852, 90.206-25). 


@@@@@


doc= 13092


Herrick, Robert (bap. 1591, d. 1674), poet, was born in 'the Golden-cheap-side' ('Poetical Works', 316). This was Goldsmith's Row on the south of Cheapside, between Bread Street and the Eleanor Cross, 'the most beautiful frame of fayre houses and shoppes that bee within the Walles of London, or elsewhere in England' (Stow, 1.345). The fifth surviving child of Nicholas Herrick (or Heryck) (1542-1592) and Julian Stone (1561-1629), he was baptized in St Vedast's, Foster Lane, on 24 August 1591. 
The Herricks were wealthy Leicester ironmongers, but Nicholas had been apprenticed in London as a goldsmith to Edward Gylberd. Julian's father was a London mercer, William Stone. At Robert's birth, Nicholas was a successful jeweller and moneylender, but before he was two Robert was effectively deprived of both parents. On 9 November 1592, two days after making his will 'of perfecte memorie in soule but sicke in Bodie' (Herrick family papers, Leics. RO, DG 9/2406), his father allegedly 'did throwe himself forthe of a garret windowe... whereby he did kill and destroye himself' (deed poll, ibid., DG 9/2410). Harsh laws concerning suicide, including burial outside hallowed ground, were then strictly enforced, and it was probably through the influence in the city of Julian's family in particular (her brother-in-law Stephen Soame was sheriff in 1593, lord mayor in 1598) that Nicholas was hurriedly buried in St Vedast's next day, apparently in an unmarked grave. 
Nicholas's presumed suicide clearly haunted Robert, whose poetry shows an obsession with the proper rites of burial that goes beyond the uncharacteristically sombre poem addressed to Nicholas's 'reverend shade' thirty-five years ('seven lustres') later, in which he apologizes for not doing 'the 'Rites' to thy Religious Tombe' since he did not know 'Whether thy bones had here their Rest, or no' ('Poetical Works', 27). Nicholas's family pressed for a verdict of accidental death. On 13 November the privy council, alerted that 'the matter is by som endevored to be found casuall' ('APC', '1592', 290-91), warned the lord mayor that no verdict should be reached until the royal almoner, to whom a suicide's estate was forfeit, had collected evidence. The almoner, Richard Fletcher, bishop of Bristol (father of John, whose 'Incomparable Playes' Herrick was to praise over fifty years later), settled for the relatively small sum of $220 'whither the death... be found by the Coroners enquest to have been casuall & accidentall or ells a wilfull murdering & making away of himself' (23 Nov 1592; Herrick family papers, Leics. RO, DG 9/2410). The coroner's verdict is lost, but Fletcher's decision freed an estate worth $3053 (excluding doubtful and desperate debts), of which Nicholas left one-third to his wife, and two-thirds to be divided among his six children, with his brothers Robert and William as overseers. 
The will was challenged by Julian: the elder Robert noted in 1602 'a suite... concerninge the validitie of the testator's will and revokinge an administration of the testators goodes formerly Comitted to Julian Hericke... upon supposition that he died intestate' (Herrick family papers, Leics. RO, DG 9/2415). In March 1593 an agreement was reached between Robert and William, on behalf of the children, and Julian, who accepted $1300, rather more than a third of the residual estate, in full settlement. Nicholas's brothers agreed to 'have fowre childeren of the said Nicholas and Julian with their portions' while 'the sayd Julian shall have tow other of the childeren with theire portions as shee shall best like' (ibid., DG 9/2413). Julian kept the newly born William and her only surviving daughter, Mercy. She lived initially with her sister Christian Campion at Hampton, and subsequently with another sister, Anne Soame, at Little Thurlow, Suffolk. 
Robert, still only about nineteen months old, and his elder brothers Nicholas and Thomas were thus henceforth brought up by their uncles, in practice by the London-based William Herrick. The effective loss of both parents may have been less traumatic than might be assumed, since Robert had probably been boarded out with a wet-nurse, a normal course in wealthy London families, and one indicated in his case by an undated note from Julian asking William to 'send for the courall from Robardes nource and send it me for Will' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. c.474, fol. 110). William Herrick, having been apprenticed to Nicholas, had by 1593 begun his own immensely successful business as goldsmith, jeweller, and moneylender. In 1596 he married Joan May, a lady of strong presbyterian leanings. Through her, Robert acquired the future privy councillor Humphrey May as an adoptive uncle, and the poet Tom May as adoptive cousin. 
Robert's childhood in this household must have had a pious presbyterian slant. He later wrote of the law's intent: '
To free the Orphan from that Wolfe-like-man, 

Who is his 'Butcher' more then 'Guardian'

('Poetical Works', 201)' but, though the birth of William's and Joan's own twelve children between 1598 and 1615 would have diverted attention from their nephews, these lines are not necessarily autobiographical. William did, however, put all three nephews to apprenticeships, while designing more gentlemanly careers for most of his own sons. This suggests some inequality of treatment, as does the fact that the nephews are rarely mentioned in surviving family documents. It is significant in a poet so conscious of family relationships that Herrick never addresses poems to William, the elder Robert, or any member of their families, while addressing several to his mother's relatives. 
Herrick did nevertheless receive a sophisticated education before being apprenticed to William in September 1607. A poem written about 1611-12 to his brother Thomas ('Poetical Works', 34), some time before he went to Cambridge, bears witness to this. It invokes a wide range of classical authors, and imitates Ben Jonson's then-unpublished 'To Sir Robert Wroth', suggesting that he knew Jonson before his presumed contact with the latter's circle in the mid-1620s. The tradition that Herrick received this education at Westminster is groundless, as is one that he lived at Hampton. It is more likely that, like William's own sons, he went to the nearby Merchant Taylors' School, but no registers survive for the years 1598-1603 when Herrick is most likely to have been there. All that is certain is that his reading was wide, and his characteristically easy use of literary allusion well established, by the time he was twenty. 
If Herrick did leave school in 1602-3 he may, like his father and William, have worked in his uncle's shop before his apprenticeship began. Since William records payments to Herrick's cousin, William Pearson, for his 'apparill' and diet in 1611-12 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. c.474, fol. 117), it seems that by the time he was nineteen, and perhaps earlier, Herrick was lodging with Pearson, who worked for William. Bound for ten years, he had served only five when, in the early summer of 1613, he entered St John's College, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner. At least two of his Soame uncles had been students there, one, Robert, twice becoming vice-chancellor. The change of career followed Herrick's coming of age. In March 1613 the City's orphan court (chaired by Sir Stephen Soame) recognized his majority, he being twenty-one 'and upwards' and Robert acknowledged his inheritance of $424 8's.', which William immediately borrowed back, paying Robert a quarterly allowance of $10 as interest during his time at Cambridge. 
In return for higher fees and a gift of silver plate, fellow-commoners shared dining privileges and other marks of status with the fellows. Robert was establishing his gentlemanly rank at one of the most expensive colleges in Cambridge. His cousin Richard Stone ('Poetical Works', 185) followed him to St John's as a fellow-commoner in 1614, as over the next two years did the future earl of Northumberland, Algernon Percy, and Sir Clipseby Crewe, son of the lord chief justice, who became a patron and friend. A still more important patron, Mildmay Fane, later the second earl of Westmorland, was at Emmanuel in 1618. Other Cambridge friends or patrons included Thomas Southwell (ibid., 53), George Parry (ibid., 322), William Alabaster (ibid., 256), and perhaps Edward Sackville, earl of Dorset (ibid., 187). Oliver Cromwell, Hugh Peters, Oliver St John, James Shirley, John Cosin, and Gilbert Sheldon were also contemporaries. Herrick's tutor was probably William Beeston, but more significant was another fellow near his own age, the Devonian John Weekes, who had graduated in 1612. They were to remain close friends at least until the publication of 'Hesperides' in 1648 (ibid., 132, 321). Still connected with St John's was another fellow, John Williams, whom Herrick later accused of being 'unkind' in some unspecified way (ibid., 52, 413), and who was in 1613 just beginning his upward climb at court. 
Herrick's only surviving prose dates from these years: fifteen letters to Sir William Herrick ('Poetical Works', 445-53) request money in a tone reflecting the deferential attitude of nephews to guardians in early modern England. Their obsequiousness obscures the fact that they are mainly reminders of the interest due on his inheritance. Although an income of $40 a year made Herrick a relatively wealthy student, it was not enough to keep him in style at St John's. Simonds D'Ewes, a fellow-commoner there in 1618, found that $50 a year caused him 'much want and discontent' ('Autobiography', 1.118-19). In 1616 Herrick asked Sir William 'whether it were better for me to direct my study towards the lawe or not' ('Poetical Works', 452) and migrated to the smaller and cheaper Trinity Hall, apparently not as a fellow-commoner. Here again his career intersected with that of an upwardly mobile courtier politician, Sir Robert Naunton, who resigned his fellowship that year. Herrick may have intended to move on to an inn of court, but instead, after graduating BA on 10 April 1617, he stayed on to take his MA in July 1620, although residence for the MA was no longer necessary. He may have stayed still longer: he was described as a fellow of Trinity Hall at his ordination in 1623. He was not a fellow, but possibly kept a room there after graduation, like his friend Sir Simeon Steward (ibid., 126). He is still listed in the college steward's accounts as owing over $10 in 1630. 
Few poems can be dated to these years (only a tiny proportion of the 1400 poems in 'Hesperides' can be dated), but the beginnings of a reputation are detectable. In 1619 Herrick contributed a poem on behalf of Trinity Hall (his only surviving holograph poem, BL, Harley MS 367, fol. 154) to a memorial collection for John Browne, a fellow of Gonville and Caius. Manuscript miscellanies belonging to the Spelman, Alston, St John, and Daniell families, all of which have Cambridge connections, contain a substantial number of his poems (Beal, 532-3). Another manuscript miscellany from this period, the 'Herrick Commonplace Book' (Texas MS), contains, along with two Herrick poems, entries in a hand which may be his. There are, however, further entries in many other hands, suggesting it was widely circulated. The case for Herrick's association with the miscellany, if not ownership of it, however, is strengthened by the fact that it contains common material with the Alston manuscript (Yale University, Osborn collection, b 197). The Alstons were a Suffolk family, connected to St John's and Trinity Hall. The Soames also owned a number of estates in Suffolk, the main one at Little Thurlow, from where Herrick's sister Mercy ('Poetical Works', 269) married John Wingfield (ibid., 131) in 1611. The Wingfields, and Herrick's mother, subsequently lived at Brantham, a few miles away, and Robert must have visited both places in the 1620s, being in touch also with the Crofts at Saxham (ibid., 267) and the Alstons at Sudbury. 
It was in Peterborough, the cathedral city near Cambridge, that the next documented step took place: Herrick and Weekes were ordained deacon and priest by Bishop Thomas Dove on 24 and 25 April 1623. Ordinations on successive days were common during this period, but the ordination of the two friends at the same time implies that some opportunity had opened for them. Both were in their early thirties, suggesting a career in the church was not their first choice, though Herrick's 'Farwell unto Poetrie' ('Poetical Works', 410) suggests he took his vows seriously. Since neither man was presented to a living, they probably became domestic chaplains. Weekes later described himself and his wife as combining to form an 'epicene chaplain' to Endymion Porter ('CSP dom.', '1633', 230). Herrick dedicated a number of poems to Porter, but in April 1623 the latter was in Spain. Though both could nevertheless have been appointed to his household, the influence of Herrick's family, or of such Cambridge contemporaries as Crewe, Fane, Sackville, Naunton, or Williams, may have helped him to a chaplaincy elsewhere. All that is clear is that he was in London in January 1624, when he sent 'A New-Yeares Gift' ('Poetical Works', 126) to Sir Simeon Steward, and in July 1625, when he wrote the 'Nuptiall Song' (ibid., 112) for Crewe's marriage to Jane Pulteney in Westminster. In 1625 Richard James, in 'The Muses Dirge', gave the unpublished Herrick his first recorded praise: perhaps having read the splendid 'Nuptiall Song', he lamented that James I had not been celebrated by 'Some 'Jonson', 'Drayton', or some 'Herick''. In 1626 Mildmay Fane addressed two friendly poems to Herrick, one of which places him in London ('Poetry', 58-9, 61). 
In July 1627 Herrick and Weekes were chaplains to the duke of Buckingham on the ill-fated expedition to relieve the Huguenots at La Rochelle (cf. Herrick's petition of 1630, TNA: PRO, SP 16/173/93). It is possible that they had been in Buckingham's service before this: several influential patrons could have promoted the connection, but since Buckingham came from Leicestershire, contact could have come through the Herrick family there. Porter, John Mennes, James Smith, and a future patron, Viscount Scudamore, were also associated with the expedition, all returning safely in November, unlike the 4000 Englishmen sacrificed to international protestantism on the islands of Re and Oleron. Weekes almost immediately became rector of Shirwell in north Devon, but Herrick probably continued in Buckingham's service until the latter's assassination in August 1628 left him looking for a new place, which he was to find, like Weekes, in Devon. 
Herrick was presented to the vicarage of Dean Prior, on the southern edge of Dartmoor, in September 1629. A previous vicar, Scipio Stukeley, had been Weekes's uncle, while the patron of the living, Sir Edward Giles, was also related to Weekes (Herrick was himself very distantly related to Giles, through the marriage of his cousin Tobias to Elizabeth Yarde). In 1629, however, Dean Prior was in the king's gift, its incumbent, Barnaby Potter, having become bishop of Carlisle. Charles approved Herrick's appointment on 1 October, and he was instituted by Joseph Hall, bishop of Exeter, on 26 October 1629, in the London house of Hall's patron, the earl of Norwich. 
Valued at $21 a year, Dean Prior was not a rich living: nearby Buckfastleigh was valued at $29, while Weekes's parish at Shirwell was worth over $30. Compared with this, let alone the $700 a year that Robert's presbyterian cousin Richard Heyrick later received as warden of Manchester College, Dean Prior did not represent worldly success for the 38-year-old poet. It did, however, represent security, and Herrick, typically Romanizing his experience, was to celebrate the 'beloved privacie' of his 'poore Tenement' ('Poetical Works', 200), as well as cursing 'the dull confines of the drooping West' (ibid., 242). The Ile de Re expedition, Buckingham's assassination, Weekes's move to Shirwell, and his mother's impending death may all have contributed to the move, which in any case he may have seen as merely a stepping-stone. 
Since Potter held the vicarage 'in commendam' until Michaelmas 1630, Herrick did not move there until late that year. The 'Mr Robbert Hyrick' who was meanwhile recommended to Lady Vere by the puritan John Davenport in January 1629 ('Letters of John Davenport', ed. I. Calder, 1937, 29, 31) was probably his cousin, the same who married Jane Gibbons at St Clement Danes in June 1632. Between 24 August 1629, when she made her will, and 5 November 1629, when it was proved, Julian Herrick died at Brantham, leaving most of her estate to the two children she had brought up, William and Mercy. Robert and Nicholas (Thomas presumably having died) received only a token ring each (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/156/97). Herrick was probably at Whitehall in May 1630, when his pastoral on the birth of Prince Charles was 'Presented to the King, and Set by Mr. Nic: Laniere' ('Poetical Works', 85). About June 1630 he wrote an epitaph on the death of his niece Elizabeth (ibid., 145), which, placed in St Margaret's, Westminster, appeared as his first published poem in the 1633 continuation of Stow's 'Survey' (Stow, 812). A poem on the approaching death of his younger brother William ('Poetical Works', 73), dating from early November 1630 (William was buried on 8 November), implies that Herrick was then still in London, and probably living with William in Westminster. William's death prompted a poem to Porter (ibid., 72) describing William as 'The staffe, The Elme, the prop, the shelt'ring wall' of Herrick's vine, a role he hoped Porter would now take on. 
If Herrick did stay in London until November 1630, William's widow, Elizabeth, may have travelled with him to Dean Prior, where she was to keep house for him until her death in 1643 ('Poetical Works', 13, 23). Herrick's other female company in Dean Prior was his maid, Prudence Baldwin (ibid., 151), who outlived him, dying in 1678, but for whom he nevertheless wrote a graceful epitaph at least thirty years premature (ibid., 262). 'His Grange, or Private Wealth' (ibid., 246) adds details of a number of pets and fowls, but fails to mention his curate, William Greene, who may also have accompanied him to Devon in November, since his hand, confusingly similar to Herrick's, first appears in the parish register for that year, continuing until 1636. Greene also signed the bishop's transcripts for 1630, 1632, and 1634, and appeared with Herrick before the bishop's visitation of 22 March 1631, the earliest date at which Herrick can definitely be placed in Dean Prior. At the 1638 visitation, however, Herrick was alone. 
In Devon, Herrick supplemented his aristocratic patrons by more modest local ones: apart from Giles and his relatives at nearby Dean Court, such gentry as John Weare ('Poetical Works', 201), John Warr (ibid., 48), John Merrifield (ibid., 90), and Thomas Shapcot (ibid., 119) were: '
Writ in the Poets Endlesse-Kalendar: 

Whose velome, and whose volumne is the Skie. 
(ibid., 168)' Less fortunate parishioners were recorded by name in epigrams which imitate Martial and Jonson. Greene and his successors as curates made regular visits to London possible for Herrick, and it was probably from there, for example, that Herrick wrote on the imprisonment of John Williams (ibid., 52) in or about 1637. If so, he was back in Dean Prior for the visitation of 1638, and in September 1639, when he married Lettice Yarde, the great-niece of Sir Edward Giles, to Henry Northleigh, a ceremony followed, perhaps uniquely, by a second, more classical one, composed and conducted by Herrick in the porch of the house, presumably Dean Court, where the marriage was consummated (ibid., 124). 
An undated note in the domestic state papers (TNA: PRO, SP 16/474/77) from 'Mr Delles man' (Laud's secretary, William Dell) endorsed 'abt mr Henrique: a minister' suggests that a long and eventful visit to London followed this wedding. The informer's report that 'Thomsen Parsons hath had a Bastard lately shee was brought to bedd at Greenwch.' is followed by a statement whose contiguity implies Herrick played some part in this event: 'Mr Herrique a Minister possest of a very good Living in Devonshire hath not resided thereon having noe Lycence for his non-residence & not being Chapline to any Noble man or man qualifyed by Law as I heare, his Lodging is at Westminster in the little Amrie at Nicholas Weilkes his house where the said Thomsen Parsons lives. (ibid.)' A further implication is that Herrick had been living in the Little Almonry for some time. Born in 1618, Thomasin was the daughter of John Parsons (died 1623), organist at Westminster Abbey. Herrick had written on Thomasin's beauty as a child ('Poetical Works', 304), and, more amorously, to her elder sister Dorothy (ibid., 186). 
It was probably on this visit that Herrick began moves to publish his poems. Though they had achieved considerable manuscript currency, apart from the adventitious publication of the epitaph on Elizabeth, only four had appeared in print, all probably unauthorized: in 1635 'Oberon's Feast' ('Poetical Works', 119) was in 'A Description of the King and Queen of Fayries', and in 1640 Benson added three poems, along with those of other 'excellent gentlemen', to his edition of Shakespeare's poems. Then, in April 1640, Andrew Crooke entered for publication ''The severall Poems' written by Master ROBERT HERRICK' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 4.483). It may have been Crooke's publication of Jonson, Shirley, Fletcher, and Killigrew that same year that led Herrick to him, or him to Herrick, and the installation of Prince Charles (to whom the volume was to have been dedicated) as prince of Wales would have made the moment timely. The edition never appeared, perhaps because of the information given to Dell. Herrick must have returned to Dean Prior, probably before the opening of the Long Parliament in November, and witnessed from there the movement towards civil war. 
Devon was a centre of conflict during the war. Herrick's loyalties were royalist, as were those of most of his local patrons, but poems such as 'Liberty' ('Poetical Works', 153) show that he understood what was at stake. A number of poems witness that: '
Sick is the Land to'th' heart; and doth endure 

More dangerous faintings by her desp'rate cure 
(ibid., 214)' while others offer comfort to and confidence in the king and queen. Family sickness counterpoised that of the land: in April 1643, a few days before he congratulated 'brave Hopton' on the first royalist victory in the south-west (ibid., 310), he buried his sister-in-law Elizabeth (ibid., 23). Conflict came closest to Dean Prior when in January 1646 Cromwell surprised the royalist cavalry at Bovey Tracey, and then moved on to Totnes, while Fairfax took Dartmouth. The tide of parliamentary success swept Herrick away with it: by 25 March 1646, before Exeter surrendered, the county commissioners had replaced him with a presbyterian minister, John Syms, who was to remain in place until 1660. 
Homeless and without income, Herrick's first move was to Weekes at Shirwell: '
To whose glad threshold, and free door 

I may a Poet come, though poor. 
('Poetical Works', 321)' By 1647 he was in London, which he greeted enthusiastically as his true home, from which he had been: '
by hard fate sent 

Into a long and irksome banishment. 
(ibid., 242)' By the time his welcome to the king was sung at Hampton Court in August 1647 (ibid., 300), the printing of his poems, as 'Hesperides, or, The Works both Humane & Divine of Robert Herrick Esq.', was already under way. It was published in 1648, probably early in that year, and sold by John Williams at the Crown and by Francis Eglesfield at the Marigold, both in St Paul's Churchyard. Copies were also printed for Thomas Hunt at Exeter, implying the existence of a local market. Although Herrick spent some time at the last minute composing epigrams to fatten the religious part of his collection, 'His Noble Numbers', he presented himself on the main title-page as a lay gentleman, 'Robert Herrick 'Esq.'', and presumably lived thus in London. The striking bust engraved by Marshall as frontispiece, also denies any clerical connections: placed in profile on a classical altar, it shows a heavy, thickset man wearing a toga, with a strong neck, a thin moustache, a prominent hooked nose, and a mass of curly hair which is suspiciously full for a man of about fifty-six. It is possible that hair and nose are exaggerated as suitably Roman characteristics, but in other respects the portrait is sufficiently idiosyncratic to suggest that it is an authentic likeness. 
Walker implies that Herrick remained in London from 1647 to 1660, and writes that 'having no Fifths paid him [he] was subsisted by Charity' (Walker, 263). Some of this charity came from Fane, to whom Herrick addressed a 'Christmas Carroll' in 1647. Fane sent $5 that November, and apparently paid $2 quarterly until 1660. To this was added an 'Annual Charity' from Viscount Scudamore, and probably something from Henry Pierrepoint, the 'gallant 'Newark'' bracketed with 'Noble 'Westmorland'' (Fane) as having a 'large heart and long hand' ('Poetical Works', 301). Herrick's only surviving brother, Nicholas, a Levant merchant in London whose travels he celebrates (ibid., 330), would have been an obvious supporter and host, more so than Sir William Herrick, long retired to Leicestershire, whose sympathies were no longer royalist. Those of the Soame and Stone families were, however, and Sir William Soame (ibid., 131) at Little Thurlow and Sir Richard Stone at Stukeley were also probably supporters of their cousin. Two earlier patrons could not have helped him much: Crewe, with whom Herrick seems in any case to have quarrelled (ibid., 161), died in 1648, and Porter in 1649. 
Even though he saw 'Hesperides' as a definitive life's work, it is unlikely that Herrick stopped writing after its publication. Very little has survived, however: apart from the 'Christmas Carroll', he contributed to the Beaumont and Fletcher folio of 1647 ('Poetical Works', 415), and to the elegies on Hastings in 'Lachrymae musarum' of 1649 (ibid., 416). When this elegy, his last known poem, was written he still had twenty-five years to live, years which from 1660 are partially documented by the Exeter diocesan records. Despite having sworn never to return to Dean Prior until 'Rockes turn to Rivers, Rivers turn to Men' (ibid., 29), he was one of the 570 clergy who petitioned the House of Lords in 1660 to secure the revenues of their livings while awaiting restitution. That came in September with the 'Act for Settling Ministers'. Aged sixty-nine, Herrick returned to Dean Prior, where he was again supported by a curate, David Mole, who described himself as a 'lecturer' (chanter 151, 41, Devon RO) and who had been curate at nearby South Brent since 1633. Herrick signed a certificate of orthodoxy for an Edward Goswell on 12 October 1661 (basket D/67/99, Devon RO), and subscribed to the 'Act of Conformity' in August 1662, but did not appear before the bishop's visitation of November that year, or ever again: in August 1665 and 1668 he was represented by David Mole, the bishop excusing him; while in 1671, apparently without a curate, he was excused as extremely aged ('valde senex'). In August 1674 a new curate, 'Mr Colwell', represented him. It was presumably Colwell who buried him at the church of St George the Martyr, Dean Prior two months later, when the parish register records 'Robert Herrick Vicker was buried the 15th day of October'. 
It has been argued that in 1648, aged about fifty-six, and with publication probably coinciding with the second civil war, Herrick launched 'Hesperides' at an inauspicious time, his poetry too old-fashioned and too harmonious for 'the untuneable Times' ('Poetical Works', 84). The evidence does not wholly support this. Wood remembered that 'Hesperides' made some impact, and that Herrick's poems 'made him much admired in the time when they were published, especially by the generous and boon loyalists' (Wood, 2.122-3). The dedication to Prince Charles and the explicitly royalist poems suggest why 'Hesperides' was timely for such readers, as less obviously does Herrick's emphasis on the continuity and shaping powers of ceremony, ritual, and tradition, and on the importance of friendship and family loyalty. Even the harmonies of the well-tuned lyric must have had a powerful nostalgic impact on readers whose world had been turned disharmoniously upside down. Seventy-five poems from 'Hesperides' were included in the 1650 edition of the anthology 'Witt's Recreations', with ten more in 1663, and Herrick continued to appear in anthologies and songbooks throughout the century. He was praised as 'Yong Herric' in 'Musarum deliciae' (1655, 2), and in 'Naps upon Parnassus' (1658) as the only English lyric poet comparable to Horace (sig. A3'v'). But 'Hesperides' did not establish him as the distinctive master of lyric that he undoubtedly was, and he was largely unknown throughout the eighteenth century. Herrick was willing to wait, however, making clear that 'Hesperides' was aimed more at a future than a present audience: '
That each Lyrick here shall be 

Of my love a Legacie, 

Left to all posterity. 
('Poetical Works', 88)' Posterity has not always known how to take the legacy: critics have found Herrick's characteristic virtues of playfulness, generosity, gracefulness, self-mockery, the very ease of his verse, difficult to deal with. A similar anxiety about such 'trivial' qualities informs both Edward Phillips's description, 'now and then a pretty Floury and Pastoral gale of Fancy' interrupted by 'trivial passages' ('Theatrum poetarum', 1675, 62), and F. R. Leavis's judgment that Herrick is merely 'trivially charming' ('Revaluation', 1936, 36). His high reputation in Victorian times was, conversely, all too often based on a view of him as a simple poet of an innocent world of daffodils, quaint customs, and blossoming village beauties which itself trivialized his achievement. 
Containing almost 1400 poems, probably almost all that he could find to print in 1647, 'Hesperides' was and remains the only effort by an important English poet to publish his entire 'oeuvre' in one organized collection. For despite the appearance of being a 'heterogeneous mass' (Nichols, 2/2.634) 'Hesperides' is organized: with its versified 'Argument' ('Poetical Works', 5), and even its versified errata, and bounded by addresses 'To his Booke', it consciously imitates that enclosed garden, outside time, after which it was named. In this and other respects the struggle with 'Times trans-shifting' ('The Argument of his Book', ibid.) is Herrick's most characteristic and most profound preoccupation. Not only does he explore all the ways in which 'Poetry Perpetuates the Poet' (ibid., 265), but his lyrics typically pin down a transient moment, as in 'The Comming of Good Luck' (ibid., 100), or, most unusually at this date, transplant the material of biography -- family, friends, his maid, his parishioners, his dog -- into his timeless garden. Consequent upon this latter process is a fictionalizing of Herrick as a character whose Anacreontic, genial, and self-mocking persona dominates 'Hesperides'. Other poets, notably his greatest mentors, Horace and Jonson, had projected versions of themselves in their work, but Herrick was the first English poet to do so in such a thoroughgoing way. He was deeply original too in the ways he deployed his strategies against 'Times trans-shifting'. His awareness of the importance and continuity of ceremony, and of the ways in which rituals and calendar customs order inchoate experience, informs poems like 'Corinna's going a Maying' (ibid., 67), 'The Hock-Cart' (ibid., 101), and 'Ceremonies for Candlemasse Eve' (ibid., 285). These three poems also display his almost pantheistic insight into the interpenetration of human and natural worlds, and of the time-defeating forces of regeneration at work in both of them. The last lines of each also display, in their very different ways, his acceptance that in the end age and death cannot be defeated, that both human and natural worlds must 'glide / Into the Grave' ('To Blossoms', ibid., 176). 


@@@@@


doc= 13093


Herries, Sir Charles John (1815-1883), financier, was born in Chelsea, London, on 14 June 1815, the eldest son of John Charles Herries (1778-1855), the politician, and his wife, Sarah Dorington (died 1821). He was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1837 and proceeded MA in 1840. He was admitted at the Inner Temple in 1836 and called to bar in 1840. In November 1842 Sir Robert Peel made him a commissioner of excise. In 1856 he was appointed by Sir George Cornewall Lewis as deputy chair of the Board of Inland Revenue, and in August 1877 Disraeli promoted him to the chairmanship. In 1871 he was made CB, and in October 1880 (on Gladstone's recommendation) KCB. He retired in November 1881. His public services were acknowledged in a Treasury minute of 2 December 1881, which was subsequently presented to parliament. Herries died unmarried, on 14 March 1883, at his country house, St Julian's, near Sevenoaks, and was buried in the family vault at Sevenoaks. He wrote an introduction to the 'Memoir of the Right Hon. J. C. Herries, by Edward Herries, C.B.' (2 vols., 1880). 


@@@@@


doc= 13094


Herries, John Charles (1778-1855), politician, was born in November 1778 in London, the eldest son of Charles Herries, merchant, and Mary Ann Johnson. His father was descended from a long line of Dumfriesshire lairds and in the course of his career in London had become colonel of the light horse volunteers, a select and prestigious London defence force that was to have an important bearing on his son's career. 
Herries was educated at Cheam and at Leipzig University, becoming proficient in French and German, and returned to London in the first half of 1798 to find that his father was bankrupt. On 5 July 1798 he was appointed a junior clerk in the Treasury at $100 p.a., and in the unusually short space of six months was promoted to a post in the revenue department at three times that salary. How far this swift progress was due to his father's connections in the volunteers is unclear, but there was no doubt about Herries's talents for business and for economics. In 1801 he was employed to draw up for Pitt his counter-resolutions against Tierney's financial proposals, and in 1803 published a pamphlet, 'A Reply to some Financial Mistatements in and out of Parliament', which was a riposte to attacks on Addington's government by Lord Grenville and Cobbett. Earlier (in 1802) he had demonstrated other talents by publishing the first of six editions of his translation from Gentz's treatise, 'On the state of Europe before and after the French Revolution, being an answer to 'L'etat de la France a la fin de l'an VIII''. 
By this time Herries had become, in February 1801, the private secretary of Nicholas Vansittart, who, besides being the secretary of the Treasury in Addington's government, was also associated with the volunteers. This was a position he held while Vansittart was in office until March 1807, and it might have led to a customs appointment in Buenos Aires, worth $1000 p.a., had not Lord Grenville's government fallen before it could be implemented. When Vansittart declined to join Portland's government, Herries found himself unemployed. His father therefore wrote on his son's behalf to Perceval, the new chancellor of the exchequer and the honorable treasurer of the volunteers, with the result that Herries became his private secretary at $300 p.a. 
It was under Perceval's patronage that Herries began to attract wider notice for his administrative and financial skills. During 1807-9 he produced two short-lived government newspapers with John Wilson Croker, and in October 1809 was entrusted with the unsuccessful negotiations with Vansittart for the latter's accession to the government. In 1810 he did the spadework for the budget presented by Spencer Perceval, who as prime minister appointed him secretary to the chancellor of the Irish exchequer, William Wellesley Pole, in June 1811. His time in Ireland, however, was brief: having refused Wellesley Pole's offer to become a lord of the Irish treasury, he returned to London to be appointed commissary-in-chief with a salary of $2700 (1 October 1811). Perceval had earlier demonstrated his faith in Herries's services by having him appointed to the lucrative and influential sinecure of secretary and registrar to the Order of the Bath (January 1809), and in July 1811 recommended him to the regent for an appointment that he never took up -- the comptroller of army accounts -- on the grounds that he was 'one of the best men of business' that he knew (Perceval to the prince regent, 16 July 1811, 'Correspondence of George, Prince of Wales', 8.46-7). 
Herries's career in the high-profile role of commissary consolidated his reputation. The main problems he faced were the corruption and inefficiency attendant on supplying the troops in the Peninsula. Building on the work of his predecessor, Herries tackled them with enthusiasm and skill, referring on one occasion to his having found his 'natural place', which was 'in the working class of politicians' (Gray, 326). Tests in English and mathematics were established to select new clerks, and the staff at headquarters in Great George Street grew to 53, with 20 commissaries-general and 1000 clerks serving at home and abroad. How far he was successful in a post that he held until October 1816 has been a matter of debate. In the case of three aspects of his work -- the running of his department, the rooting out of corruption, and the settlement of subsidy payments to the allies -- there has been no dispute. Herries was exceptionally able in all three fields, particularly in the settlement of subsidies amounting to the enormous sum of $42.5 million, half of which was handled by Nathan Meyer Rothschild and most of which was paid, for the first time, in advantageous foreign currencies. There has been some debate, however, about the supplies of cash to Wellington's armies. Napier, following Wellington himself, alleged that the armies' operations had been restricted by lack of specie, but more recent writers have judged that Wellington never appreciated Herries's difficulties in this department and that the latter's efforts did improve, most notably when he formed a plan with Rothschild at the end of 1813 to provide the army with French specie. Thus although the judgement that Herries was 'the unsung Carnot of Whitehall' (Gray, 330) may be an exaggeration, the sensible conclusion is that Herries's work was an important and largely neglected aspect of the war effort. It was certainly seen as such by the government when the office was abolished after the war (24 October 1816), Herries being complimented in word and deed, the latter taking the form of a pension of $1350 and the new post of auditor of the civil list. In 1817 Vansittart, the chancellor of the exchequer, went so far as to claim in the Commons that the great allied push of 1812-13 had depended on his friend's efforts. 
Although his marriage on 8 February 1814 to Sarah, a daughter of John Dorington, clerk of the fees of the House of Commons, had been within his own social class, Herries was now moving in powerful circles and forging connections which caused some controversy. The friendship with Vansittart, and earlier Perceval, associated him with the evangelical and intemperate wing of the tory party and, more particularly, with Vansittart's economic thinking, which in its opposition to the resumption of cash payments and a bi-metallic currency was the reverse of Huskisson's, the most influential political economist of the post-war era. Moreover the collaboration with Rothschild and the fact that his brother owned a bank suggested that he had strong interests in the City, while being secretary to the Order of the Bath and auditor of the civil list meant that he was in frequent contact with the regent and his influential secretary, Sir William Knighton. 
For the moment these associations did not interrupt his career as 'a man of business'. On 27 February 1821 he suffered the personal tragedy of the death of his wife (who had borne three sons, including the financier Sir Charles John Herries, and three daughters), but in July of that year he was appointed a member of the commission of inquiry into the Irish revenue and wrote the report (28 June 1822) which was the basis for the eventual amalgamation of the British and Irish revenue services. This provided the impetus for his elevation to high office. Thus, when the financial secretaryship of the Treasury became vacant in that year Charles Arbuthnot, the patronage secretary, having consulted Canning and checked with Huskisson, recommended Herries as the replacement, and Lord Liverpool agreed to the appointment in February 1823. In the same month he was returned as a colleague of Canning's for the Treasury borough of Harwich and some time that year took a lease on Montreal, Lord Amherst's seat near Sevenoaks, while the latter was in India (1823-8). By that time he had resigned his secretaryship of the Order of the Bath. 
Although he made no mark as a speaker, Herries played an important background role in the development of free-trade policies in Liverpool's government. One of his achievements was the consolidation of the customs laws and another was an engineered revival in the Lancashire silk industry. In general, the leading authority on the subject argues that he did as much to advance free trade in these years as Robinson, the president of the Board of Trade, although always with pragmatic as opposed to ideological motives (Hilton, 183-4). On the other hand, he was unable to shake off the faint whiff of scandal generated by his friendship with Rothschild and Knighton. Suspicious minds therefore worked overtime when Herries proposed that the banking crisis of 1825-6 was best dealt with by an inflationary policy that included the Bank of England and City financiers buying exchequer bills in the market place to keep them at a premium. The back-bench tory squires, who distrusted the City, were also alarmed, remembering, perhaps, that Herries had argued since 1819 for the re-establishment of a property tax. 
In the first few months of 1827 Herries was beginning to feel the strain of what he called his 'laborious vocation' (Herries to Knighton, 27 Feb 1827, 'Letters of George IV', 3.200). He continued in the same office in the government that Canning formed in April, but in July asked to resign his post for one with fewer duties as a result of ill health. Canning agreed, asking him to delay until a successor could be found, but must have been disappointed, as Herries had earlier outlined an imaginative economic recovery plan which included revisions to the hallowed Sinking Fund, drastic reductions in expenditure, and the setting up of a Commons' finance committee to recommend such reductions. Indeed there are some grounds for thinking that Canning wanted to promote Herries to the chancellorship. He nevertheless had Herries appointed in the interim as one of the commissioners for supervising the restoration of Windsor Castle. 
It was at this point that Canning died. By this time the king had become, of necessity, the guardian of the fragile coalition government that Canning had formed out of his own followers, the pro-Catholic tories and the Lansdowne whigs. He therefore asked Goderich to stay in office and become prime minister and, having failed to persuade Sturges Bourne to become chancellor of the exchequer, accepted Goderich's suggestion that Herries take the post, arguing later that he understood Canning to have regarded him as the best man to deal with the economic situation. The offer, which was accompanied by Herries's appointment to the privy council (17 August), created a storm of public controversy, the terms of which would have destroyed lesser men. No one questioned that Herries, to quote Lansdowne's acolyte, James Abercromby, was 'an excellent man of business' (Abercromby to Huskisson, 26 Aug 1827, BL, Add. MS 38750, fols. 95-6), but there was a widespread feeling, especially among the coalition whigs, that his connections in the City and at Windsor would make him a Trojan horse for Rothschild and the king, and that this was sufficient to disqualify him. Tories also greeted the prospective appointment with alarm; Arbuthnot referred to the narrowness of his 'mind' (Arbuthnot to Peel, 15 Aug 1827, BL, Add. MS 40340, fol. 174), and others asked what would happen if Huskisson, the leader of the Commons, was unwell, and Herries, who was regarded as a poor speaker, had to fill his shoes. 
Herries, for his part, initially pleaded ill health and noted that the chancellorship was 'far above my pretensions and so much beyond my wishes' (Herries, 'Memoir', 2.51). He therefore urged Goderich to appoint Huskisson to the post -- the man with whom he had been most at loggerheads over economic policy. This, together with the whigs' objections, led the prime minister to search for an alternative, but as his efforts became increasingly confused the king's determination in favour of Herries hardened, with the result that he was appointed on 3 September 1827. The controversy, however, did not end there. While Herries prepared his first budget, in which he apparently decided to include a property tax, a quarrel broke out over the appointment of a chairman of the projected finance committee. In November, without any prior consultation with Herries, and at Tierney's instigation, Goderich and Huskisson agreed to the nomination of Lord Althorp, one of the leading non-coalition whigs, as chairman. Herries resented this slight and insisted upon resigning if Althorp was placed in the chair, while Huskisson said he would do likewise if Althorp was not appointed. The real point of controversy was what happened next -- an issue complicated by Goderich's confused negotiations and by the prime minister's decision to provide a place in the cabinet for Lord Holland, a non-coalition whig detested by the king. On two points all sides are agreed: first, that Herries stated on 28 December that he would resign if the policy or the composition of the government abandoned or compromised the principles of Lord Liverpool's administration -- a statement that was taken to mean opposition to Althorp as finance committee chairman and to Holland as a cabinet member; and, second, that it was over this issue that Goderich resigned. Herries's view, which was articulated at length in the Commons the following year, was that the circumstances justified his action. Huskisson, however, detected a plot by the king to use 'his' chancellor to bring the government down, and argued that Herries changed his mind on the Althorp affair, having agreed to his appointment prior to the overtures to Lord Holland. Moreover, a leading authority has recently alleged that Rothschild and other financiers were becoming nervous about what a finance committee might recommend, and in December put pressure on Herries to put his foot down over the chairmanship (Hilton, 243-5). 
In the current state of the evidence, it is not possible to add to this account. Given Herries's modesty and his practical abilities as a man of business, it seems unlikely that he was ever party to a plot by either the king or Rothschild. On the other hand, it is quite conceivable that, being new to the feverish state of high politics, he allowed the king's views and the fears of Rothschild to play a part in his thinking without fully realizing the capital that could be made out of it. Goderich's ineptitude and Huskisson's paranoia could also not have helped matters. 
The immediate effect of Herries's action was the formation of Wellington's government and his own appointment to the cabinet as master of the Royal Mint, Huskisson insisting that the price of his own inclusion was that Herries should not be chancellor. From this undemanding position he advised the government generally on economic policy and supervised the proceedings of the finance committee on its behalf. Although there is no conclusive evidence, the likelihood is that his advice played a part in the government's decisions to cut military expenditure and to abandon the Sinking Fund; and he certainly wrote the financial statement which accompanied the committee's fourth report, on which Sir James Graham commented that it made the public accounts 'intelligible' for the first time. In February 1830 he added the presidency of the Board of Trade to his portfolio and was disappointed when the cabinet decided not to introduce a property tax as part of its budget that year -- the third plank of the recovery programme that he had put to Canning. Moreover his stock fell as his weaknesses as a speaker became more apparent, with Arbuthnot remarking in July that he would be better employed below cabinet level. 
Following the government's resignation in November 1830, Herries spent the next two years using his considerable managerial skills to re-establish the tories as an effective force. Initially he managed relations with the press and later established the party meeting-place in Charles Street, which was the precursor of the Carlton Club. In addition he was said to have taken the initiative in framing the motion on the timber duties in March 1831 that foreshadowed the defeat of Grey's government and the calling of the 1831 general election; and in January and July 1832 he moved a series of resolutions condemning the Russian-Dutch loan which, coming from such a knowledgeable source, inflicted considerable damage on the government. 
The important role that Herries played in refashioning the tories as the Conservative Party was one of the reasons why Peel appointed him secretary at war in his short-lived 1834-5 ministry, although the fact that the army estimates which he framed for 1835 were lower than any voted since 1793 was an indication of his fitness for the post from a political angle. Thereafter, he cut an increasingly influential figure in the Commons -- the theatre in which he had not previously shone. He was a prominent member of the select committee on metropolitan improvements and wrote the greater part of the second report for 1838. He also played an important part in debate during 1840-41 as a trenchant critic of the whigs' financial and commercial policies. His efforts, however, were not rewarded. At the 1841 general election he was unable to continue as candidate for Harwich, as a result of the Treasury influence wielded by the whigs, and was defeated in his candidature for Ipswich. Moreover, although Peel would have put him in the cabinet at one point, Herries declined an opportunity to be returned for Ripon, preferring by that stage to be consulted unofficially, as he was over the introduction of the income tax. 
Herries was returned for Stamford as a protectionist in the 1847 election and, although he was now nearly seventy, his reputation as an economist was such that he quickly became one of the troika that shared the leadership of the party in the Commons, the other two being Disraeli and Lord Granby. It was in that capacity that he made a major speech in 1849 against the repeal of the navigation laws, Lord Stanley reporting that he spoke 'very slowly, sometimes hesitating, his voice feeble, but he made every argument tell upon the House' (Vincent, 5). In February 1851 Derby offered him the chancellorship of the exchequer in a government he failed to construct, and twelve months later said that his presence in another cabinet he was attempting to form was 'indispensably necessary' (memorandum, 23 Feb 1852, appended to Herries's letter to Lord Derby of the same date, Herries MSS). On this occasion, however, Derby wanted Disraeli as chancellor, and offered Herries the Colonial Office or the Board of Trade. Herries responded by saying that if he could not have the office for which he and the public felt he was qualified -- the chancellorship -- he would prefer one 'with small labour and responsibility' (Herries to Derby, 23 Feb 1852, Herries MSS). He therefore agreed to be president of the Board of Control -- the position he held until the government fell in December 1852. He was returned again for Stamford at the general election of 1852 but retired from parliament at the end of the session the following year, his last speech (11 July 1853) being made on the 'Government of India Bill'. He died suddenly at St Julians, near Sevenoaks, Kent, on 24 April 1855, and was buried in the family vault there. 
Until comparatively recently assessments of Herries have focused on the controversy surrounding his holding of the chancellorship in Goderich's administration and, to a lesser extent, on the criticisms levelled by Wellington over supplying his Peninsular army with cash. A broader and more favourable view is taken now. It is therefore clear that he played a significant role in politics for more than fifty years, his most notable contributions being the reform of the commissariat in 1809-12, the settlement on favourable terms of the huge subsidy payments to the allies in the fourth coalition, the advancing of free trade in the 1820s, the reorganization of toryism during the reform period, and almost continuously (and well into his seventies) the giving of expert and pragmatic advice on the economy. This was no mean achievement for someone born a member of the professional classes. The last words can be left to his political opponent, Lord Brougham, who on Herries's retirement from parliament wrote that Alexander Baring, Lord Ashburton (1774-1848), the banker, had told him that 'you were, of all the men he had ever seen in the finance department, and I think he added, transacted business with, by far the most competent' (Herries, 'Memoir', 2.277). 


@@@@@


doc= 13095


Herring, Francis (d. 1628), physician, a native of Nottinghamshire, matriculated from Christ's College, Cambridge in 1582, graduating BA in 1585, and MA in 1589. On 3 July 1599, two years after obtaining his MD, he was admitted a fellow of the College of Physicians. He was censor in 1609, 1618, 1620, 1623, 1624, 1626, and 1627. He was named an elect on 5 June 1623. 
Herring's first published work was 'Anatomyes of the True Physition and Counterfeit Mounte-Banke' (1602), a translation from the work in Latin by Johann Oberndoerffer. He took the opportunity to add, by way of appendix, 'A short discourse, or discovery of certaine stratagems, whereby our London-empericks have bene observed strongly to oppugne, and oft times to expugne their poore patients purses'. 
Herring's later writings concentrate on the plague and on anti-Catholic propaganda. In 'Certaine rules, directions or advertisements for this time of pestilentiall contagion: with a caveat to those that weare impoisoned amulets' (1603, rev. edns 1625 and 1665), he asserted that although the plague was a punishment from God, there were practical precautions that could be taken. These included cleaning the streets, burying the dead outside the city, fumigation, and keeping people away from public places. He also noted that arsenic amulets were of no use. In 1604 he published 'A Modest Defence of the Caveat Given to the Wearers of Impoisoned Amulets'. 
Herring's other interest was verse of an anti-Catholic bent. His 'Pietas pontificia' (1605), dealing with the Gunpowder Plot, appeared in several editions and was translated into English twice, as 'Popish Pietie' (1610) and 'Mischeefes Mysterie' (1617). Herring died in the early part of 1628. 


@@@@@


doc= 13096


Herring, John Frederick, senior (1795-1865), sporting painter, was born on 12 September 1795 in Blackfriars, London, the eldest of nine children of Benjamin Herring (died 1871) and Sarah Jemima (died 1831), 'nee' Howard. His father was a fringe maker and upholsterer working from Newgate Street in the City of London. The Herring family were of Dutch origin and both his father and grandfather, Jan Frederick, pursued unsuccessful claims to family property in Curacao. 
Herring was never apprenticed to his father and was, therefore, ineligible to work in the trade. At the age of eighteen he was producing both inn signs and paintings (his parents had one of the Hampton Court coach); he had also learned to drive a team of horses. In September 1814 he took the Royal Leeds Union stage and arrived at Doncaster in time to attend the Great St Leger horse race. Lodging in the town, he came upon a coach builder's finishing shop and helped an employee complete the painting of a horse on one of the coaches. The coach builder was impressed and asked him to paint the insignia on the Royal Forrester. On the trial run of the latter he met the proprietor, Mr Hill, and begged of him the vacant post of coachman to the Nelson. He was given the job and followed the arduous profession for six years, ending up on the box of the prestigious High Flyer plying between York and London. 
Within a year of arriving in Doncaster Herring had set up house with Ann Harris (1796-1838) -- no record of their marriage has been found -- and had seen the birth of the first of their children, John Frederick junior ['see below']. In his leisure time Herring played the clarinet, composed music, and continued to paint. As the public became aware of his talent in the latter direction, he was increasingly pressed to turn full-time to art. Among his early patrons were his contemporary Mr (afterwards the Revd) Charles Stanhope, a severe critic whose opinion he dreaded; Mr Clarke of Barnby Moor, owner of the High Flyer; and Mr Hawkesworth of Hickleton Hall, whose repeated appeals eventually persuaded him to give more time to painting and who found commissions for him in the first year of his new vocation from the Hon. E. Petre, Sir Bellingham Graham, and others. 
Herring's first exhibit at the Royal Academy was 'A Dog' in 1818; in the following year he had his drawing of the fractured leg of a racehorse reproduced in the 'Sporting Magazine'. 
The year 1825 saw the start of the scheme that made the name Herring a household word. The 'Doncaster Gazette' arranged for him to paint the winners of the St Leger from 1815 onwards. The pictures were then engraved and published first by Messrs Sheardown & Son, owners of the 'Gazette', and subsequently by S. and J. Fuller, and then by Baily Bros. In all, Herring painted thirty-four winners, thirty-one of which were made into prints. A series of twenty Derby winners followed two years later in 1827. 'As a pourtrayer of the thoroughbred horse in high condition, he is, and long has been unrivalled' ('Memoir'). In the same year Muir records that he took lessons from Abraham Cooper RA: 'For a man of thirty-two with an established reputation to take such a step is indication of an unusual strength of character, for successful artists rarely realise their limitations. Herring's studies under Cooper taught him all that his work had hitherto lacked in technicality. (Muir)' This is doubted by Oliver Beckett, but certainly his subject matter changed and increasingly he produced rural studies with more than a touch of the Romantic and sentimental. 
By 1830, his fame as a painter of the turf established, Herring moved to Six Mile Bottom, near Newmarket, the headquarters of racing. He stayed there for three years before departing for Camberwell on the outskirts of London. He now had seven surviving children, three of whom became artists: John Frederick junior, Charles (1828-1856), and Benjamin (1830-1871). Another Benjamin (1806-1830), Herring's brother, was also an artist. 
Although apparently successful, Herring was in fact in financial difficulties and was rescued by William Taylor Copeland, the owner of the Spode China Company. Copeland paid off his debts of $500, commissioned a number of paintings, and used Herring's images of fox-hunting to decorate the company's wares. Ann, aged forty-two, died in 1838 and Herring moved from Park Street to Cottage Green in the same village. He did not totally abandon racing subjects and in 1840 visited France to paint the racehorses of the duc d'Orleans. Further renown came when he was appointed animal painter to the duchess of Kent (Queen Victoria's mother) and received commissions from Queen Victoria. 
After twenty years in Camberwell, now married to Sarah Gale (1794-1882/3), he revolted against the smell from both the nearby manure factory and the house drains, and the hungry and thirsty uninvited guests, and made an instant decision to move to the country. He rented Meopham Park near Tonbridge, Kent. In this idyllic refuge, with outbuildings and 30 acres, he soon installed his favourite model, the white Arab Imaum, once given to Queen Victoria, together with other horses, a miniature pony that wandered around the house eating ginger nuts, ten cows, two pigs, geese, peacocks, fowl, duck, rabbits, and two dogs. This Noah's ark of animals soon featured in his immensely popular genre paintings of the farmyard which were no sooner completed than sold to the London dealers. Satisfaction at his success was marred by the death in 1856, after a long illness, of his favourite son, Charles, who had lived with him and worked as his assistant, for which he had been paid $500 a year. 
Herring himself had suffered since his youth from asthma and bronchitis -- as a result, he thought, of his early exposure, when a night coachman, to the bitter winter weather of the north of England. His health now began to deteriorate and for the last few years of his life he was confined to a wheelchair. He continued to send paintings to the British Institution and the Royal Academy until his death. 
Although his work was disparaged by some -- 'Velocipede is cleverly painted but it wants effect; the background has not been sufficiently attended to' ('Sporting Magazine', 1830, p. 175) -- nevertheless it was eagerly sought by the increasingly prosperous middle classes. Engravings of over 350 of his paintings were made in his lifetime. Although suspicious that other artists might steal his ideas and apprehensive of forgers, he did collaborate with a number of his contemporaries -- James Pollard, A. F. Rolfe, Henry Bright, Sir Edwin Landseer, C. E. Boutibonne, G. B. Campion, John Faed, W. P. Frith -- to produce paintings in which he portrayed the animals and the others the background. He exhibited twenty-two pictures at the Royal Academy, eighty-three at the Society of British Artists, and forty-four at the British Institution. 
Herring died at his home on 23 September 1865 and was buried at Hildenborough, Kent. Examples of his work are in the Tate collection, Doncaster Museum and Art Gallery, and a private collection in Kent. 
Herring painted the same subjects and very much in the style of his father, in both oil and watercolour. His pictures were, however, inferior; they lacked the firmness and confidence of his father's composition and contained too much finicky detail. 
Of all sporting artists the problem of attribution is probably greater with the Herrings than any others. Herring senior often made a number of copies of a popular painting, some unsigned; there were many forgeries of his work, both in his lifetime and in the twentieth century, and signatures of father and son are often confused. Herring junior sometimes signed his work J. Fred. Herring, sometimes J. F. Herring, and less often J. F. Herring junior. He exhibited fifteen paintings at the Royal Academy and thirty-five of his works were reproduced in the 'Sporting Magazine'. Herring junior died on 6 March 1907. Examples of his work are in the British Sporting Art Trust Gallery, Newmarket. 


@@@@@


doc= 13097


Herring, Julines (1582-1644), Church of England clergyman and Reformed minister in the Netherlands, was born at Llanbrynmair, Montgomeryshire, and received his first education from his mother's kinsman, a Mr Perkin, minister at More chapel in Shropshire. Herring later joined his parents in Coventry, where his father served as sheriff and mayor, and he attended the school there. As a schoolboy he was unusually pious; he not only read the scriptures diligently but also engaged with two or three friends in religious exercises before going to play. In 1600 he was admitted as a scholar to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, from where he graduated BA in 1604. He subsequently returned to Coventry and was encouraged to study divinity by the renowned nonconformist minister Humphrey Fenn. Herring, along with his friend John Ball of Whitmore in Staffordshire, deliberately chose to be ordained by an Irish bishop in order to avoid subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. 
With the influence of Arthur Hildersham, the prominent nonconformist vicar of Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire, Herring was employed from about 1610 at the parish of Calke, Derbyshire, which was a peculiar jurisdiction exempt from the bishop's authority. Herring was a popular preacher, attracting auditors from twenty towns and villages in the area, and on Sundays so many people attended his sermons that they had to listen at the windows outside the chapel. Fortunately they could hear what he said, because Herring's voice was 'clear and strong'. At Calke Herring also influenced the young Simeon Ashe, who later became a prominent pro-parliamentarian minister during the civil war. Herring remained at Calke for eight years, but was eventually forced out, according to Clarke, by 'prelatical power' and by 'ill-affected men' (Clarke, 463). While he was at Calke Herring married Christian Gellibrand, daughter of a former preacher to the English company at Flushing; they had thirteen children. Through his wife's relatives Herring was connected with a network of godly preachers: one of her sisters was married to Robert Nicolls, minister at Wrenbury, Cheshire, another sister married Oliver Bowles of Sutton, Bedfordshire, and a third married a Mr Barry of Cottesmore, Rutland. 
In 1618 Herring was invited by the corporation of Shrewsbury to be the lecturer at St Alkmund's, where he preached every Tuesday and every Sunday. Under his influence Shrewsbury gained a reputation as the centre of a puritan network which stretched from Cheshire through Shropshire and into Herefordshire. Herring repeated his Sunday sermon in the evening in rotation at the houses of the leading godly members of the corporation, Edward Jones, George Wright, and William Rowley. He also attracted puritan preachers from further afield to preach in the town, including Thomas Pierson of Brampton Bryan, Herefordshire, and his brother-in-law Nicolls. Herring was also welcomed to the house at Sheriffhales, Shropshire, of Lady Margaret Bromley, who entertained at religious exercises eminent puritan ministers from neighbouring counties, including Pierson, Ball, and Nicolls. 
Herring spent seventeen years at Shrewsbury, but during that time the conformists in the town, led by Peter Studley, vicar of St Chad's, mounted a campaign to remove him and complained on numerous occasions about his nonconformity. In 1620, for example, he was presented to the church authorities for failing to read the prayer book and not administering or receiving the sacrament. As a result Herring was suspended from preaching several times and when in the 1630s his actions were drawn to the attention of Archbishop William Laud, the archbishop declared 'I will pickle up that Herring of Shrewsbury' (Clarke, 466). During his suspensions Herring took refuge in conducting private fasts and regularly expounded the scriptures three times a day to his family and neighbours. He also made a practice of attending church services on Sundays, in order to demonstrate his opposition to separation, and he was an early opponent of the Shropshire separatists Daniel and Katherine Chidley. In 1637 Herring was one of thirteen clerical signatories (who also included John Dod, Simeon Ashe, and John Ball) to a letter addressed to ministers in New England, which expressed the fear that they were adopting separatist practices. Eventually Herring gave up hope of being reinstated in Shrewsbury and he moved to Wrenbury in Cheshire where he lived with his widowed sister-in-law Mistress Nicolls. At Wrenbury he lived privately and comforted individuals with afflicted consciences. 
In 1636 Herring was invited to succeed the ageing John Paget as minister of the English Reformed church in Amsterdam. After much 'seeking of God' and consultation with 'godly brethren', Herring accepted this post, although it meant leaving many friends and relatives in England, whom he feared he would never see again (Clarke, 468). He was also forced to take ship from Great Yarmouth to Rotterdam in secret in order to avoid a ban on travel without a licence. On 24 August 1637, before his departure, he drew up a will leaving bequests to his wife, his sons John, Jonathan, Samuel, and James, and his daughters Christian, Dorcas, Mary, and Joanna. He burnt many of his manuscripts and correspondence with other puritan ministers to avoid their seizure 'en route' by the authorities. He arrived in Rotterdam on 20 September and his first sermon was so satisfactory that the English congregation accepted him immediately. At Amsterdam Herring was able to officiate within a functioning presbyterian system and he used his position to comment on the religious and political situation in England. He declared that he was not an enemy to the bishops personally, but only to their 'Pride and Prelatical rule'. He favoured a presbyterian church government, which he described as 'the Government of Jesus Christ' and drew attention to the errors of the English Independents. He prayed that the Scots might be an instrument of good in England and on hearing of the battle of Edgehill in 1642 he prayed to God to 'preserve thine own People, and maintain thine own cause' (ibid., 471). After a lingering illness Herring died on 28 March 1644 in Amsterdam. His will was proved by his widow on 26 March 1646. His lifelong refusal to yield to the authority of the English bishops made Herring a significant figure to the presbyterians in England during the civil war period. 


@@@@@


doc= 13098


Herring, Thomas (1693-1757), archbishop of Canterbury, was the son of John Herring, rector of Walsoken in Norfolk, who had previously been vicar of Foxton, near Cambridge, and his wife, Martha Potts. Herring attended Walsoken School before moving to Wisbech grammar school. From there he went in 1710 to Jesus College, Cambridge, where he was a contemporary of Matthew Hutton, who was to succeed him in all three of his episcopal offices. He proceeded MA in 1717. He moved to Corpus Christi College as a fellow (1716-23) where he taught classics, and where he was ordained priest in 1719. 
Herring was a fervent whig supporter in university politics (as in national affairs). Having been appointed a preacher at Ely House by Bishop Fleetwood of Ely (to whom he was chaplain), Herring became known to Philip Yorke, then solicitor-general, who, later as Lord Chancellor Hardwicke, was to be his close friend and adviser. At this stage he also held a number of livings: Holy Trinity, Cambridge; Rettendon in Essex; Great Shelford; Stow cum Quy; and, very briefly, All Hallows-the-Great. But he resided at one living only, Barley, near Royston. In 1728 a DD was conferred on Herring, and he was appointed chaplain to George II. Preaching at Ely House earned him a considerable reputation, and he achieved notoriety particularly for attacking as immoral John Gay's 'Beggar's Opera' (1728). This episode marked the beginning of a friendship and correspondence with William Duncombe, the published letters to whom form an important source for a judgement on Herring's public role and private sentiment. In 1731 he was appointed rector of Bletchingley through the patronage of Sir William Clayton, and advanced to the deanery of Rochester, the patronage of Hardwicke being instrumental in his promotion. He resigned Bletchingley, but retained the deanery, when he was appointed in 1737 to the bishopric of Bangor. There he performed his duties faithfully each summer, leaving charming accounts of his journeys, with a deep appreciation of natural beauty. In 1743 he was appointed archbishop of York -- bishops Edmund Gibson and Thomas Sherlock having refused that preferment. 
Herring's time at York was notable first for his visitation of the diocese in 1743, a detailed report on the contemporary church in an extensive area of the north providing important evidence on the condition of the Georgian church. The second notable feature was his leadership of the county when volunteers were raised and a county fund -- supported by 'men of all parties' -- established to resist the Jacobite uprising of 1745. (It was feared that the Jacobites would pass through Yorkshire as they advanced south.) Although a convinced whig, Herring's attitude to tories softened after the unity he had helped to create when danger was apparent. His leadership had been dependent on a close relationship with the three lords lieutenant of the Ridings of Yorkshire. 
In 1747 Herring reluctantly accepted the archbishopric of Canterbury, bishops Gibson and Sherlock having refused the offer. He soon found himself in disagreement with the duke of Newcastle, the 'ecclesiastical minister', Herring favouring a more narrow range of (politically) orthodox whigs. For the second half of his tenure of the primacy he was afflicted by increasing ill health. There was an early difference with Newcastle over the summoning of convocation (though both were agreed that that body should confine its activities to expressions of loyalty to the regime). On ecclesiastical appointments Herring often found himself at odds with the duke (whose nominations tended to be less narrow in range than those of the archbishop). Although attractive as a person and a warm friend, Herring was a weak primate, disliking the responsibilities of office, and following Hardwicke on matters of policy -- the 'Marriage Act' of 1754, the establishment of the British Museum, the reformed calendar -- but also in the enactment and repeal of the 'Jewish Naturalization Bill' of 1753, and the abandonment of a scheme for bishops in America. Talk on unity with dissenters came to nothing, as did correspondence with Swiss protestants. 
Herring was a kindly man, promoted to his last office beyond his desires (or his capacities), and dominated, however benignly, by Hardwicke, and, impatiently, by Newcastle. He failed to see the emerging pastoral needs of his northern diocese where large industrial areas were growing. His tendency to appoint his relations to offices prompted the pun that York was a good sea for herrings. The archbishop never married. He died at his house in Croydon on 23 March 1757, and was buried in Croydon parish church. 
Herring was uninterested in theological debate, his own convictions being concerned with conduct rather than doctrine. His sermons reflected this practical emphasis. With the exception of the sermon preached in York Minster during the Jacobite uprising, his discourses were plain and unadorned. His theology was latitudinarian in spirit, if weak in substance, reflecting an aversion to metaphysical speculation. His evident sincerity and charm make him one of the most attractive, as he was among the most reluctant, archbishops of Canterbury. But the relationship with Newcastle cast a shadow over his tenure of office, and his dependence on Hardwicke effectively deprived him of initiative, had he been disposed to exercise it. 


In the early part of his career Herring was rector of the Norfolk villages of Alburgh (1742-3) and Edgefield (1743-7). In 1747 he became rector of Bolton Percy, Yorkshire, and in 1751 he was elected dean of St Asaph. Herring held both posts until his death in Yorkshire on 23 May 1774. 


@@@@@


doc= 13099


William Herring (1718-1774), dean of St Asaph, born in Norwich, was the son of William Herring (died 1762), a Church of England clergyman who was probably the brother of Archbishop Thomas Herring. Educated at Clare College, Cambridge, he graduated BA in 1740 and proceeded MA in 1743; he held a fellowship of the college from 1741 to 1743. In 1750 he married Elizabeth Cotton in Lambeth Palace chapel. In 1751 he was made a Lambeth DD. 


@@@@@


doc= 13100


Herschel, Caroline Lucretia (1750-1848), astronomer, was born at Hanover on 16 March 1750, the eighth child and fourth daughter of Isaac Herschel (1707-1767) and his wife, Anna Ilse Moritzen, of Neustadt. Isaac, a former gardener, was an oboist in the Hanoverian foot guards, and though his formal education was limited he possessed an intellectual curiosity that he successfully communicated to Caroline's brothers. Her illiterate mother, however, had no doubt that a daughter's place was in the home, helping with the housework; she opposed all attempts by Caroline to acquire anything more than the most rudimentary education, and resented even the occasional violin lesson given by her father. Caroline tried to acquire some ability in needlework from a kindly neighbour, but for this they had to meet at dawn, for at 7 a.m. her household chores would begin. 
Caroline's childhood was overshadowed by the defeat in 1757 of the Hanoverian army by the French in the Seven Years' War and the resulting occupation of Hanover. Her elder brother William ['see 'Herschel, William], though in the same band as their father, was too young to be under oath, and so was free to flee to England. In 1767 Isaac, whose health had been poor for many years, died, leaving Caroline's fate in the hands of her mother and brothers. Eventually she was given grudging permission to attend a dressmaking school, but this lasted only a few weeks, after which she resumed her role of household drudge. 
Meanwhile William, who by now was established as organist of a chapel in Bath, devised a scheme to liberate his sister from her Hanoverian servitude. He proposed that she be allowed to join him in Bath, at least for a period, to see whether she could be trained as a singer to assist him in his concerts. At first opinion within the family was favourable, but then her eldest brother, Jacob, began to ridicule the idea. Eventually, in August 1772, William travelled to Hanover and prevailed on their mother to release his sister, smoothing the way by the promise of an annuity to pay for a substitute servant. 
The couple left Hanover later in the month, and after an eventful and sometimes perilous journey reached London. There William took the opportunity to visit the shops of opticians: his thoughts were turning away from music and towards astronomy. 
In Bath, Caroline took over the running of the household, no easy task as she was virtually uneducated and had limited English. She found it still more difficult to integrate herself into the fashionable society whose members came to take the waters at Bath. But at least her natural abilities were now given free rein: her brother gave her two singing lessons daily, sometimes three, as well as teaching her English and arithmetic, and she had coaching from a dancing-mistress to give her the stage presence required for oratorios. Before long she was appearing at Bath or Bristol as many as five nights a week, singing leading soprano parts in works such as 'Messiah', 'Samson', and 'Judas Maccabaeus'. The transformation wrought by William was dramatic: only a short while before, Caroline had been qualified to work only as a housemaid. 
But the brother who had rescued Caroline was now to prove so self-centred as to destroy her new career without so much as noticing. William was becoming obsessed with the ambition to explore what he later termed 'the construction of the heavens', and in order to study distant and faint celestial objects he would need telescopes as big as possible. These, he found, he would have to make for himself. Caroline, he assumed, would do whatever was necessary to help. Thus she found the summer of 1775 'taken up with copying Music and practising, besides attendance on my Brother when polishing [telescopic mirrors], that by way of keeping him alife, I was even obliged to feed him by putting the vitals by bits into his mouth' (Lubbock, 68). 
Their lives were transformed by William's discovery in March 1781 of the planet Uranus, which he chanced upon as he was systematically familiarizing himself with all the brighter stars. His scientific friends seized the opportunity to persuade the king to grant him a pension that would enable him to give up music for astronomy, his only duties being to show the heavens to the royal family when requested. William eagerly accepted, taking it for granted that Caroline would give up her career in music and partner him in his new vocation. 
William and Caroline arrived at their new home at Datchet, near Windsor Castle, in August 1782. Caroline was dismayed at the dilapidated condition of the house William had taken and at the high price of the local food. But these were the least of her problems. 'I found', she wrote later, 'I was to be trained for an assistant Astronomer; and by way of encouragement a Telescope adapted for sweeping... was given to me. I was to sweep for comets.... But it was not till the last two months of the same year before I felt the least encouragement for spending the starlight nights on a grass-plot convered by dew or hoar frost without a human being near enough to be within call. (Lubbock, 150)' By the following summer William had built her a telescope expressly designed for the discovery of comets. 'Its movements', he wrote, 'are so convenient, that the eye remains at rest while the instrument makes a sweep from the horizon to the zenith' (W. Herschel, 'PTRS', 90, 1800, 71). In 1791 this sweeper was superseded by a more powerful instrument, of 9 inches aperture and 5 foot focal length. Two years later the astronomer royal, Nevil Maskelyne, visited the Herschels and left the following description of Caroline at work: '[The sweeper] is a very powerful instrument, & shews objects very well... The height of the eye-glass is altered but little in sweeping from the horizon to the zenith. This she does and down again in 6 or 8 minutes, & then moves the telescope a little forward in azimuth, & sweeps another portion of the heavens in like manner. She will thus sweep a quarter of the heavens in one night. (RAS, Pigott MSS, letter 60)' Caroline was to become famous as the discoverer, or co-discoverer, of no fewer than eight comets, four with the sweeper made in 1783, three with its successor, and the last, found in 1797, with the naked eye. However, her earliest sweeps, in the winter of 1782-3, yielded not comets but comet-like nebulae, to add to the hundred or so already known. Later in 1783 she was to discover the companion to the Andromeda nebula. 
Excited by these discoveries, Caroline quickly became reconciled to her new career. William, duly impressed, himself began to sweep for nebulae with a small refractor. But whereas the detection of newly arriving comets was an urgent task calling for small instruments with wide fields of view, the study of the permanent nebulae was best done, slowly and methodically, with the most powerful telescope available. In October 1783 William completed the ideal instrument for the purpose, a reflector of 20 foot focal length and 18 inches aperture, and with a stable mounting; and a few days later he and Caroline began to sweep the visible sky, strip by strip, in the search for nebulae. The instrument was directed to the south, at a particular elevation, and at the eyepiece William watched the sky drift past, waiting for a nebula to come into view. He then shouted out a description to Caroline, who was seated at a desk in a room nearby, next to an open window, 'with Flamsteed's Atlas open before her. As he gives her the word, she writes down the declination and right ascension and the other circumstances of the observation' (Lubbock, 138). Afterwards, Caroline would write up a fair copy and carry out the necessary calculations. Her many other duties included preparing lists of stars for use in the sweeps as position indicators and making fair copies of the resulting papers for publication in 'Philosophical Transactions'. 
Caroline was an indispensable member of a most remarkable team that, in one of the greatest campaigns known to observational astronomy, swept the whole of the visible sky. In twenty years of unremitting toil, brother and sister increased the number of known nebulae from about a hundred to 2500. In 1787 Caroline too received a royal pension, of $50 a year; revealingly, this was the first money that she felt she could consider her own. Meanwhile she continued to manage their domestic affairs as the mistress of William's household. In 1788 this well-established routine received what was to Caroline a most unwelcome disruption, when at the age of forty-nine William decided to marry the widow of a neighbour. Caroline, who until then had been his inseparable companion in every aspect of his life, now had to move into lodgings; and although she eventually became reconciled to the change and doted on her nephew John, born in 1792, she later destroyed her diary for the period. 
The standard catalogue of stars was the 'British Catalogue' of John Flamsteed, published in 1725. William had found his work increasingly hampered by errors in the catalogue, and in 1796 he persuaded Caroline to assemble a list of these errors, a task that took her twenty months. Her list, with an index to Flamsteed's observations, was published by the Royal Society in 1798. 
This, and her cometary discoveries, earned Caroline the profound respect of the professional astronomers of the day; thus she spent a week in August 1799 at Greenwich as guest of the astronomer royal. She was also friendly with various members of the royal family, one of the queen's ladies-in-waiting having been a fellow student of Caroline's in a dressmaking class in Hanover. In 1787 Fanny Burney described 'the celebrated comet-searcher' as 'very little, very gentle, very modest, and very ingenuous; and her manners are those of a person unhackneyed and unawed by the world, yet desirous to meet and return its smiles' ('Memoir and Correspondence', 125). 
William was older than Caroline and lacked her physical toughness, and in the second decade of the new century his health began to decline. He died in August 1822, and in her grief Caroline made the impulsive decision to quit England and return to Hanover. It was a mistake, for in the half-century since her departure the town had changed beyond recognition. She thought she had returned home to die, but in fact she had many more years of good health left to her, yet the astronomical research that had motivated her life in England was no longer possible: 'at the heavens there is no getting, for the high roofs of the opposite houses' ('Memoir and Correspondence', 131). 
There was, however, one last contribution to astronomy that Caroline could make. In his declining years William had persuaded his son John to abandon his intended academic career and take over his father's work as a student of the heavens. But revision of the great catalogues of nebulae was made difficult by their organization by class rather than position. To facilitate her nephew's re-examination of the nebulae, Caroline therefore undertook the massive task of rearranging the catalogues into a more suitable form. It was work that called for her immense industry and capacity for taking pains, a chore gladly undertaken because it would enable her nephew to bring still greater glory to her departed brother. For this achievement she was awarded a gold medal of the Astronomical Society. Sir David Brewster termed her catalogue 'an extraordinary monument of the unextinguished ardour of a lady of seventy-five in the cause of abstract science' ('Memoir and Correspondence', 132). 
The sturdy health Caroline had enjoyed throughout life, except for a childhood attack of typhus fever, continued. When John visited her in 1832, before leaving for the Cape of Good Hope to survey the southern skies, he recorded that his 82-year-old aunt 'runs about the town with me and skips up her two flights of stairs... In the morning till eleven or twelve she is dull and weary, but as the day advances she gains life, and is quite 'fresh and funny' at ten or eleven p.m. and sings old rhymes, nay, even dances to the great delight of all who see her. (Lubbock, 372)' On his return from Africa he visited his aunt again; but, unable to face the emotion of a final farewell, he slipped away before dawn, leaving her devastated. She lived long enough to hold in her hands John's magnificent volume of Cape 'Observations', which completed the pioneering work that she and William had carried out for the skies visible from England. 
Caroline was a local celebrity, visited by passing scientists of the calibre of Humboldt and Gauss. For her ninety-sixth birthday Humboldt presented her with the gold medal for science, in the name of the king of Prussia; a year later she entertained the crown prince and princess for two hours, and sang them a song by William. 
Caroline Herschel had devoted her life unstintingly to the brother who had rescued her from poverty and servitude in Hanover, and her gratitude had known no bounds. During the sweeps for nebulae, as she spent her nights acting as scribe and running errands for her brother on the platform of the telescope, 'I had... the comfort to see that my brother was satisfied with my endeavours to assist him' ('Memoir and Correspondence', 52). In later life she would allow nothing to detract from William's reputation, constantly downplaying her own part in their achievement: 'I did nothing for my brother, but what a well-trained puppy-dog would have done' (Clerke, 140). After her death, a cousin wrote to John: 'She looked upon progress in science as so much detraction from her brother's fame' ('Memoir and Correspondence', 346). Nevertheless, she was too intelligent to be unaware that she could have carved out her own career if her mother had not blocked her every attempt at education, and if her brother had not sacrificed her musical vocation to his own ambitions in astronomy: 'I have been throughout annoyed and hindered in my endeavours at perfecting myself in any branch of knowledge by which I could hope to gain a creditable livelihood' (ibid., 31). Yet it would be hard to identify a single original thought that passed through her mind. Her greatest assets lay in her inexhaustible industry, loyalty, and dedication; although William was one of the greatest astronomers in history, his achievement would have been wholly impossible without the partnership of his devoted sister. 
Caroline Herschel died peacefully in Hanover on 9 January 1848, aged ninety-seven, and was buried in the churchyard of the Gartengemeinde, Hanover, alongside her parents and with a lock of her brother's hair in her coffin. 


@@@@@


doc= 13101


Herschel, Sir John Frederick William, first baronet (1792-1871), mathematician and astronomer, was born on 7 March 1792 in Slough, the only child of the marriage in 1788 of William Herschel (1738-1822), astronomer, and the widow Mary Pitt, 'nee' Baldwin (1762/3-1832?). His father was of German ancestry, his mother English. 
At the time of John Herschel's birth, his father, William Herschel, had set aside his musical career and had established himself as an internationally prominent astronomer by his discovery in 1781 of the planet Uranus, his construction of the most powerful telescopes of the period, and his pioneering studies of stellar astronomy. To these efforts his sister Caroline Lucretia Herschel (1750-1848) made important contributions, as she also did to his son's upbringing. After attending Mr Bull's school at Newbury, and a short period of study at Eton College in 1800, John Herschel enrolled at Dr Gretton's private school at Hitcham, Buckinghamshire. More important, he received private instruction, especially in mathematics, from Alexander Rogers. 
On 19 October 1809 John Herschel entered St John's College, Cambridge. Widely recognized as very gifted, he graduated in 1813 as senior wrangler and first Smith's prizeman and was soon elected to a fellowship at St John's. In May 1813 the Royal Society elected Herschel, already a published mathematician, to membership. 
John Herschel's gift for mathematics, which brought such success in the Cambridge mathematical competitions, was also evident in his efforts, along with his fellow undergraduates and long-time friends Charles Babbage and George Peacock, to induce Cambridge University to set aside the Newtonian, fluxional methods of mathematical analysis in favour of instruction based on continental, Leibnizian techniques. The Analytical Society, which these undergraduates formed under Herschel's leadership, emerged as a significant force for the reform of British mathematics. In 1813 Herschel and Babbage pressed this programme by publishing their 'Memoirs of the Analytical Society' to exemplify the methods they favoured. Herschel, Babbage, and Peacock further supported this cause by translating from the French and publishing a calculus text written by Silvestre Lacroix as 'An Elementary Treatise on the Differential and Integral Calculus' (1816). 
Influenced in part no doubt by the difficulties in securing a position as a mathematician, Herschel was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1814 to prepare for the bar. None the less, his interests in empirical science increased during this period, stimulated by contacts with the chemist William Hyde Wollaston and the physician-astronomer James South. Herschel's study of chemistry progressed to the point that in 1815 he came within one vote of being elected to the vacant professorship in chemistry at Cambridge. He returned to Cambridge as a sub-lector but, finding himself dissatisfied with 'pupillizing', he left Cambridge, writing to Babbage on 10 October 1816 that 'I am going, under my Father's directions, to take up the series of his observations where he has left them (for he has now pretty well given over regularly observing) and continuing his scrutiny of the heavens with powerful telescopes' (Buttmann, 20). Mathematics was not, however, entirely set aside, some significant publications by him appearing before 1820. The Royal Society recognized the importance of Herschel's mathematical work by awarding him in 1821 its Copley medal. Nor was chemistry completely abandoned; in fact, in 1819 he published the first and most important of a number of contributions he made to photochemistry. This was his detection that hyposulphite of soda (sodium thiosulphate or 'hypo') dissolves silver salts, a major discovery in the prehistory of photography. 
In 1820 Herschel played a key role in the creation of the Astronomical Society (from 1831 the Royal Astronomical Society). From its founding until 1827 he served as its foreign secretary, a role for which he was especially suited because of his numerous visits to the continent during the 1820s; increasing fame, and his gift for correspondence, made him very well known in international scientific circles. Herschel's continuing importance for that society is reflected in the fact that its members thrice (1827, 1839, and 1847) elected him to its presidency, the term of office extending for two years, and twice (1826 and 1836) awarded him the society's gold medal. 
Herschel's decision to take up astronomy under his father's tutelage attained expression in their collaboration in 1820 in the construction of a 20 foot focal length, 18.25 inch aperture reflecting telescope, very similar to the instrument that his father had used so productively. Herschel employed this as his main telescope for his observational astronomy, which centred on the period from 1820 to 1838. The son took over not only the elder Herschel's telescopic technology, but adopted much of his father's research programme, especially in regard to stellar astronomy. William Herschel had pioneered the observational study of nebulous patches and star clusters, having sighted and catalogued between 1780 and his death in 1822 approximately 2500 of these objects, whereas scarcely more than a hundred had been recognized by 1780. Moreover, William Herschel had catalogued 848 double stars, hoping thereby to detect stellar parallax and to show that some double stars were gravitationally linked. The first quest failed, but the second was successful. No less important, the elder Herschel had raised questions fundamental for stellar astronomy. What is the size and structure of the Milky Way? Are nebulae 'island universes', immensely distant systems of stars comparable in size and structure to our Milky Way? Can one trace the history of the stellar region? Are gravitational forces the key to deciphering this history? Gradually, from 1820 on, John Herschel took up this legacy, while simultaneously making an array of contributions to other areas of science. 
During the 1820s John Herschel emerged as Britain's first modern physical scientist. Possessing not only exceptional mathematical expertise but also extensive knowledge of and experimental dexterity in such areas as chemistry, mechanics, optical science, acoustics, and electricity, not to mention his unrivalled command of matters astronomical, he was in many ways the model for future British physical scientists. His most important contribution to physics during the 1820s consisted of his book length article 'Light', written for the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' and completed in 1827. In it Herschel provided a mathematical treatment of most of physical optics in terms of the wave theory of light as recently worked out by Thomas Young and (more mathematically) by Augustin Fresnel. Continental scientists expressed their enthusiasm for Herschel's synthesis by having his treatise translated into French and German. His articles (also book length) titled 'Physical astronomy' and 'Sound' for the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' were, especially the former, major contributions to science. 
The broadest and most synthetic of all Herschel's writings appeared in 1830 as his 'Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy'. Now recognized as a classic in the empiricist tradition of the philosophy of science, it was also a major statement of the important place of natural science in culture and society. A number of major scientists and philosophers were strongly influenced by it, including Charles Darwin, Michael Faraday, John Stuart Mill, and William Whewell. Written with the credibility accorded an accomplished scientist and with a quality of style rare among natural philosophers, Herschel's 'Preliminary Discourse', soon translated into Danish, French, German, and Italian, emerged as a powerful force in gaining recognition for the importance of scientific inquiry. 
Twentieth-century scholarship on the methodology of science tended to downplay the importance of Herschel's 'Preliminary Discourse', noting that William Whewell's 'Philosophy of the Inductive Science' (1840) broke more successfully from the Baconian tendencies of the period and that John Stuart Mill's 'System of Logic' (1843) was far more influential than either Herschel's or Whewell's volumes. Among the responses made to these claims are that Herschel's 'Preliminary Discourse' actually did depart in major ways from the Baconian tradition, that Herschel very significantly influenced both Whewell and Mill, and that Herschel's intended audience was different from and broader than the philosophical audience addressed by Whewell and Mill. 
Although known for his judiciousness, tactfulness, and modesty, Herschel in the period around 1830 found himself at the centre of a controversy about science in England. His close friends Charles Babbage and James South had been outspoken in claiming not only that science had declined in England, but also that Britain's foremost scientific society, the Royal Society, needed major reform, not least rejection of the practice of electing to membership (and frequently to high office) aristocrats who typically possessed only limited interests in and even less knowledge of science. These criticisms reached the peak of intensity in 1830 when Herschel's friends persuaded him to allow his name to be put forward for the presidency of the Royal Society. His opponent in the election was the duke of Sussex, the brother of George IV. Although Herschel lost the election 119 to 111, the programme of the reformers was eventually largely adopted. 
On 3 March 1829 John Herschel married Margaret Brodie Stewart (1810-1884), daughter of Alexander Stewart DD, a Scottish Presbyterian minister and Gaelic scholar. Their marriage, uniformly reported to have been fulfilling for both, was undoubtedly fruitful. Three sons -- the eldest, Sir William James Herschel, became a judge and developer of fingerprinting -- and nine daughters came from the union, the youngest child, Constance, having been born when her father was sixty-three years of age. Herschel, who until his late fifties had been essentially without paid employment, managed the costs involved in raising and educating such a large family through inherited wealth, which seems to have come mainly through his mother. The high esteem in which nearly all his contemporaries held Herschel is reflected in the fact that in 1831 William IV raised him to knighthood in the Royal Guelphic Order. 
In the period between 1820 when Herschel erected his new 18.25 inch aperture reflecting telescope and 1833 when he disassembled it to take it to south Africa, Herschel's observational interests centred on double stars and nebulae, the latter gradually drawing the greater share of his interests. In March 1821, working in collaboration with James South and at first using refracting telescopes supplied by South, Herschel began searching for double stars. The first of their catalogues appeared in 1824, listing and describing 380 doubles and winning both the Lalande prize from the French Academy of Sciences and a gold medal from the Astronomical Society. This could be frustrating work, as he lamented in a letter of 23 July 1830 to his wife, Margaret: 'Two stars last night and sat up till two waiting for them. Ditto the night before. Sick of star-gazing -- mean to break the telescopes and melt the mirrors' (Clerke, 154). By the time in 1833 when Herschel set aside this work six catalogues had been published, recording observations of 3346 double and multiple stars. The mathematically astute astronomer also published in 1832 a graphical method of calculating the orbits of gravitationally linked doubles. This contribution, which won him a gold medal from the Royal Astronomical Society, was hailed as one of his greatest achievements, a proof of his father's 1803 determination, based on his observations of double stars, that Newton's laws of gravitational attraction rule remote stellar systems as they do our solar system. 
On 18 April 1825 Herschel announced to his Aunt Caroline his intention to take up the study of nebulae: 'These curious objects... I shall now take into my especial charge -- nobody else can see them' ('Memoir and Correspondence of Caroline Herschel', 188). The first fruits of this resolve took the form of a careful study published in 1826 of the prominent nebulous patches in the constellations Orion and Andromeda. Another object studied by him with special care was Messier Object 51, which in his observation book for 1830 he described as a 'Brother System', indicating that he viewed it as a stellar system comparable to the Milky Way. By 1833 he had completed and published a catalogue of 2306 nebulae and star clusters, 525 of which he had himself discovered. Included in this publication were drawings of nearly a hundred of these objects. Recognizing the importance of this catalogue, the Royal Astronomical Society awarded Herschel its gold medal and the Royal Society bestowed its royal medal, both in 1836. 
The year 1833 saw the publication of Herschel's 'Treatise on Astronomy', which for nearly two decades was deemed the authoritative presentation in English of astronomical science. It was soon translated into Danish, French, and German. Herschel devoted only 10 per cent of that volume to stellar astronomy, which even at that date had as yet attracted few advocates. This section was, however, sufficient to indicate his convictions that most nebulous objects consist of stars, but that some may be formed of what his father had described as a shining fluid. During the period leading up to 1833 Herschel must have come to realize that the most important and timely extension that he could give to his father's nebular research programme, which had been confined to objects visible from England, would be to complement it by observing the comparable objects of the southern heavens. This vast project he took up in 1833. 
On 13 November 1833 Herschel, along with his wife, their three small children, and his giant reflecting telescope, sailed from Portsmouth on the 'Mountstuart Elphinstone', bound for the Cape of Good Hope at the southern tip of Africa. One can easily imagine the anticipation experienced by Herschel on this voyage as gradually the spectacular celestial objects of the southern heavens, especially the Magellanic Clouds, revealed themselves to him. On 15 January 1834 the Herschel party arrived at Cape Colony where, a few days earlier, Thomas Maclear, the new director of Britain's Royal Observatory at the Cape, had disembarked. The challenges that Herschel and Maclear faced in this outpost of the British empire are suggested by the facts that the founding director of the Cape observatory had died in a scarlet fever epidemic a few years after taking his post and his successor (and Maclear's predecessor) had resigned after thirteen months in protest at the poor living conditions. 
Soon after arriving at the Cape, Herschel leased (and later purchased) a house, Feldhausen, 5 miles from Cape Town, where he set up his telescopes, most notably his 20 foot reflector. It was on 22 February 1834 that he began observing with this telescope, with systematic sweeps, as the Herschels called them, commencing on 5 March. Herschel was not far advanced in his search for southern nebulae when he experienced a major disappointment. He had carried with him a catalogue of nebulae published in 1828 by the astronomer James Dunlop, who had observed from Parramatta in New South Wales. Herschel's distress resulted from his recognition of the unreliability of Dunlop's catalogue; in fact, Herschel found that he could confirm only 206 nebulae reported by Dunlop, whereas another 629 seemed to be spurious. The locations to which Dunlop had assigned southern stars also proved unreliable, a problem that was resolved when Maclear agreed to remeasure the location of key stars. 
In Herschel's slightly more than four years at the Cape he observed and catalogued 1708 nebulae, all but 439 of which had not previously been reported. Moreover, these observations, when combined with his earlier observations of nebulae in the northern heavens, allowed him to prepare a chart forcefully demonstrating the theoretically important fact that nebulae appear to lie toward the poles of the Milky Way. Herschel's evidence for this distribution eventually created a very serious problem for those who identified nebulae as island universes comparable to the Milky Way; if this were the case nebulae should be randomly scattered over the heavens rather than oriented in terms of our Milky Way. Regarding the Milky Way itself, Herschel's Cape observations led him to back away from the traditional disc structure assigned to it in favour of a ring, or annulus. 
Herschel scrutinized various spectacular nebular objects of the southern skies with particular attention. Chief among these were the nebulae around Eta Carinae (or, as it was then known, Eta Argus), as well as the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds. For the first of these objects Herschel catalogued 1216 stars and provided a drawing of it, which like many of his drawings shows exceptional ability. He not only attempted a sketch of the Large Magellanic Cloud, but also catalogued 919 stars, nebulae, and clusters in it, whereas in the Small Magellanic Cloud (itself far larger than any northern hemisphere nebula) he catalogued 244. The most theoretically significant aspect of his observation of these objects was his detection within the Large Magellanic Cloud of nebulous structures alongside stars of nearly comparable brightness, which observation led later astronomers to doubt the claim that nebulae are island universes. How, it was asked, could these nebulous structures consist of millions of stars if adjacent individual stars rival in brightness the entire nebula? 
Although nebulae were the objects he most assiduously and systematically sought, Herschel also discovered and catalogued 2103 double star systems. Aware of the possibility that some of these could be gravitational doubles and would correspondingly have orbital motions, he made micrometrical measures of 417, thereby leaving an invaluable historical record of their relative positions. Three features of Herschel's work on nebulae and multiple stars are especially noteworthy. First, historians of astronomy, who typically write from the northern hemisphere, have perhaps not adequately recognized the importance of Herschel's opening up the southern heavens. Second, with Herschel's survey of the southern skies, he became and would long remain the only astronomer who had personally scrutinized with a major telescope the entire heavens. Third, Herschel's goal in observing and cataloguing so many thousands of nebulae and double stars systems was, like that of his father, not simply to locate nebulae and double star systems, but also to establish and record their appearance at the time of observation so that future observers could determine the degree to which these massive celestial objects change or evolve. Thus, a major legacy of the Herschels was not only to reveal the richness of the region beyond the solar system, but also to show that its objects should be seen as historical, possibly evolving entities. 
Although Herschel devoted most of his observational energies at the Cape to nebulae and double stars, other objects received attention. Both he and Maclear anxiously awaited a predicted apparition of Halley's comet, an event made special both by the brilliance of the comet and the rareness of its appearances, the last having occurred in 1758. Herschel observed the comet with care and proceeded to provide a valuable dynamical analysis of the changes it was seen to undergo. He also devoted a portion of ninety-five nights of observing to the Saturnian system, especially two of Saturn's satellites, Enceladus and Mimas. These very faint moons, although discovered by William Herschel in 1795, had never subsequently been sighted by another astronomer. These observations not only confirmed the existence of these satellites, but also allowed Herschel to establish their periods of revolution. 
The intensity of Herschel's dedication during his Cape period and the quality of the weather in the area are both suggested by the fact that in his four years there he completed a total of 382 stellar and nebular sweeps. This total can be compared with the 410 stellar sweeps Herschel had completed in the nine-year period between 1825 and 1833. Moreover, he actively contributed to the intellectual life of the colony, serving, for example, as president of the South African Literary and Scientific Institution. An ardent naturalist in regard to not only the heavens but also the earth, Herschel explored the flora, fauna, and geology of the region, making in the process a number of significant contributions in those areas. Not the least of his activities in regard to biological science took the form of two letters Herschel wrote from the Cape to Charles Lyell on the question of the evolution of organic forms. These letters, scholars have concluded, significantly influenced Charles Darwin in working out his ideas on biological evolution. 
The Herschel family, which in about four years at the Cape had expanded by three additional children, began their return voyage on 11 March 1838 aboard the 'Windsor Castle', arriving in London on 15 May 1838. Herschel's return to England was immediately hailed by a dinner in his honour on 15 June, attended by 400 scientists and other notables. This dinner and, thirteen days later, Herschel's elevation to the baronetcy at the coronation of Queen Victoria support the contemporary view of John Herschel as the foremost scientist of the period. He returned with masses of observations that required painstaking analysis and reduction. This process, from which other responsibilities and interests repeatedly distracted him, took nearly a decade. It was in 1847 that Herschel's 'magnum opus' appeared as a splendidly printed volume funded by the duke of Northumberland: 'Results of astronomical observations made during the years 1834, 5, 6, 7, 8 at the Cape of Good Hope; being the completion of a telescopic survey of the whole surface of the visible heavens, commenced in 1825 by Sir J. F. W. Herschel'. Honours and praise were showered on the volume, the Royal Society, for example, awarding Herschel his second Copley medal. 
The honours and offices offered Herschel in the period after his return from the Cape indicate the esteem in which his contemporaries held him. By the end of 1839 he had been urged to stand for Oxford's Savilian professorship of astronomy, which he declined, and offered its degree of DCL, which he accepted. He also declined the presidencies of the Royal Society and the Geological Society, but accepted the presidency of the mathematics section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science and the presidency of the Royal Astronomical Society. Responsibilities, many of which accompanied these titles, began to take up a large portion of his life. Over the period from 1838 to about 1845 he served on the royal commission on standards, prepared two major reports on constellation reform, actively advised on James Ross's south polar expedition and on efforts to establish a worldwide network of magnetic and meteorological observatories, and in 1843 agreed to serve on the board of visitors for the Royal Observatory and as a trustee of the British Museum. All this was possible because with his return from the Cape, Herschel had terminated his large scale observational programme in astronomy. 
Despite such extensive service to British science, Herschel remained during this period creatively involved with science, especially the new science of photochemistry. In the years immediately after the announcement in early 1839 by L. J. M. Daguerre of his new photographic process and shortly thereafter by W. H. Fox Talbot of a different process, Herschel sought ways to improve and advance photographic science. His efforts, which involved hundreds of experiments, yielded three major papers (1839, 1840, and 1842) published by the Royal Society, for the first of which he was awarded the society's royal medal. It was in this period that Herschel's sodium thiosulphate came to be recognized as the most useful of all the chemicals proposed as the fixer for silver based photographic images. His other important contributions include his extensive experimentation on the light sensitivity of various metals and vegetable dyes, his working out of techniques of making photographs in colour or on glass plates, and his advancing of various terms now standard in photographic science, namely, 'positive', 'negative', 'snap-shot', and 'photographer'. 
Herschel's experiments in photography, which had interrupted his efforts to write up his Cape observations, were themselves interrupted when, in April 1840, the Herschel family moved from Observatory House in Slough to a large home in Hawkhurst in Kent, which they named Collingwood House and which served as the chief family residence for the remainder of Herschel's life. Another distraction came in 1845 when Herschel served as president of the British Association meeting held that year in Cambridge. In the controversy that occurred in 1846-7 concerning the discovery of the planet Neptune, Herschel became involved in many ways, not least as a peacemaker but also as a person who before the discovery had urged astronomers to look for the planet and after the discovery had suggested that William Lassell should search (as he successfully did) for a satellite. 
Herschel published two major books in 1849. One of these was the 'Admiralty Manual of Scientific Enquiry', for which he served as editor and to which he contributed an important essay on meteorology. Far more significant was his 'Outlines of Astronomy', which was based partly on his earlier and shorter 'Treatise on Astronomy'. Hailed as the definitive presentation of astronomy available in English, Herschel's 'Outlines' had by 1871 gone through eleven editions and also translations into Chinese and Arabic. Changes in these later editions record the evolution of Herschel's thought. For example, in the first edition Herschel, aware of the resolutions of nebulae into stars achieved by Lord Rosse and others, inclined to the view that all nebulae are composed of stars, but in the 1869 edition of 'Outlines', by then aware that William Huggins had spectroscopically shown the gaseous nature of at least some nebulae, Herschel returned to his father's notion that true nebulosity can and does exist. 
Possibly it was the prestige associated with a position once held by Isaac Newton that led Herschel in late 1850 to agree to accept the mastership of the Royal Mint. More probably, this decision was motivated either by his readiness to assume responsibility for overseeing a planned reform of the mint or by the financial needs of a man who in the first fifty-eight years of his life had never held a paid position, but who had responsibility for the support and education of his (by 1846) eleven children, a twelfth being born in 1855. Whatever the reason and with whatever reluctance may have been generated by his already frail health and by the necessity of taking up residence in London away from his beloved family, Herschel in December 1850 took up the appointment. The planned reform was both major and disruptive. Moreover, the need to expand production of coinage, to explore its decimalization, and to establish an Australian branch of the mint at Sydney, compounded his difficulties in serving as master. Tensions grew ever more severe, bringing Herschel by late 1854 to the verge of a nervous breakdown, and leading him to submit his resignation in early 1855. In April that year he returned to his family in Collingwood and sought to restore his health. The consensus among scholars is that Herschel was successful in bringing off the much needed reform in the mint, but that the toll that it took on his energies was excessive. 
During the final seventeen years of Herschel's life problems of health -- gout, rheumatism that periodically confined him to a wheelchair, and severe bronchitis -- prevented extended travel and lessened the degree to which he could be present in person in the scientific community. But such difficulties did not stop him from writing or from corresponding. Eight books and monographs as well as over a hundred shorter writings published during this period attest to the continued vitality of his intellect. A number of the books and monographs from these years drew together earlier work. This was the case for his 'Essays from the Edinburgh and Quarterly Reviews, with Addresses and other Pieces', published in 1857 but incorporating the most important of the essays that he produced before that time. One example of the important writings appearing in this volume is Herschel's review, written in 1849, of Adolphe Quetelet's 'Theory of Probabilities'. Recent scholarship has shown that this essay not only significantly influenced the development of social science in Britain, but also was a key factor in leading James Clerk Maxwell to the creation of the statistical approach to heat phenomena. Another significant compilation was Herschel's 'Familiar Lectures on Scientific Subjects', which appeared in 1866. This volume consisted mainly of essays that Herschel had written in the period after 1855 for such journals as 'Good Words' and the 'Cornhill Magazine'. Two of the fourteen essays in this volume were written as part of Herschel's extended campaign against Britain's adoption of the metric system. In this cause, Herschel was not alone, nor did he lack reasonable arguments. 
In 1861 Herschel published synthetic books on three separate topics, all of which had been written initially as major articles for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. These were 'Meteorology', 'Physical Geography', and 'The Telescope'. Rather than presenting new research these studies drew on Herschel's decades of activity in these areas. Another production, which appeared in 1866, indicates his lifelong love of poetry and of foreign, including classical, languages: this was his translation of Homer's 'Iliad' into hexameter verse. 
John Herschel's dedication to his father's legacy as well as to observing nebulae and double stars led him to devote much effort during the last decade of his life to compiling observations of these objects into two large catalogues. The first of two large compilations was published in 1865 in the Royal Society's 'Transactions' as 'A catalogue of nebulae and clusters of stars', and listed 5079 known nebulae, all but 450 of which had been discovered by William and John Herschel. At the time of his death in 1871 John Herschel had nearly finished his other project, a catalogue of 10,320 double and multiple stars; completed by Charles Pritchard and Robert Main, it was published in 1874 in the Royal Astronomical Society's 'Memoirs'. 
For approximately twenty-seven of the last thirty-one years of his life, Herschel lived at Collingwood House in Hawkhurst, over 40 miles from London. He may have been somewhat introverted by nature and isolated by location, but during those decades he was certainly no recluse, corresponding widely, even in the last decade of his life. In general he was extremely active as a correspondent, as is shown by the fact that over ten thousand letters to him, many from leading British and foreign scientists, have been preserved. His responses show remarkable breadth of learning, generosity, and judiciousness. 
Herschel died at Collingwood on 11 May 1871. Bronchial problems, which had beset him for many years, were probably the main cause of his death. His funeral, which took place in London on 19 May, was attended by most of the leading British scientists of the mid-Victorian period. Such was the esteem in which Herschel's contemporaries held him that he was buried in Westminster Abbey next to Newton, with whom he had at times been compared. In fact, in T. Romney Robinson's obituary notice on Herschel, he remarked that with the death of Herschel, 'British science has sustained a loss greater than any which it has suffered since the death of Newton' (Robinson, xvii). 
Herschel's exceptional human qualities, which made him almost universally liked and respected among his contemporaries, may have led Robinson and others to speak of Herschel in terms that overstate his significance. The judgement of history has been that Charles Darwin, James Clerk Maxwell, and possibly other British scientists of the nineteenth century surpassed John Herschel in the number of fundamental insights attained and discoveries made. None the less, few, if any, of his contemporaries surpassed Herschel in range of contributions, from astronomy to chemistry, from mathematics to meteorology, from physics to philosophy of science. Nor did any nineteenth-century astronomer of any nation surpass Herschel in range of knowledge of the heavens or in the magnitude of their contribution to extending the foundations for stellar and extra-galactic astronomy that William Herschel had laid. In this, the Herschels were prophetic because stellar astronomy was the astronomy of the future. Moreover, historians of science have come to recognize that many, perhaps most, of Herschel's British contemporaries saw his writings and his exemplary scientific life as providing a model for the future. 


@@@@@


doc= 13102


Herschel, William (1738-1822), musician and astronomer, was born at Hanover on 15 November 1738, and baptized Friedrich Wilhelm. He was the fourth of the ten children (and the third of six to survive infancy) of Isaac Herschel (1707-1767), a former gardener who was then an oboist in the Hanoverian foot guards, and his wife, Anna Ilse Moritzen. All the children, except the eldest, inherited their father's musical talent; and, although the family lived in humble circumstances, the boys were encouraged to take a lively interest in scientific and philosophical questions. Herschel attended the garrison school, where he proved an apt pupil. 
At the age of fourteen Herschel followed his father into the band of the guards, after passing a test on the violin and oboe. His salary helped to pay for lessons in French. In 1756 the guards were stationed for some months in England, where Herschel took the opportunity to learn the language and purchased a copy of Locke's 'Essay on Human Understanding'. The guards were then recalled to Hanover, and in July 1757 were heavily defeated in the battle of Hastenbeck. On his father's advice the young Herschel quit the scene and fled to Hanover, where he found himself in danger of being pressed into service as a soldier. He therefore returned to his regiment, to find no one interested in a boy bandsman. His father proposed that he leave for England; he was not under oath, and his father undertook to secure his formal discharge, a promise he fulfilled in 1762. 
William Herschel, as he called himself when he settled in England, arrived in London in company with his elder brother Jacob, with 'not half a Guinea in the world. He went to a music shop in town and asked to write music. An opera was put into his hands to copy, and he returned it with such dispatch as amazed his employer, who from that time kept him in full employ till he found a more profitable line of labour. ('Scientific Papers', 1.xvi)' After a couple of years Herschel came to the conclusion that London was overstocked with musicians, and so he accepted an invitation to take charge of the little band of the Durham militia. His talents were quickly recognized, and he was soon in demand as a performer and teacher across the north of England. He now began to compose music, and by the end of 1760 had completed six symphonies. In due course his 'Eccho Catch' and 'Six Sonatas for the Harpsichord with Violin and Cello Obbligato' were published. A considerable number of his works survive in manuscript: the instrumental ones include several symphonies, and concertos for oboe, violin, and viola, along with two concertos and other pieces for organ. They are judged to display 'strong concern for formal structure but limited inspiration' ('New Grove'). 
In August 1766 Herschel successfully competed for the post of organist of Halifax parish church, when he produced a pleasing volume of sound by placing lead weights on the lowest key and on the key an octave above, and improvised a suitable harmony with his two hands. His musical career was now proving embarrassingly successful, for only a few days earlier he had been offered the post of organist at the new Octagon Chapel in Bath. After some hesitation, in October Herschel gave notice of resignation from his Halifax post. He was immediately offered an increased salary to stay, but was not to be persuaded, and he arrived in Bath before the year's end. 
By now he had learned some Italian, as the knowledge would be of use in music. With Herschel one thing led to another: from Italian he passed to Latin, and even to Greek. By the same token, he had studied the mathematical theory of harmony in the 'Harmonics' of Robert Smith, lately professor of astronomy at Cambridge, and from this he passed to other works in mathematics, and to Smith's 'Opticks'. Herschel's father had long ago introduced his children to the stars, and in 'Opticks' Herschel learned not only about the theory of the subject, but also how to construct telescopes, and something of what might be seen in the heavens with the finished instruments. Early in 1766 his memoranda include entries that read: 'Observation of Venus', and 'Eclipse of the moon'. 
At Bath Herschel's musical career blossomed. He accepted an invitation to join the musicians who played in the Pump Room and elsewhere, he took innumerable pupils, and he was much involved in the staging of 'Messiah' and other oratorios. Before long his annual income was in excess of $300. 
Bath now proved a magnet for Herschel's siblings. In 1767 his brother Jacob arrived and stayed for two years; in 1768 Dietrich came for a year; and in 1770 Alexander arrived and put down his roots. But his sister Caroline ['see 'Herschel, Caroline Lucretia] was languishing in Hanover, a drudge in the family household. Herschel proposed that she join him in Bath, train as a singer, and collaborate in his concert work. There was family opposition, but Herschel visited Hanover in August 1772 and brought Caroline back with him to Bath. 
Herschel's musical duties were now competing with what was fast becoming an obsession for astronomy. That spring he bought a copy of James Ferguson's celebrated 'Astronomy', along with a quadrant and components for telescopes. His sister had hoped to see more of him with the ending of the season: 'But I was greatly disappointed; for, in consequence of the harassing and fatiguing life he had led during the winter months, he used to retire to bed with a bason of milk or glass of water, and Smith's 'Harmonics' and 'Optics', Ferguson's 'Astronomy', etc., and so went to sleep buried under his favourite authors; and his first thoughts on rising were how to obtain instruments for viewing those objects himself of which he had been reading. ('Memoir and Correspondence of Caroline Herschel', 34-5)' He experimented with refractors, but these had to be of excessive length in order to minimize the effect of chromatic aberration, while the lenses themselves were severely limited in size by the available glass technology. He therefore hired a small reflector. This was encouragingly convenient to handle, but its 'light-gathering power' was wholly inadequate for Herschel's ambitions. Conventionally trained astronomers saw it their business to examine the individual members of the solar system and to monitor their movements against the largely unchanging background of the stars. Herschel, knowing no better, set out to investigate the large-scale structure of the universe, what he termed 'the construction of the heavens'; and for the study of distant and faint objects he would need reflectors with massive mirrors to collect as much light as possible. 
In September 1773 Herschel had his first disc cast, and, guided by Smith's 'Opticks', set about shaping and polishing it with some second-hand tools he had bought. For the rest of the decade, much of the time not occupied by his round of musical engagements was devoted to the grinding and polishing of telescopic mirrors. As the eager experimentation proceeded, Herschel gradually became a craftsman without peer in the construction of sizeable reflecting telescopes. To her sorrow, Caroline saw almost every room turned into a workshop. 
A large reflector had three features of fundamental importance: a mirror of speculum metal, ideally of parabolic shape, that would reflect the incident light back to a focus; an eyepiece, in effect a microscope with which to inspect the image; and a wooden mounting, to permit the observer to direct the telescope in the desired direction and then to look through the eyepiece. Herschel's fundamental advance in the mounting was to come later; for the present he contrived a simple stand for the smaller instruments, and slung from a pole in rudimentary fashion the reflector of 20 foot focal length that he completed in 1776. In making his eyepieces he found no difficulty in obtaining magnifications of hundreds, and even thousands, exceeding in this the ambitions of most contemporary opticians. But it was in the grinding and polishing of mirrors that Herschel proved the supreme craftsman. His limitless energy encouraged an unsophisticated approach: the production of great numbers of mirrors, and the selection of the most successful for use in his telescopes. 
For several years word of this extraordinary organist-astronomer had been spreading among friends of his neighbours and pupils, and in 1777 Herschel had been visited by Nevil Maskelyne, the astronomer royal, and by Thomas Hornsby, professor of astronomy at Oxford. His scientific isolation ended in December 1779, when a passer-by, Dr William Watson FRS, saw Herschel observing in the street and asked to be allowed to look through his telescope. The two became close friends, and Watson proved a faithful ally. A society, the Bath Literary and Philosophical Society, was being formed 'for the purpose of discussing scientific and phylosophical subjects and making experiments to illustrate them' (Porter, 30), and Watson drafted Herschel -- 'optical instrument maker and mathematician' -- to be a founder member. During the next fifteen months he furnished the Bath society with some thirty-one papers on a variety of subjects. Four of them were communicated by Watson to the Royal Society in London and published in 'Philosophical Transactions'. 
By 1781 Herschel's ambitions for large mirrors to see further into space had outrun even the capacities of the local foundries to cast the blanks. He therefore converted the basement of his home into a foundry, at first with the intention of casting a mirror that would have been a staggering 4 feet in diameter. He later reduced this to 3 feet, but even so the mirror would have been the largest in the world. Not only the family but eminent visitors were pressed into service to pound the horse dung required for the mould. Unfortunately, the first mirror cracked on cooling, and in the second casting the mould fractured and the molten metal spilled out over the flagstones, with near-fatal consequences for Herschel and his brother. 
Meanwhile Herschel found time for an occasional look at the heavens. In March 1774 he began his first observing book, and on the opening page he drew a sketch of the Orion nebula, remarking that the shape of this 'lucid spot' was not as delineated by Smith in his 'Opticks'. He was quick to see the momentous implications that would result if the change was confirmed by careful observation. A list of six of the milky patches in the sky known as 'nebulae' had been published by Edmond Halley in 1715. Halley believed them to be clouds of a lucid medium that Herschel would later term 'true nebulosity'. Others thought them star clusters so distant that the individual stars could not be distinguished with the available instrumentation. But a distant star cluster that nevertheless appeared to be spread across the sky would be vast indeed, too vast to alter shape noticeably in only a few decades. A change in the shape of the Orion nebula, therefore, would show it to be formed, not of stars, but of true nebulosity. 
In the 1770s Herschel several times observed the Orion nebula, and became convinced that it was indeed changing shape. But as a novice observer he faced the more urgent task of familiarizing himself with the brightest stars of the night sky. After examining in turn each of the brighter stars, in August 1779 he embarked on a second and more thorough 'review'. This led him on 13 March 1781 to examine stars in the constellation Gemini, where he came across one whose appearance instantly struck him as 'curious'. Returning to it a few days later, he found that it had altered position: it was not a distant star, but a nearby member of the solar system, presumably -- since it was not one of the known planets -- a comet. 
Herschel at once informed Maskelyne and Hornsby, but neither could see anything unusual in that part of the sky. When eventually Maskelyne identified the object by its movement, he suspected it might in fact be a planet, and after its orbit had been calculated this indeed proved to be the case. Herschel thus became the first person in history to discover a planet of the solar system. 
Worldwide fame quickly followed. In November 1781 Herschel was presented with the Copley medal of the Royal Society; the following month he was elected a fellow and, in a pleasing gesture, was exempted from the normal annual payment on the grounds that the money saved would be spent on science. More significantly, the discovery gave Herschel's allies at the English court the opportunity to lobby George III -- himself a Hanoverian -- on Herschel's behalf. In 1769 the king had established an observatory at Kew, and the incumbent observer, S. C. T. Demainbray, was now advanced in years. Herschel seemed to Sir Joseph Banks, president of the Royal Society and confidant of the king, to be a suitable successor, though it transpired that the king had promised the post to Demainbray's son. Nevertheless, in April 1782 Herschel was told that the king wished to see him, and on 20 May he packed up the 7 foot reflector with which he had discovered the planet and set off for London. The king then ordered the telescope to be set up at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, where it remained throughout June, giving Maskelyne and other astronomers ample opportunity to compare it with the professionally made observatory instruments. Of Herschel's supreme skill as a maker of reflecting mirrors and eyepieces there could no longer be any question. 'Double stars which they could not see with their instruments I had the pleasure to show them very plainly' (Lubbock, 115). 
At the beginning of July, Herschel was at Windsor, showing planets to the royal family. Shortly thereafter it seems he made an application for financial support from the crown, and was immediately offered a pension that would make him independent of music. It was not a large amount: $200 yearly, much less than he was earning from music, but attractive enough compared to the $300 paid to the holder of the onerous post of astronomer royal. His only duties were to reside near Windsor Castle and be available to show the heavens to the royal family when asked to do so. This transformation in Herschel's life would also mean the end of Caroline's career in music; but it never occurred to her brother to consult her before accepting. 
Long before, Galileo had cemented his relationship with his Medici patrons by giving their name to his newly discovered satellites of Jupiter. Herschel, under advice, named his planet after the king; but continental astronomers resisted this departure from tradition, and the name Uranus was adopted, although Herschel himself always referred to it as the Georgian Planet. 
At the end of July, Herschel returned to Bath and with precipitate speed organized the move to Datchet, near Windsor, where he had taken a house that was in ruinous condition but had the space he needed for all his apparatus. By 5 August he was making observations there, and by 22 August Caroline found herself under orders to sweep for comets. For a time the royal family not infrequently exercised their right to require Herschel's presence at Windsor of an evening. This involved him in transporting a telescope there in the daytime, and back home again in the darkness. He then had to set up the telescope for the night's serious work, for he was now engaged in a third review of the heavens. 
The third review, like the second, had a subsidiary aim of great significance: the search for double stars. Herschel knew from Galileo of a method whereby observations of a double star -- two stars that lie in almost the same direction from earth and so appear at first glance to be a single star -- might be used to circumvent some of the daunting obstacles confronting any astronomer who wished to measure the distances of stars. As a contribution to this method he published in 1782 a list of 269 double stars, no fewer than 227 of which he had found himself, and in 1785 a further list of 434. The consequences were very different from those he intended. In 1784 John Michell pointed out in print (for the second time) that double stars were far too numerous to be explained as resulting from chance alignments, that is, virtual coincidences of the directions of the two members of a double as seen from earth. Instead, most doubles must be binary stars, companions in space lying at the same distance from earth, and therefore useless for Galileo's method. And when, after an interval of two decades, Herschel re-examined a number of his doubles, he did indeed find several in which the two stars had moved in orbit around each other, so confirming that they were companions bound together by attractive forces. 
In collecting double stars, Herschel imported into astronomy the methodology of the natural historian: he had become a gatherer and classifier of astronomical specimens. Contemporaries found this hard to accept. Herschel had from the start been a controversial figure, a rank amateur unfamiliar with the niceties of scientific discourse, and an observer incapable of giving a coherent definition of the position of a new planet when he had been lucky enough to find one. The draft of his paper on mountains on the moon had included highly inappropriate speculations about lunar inhabitants, while his claims to have eyepieces that magnified thousands of times had seemed nothing short of lunatic. Now he was turning a physical science into a biological one. 
Friends such as Watson did their best to coach their protege in the scientific conventions and to defend him against detractors. Meanwhile, at Datchet, Caroline was having no luck in detecting new comets, but she was encountering a significant number of nebulae. Herschel began himself to sweep for nebulae with a small refractor, before it occurred to him that they were permanent features of the night sky, and so should be tackled without haste, and with the most powerful instrumentation that Herschelian ingenuity could contrive. And he was now completing a 20 foot reflector with 18 inch mirrors and, more significantly, a stable and convenient mounting. 
The 'large' 20 foot came into service in October 1783, and Herschel embarked on a systematic search of the skies visible from Windsor that was to take him and Caroline two decades to complete. By the end of the year a suitable technique of 'sweeping' had been devised. With the telescope facing south, Herschel stood on the platform laying an ambush for any nebula that might drift into the field of view as the skies turned overhead, while his sister was indoors at a desk near an open window ready to write down its position and description. The telescope, whose field of view was typically 1/4 degree in diameter, was constantly being raised and lowered a little by a workman, so that each 'sweep' covered a strip of sky some 2 degree wide. In an observational campaign that is second to none in the history of astronomy, brother and sister increased the number of known nebulae from about a hundred to 2500. 
Herschel's earliest observations of the Orion nebula had suggested that the object altered shape and so was a small nearby cloud of 'true nebulosity'. But how to distinguish true nebulosity from the appearance of nebulosity generated by a vast, distant star cluster? Herschel decided that the apparent nebulosity of a star cluster was irregular or 'mottled', while true nebulosity was uniform or 'milky'. He discussed his current programme in 'Account of some observations tending to investigate the construction of the heavens', read before the Royal Society in June 1784. In this remarkable paper he also initiated the method of stellar statistics that is fundamental in modern astronomy. Like several mid-century speculators, Herschel believed that the Milky Way seen in the sky is the optical effect of the earth's immersion in a layer of stars (the galaxy). But Herschel wished to know the actual shape of the galaxy, and for this the earth's interior location is most unhelpful. He saw that he could make progress on the question if he made two assumptions: first, that his telescope could reach to the borders in every direction (for unless this was so the task was hopeless), and, second, that within the galaxy the volume of space was uniformly stocked with stars. The second assumption implied that, the more stars that could be counted in a given field of view, the greater the distance to the border of the galaxy in that direction. It was, of course, an assumption that was not strictly true; Herschel hoped it would be true enough for his purposes. 
In a second paper, published in 1785, Herschel gave the results of his star counts to date. So much of his time was taken up with sweeping that he could offer no more than a sample of star counts; but he listed the results for a great circle of the sky, and sketched the resulting cross-section of the galaxy. In later years he abandoned both the assumptions on which the sketch was based: with more powerful telescopes he found he was able to see stars invisible in the 20 foot, while increasing familiarity with star clusters convinced him that the assumption of uniform distribution was seriously misleading. But for much of the nineteenth century, for want of anything to put in its place, writers were to reproduce the sketch that had been disowned by its author. 
No sooner had the 1784 paper been read than Herschel came across two nebulae in which he could see both milky and mottled nebulosity; indeed, in the second nebula he believed he could see stars as well. While stubborn in the face of criticism from others, Herschel was very ready to reform his own ideas, and he now concluded that he had been over hasty in accepting the existence of true nebulosity and that all nebulae were indeed distant star clusters: mottled nebulosity indicated the presence of a star cluster only just too far away for his telescope to 'resolve' the cluster into its component stars, while milky nebulosity revealed the presence of innumerable stars at a very much greater distance. The supposed changes he had observed in the Orion nebula he now chose to ignore. 
But clustering implied the action of attractive forces: the more dense the cluster, the longer attractive forces had been at work on it. And so Herschel arrived at the revolutionary concept of the age of a star cluster. In the 1785 paper he described how a widely scattered collection of stars would eventually condense into clusters, and these would become more and more concentrated as time went on. His contemporaries were once more at a loss: not only was the methodology revolutionary, but only Herschel, with his 20 foot reflector, had access to the evidence. 
A further paper on the construction of the heavens followed in 1789, but the following year Herschel's identification of nebulae with star clusters received a fatal blow. On 13 November he was sweeping as usual when he came across 'A most singular phaenomenon', a star surrounded by 'a faint luminous atmosphere' ('Scientific Papers', 1.421-2). It was in fact an unusually near example of a type of object that Herschel had discovered and termed 'planetary nebula', with a disc like a planet but pale light like a nebula. In the 1790 example Herschel could see a central star, and he at once concluded that the star was condensing out of the surrounding cloud of nebulosity. 
The impact on Herschel's theorizing was dramatic. He had previously viewed the earth's galaxy as one among many; for if (say) the Orion nebula was so distant that the component stars could not be seen, and yet it occupied so much of the sky, it must be vast indeed, and 'may well outvie our milky-way in grandeur' ('Scientific Papers', 1.255). Now it reverted to being a cloud of nearby and changeable nebulosity, a minor component within the galaxy. 
More importantly, the evolutionary process among star clusters had to be extended backwards in time. In a series of papers published towards the end of his life, Herschel pictured the process as beginning with widely diffused nebulosity that gradually condensed, here and there, into clouds, out of which in time stars began to be born, to form star clusters. As time went on these condensed more and more -- perhaps ending in a cataclysmic gravitational collapse that would contribute to the cycle beginning all over again. Each stage in this theoretical picture Herschel illustrated with examples from his catalogues of nebulae and star clusters, remarking that the difference between one stage and the next was perhaps less than there would be 'in an annual description of the human figure, were it given from the birth of a child till he comes to be a man in his prime' ('Scientific Papers', 2.460). 
Until 1786 there is no hint to be found in Herschel's life of romantic attachments. But that year his friend and neighbour John Pitt died, leaving a widow, Mary (1762/3-1832?), and two years later, on 8 May 1788, William and Mary ('nee' Baldwin) were married. Their only child, Sir John Frederick William Herschel, was born in 1792. Mary was of serene and pleasant nature, and brought with her money enough to relieve the pressure on her husband to supplement his income by the manufacture of telescopes for sale. The pace of life slackened, and in the years to come holidays away from Slough became a regular event. 
In 1785 Herschel had requested royal funding for the monster reflector he had long coveted. In the event he received two grants of $2000 each, with $200 per annum for running costs, and Caroline was also given a small pension. Herschel had invited the king to choose between an instrument of 30 foot focal length and one of 40 foot. The king, not surprisingly, opted for the larger size, but this proved to be an unfortunate choice. Towards the end of the century Herschel was to build for the king of Spain a 25 foot, with 2 foot mirrors, and in trials at Slough this reflector proved an outstanding success: Herschel's technology was equal to a challenge on this scale. But the monster he built for himself proved of limited use. He found the tube cumbersome to manage, and the 4 foot mirrors, weighing many hundredweight, had to be made of an unusual alloy to prevent their deforming under their own weight when tilted in use. As a result they tarnished easily. 
In any event, a prime purpose of the telescope had doubtless been to endorse Herschel's identification of nebulae with star clusters, by 'resolving' additional nebulae into their component stars, and the Orion nebula was the first object he examined with the unfinished instrument. But within months of the completion in 1789 Herschel changed his mind and decided that true nebulosity existed after all. Supervising the mammoth construction task had absorbed a disproportionate amount of his energies; and, although the instrument was visited by kings and archbishops as well as continental astronomers, a wonder of the age worthy of indication on the Ordnance Survey map, it proved a disappointment. 
Except for a token paper that Herschel published in extreme old age as first president of the Astronomical Society, all his researches appeared in 'Philosophical Transactions', to whose pages he acquired almost automatic right of access. Many of his papers concerned the solar system. He argued that, when looking at the sun, observers see, not the surface of the star, but its luminous outer atmosphere, through gaps in which are seen (as 'sunspots') portions of the cool inner atmosphere that shields the inhabitants of the planet-like body of the sun from the heat of the outer atmosphere. He discovered two satellites of Uranus in 1787, after he had contrived to dispense with the secondary mirror of the 20 foot in its normal, Newtonian configuration and so avoid the loss of light that this entailed; instead, he tilted the primary mirror slightly and positioned the eyepiece inside the end of the tube, so that he stood with his back to the sky, looking directly at the image formed at the focus. In 1798 he made the astonishing announcement that the motion of the two satellites was retrograde. He subjected Saturn to frequent examination, and in 1789 discovered the satellites Mimas and Enceladus. When the supposed planets Ceres and Pallas were discovered on the continent after the turn of the century, he showed that they were far too small to be considered planets, and proposed instead the name 'asteroid'. 
In 1783, in an exercise of analysis carried out at his desk, Herschel claimed to have identified the direction in which the entire solar system is travelling. It was a masterly analysis, though the striking similarity of his direction to that of modern astronomy is partly a matter of luck. In the late 1790s he put the study of variable stars onto a sound observational basis by publishing catalogues in which the brightness of a given star of a constellation was compared to that of stars of very similar brightness in the same constellation, so that a future change in the brightness of the given star would reveal itself by disturbing the published comparisons. In 1800 he discovered infra-red rays from the sun; and he more than once passed the light of stars through a prism, though he could of course offer no explanation of the spectra thus obtained. Between 1807 and 1810, deaf to all advice, he published three long and misguided papers entitled 'Newton's rings'. 
As he moved into his later seventies, the consequences of the long nights spent in the 1780s and 1790s observing in the cold and damp began to take increasing toll on Herschel's health, and in 1816 he persuaded his son John to abandon his career as a Cambridge don and return home, so that he could pass his astronomical skills and experience on to him before it was too late. John accepted the completion and revision of his father's work as a sacred duty, and was himself to acquire lasting fame as he discharged this duty. Over the next six years his father became increasingly frail, and on 25 August 1822, after some days in bed, Herschel died at Observatory House, his Slough home. He was buried on 7 September at St Lawrence's, Upton, near Slough. His epitaph included the words 'Coelorum perrupit claustra' ('he broke through the barriers of the heavens'). To the poet Thomas Campbell, in 1813, Herschel had remarked: 'I have looked further into space than ever human being did before me. I have observed stars of which the light, it can be proved, must take two million years to reach the earth.' 'I really and unfeignedly felt at the moment', wrote Campbell to a friend, 'as if I had been conversing with a supernatural intelligence' (Lubbock, 336). 
Herschel had risen from the obscurity of his Hanoverian origins to become, first, a musician and composer of more than average competence and then a pioneer in astronomy who changed the very nature of the science. He was in the first rank as telescope builder, as observer, and as theorist, a combination of talents unique in the history of astronomy. His achievements were widely recognized: he received doctorates from the universities of Edinburgh (1786) and Glasgow (1792), was a member of the American Philosophical Society and of innumerable societies across Europe, and in 1816 was appointed a knight of the Royal Guelphic Order. (He was often styled, incorrectly, Sir William Herschel.) Yet several contemporary astronomers, unable even to see many of the objects he discussed, were uncertain what to make of his revolutionary methodology and novel theories. Being self-taught, he had not known that astronomers were expected to focus on the solar system. Instead, he explored the construction of the universe, and it was on later generations that the questions he asked and the methods he devised to answer them were to have profound influence. 


@@@@@


doc= 13103


Herschell, Farrer, first Baron Herschell (1837-1899), lord chancellor, was born at Brampton, Huntingdonshire, on 2 November 1837, the eldest son of the Revd Ridley Haim Herschell (1807-1864) and his first wife, Helen Skirving (died 1853), daughter of William Mowbray, an Edinburgh merchant. Raised in a non-denominational form of dissent, he later adhered to the Church of England, with broad-church leanings. 
On leaving his grammar school in south London Herschell was taken by his mother to Bonn in 1853 to complete his education at the university, but with her death a few months later this idea was abandoned. Following travels with his father he matriculated at London University in July 1855. In October he entered University College and graduated BA with honours in classics in 1857. A keen advocate of the extension of university provision, he afterwards served the university as examiner in common law (1872-6), on the senate (from 1883), and from 1894 as chancellor. From early youth Herschell had proclaimed his vocation for the law. On 12 January 1858 he entered Lincoln's Inn and was called on 17 November 1860; he later became a bencher (8 May 1872) and was treasurer in 1886. He was a pupil of Thomas Chitty, the famous special pleader, and found a place in the chambers of James Hannen. 
Herschell started out on the northern circuit with no connections and at first had to supplement his income by contributing to the 'New Reports' (1863-5). He soon gained a reputation, especially in commercial cases, and was able to confine his excursions to Liverpool and Manchester, eventually becoming Charles Russell's leading rival there. Blessed with a remarkable memory which usually enabled him to dispense with notes, he was not a great jury advocate but had few equals as a lucid presenter of facts and law. He took silk on 8 February 1872 and served as recorder of Carlisle from 10 October 1873 to June 1880. On 20 December 1876 he married Agnes Adela, third daughter of Edward Leigh Kindersley of Clyffe, Dorset, and granddaughter of the judge Richard Torin Kindersley. 
Courted by both political parties, Herschell embraced Liberalism and at a by-election on 13 June 1874 became a member for Durham City. He recommended ambitious barristers to enter parliament, but few adapted their courtroom style to the very different requirements of the Commons as successfully as he. Herschell made his mark with an impressively grave and dignified speech on a controversial Admiralty circular concerning the surrender of fugitive slaves (24 February 1876) and thereafter commanded general respect, though he could not persuade the house to support his bill to discourage actions for breach of promise of marriage. His steadfast adherence to Gladstone's views on the Eastern question and Ireland bore fruit when the latter returned to power in 1880 and made him solicitor-general (3 May); he was knighted ten days later. 
Herschell and the attorney-general, Sir Henry James, proved an unusually effective team of law officers. They met unprecedentedly heavy demands, particularly from the Foreign Office. The presentation of their opinions was admirably adapted to lay readers, and unlike many of their predecessors, they regularly attended the house. Herschell in particular was much admired for his stamina in combining onerous public duties, including leading roles in the 'Irish Land Bill' (1881) and the 'Bankruptcy Bill' (1883), with an enormous load of private work -- he appeared in almost every major case in the Lords and privy council at this time. The effect on his health became apparent only later. 
Herschell had turned down a puisne judgeship in 1879 and subsequently declined offers to be a lord of appeal, to succeed Sir George Jessel as master of the rolls, and to be speaker. His judgement was called into question when, having had to vacate his seat through the changes wrought by the third 'Reform Act', he was defeated for Lonsdale North (Lancashire) at the election of November 1885. However, the ensuing political upheavals worked greatly to his advantage. When Gladstone formed his third administration Selborne and James declined to serve in a ministry planning Irish home rule and thus Herschell became lord chancellor, created Baron Herschell of the City of Durham on 8 February 1886. The defeat of the 'Government of Ireland Bill' ended his brief tenure of office (3 August) and even his noted talents for conciliation, deployed at the 'round-table conference' of January 1887, failed to bring Chamberlain and the Liberal Unionists back into the fold. 
In opposition, Herschell was enabled to indulge his love of travelling -- spending, for example, part of the winter of 1891-2 with the Gladstones at Biarritz -- but he was not idle in public affairs. After his masterly speech against the appointment of the Parnell commission in 1888 he dropped out of political life to some extent, but besides his judicial work he presided over royal commissions into the Metropolitan Board of Works, Indian currency, and vaccination, demonstrating his 'prodigious powers of acquisition and assimilation' (Atlay, 2.459) and impressive drafting skills. When Gladstone formed his last government in 1892, Herschell was the obvious choice for lord chancellor, and resumed the great seal on 15 August, staying on under Lord Rosebery until his ministry resigned on 22 June 1895. 
Herschell had quickly learned how to manage the Lords from the woolsack, though 'an unfortunate tendency to distil a spirit of acrimony' (A. Fitzroy, 'Memoirs', 1926, 1.11) was noticed, and he grew irked by the crushing weight of the Conservative majority, which led him to espouse reform of the upper house. Always an enthusiast for codification and consolidation, he had encouraged his former pupil McKenzie Chalmers in his 'Bills of Exchange Act' (1882), and was now able to pass his 'Sale of Goods Act' (1893), also assisting the parliamentary counsel with the 'Merchant Shipping Act' of 1894. He also secured the passage of two measures to restrict betting and continued to press, in modified form, Halsbury's plans to extend title registration and assimilate real and personal property, though they were not enacted until 1897. 
Although advocating reforms to coroners' courts, Herschell showed little inclination to tackle the defects of the superior courts, ignoring proposals for a court of criminal appeal and making only minor adjustments to the assizes. His dispensation of judicial patronage, however, was praised as scrupulously unpartisan. Having categorically refused to pack Liberals into the magistracy to reduce the tory majority, he was driven to distraction and uncharacteristic petulance by the persistent importunities of his parliamentary party. 
It was said that Herschell aspired to a more overtly political office and many considered him admirably qualified, but the only offer he received was viceroy of India. He was however made GCB in 1893 and was held in high regard by the queen and by the Liberal Party. 
Though he clashed with Halsbury over the latter's handling of the great Labour case of 'Allen v. Flood' (1898), Herschell's services were again in demand by the Conservatives. In 1898 he agreed to sit on two commissions arising from disputes with the USA over the boundaries of Venezuela and Alaska respectively. After presiding over an inquiry into the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, of which he was a vice-president, he went to Washington for the Canadian arbitration in August 1898 and there, the following February, he was injured in a fall and died unexpectedly in the Shoreham Hotel on 2 March 1899. His body was brought home and buried at Tincleton church, Dorset. He was survived by his wife, who died at Pau on 23 February 1902, two married daughters, and an only son, Richard Farrer (died 1929). 
Herschell was of middle height and slightly built, with regular features and dark eyes. He derived his taste for music, his principal recreation, from his mother. Sociable, ready with anecdotes, and generous to unsuccessful barristers, he was generally well liked. On the bench he became somewhat overbearing and was notorious in later years for interrupting counsel, but contemporaries rated his judgments very highly. However, he conceived the judicial function narrowly: 'we have to interpret the law, not make it' ('Salomon v. Salomon', 1897). This espousal of strict formalism, and the unornamented and utilitarian style of his judgments, has diminished his reputation in some quarters. Nevertheless his judgments, ranging across most important areas of the common law, remain admirable specimens of accurate legal reasoning and include several of great importance in the development of company and commercial law, such as 'Derry v. Peek' (1889) and 'Salomon v. Salomon'. 
Herschell had an unusually wide range of interests outside the law. He was on the council of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science; was president of the Society of Comparative Legislation (1894); an original member and later president of the Selden Society; president of the Imperial Institute; a freemason and company director. He was honoured by the universities of Durham (DCL, 1882), Oxford (DCL, 1886), and Cambridge (LLD, 1893); and he was captain of Deal Castle from 1890 and deputy lieutenant for Kent and Durham. 


@@@@@


doc= 13104


Herschell, Ridley Haim (1807-1864), missionary and Independent minister, was the third son and fourth child of Judah Herschell, a brewer, and his wife, Ghetal, of Strzelno (about 30 miles north of Torun, Poland), where he was born on 7 April 1807. Before his birth his mother was in danger because of the French occupation of the town and this suggested the name Haim ('life') for her son. His grandfather, Rabbi Hillel, lived with the boy's parents, who were pious Jews, and his simple but tolerant faith was a significant influence on the boy. From the age of eleven he attended two rabbinical schools, but owing to ill health he returned a few years later to work in his father's business. From about 1822 he studied in Berlin, supporting himself by teaching. He began to learn English as a visitor to England in 1825 and, having finished his studies, he again went to London and then to Paris. As a student he had begun to question some of his earlier beliefs, and exposure to the temptations of Paris now furthered the process of alienation. However, with the news of his mother's death, his religious feelings revived, and he began to study the 'New Testament', though his instincts were hostile to the rituals of French Catholicism. 
About 1829 Herschell again came to England and on 14 April 1830 he was baptized in St James's, Westminster, by the bishop of London, one of his sponsors being the Revd Henry Colborne Ridley, whose name he adopted. Working as a lay evangelist to Jews in the London area Herschell felt restricted by the conservatism of the Anglican authorities in the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews; he established an independent group, which gathered informally in Kensington for study and prayer, with encouragement from Edward Irving. At one of these house meetings Herschell met Helen Skirving Mowbray (1797-1853). Her father, William, a merchant from Leith, strongly opposed the ensuing friendship, with support from influential church leaders such as Thomas Chalmers, who claimed that Herschell had a 'shady past, including several romantic liaisons' (Brown, 217). Nevertheless, on 29 September 1831 they were married, and Herschell continued to work among Jews in Woolwich and later in Camden Town. In 1835 Lady Olivia Sparrow, who, like Herschell, had become disillusioned with the charismatic developments in Irving's church, persuaded him to take responsibility for the schools and mission work which she had established in Leigh-on-Sea, and later, near her home in Brampton, Huntingdonshire. His preference for a non-liturgical form of evangelical Christianity is reflected in his request in 1835 and 1836, for birth-notes for his daughters from the Witham Quaker monthly meeting, in preference to having them baptized. 
Returning to London in 1838 Herschell began to preach in Founders' Hall Chapel, Lothbury. The following year he gathered a non-sectarian congregation at Chadwell Street Chapel, Islington, and in 1844 he took charge of Trinity Chapel, which had been built for him in John Street, Edgware Road, with help from such friends as Sir Culling Eardley Eardley. His hearers included both Anglicans and nonconformists who appreciated his respect for Judaism and his refusal to interpret the 'Old Testament' as merely a prelude to the 'New Testament'. His eschatology was more fully expounded in several publications, including his popular 'Brief Account of the Present State and Future Expectations of the Jews' (1833; 5th edn, 1841), and in 'The Voice of Israel' which he edited from 1844 to 1847. He travelled widely, visiting synagogues and preaching in eastern Europe, France, Italy, America, and Palestine. Typical of his non-denominational evangelicalism was his involvement in the establishment of both the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews (1844) and the Evangelical Alliance (1845). After the death of his first wife in 1853 he married Esther Fuller Maitland (died 1882) on 3 July 1855. He died at 105 King's Road, Brighton, on 14 April 1864 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. His three surviving children were Farrer Herschell, first Lord Herschell; Mary, who married John Cunliffe, the uncle of Walter Cunliffe; and Ghetal, who married John Scott Burdon Sanderson. His son Ridley had died unmarried in 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 13105


Hershon, Paul Isaac (1817-1888), Hebrew scholar, was born of Jewish parents in Galicia but converted to Christianity at an early age. As a protestant missionary he became an active member of the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews in England and the East. He worked successively as director of the House of Industry for Jews at Jerusalem and of the model farm at Jaffa. 
In 1859 Hershon retired from the mission field in order to devote himself to work on the 'Talmud' and 'Midrashim'. He published a number of texts on the 'Talmud', including 'Extracts from the Talmud' (1860); 'The Pentateuch According to the Talmud... Genesis' (1878); and 'A Talmudic miscellany... or, A thousand and one extracts [translated] from the Talmud, the Midrashim, and the Kabbalah' (1880), which was published as volume 19 in Trubner's 'Oriental' series. He translated from the Judaeo-Polish (the language most widely spoken by Jews in Europe) Jacob ben Isaac of Janowa's rabbinical commentary on 'Genesis' (1885). He also translated the 'New Testament' into Judaeo-Polish, and compiled an unpublished digest of marginal references in Hebrew for the whole 'Bible', which became the property of the London Jews' Society. He died, comparatively suddenly, on 25 September 1888, at his home, 9 Park Avenue, Wood Green, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 13106


Hertslet, Lewis (1787-1870), librarian and editor of state papers, was born in November 1787, the eldest son of Jean Louis Pierre Hertslett (formerly Hiertzelet). His father was a Swiss settled in England, who became a king's messenger in May 1797. Lewis Hertslet was appointed sub-librarian in the Foreign Office on 8 February 1801; almost nine years later, on 6 January 1810, he succeeded Richard Ancell as librarian and keeper of the papers. He remained in this post until his retirement on 20 November 1857. 
Hertslet was responsible for administering not only the Foreign Office's printed book collection, but also its records; in time he became a considerable authority on all matters of historical and geographical interest pertaining to British policy overseas. According to one foreign secretary, he was 'a Walking State Paper', while the historian Harold Temperley later observed that on occasion he exercised a powerful influence on policy. Research into records was facilitated by his introduction of a library system of registering and indexing manuscript correspondence, and his department provided secretaries of state with a steady stream of memoranda, offering guidance on precedents and information on international issues of the day. During the Crimean War these included papers on such topics as the status of the Aland Islands, the Russian occupation of Moldavia and Wallachia, and the Ottoman firman on the independence of Circassia. 
In 1813 Hertslet began compiling a newspaper scrapbook, containing cuttings from reputable journals recording important political developments, which he called his 'Public documents book'. But of more lasting significance was his work on diplomatic documents. In 1820 he published, as a private undertaking but with a guaranteed order from the Foreign Office, two volumes of 'A Complete Collection of the Treaties and Conventions', relating to commerce, navigation, and the slave trade. Six years later appeared his classic work of reference under the title 'British and Foreign State Papers'. Originally intended only for distribution to members of the government and British missions abroad, this collection of treaties and other commercial and political documents went on general sale in 1831 and continued as a series until 1968. 
Hertslet married Hannah Harriet, daughter of George Cooke of Westminster; their youngest son, Sir Edward Hertslet (1824-1902), later succeeded him as librarian at the Foreign Office. Hertslet died at his house, 16 Great College Street, Westminster, on 15 March 1870. A second wife, Mary Spencer Hertslet, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13107


Hervey (d. 1131), bishop of Ely, was a Breton by birth. He became a clerk in the service of William Rufus, and, at a time of rapid Norman advances into Wales, was promoted to the bishopric of Bangor in 1092, being consecrated by Archbishop Thomas of York (died 1100). However, as Welsh resistance stiffened, Hervey was unable to maintain his position, despite his employment of secular force and excommunication, and he soon fled back to the English court, probably in 1095. Retaining his episcopal title, he attended Archbishop Anselm's general council at Westminster in 1102, and became confessor to Henry I, who in 1106 tried unsuccessfully to transfer him to the see of Lisieux. Hervey then became involved in plans to create a new bishopric at Ely. 
The very large diocese of Dorchester-Lincoln, to which Ely had belonged since at least 1000, consisted of the seven archdeaconries of Lincoln, Stow, Bedford, Buckingham, Leicester, Oxford, and Huntingdon. From 1072, when Bishop Remigius (died 1092) removed his see from Dorchester in Oxfordshire, the diocese was governed instead from Lincoln, where a new cathedral was dedicated in 1092. The large and wealthy Benedictine monastery at St Albans had by the end of the eleventh century virtually succeeded in establishing its independence of the diocesan at Lincoln, owing instead direct obedience to the pope, and it is possible that Abbot Richard was inspired to similar tactics on behalf of Ely. He could expect to have at his disposal very considerable monastic property, which must have seemed an ample endowment for a bishopric. But there were also problems to be solved before his scheme could be put into effect. He had to reckon with the substantial degree of autonomy enjoyed by his own religious house, where the sacrist's administrative powers had created in the Isle of Ely what was virtually an independent enclave. And there was also the fact that not far from Ely there were two large and fairly wealthy monasteries, at Thorney and Chatteris, which could have presented a threat to a new diocesan organization, and might even have been centres of hostility to it. 
In any case, although Abbot Richard declared that the house of Ely owed no allegiance to Lincoln, and refused after his election to seek benediction from Bishop Robert Bloet (died 1123), his campaign was not at first successful. Henry I drove him from Ely, probably in 1102, and caused him to seek the aid of Pope Paschal II ('r'. 1099-1118), who persuaded the king to restore Richard to his abbacy, apparently in the following year. But by the time of his death, in July 1107, Richard had completed both the rebuilding of the monastic church, begun under his predecessor, Abbot Simeon, and the translation of the relics of St Etheldreda and other Ely saints -- two important steps towards the establishment of a new see. Following Richard's death Hervey was directed by the king to administer Ely's endowments until a decision was reached about their disposal. His actions seem to have won the approval of the monks, although they were not, it seems, aware of his instructions from the king, who late in 1108 sent him to seek papal approval for the creation of a bishopric in Ely. A papal mandate to the king to create the new see and install Hervey as the first bishop was issued on 21 November. The creation of the new see was finally approved in council at Nottingham on the feast of St Etheldreda's translation, 17 October 1109. The consent of the monks was, it seems, partly won by Henry I's grant to them of freedom from toll throughout England, which was to be confirmed in a charter guaranteeing to them the liberties granted by Edward the Confessor. Meanwhile, and more importantly, the consent of Bishop Bloet was assured -- apparently through Hervey's management -- by the grant to the church of Lincoln of the important Ely manor of Spaldwick in Huntingdonshire. 
The administration of the new diocese was necessarily left in the hands of the archdeacon, Nicholas of Huntingdon, who plainly resented the new diocesan administration, and in 1110 departed to Rome to appeal against it, but he died before he had gone far. This enabled Hervey to appoint his own nephew, William the Breton, as archdeacon, and to endow him with the manors of Pampisford and Little Thetford. There is nothing to show whether Hervey made any attempt to interfere with the monks' claims to archidiaconal administration in the isle, although the persistence of the sacrist's claim to it as late as the fourteenth century suggests that he made no progress in asserting either his own powers or those of William. But there is some evidence that he tried to assert his control over the other two monastic houses in his diocese. Two royal writs show the king intervening to protect Thorney from Hervey's demands, though in 1128 the bishop was prepared to define Thorney's rights in its manor of Whittlesey, apparently on the occasion of his dedicating the abbey's church. And a writ of 1127, in which Henry I remitted to Chatteris 6's'. 7died due for wardpenny, also records that the king had given the nunnery to Ely, which would therefore have received the money in question. 
The royal mandate for the creation of the new diocese enjoined upon Hervey an equal division between himself and the monastery of the Ely properties, and this division was embodied in a charter 'c'.1116-17, of whose authenticity, however, there is some doubt. The Ely chronicle makes clear that the monastic income was subsequently inadequate: there was enough for only sixty monks instead of the old figure of seventy-two, and the bishop himself retained $1800 in revenues. Some concession was at least provided by the royal charter freeing the monks from toll on any sources of stone and lead for the church building. Hervey meanwhile (probably in 1130) prudently arranged with the king, in his own interest, to be free of castleguard at Norwich, which had been a serious burden on his finances. The pipe roll of 1130, listing debts owed to the crown by the bishop which amounted to some $1500, shows that he promised $1000 for the remission of castleguard. A reduction of the scutage owed from Ely's fees, from $100 to $60, cost him $240. No doubt the other royal grants of privileges and exemptions which he obtained, including a yearly fair at Ely itself, cost similar sums. A few traces also survive of the arrangements made by Hervey to administer his new revenues and household, such as the creation of an official baker's fee, and the assembly of the episcopal reeve's fee in Fen Ditton. It seems likely, too, that the parish church of St Mary in Ely was created to serve the bishop's men living in the vicinity of his barton, or farming centre, at the top of Back Hill, which led down to the river. In the same way the episcopal vineyard, and a series of large holdings like Lisle Place, were established at an early date on the north side of Fore Hill. 
There are few traces of Hervey's activity as a diocesan after his appointment of William as archdeacon. He was present in 1127 at a legatine council at Worcester, and at a royal council in 1129 when clerical marriage was condemned; he witnessed an act by which Walter 'grammaticus' granted to the priory the church of Stretham; he gave to the church a silk alb, a flowered chasuble, two great cloths, and a gold pastoral staff; finally in 1131, when his death was imminent, he prepared to enter monastic life. It is not clear where he died, and the dates of his palace buildings have not been established. The many miracles wrought by St Etheldreda continued and increased in his time, not unassisted by the creation, at his insistence, of a causeway from Exning to Ely which facilitated the journeys of pilgrims. The chronicle of Orderic Vitalis contains a lengthy account of a miracle worked by the saint in 1116 -- the release from prison of Bricstan of Chatteris, unjustly accused before the king's justices of concealing treasure trove -- which was apparently circulated in writing on the bishop's instructions. The same chronicle, under the year 1118, relates a strange story of Hervey's having a pregnant cow slaughtered and opened, to find three piglets within, a prodigy interpreted as foretelling the deaths of three great men and other dreadful events. Hervey died on 30 August 1131, and was buried in his cathedral on the following day. 


@@@@@


doc= 13108


Hervey, Lord Arthur Charles (1808-1894), bishop of Bath and Wells, fourth son of Frederick William Hervey, first marquess and fifth earl of Bristol (1769-1859), and his wife, Elizabeth Albana Upton (1775-1844), daughter of Clotworthy Upton, Lord Templetown, was born at his father's London house, 6 St James's Square, on 20 August 1808. From 1817 to 1822 he lived abroad with his parents, chiefly in Paris, and was taught by a private tutor, Samuel Forster, former head of Norwich grammar school. He entered Eton College in 1822, where his friends included Gladstone, and he remained there until 1826. In 1827 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner and obtained a first class in the classical tripos, graduating BA in 1830. In 1828 he was awarded a college prize, and in 1830 a Latin declamation prize. Hervey was an active sportsman, and was a champion tennis player. 
Having been ordained both deacon and priest in October 1832, Hervey was instituted in November to the small family living of Ickworth-cum-Chedburgh, Suffolk; as Chedburgh was in 1844 separated from Ickworth and joined to Horningsheath or Horringer, he also became curate of Horringer, until in 1856 he was instituted to the rectory which he held with Ickworth. On 30 July 1839 he married Patience, daughter of John Singleton of Hazeley, Hampshire, and Mell, co. Louth. They had twelve children. He took a leading part in the organization of educational institutions in the neighbouring town of Bury St Edmunds as president of the Bury Athenaeum, and was an early proposer of a system of university extension (extramural teaching) in a pamphlet entitled 'A suggestion for supplying the literary... institutes... with lecturers from the universities' (1855). In 1862 he was appointed by Bishop Turton of Ely to the archdeaconry of Sudbury. 
On the resignation of Robert John Eden, Lord Auckland, bishop of Bath and Wells, in 1869, Hervey was offered the bishopric on the recommendation of W. E. Gladstone, and was consecrated on 21 December. In consequence of his refusal to institute a clergyman of intemperate habits, who had presented himself to a benefice, he was in 1877-9 involved in a lawsuit, which was carried before the privy council. Judgment was given in his favour with costs, but being unable to recover them he had to pay $1558, of which $978 was raised by subscription in the diocese. As a bishop he was of moderate views on church matters, though inclined to evangelicalism. He set about making Wells the centre of the diocese, and founded church-building and choral societies. 
Hervey researched the chronologies of Jewish history, publishing 'The Genealogies of Our Lord' in 1853. As well as publishing sermons, he contributed to William Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible' and to the 'Speaker's Commentary'. He was a member of the committee for the revision of the 'Old Testament', receiving an honorary DD from Oxford University in 1885 in recognition of his work, complementing the DD received from Cambridge in 1870. Though not intellectually brilliant he was accurate and painstaking. Archaeology and family history attracted him. He wrote several papers and addresses on these subjects and served as president of the Royal Archaeological Institute. He died on 9 June 1894 at Hackwood House, near Basingstoke, the house of his son-in-law, C. Hoare. He was buried at Wells. His wife, five sons, and three daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13109


Hervey, Augustus John, third earl of Bristol (1724-1779), naval officer and politician, was born on 19 May 1724, the second son of John Hervey, Baron Hervey of Ickworth (1696-1743), courtier and politician, and his wife, Mary Hervey, nee Lepell (1699/1700-1768), and grandson of John Hervey, first earl of Bristol. He entered Westminster School in January 1733, and he probably remained there until May 1735 when he entered the navy as a captain's servant in the 'Pembroke' (60 guns), commanded by his uncle, the Hon. William Hervey. He subsequently served in other ships as a midshipman. Early in the war of Jenkins's Ear (1739-43) he was again with his uncle, this time in the 'Superb' (60 guns). On 31 October 1740, after three quarrelsome officers had been dismissed from the ship, Hervey, aged sixteen, passed for lieutenant and was commissioned to fill a vacancy. Later that year a refit in the Tagus gave him the opportunity to initiate a Casanova-like campaign of amorous adventure, often involving young married women. 
In 1741 Hervey took part in Vernon's attack on Cartagena. The capture in November of a Spanish vessel yielded him $1500 in prize money which sufficed to settle his debts. In 1742 his intemperate uncle William was dismissed from the navy, but Hervey had already acquired a new patron, Captain the Hon. John Byng. A firm friendship began between these two contrasting characters, Hervey being of an impetuous, cocksure, convivial disposition and Byng of opposite tendency. In 1742-3 Hervey was with Byng in the 'Sutherland' (50 guns) and 'Captain' (70 guns), and Byng much admired his professional flair. 
While waiting in 1744 to go to Jamaica in Thomas Davers's flagship, Hervey contracted a reckless secret marriage which eventually became notorious. Having just turned twenty, he met in Hampshire Elizabeth Chudleigh (c.1720-1788). Stemming from the Devon gentry, she was lively, beautiful, and a maid of honour to the princess of Wales but, as it transpired, was inclined to marital intrigue and promiscuity. Hervey married her before a few witnesses late at night on 4 August 1744 in the church at Lainston, near Salisbury. Hervey's finances were totally inadequate to support the marriage. A son was baptized Augustus Henry Hervey at Chelsea on 2 November 1747 but he soon died. By 1749 Hervey, alienated by reports of his wife's misconduct, had finally separated from her, but the marriage, though not widely suspected for many years, ultimately prevented him from acquiring a legitimate heir. 
Meanwhile, on 16 September 1746, Hervey was promoted to command the sloop 'Porcupine', and on 15 January 1747 he was posted, prospectively as Byng's flag captain, to the 'Princessa' (74 guns), which he justly deemed 'a glorious ship' ('Hervey's Journal', 47). He sailed for the Mediterranean where Byng finally decided to hoist his flag in the 'Boyne' (80 guns). Byng sent the 'Princessa' on three highly profitable cruises and, by the coming of peace in 1748, Hervey had accumulated prize and freight money to the tune of $9000. He was naturally grateful to Byng and remained steadfastly loyal to him. Visits to various Italian ports allowed Hervey to engage in amorous affairs faithfully recounted in his richly informative, if tendentious, 'Journal'. Meanwhile, however, at Leghorn in March 1748, he bravely went in his barge and boarded a burning merchantman, heavily laden with gunpowder, which no one else would approach. He cut her free and towed her clear of the mole and the many endangered ships and storehouses. Thereupon she blew up. Hervey's coat was burned but everyone escaped injury. The governor and the merchants thanked him for averting a calamity. 
With the war ending Hervey, hoping to remain employed, shifted in May 1748 into the 'Phoenix' (20 guns). However, he was ordered to pay off in England. While on half pay in 1749 he was unduly prominent among the officers who protested against the new 'Navy Bill'. However, in 1752, thanks to Lord Anson's tolerance, he was reappointed to the 'Phoenix'. In time of peace bullion and coinage still awaited safe transportation, and Hervey did well out of freight money. On the proceeds he much enjoyed himself among the ladies of Genoa, Naples, Leghorn, and Lisbon. 
In July 1755 Hervey, while stationed at Genoa, began sending intelligence to the Admiralty of warlike French preparations at Toulon. In September he sailed to Minorca. Already many warnings had been received there of the impending French invasion. In February 1756, as the senior naval officer in Minorca, he tried to energize the governor's council. Then Commodore Edgcumbe arrived and sent him to Villefranche for intelligence. On 12 April he heard that the French had sailed from Toulon. By 16 May Hervey had joined Byng's fleet on its way up to Mahon. From the 'Phoenix' (primed as a fireship) Hervey witnessed the battle of Minorca on 20 May. At Byng's subsequent council of 24 May Hervey alone among the captains argued that, though damaged, the fleet should remain off Minorca and land a reinforcement for the besieged garrison, but he did not persist with his dissent. Notoriously the fleet fell back on Gibraltar with dire consequences for Admiral Byng. 
On 2 July Sir Edward Hawke superseded Byng at Gibraltar. Hervey, now in the 'Hampton Court' (64 guns), favourably impressed Hawke during the fleet's unrewarding Minorcan cruise. In the autumn, having returned to England with officers required for Byng's court martial, Hervey wrote several pamphlets on the admiral's behalf and, at his trial, testified warmly in support of his isolated friend. Hervey campaigned in vain against the iniquitous death sentence. His 'Journal' is enlivened by recurrent shafts of invective aimed at 'that prejudiced weak head' Anson, 'that wasp of power and snake of ministerial dirt' Lord Barrington, and 'that infernal black demon, Mr Fox' ('Hervey's Journal', 239, 253). 
In the summer of 1757 Hervey again commanded the 'Hampton Court' in the Mediterranean, where Vice-Admiral Osborn accepted much of his advice on strategic matters. In July Hervey destroyed the French frigate 'Nymphe' (32 guns) on the rocks of Majorca. In February 1758 his ship's slowness prevented Hervey from reaching the 'Monmouth' (64 guns) before she silenced the mighty 'Foudroyant' (80 guns). Captain Gardiner having died in the fight, Hervey soon afterwards shifted into the faster sailing 'Monmouth'. In July he destroyed the French frigate 'Rose' (36 guns) outside the grand harbour of Malta. By October he was back at Portsmouth. 
In December 1758 Hervey went to Ickworth and, at great expense, entertained the corporation of Bury St Edmunds, which had made him a member. In May 1757 he had been elected a member of parliament for that family borough by 11 votes to 10; he took his seat in January 1759. 
From May 1759 Hervey, again in the 'Monmouth', played a notable part in Hawke's all-important blockade of Brest. In July Hawke wished to tighten his blockade of the port and chose Hervey to command the inshore squadron. Hervey displayed great zest, resolution, audacity, and resource. On 22 July he earned Hawke's warm commendation when, by a characteristic bluff, he foiled a French attempt to loosen the British stranglehold. In October Hawke's fleet was blown off station, but Hervey's little squadron clung on. Hervey was now suffering from gout in both feet and, on 3 November, only a fortnight before the crowning triumph at Quiberon Bay, Hawke had to order the 'Monmouth' to return home. 'I heartily regret your being obliged to go in', wrote the admiral (Mackay, 'Admiral Hawke', 235). 
In spring 1761, perhaps on account of ill health, Hervey was required to leave his ship, the 'Dragon' (74 guns), and did not participate in the capture of Belle Ile. However, he resumed command in late August and from December he was with Rear-Admiral Rodney in the Leeward Islands. There he was active at the capture of Martinique and in February 1762 he was detached, as commodore, to take St Lucia. This he did with typical boldness, imagination, and skill. In the same year Hervey took a prominent and distinguished part in the capture of Havana. His attack from seaward on the commanding Morro Castle was a gallant, if unsuccessful, episode. Finally Hervey's share of the enormous prize money was $1600. 
His health somewhat impaired, Hervey began to turn away from the sea and seek advancement in politics. His seat at Bury was in the gift of his elder brother George Hervey who had succeeded as the second earl of Bristol in 1751, but Hervey disliked Bristol's political associates, notably Newcastle, Fox, and, until his death in 1762, Lord Anson. Hervey was at first attached to the friends of George III and was, on 6 November 1762, appointed colonel of the Plymouth division of marines, a near-sinecure worth $800 a year. In February 1763 he vacated his seat at Bury but was elected for Saltash, an Admiralty borough, in December. Having been a loyal supporter of George Grenville's (1763-5) ministry, Hervey avoided open opposition to Rockingham, though he did criticize the new administration's proposals for repeal of the 'Stamp Act' in 1766. Hervey was meanwhile designated commodore to command in the Mediterranean but for political reasons became instead a groom of the bedchamber, a post worth $500 a year. In October 1766 Hervey was appointed secretary to his brother Lord Bristol, the lord lieutenant, and was sworn of the Irish privy council, but he never went to Ireland. In July 1767 he resigned, having quarrelled with his brother over his own continuing attachment to George Grenville. However, in 1767 Hervey moved in the Commons a badly needed increase in the half pay of naval lieutenants, and this was approved. In 1768 he was again elected a member for Bury; he held that seat until, on 18 March 1775, he succeeded his brother as earl of Bristol. 
Meanwhile by 1767 Hervey was aiming for a seat on the Board of Admiralty, perhaps as first lord. He had for a long time been a member of Lord Sandwich's convivial set and shared the latter's strong interest in naval policy. At the end of 1770 Hervey encouraged Sandwich in his efforts to replace the ailing Hawke as first lord. In the wake of criticism of the unreadiness of the guardships during the Falklands crisis Hawke resigned in January 1771 and Sandwich was appointed in his stead. On 2 February Hervey became a lord commissioner at the Admiralty. He had a wide and trenchant knowledge of naval personnel and Sandwich openly acknowledged the value of his advice on the key matter of the guardships. Otherwise, however, he appears to have made no great contribution to the first lord's reforms. As the solitary naval lord, Hervey's record of attendance at the board, affected by ill health, was unimpressive. On succeeding to the peerage in 1775, Hervey resigned from the Admiralty. At the time of his ennoblement, Bristol was pilloried in a 'Tete-a-tete' pen portrait for his ongoing relationship with the courtesan Mary Nesbitt (1742/3-1825) which had begun four years earlier, the couple living together at his properties in St James's Square, Westminster, and at Ickworth. The earl's divorce petition having been dismissed in 1779, he was prevented from marrying Nesbitt, whom in his will (for which she was an executor and legatee) he described as his 'dear valuable and best friend' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1059, fols. 98-100). 
As earl of Bristol, Hervey now had an income of over $10,000 a year. In politics he veered away from his association with Sandwich and, in a long speech of April 1779 in the House of Lords, he recommended Sandwich's removal from his post. He even had the effrontery to extol the list of guardships bequeathed to Sandwich by Hawke. Meanwhile in 1775 he had been promoted to rear-admiral of the blue and he automatically progressed finally in 1778 to vice-admiral of the blue. 
Largely on the strength of his 'Journal' (covering the years 1746-59 but not composed from his original records until 1767-70) Hervey has emerged as a naval Casanova. Among contemporaries his reputation suffered through his having seemed to collude with his wife when she was declared a spinster, in February 1769, before an ecclesiastical court. In 1776 the House of Lords found her guilty of bigamy in her marriage of 1769 to the duke of Kingston. But it is for his remarkable seagoing record, especially in the Seven Years' War, that Hervey should be remembered. 
Though quite small, he was lithe and athletic in appearance. Until gout supervened he loved singing, dancing, and pulling at an oar. His bearing was that of a haughty aristocrat and in most things he lacked moderation. 
Hervey died of 'gout of the stomach' ('Hervey's Journal', xi) at St James's Square, London, on 23 December 1779 and was buried at Ickworth five days later. The title and estates passed to his brother Frederick Augustus Hervey (1730-1803), but Hervey alienated from him as much wealth as he could. He thus provided for his ultimate mistress, Mary Nesbitt, and for 'little' Augustus Henry Hervey (1764?-1782), his natural son by Kitty Hunter (later the wife of Sir Alured Clarke). 


@@@@@


doc= 13110


Carr Hervey, Lord Hervey (1691-1723), who was born on 17 September 1691, and educated at Clare College, Cambridge, where he graduated MA in 1710. In the following year he embarked on a grand tour, which included a meeting with Marlborough in Flanders and an introduction to the elector of Hanover. He was elected MP for the borough of Bury St Edmunds. Following the accession of George I he was granted the courtesy title of Lord Hervey, and was appointed one of the gentlemen of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales, whom he followed into opposition in 1717. To Horace Walpole he was the 'elder brother of the more known John, Lord Hervey, and reckoned to have superior parts'. However, his life was clouded by scandal. Writing in the 1830s Lady Louisa Stuart maintained that Carr was the true father of Walpole, a claim countenanced by the 'DNB' but for which there is no contemporary evidence and which most probably derived from Stuart's hostility to Walpole. Carr continued to sit as an MP until March 1722, when, on account of his neglecting his parliamentary duties, he was defeated. He died at Bath, unmarried, in debt, and, in his father's words, 'drowned in drink', on 14 November 1723, aged thirty-two, and was buried on 24 November at the church at Ickworth, Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 13111


Hervey, Frederick Augustus, fourth earl of Bristol (1730-1803), Church of Ireland bishop of Derry, was born at Ickworth House, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, on 1 August 1730, the third son of John Hervey, Baron Hervey of Ickworth (1696-1743), courtier and writer, and his wife, Mary Hervey, Lady Hervey (1699/1700-1768), courtier and wit, the daughter of Brigadier-General Nicholas Lepell and Mary Brooke. The manor of Ickworth had been in Hervey's family since the fifteenth century, but the earldom of Bristol came to him in 1779, from his grandfather John Hervey (1665-1751), a noted politician who received the title in 1714. Hervey's father had briefly been lord privy seal but his political career was cut short by his death. Despite the continuing presence of his distinguished grandfather it is believed that Hervey's mother was the principal influence that shaped his character and those of his seven siblings. He received a conventional education, first at Dr Newcome's private school in Hackney, and later at Westminster School. There he was taught by the Latinist Vincent Bourne, in the company of William Cowper, Charles Churchill, and William Hamilton. After seven years at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, he graduated MA, as a nobleman, in 1754. During this period, and in the face of joint family opposition, he formed a love match with Elizabeth Davers (1732/3-1800), whom he married on 10 August 1752; she was one of the legitimate children of the tory Sir Jermyn Davers, of Rushbrook Hall, Suffolk, and his wife, his former long-term mistress Margaretta Green. Hervey, as a third son, had a small fortune; even so his wife's unpopularity with his family was not offset by her dowry of $3000. They had three daughters and four sons; their middle daughter was Elizabeth Christiana Cavendish, duchess of Devonshire. 
Following a failed attempt to secure a parliamentary seat for his elder brother Augustus John Hervey, later third earl, with whom he was to remain on bad terms, Hervey abandoned an intended career in law and took holy orders. He was ordained deacon on 24 August 1754 and priest on 26 January 1755. His family background enabled him to proceed smoothly to a clerkship of the privy seal in 1756 and to a royal chaplaincy in 1763. He had sufficient leisure to undertake the first of several tours of the continent in 1765-6, during which he travelled to Brussels, Geneva, Naples, Rome, and Florence. A visit to Vesuvius with William Hamilton when a minor eruption was in progress led to a lifelong interest in geology, even though he was hit by a hot volcanic rock and had to recuperate for a few weeks. He travelled on to Corsica, where he met General Pasquale Paoli, and returned to England via the Veneto and Switzerland. He was deeply affected by the death of his eldest son, George, who died in Spa, aged nine. 
Despite its element of prestige Hervey's chaplaincy to George III was a post of poor emolument, and as his family grew so did his financial difficulties. A point of peculiar irritation was the continual failure of his brother-in-law Sir Robert Davers, a man dogged by family tragedies and suicides, to meet the terms of Hervey's marriage settlement. The situation improved dramatically, if briefly, when Hervey's eldest brother, George William Hervey, second earl of Bristol, accepted the lord lieutenancy of Ireland in August 1766 and appointed Hervey his first chaplain. It was Hervey's first contact with Ireland. 
Lord Bristol held the Irish viceroyalty for less than a year, and never visited the country. But short as his tenure was it was sufficient to put his brother's foot on the lucrative ladder of Irish preferment. Hervey was given the bishopric of Cloyne, which he held for nine months while he and his brother waited for the death of Dr William Barnard, bishop of Derry, whose position was worth at least $7000 a year. Barnard in fact outlived Bristol's term of office but the subsequent Irish viceroy approved the appointment, and Hervey succeeded to the see of Derry in February 1768. Two days earlier the degree of doctor of divinity had been conferred on him by Trinity College, Dublin. In 1770 a second such doctorate was conferred on him by Oxford University. 
While Hervey's passion for politics clearly was inherited from his father's side of the family it is believed that his lifelong interest in religion was kindled by his mother. His early contacts with Irish Roman Catholic leaders indicate that his views on the issue of relief from the penal laws were well developed, as he explained to an unnamed Catholic in October 1767: 'My object is to leave you your faith entire but to secure your allegiance to the present government and to make you independent of all foreign jurisdiction whatever' (Walsh, 12). At this time the Catholic Committee, a patrician-led body that represented Irish Roman Catholic interests, was struggling to formulate an oath of allegiance that, it was hoped, would be acceptable both to the government and to the Catholic clergy and laity. Hervey's sympathetic attitude toward Catholics, and his powerful family connections, made him an attractive intermediary, and he was soon in close consultation with the Catholic Committee. 
On his second European tour (April 1770-October 1772), Hervey had at least one audience with Pope Clement XIV, visited Irish Catholic seminaries in France, and took soundings on the suitability of a Catholic oath of allegiance. He formulated an oath that not merely contained a statement of allegiance to the government but also attempted to address the most common protestant fears. It required from Catholics detailed denials of the pope's infallibility, his avowed temporal supremacy, and his supposed power to absolve subjects from their allegiance to 'heretic' kings; the Stuart pretender and his heirs were likewise to be repudiated. Hervey communicated his proposal to protestant as well as Catholic parties, but his over-strenuous efforts to persuade protestants to sanction the oath have damaged his historical reputation. He sought to win protestant support by suggesting that his oath was deliberately calculated to divide Catholics and so strengthen the protestant interest. Despite support from the Catholic gentry for his endeavours Hervey's protestant correspondents, both lay and ecclesiastical, were either opposed to his proposals or pessimistic of his chances of success. The papal internuncio wrote from Brussels to the Irish Catholic bishops, condemning the oath with its denials of papal powers. The hierarchy, fearful of the effects of their own internal disagreements on these issues and even more fearful of the effect of the internuncio's views on the government, suppressed the letter while they made vain attempts to work out with the internuncio some alternative course of action. To the consternation of his colleagues one of the bishops who was opposed to Hervey's oath eventually (in 1772) published the internuncio's letter. Despite these developments the supporters of the oath continued to press the issue until the substance of Hervey's oath was embodied in a piece of legislation in 1774. The divisions among both bishops and laity on the issue now became stark and obvious, and the Catholic Committee became split between jurors, who were prepared to take the oath, and nonjurors, who were not; as a result the committee collapsed. 
Notwithstanding the disastrous effects of his involvement on the Catholic community Hervey continued to play off one side of the Irish sectarian divide against the other for the rest of the decade. To a prominent protestant politician he suggested that recognition should be extended to all jurors, that Catholic bishops and clergymen should be state-appointed, and that the (still illegal) religious orders should be allowed monasteries and that these should be run as seminaries with state funding. Hervey was aware that these ideas, if put into practice, would lead to further divisions among Catholics but he felt that such divisions could only be of value to the establishment in view of the approaching war with France. 
Hervey chose to detach himself from Irish politics in the late 1770s. In 1777 he set out on his third trip to Italy, this time accompanied by his wife and youngest daughter, Louisa (1767-1821), the future wife of Robert Banks Jenkinson, second earl of Liverpool. By November 1777 he had settled in Rome, where he indulged his passion for art and architecture. On this and on his three subsequent visits to Italy he cultivated a taste for Roman antiquities and early Italian Renaissance paintings but he also commissioned works from many contemporary artists, including portraits of himself and his family by Pompeo Batoni, Wilhelm Tischbein, Anton Maron, Elizabeth Vigee Le Brun, and Angelica Kauffmann. As he wrote to his eldest daughter, Mary: 'I cannot resist the temptation of being extravagant here especially when it is with a view of beautifying dear Ireland' (Fothergill, 53). His purchases were destined for the house at Downhill, in co. Londonderry, that was built in 1776-9 by Michael Shanahan. Hervey, however, often proved a troublesome patron; John Soane, for instance, had a wasted journey to Downhill when the promised commission for a new dining-room failed to materialize. 
Hervey's fickleness contributed to his reputation for eccentricity. His extravagant dress invited both comment and ridicule; he attended the Sistine Chapel on Maundy Thursday 1779 in full canonical dress, and had a penchant for puce and golden robes. The painter Thomas Jones described how Hervey adorned himself at his levee: 'I found him combing and adjusting a single curl which was fixed to his own short hair' (Fothergill, 65). His singular appearance was matched by his unconventional religious beliefs. Though Emma Hamilton's statement that he was 'an avowed sceptic in religion' (ibid., 37) is probably an exaggeration, he seems to have been a freethinker, and he courted the friendship of Voltaire, whom he visited at Ferney. He shocked polite company by swearing freely in public and on one occasion made fools of the candidates for a wealthy living in his diocese by making them race each other after they had feasted at his table. 
In December 1779 Hervey's elder brother, Augustus John Hervey, died, and he succeeded as fourth earl of Bristol, acquiring estates with an annual rental value of $20,000 and thereby doubling his income. Without obvious cause he and his wife separated in 1782, never to be reconciled. Perhaps to divert himself the Earl-Bishop, as he was known, left his inherited estate of Ickworth, in Suffolk, and returned to Londonderry, where he became a committed volunteer commander. His volunteers were among the many Irish who realized the necessity to copperfasten the legislative independence secured in 1782 with a measure of parliamentary reform. In the northern Irish counties, where volunteering was at its most articulate, informed, and enthusiastic, the issue of parliamentary reform became inextricably linked with the liberation of Catholics from the political as well as the social and economic strictures of the penal laws. As colonel of the Londonderry corps Bristol joined together with 500 Ulster corps delegates who met in Dungannon in 1783 to plan a grand general convention of volunteers for Dublin in November. At this convention it was intended to press the government to reform the allegedly corrupt Irish legislature. 
But despite their frequent parliamentary stance in opposition to government the aristocratic colonels of the other volunteer corps were closely wedded to the protestant establishment, and were concerned to exercise control over their armed followers and to redirect or contain their more radical aspirations. Notwithstanding Bristol's high-profile triumphal procession from Londonderry to Dublin in November 1783, a journey interrupted by several civic receptions, care was taken once he reached Dublin that he was not elected president of the convention. In the event parliamentary reform, a multi-faceted issue, was subordinated to the sectarian concerns of the Irish establishment and to the morbid fears of individual protestant delegates. The powerful parliamentary orator Henry Flood, on whose support Bristol had counted heavily, baulked at the proposal to enfranchise Catholics. An address from the revived Catholic Committee, embodying their wishes for further relief concessions, blunted itself against the government's determination to divide and confuse the delegates. A letter, allegedly from one of the leading Catholic gentry, was produced by a government supporter and asserted the satisfaction of Catholics with their current lot. Bristol's uncertain temper let him down more than once during the convention, and the majority of the delegates, like Flood, were unable to swallow the proposal to extend the vote to Catholics; such Catholics, it was feared, might then fill the Irish parliament to the exclusion of protestants. The delegates eventually produced a reform bill that was vague in regard to detail and pro-protestant in character. The Irish House of Commons rejected it by a large majority, and the convention dissolved itself. 
The end of the American War of Independence and the renewed confidence that the return of a reasonably-sized army lent to the government had played a part in the contemptuous rejection of the 'Reform Bill'. The government now also felt able to discourage volunteering. In the event, however, having lost much of its political 'raison d'etre', volunteering went into a steady voluntary decline. Bristol, bitter beyond words at the failure of all his political ambitions, retreated further into eccentricity and nihilism. His intemperate replies to the many addresses presented to him by volunteer corps in the aftermath of the convention attracted the attention of the government, but he escaped impeachment. A close official eye was kept on him for as long as he remained in Ireland, but the government refused to be provoked by his extravagant utterances. It is said that Bristol preferred his retreat at Downhill to his English home at Ickworth. Built on a windswept clifftop it had two main entrances, north and south, so that guests might avoid the worst of the gales. For Ickworth he had many grandiose plans, which, due to his travels and divided attentions, were never completed. He commissioned Francis Sandys, an Irish architect, to build a large oval rotunda with quadrant wings, and work began in 1796; it succeeded, then as now, more as a storehouse of art treasures than as a comfortable residence. Throughout his life Bristol was moved to design and build houses in which he was destined never or seldom to live. He spent only a matter of weeks in his newly built house at Ballyscullian, co. Londonderry, in 1790-91, after which it was left empty; visitors rated it as more splendid and more pleasingly designed even than Downhill. These projects did, however, provide much-needed local employment. His determination to leave his mark on the landscape in the form of bricks and mortar was visible also during his early enthusiastic years as bishop of Derry, when as part of an assiduous visitation exercise he insisted on the building of glebe houses. 
Bristol's health began to fail, and he left for Europe again in 1785. His visits to Ireland thereafter were increasingly short, and throughout the 1790s he travelled without purpose. His increasingly outrageous behaviour and his long absence from his diocese began to cause concern. The early days of his incumbency -- when his personal charity had been a byword, when he had encouraged improved farming techniques, when he had received the approbation of John Wesley, and when he had supported financially not only his own church but those of his Catholic and Presbyterian neighbours -- had become a distant memory. He spent the last nine years of his life abroad, and became an intimate of Emma Hamilton and a dabbler in the affairs of the Prussian court. His reaction to the death of his estranged wife, on 19 December 1800, was characterized by its coldness and indifference; he was heard to comment scathingly on her will. While on the road from Albano to Rome on 8 July 1803 Bristol was seized with a stomach complaint and died. His body was sent to England for burial at Ickworth Park. 


@@@@@


doc= 13112


Hervey, George William, second earl of Bristol (1721-1775), diplomatist, born on 3 August 1721, was the eldest son of John Hervey, Baron Hervey of Ickworth (1696-1743), politician, and Mary Lepell (1699/1700-1768), political hostess ['see 'Hervey, Mary]. He became ensign in the 38th, or duke of Marlborough's, regiment of foot on 2 June 1739 and ensign in the 1st regiment of foot guards on 11 May 1740. He was travelling in Italy when he was recalled on his promotion to captain in the 48th, or Cholmondeley's, regiment of foot, and he returned home in May 1741 but resigned this commission in August 1742. On 5 August 1743 Hervey succeeded his father as third Baron Hervey of Ickworth, and on the following 1 December he took his seat in the House of Lords. He became second earl of Bristol on the death of his grandfather John Hervey (1665-1751) on 20 January 1751, and hereditary high steward of Bury St Edmunds. 
Bristol was gazetted envoy-extraordinary to Turin on 5 April 1755; he resigned his post in August 1758 on being appointed ambassador-extraordinary and plenipotentiary to Madrid. On the ratification of the family compact between the houses of Bourbon he left Madrid without taking leave on 17 December 1761. A court whig, he was nominated lord lieutenant of Ireland and a privy councillor on 26 September 1766, but he threw up the post of lord lieutenant the next year without visiting Ireland, although he received the usual allowance of $3000 for the voyage, as well as the annual salary of $16,000. On 2 November 1768 he was chosen lord keeper of the privy seal, an office he retained until 29 January 1770 when he became groom of the stole and first lord of the bedchamber to the king. He died, unmarried, in Bath on 18 March 1775 of palsy, and was buried on 26 March at Ickworth. He was succeeded by his brother Augustus John Hervey as third earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 13113


Hervey, James (1714-1758), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born on 26 February 1714 at Hardingstone, near Northampton, son of William Hervey (1679/80-1752), rector of Collingtree and Weston Favell. He was taught by his mother until aged seven, and was then sent to the free grammar school in Northampton, where he learnt Latin and Greek under a Mr Clarke. In 1731 he went up to Lincoln College, Oxford, where his tutor was Richard Hutchins, later to become rector; the then rector, Dr Euseby Isham, appointed him shortly after he entered the college to a Creweian exhibition of $20 p.a., which he held until September 1736. He was for four years a student of civil law, but he changed faculties after the college told him that to qualify for holy orders he must hold the degree of BA. For the first two years he was idle, receiving little guidance from his tutor. In 1733 he joined the Oxford Methodists and came under the powerful influence of John Wesley, who unofficially taught him Hebrew. Having been admitted in April 1736 to the degree of BA, he was ordained deacon on 19 September by John Potter, bishop of Oxford. 
Accounts differ as to whether Hervey now returned home to serve for a short time as his father's curate. By the end of 1736 he was curate to Charles Kinchin, one of the Oxford Methodists, at Dummer, near Basingstoke, Hampshire; the curacy was briefly held before him by another Oxford Methodist, George Whitefield. In June 1737 he refused the invitation of the inhabitants of Collingtree to settle among them. In 1738 he moved for two years to Stoke Abbey, Devon, the estate of Paul Orchard, another Oxford friend; they signed a pact on 28 November 1738 stating that they had been brought together by providence and agreeing to watch over each other's conduct. After Orchard's death Hervey provided a sketch of his friend's character in the dedication of the second volume of 'Meditations and Contemplations' (1747) to his godson, Orchard's son Paul. In December 1739 he was ordained priest at Exeter, and from 1740 he was curate of Bideford, Devon, for two and a half years. During this period he firmly committed himself to the doctrines of free grace and justification by faith that he was to teach for the rest of his life, and embarked on what was to be an extraordinarily successful literary career. His friends collected money to raise his small stipend to $60 p.a. In 1743 the new rector of Bideford, who disliked his views, dismissed him, and although the parishioners offered to maintain him he returned to Weston Favell to act as curate to his father. His health, always precarious, became much worse, and in June 1750 his friends tricked him into staying in London in order to convalesce, partly with Whitefield and partly with his brother, William, in Miles's Lane. He did not return until May 1752, when on his father's death he succeeded to the family livings of Weston Favell and Collingtree. In order to hold both livings, jointly worth $160 or $180 p.a. (out of which he paid his curate, Abraham Maddock), he had by a tortuous and expensive process to obtain an MA at Cambridge and dispensation from the archbishop of Canterbury before being instituted by the bishop of Peterborough. He was thus able to support his mother and sister, with whom he lived at Weston for the rest of his life. 
As an evangelical or gospel clergyman Hervey thought differences between denominations over forms of prayer and manner of worship unimportant; what mattered was correct doctrine. He told Isaac Watts in an admiring letter of 10 December 1747 that he had introduced Watts's hymns into his church services. In a letter of 18 August 1748 to an unidentified recipient he wrote, 'Though I am steady in my Attachment to the established church, I would have a Right-hand of Fellowship, and a Heart of Love, ever ready, ever open, for all the upright evangelical Dissenters' (Hervey, 'Collection of Letters', 1.264). There seem to have been particularly open relationships between churchmen and dissenters in Northampton and the surrounding area. His friends and correspondents in the established church were mostly Methodists or of an evangelical persuasion: Wesley, Whitefield, James Stonhouse, Thomas Hartley, Moses Browne, the countess of Huntingdon, and Lady Frances Shirley. His chief friends among the dissenters were Philip Doddridge (who dedicated 'Christ's Invitation to Thirsty Souls' to him in 1748), Risdon Darracott, John Collett Ryland, Richard Pearsall, and William Cudworth. He sent many of these friends manuscript copies of his works in progress, asking for comments and corrections both theological and literary. 
As a writer Hervey had two main aims: to propagate the Reformation theology that he believed, like other members of the evangelical movement, had been abandoned by the Church of England, and to draw on the intellectual and aesthetic interests of the wealthy and polite in order to draw them to Christ -- 'to bait the Gospel-Hook, agreeably to the prevailing Taste' (Hervey, 'Collection of Letters', 2.101). With this end in view he combined his extensive interest in physico-theology (derived mainly from Keill's 'Anatomy', Derham's 'Physico-Theology' and 'Astro-Theology', and Pluche's 'Spectacle de la nature') and classical and modern poetry (especially Homer, Virgil, Milton, Thomson, and Edward Young) with a commitment to the 'Bible' as the central text of literature as well as religion. His most popular work, 'Meditations and Contemplations' (1746-7; rev. edn., 1748), consisted in its final form of six parts in two volumes. The first volume contained 'Meditations among the tombs', 'Reflections on a flower-garden', and 'A descant upon creation', and the second 'Contemplations on the night', 'Contemplations on the starry heavens', and 'A winter-piece'. The first two parts, dedicated to the daughter of George Thomson, vicar of St Gennys, Cornwall, were first printed as pamphlets by Samuel Richardson. Hervey's peculiar ecstatic style, which delighted huge numbers of readers and disgusted some critics, was the result of his attempt to combine the language of puritan meditation with that of 'The Spectator' and Shaftesbury's 'Moralists' (though he never mentioned the latter). His ideal was what he called Christ's style: 'Majestic, yet familiar; happily uniting Dignity with Condescension; it consists, in Teaching his Followers the 'sublimest Truths', by spiritualizing on the most 'common Occurrences'' (Hervey, 'Meditations', 2.xiv). He reinterpreted for the eighteenth century the ancient notion of God's two books of nature and scripture, teaching his readers 'the Christian's 'Natural Philosophy'' by encouraging them to view the world with an evangelical telescope and with an evangelical microscope (ibid., 1.185-6). 
Hervey's second substantial work, 'Theron and Aspasio' (3 vols., 1755; two rev. edns in the same year), which was intellectually far more demanding than the 'Meditations', was devoted to what he regarded as the key gospel doctrine, the imputation of Christ's righteousness to sinners (the importance of this doctrine was flagged in a note to the 'Meditations', 1.274-5n.). The narrative, in the form of seventeen dialogues and twelve letters, portrays the slow conversion to Reformation Christianity of the polite and cultivated Theron by his friend Aspasio (who resembles Hervey in his earlier literary tastes and his preference for the 'Bible'). Theron thinks this is not a religion for gentlemen. The process whereby he is brought to believe otherwise is a skilful combination of the puritan conversion narrative with Shaftesburian dialogue. The argument is supported both by analysis of the precise meaning of biblical texts and by much quotation from Milton and Young. The polite reader is enticed by descriptions of landscape and works of art and by physico-theological illustrations, a process Hervey called setting apples of gold in pictures of silver. He intended to write a further volume on gospel holiness, for which he sketched a plan, but instead he felt obliged to defend his theological principles from Wesley's attack. 
Though Hervey described himself as a moderate Calvinist, when Wesley read 'Theron and Aspasio' in print (he had commented on the first three dialogues in manuscript) he decided that Hervey was 'a deeply-rooted Antinomian' ('Letters of the Rev. John Wesley', 3.230) whose views would dangerously undermine holiness. Hervey ignored Wesley's lengthy critical letter of 15 October 1756, so Wesley included it in 'A Preservative Against Unsettled Notions in Religion' (1758). With encouragement from Cudworth, whom Wesley intemperately described to Hervey as 'an evil man' (29 November 1758, ibid., 4.47), Hervey spent his dying months preparing a clear and carefully argued defence of his theological principles, supported by much discussion of biblical texts in Hebrew and Greek. Shortly before his death he told his brother William not to publish it, as its transcription for the press was not complete, but after a surreptitious edition appeared William brought it out as 'Eleven Letters from the Late Rev. Mr Hervey, to the Rev. Mr John Wesley' (1765) (in later editions it was entitled 'Aspasio Vindicated'). The deeply wounded Wesley said that Hervey died 'cursing his spiritual father' (ibid., 4.295). 
Hervey had mixed feelings about writing mainly for the polite. His aim was to be a polished shaft in God's quiver ('Isaiah' 49: 2), an image he often referred to in correspondence. He was reluctant to cut 'Theron and Aspasio', 'lest it should be like wiping the Bloom from the Plumb, or taking the Gold from the Gingerbread' (Hervey, 'Collection of Letters', 2.125), but at the same time he was anxious to reach a wide audience who would be discouraged by the size and cost of a three-volume edition. These fears proved groundless. Both 'Meditations' and 'Theron and Aspasio' were printed in two sizes at different prices, octavo and duodecimo, and achieved enormous sales, usually in editions of 5000 or 6000. He gave away all the proceeds of his publications in charity to the poor; the 'Meditations' brought 'c'.$700. An extempore preacher who rarely used notes, he published only a few sermons in his lifetime, 'The Cross of Christ the Christian's Glory', preached at the visitation of the archdeacon of Northampton (1753), and three fast sermons (1757). These were evangelical in content and deliberately plain in style. He wrote critical 'Remarks on Lord Bolingbroke's Letters on the Study and Use of History' (1752) at Lady Frances Shirley's request, originally as private letters. He was passionately interested in seventeenth-century puritan and Calvinist writing, his favourites being Walter Marshall, Benjamin Jenks, and the Dutch theologian Witsius. As a result of his recommendation in the third edition of 'Theron and Aspasio' of Marshall's 'Gospel-Mystery of Sanctification' as his desert-island choice besides the 'Bible', it was republished with a statement dated 5 November 1756 that until he resumed his own account of holiness it was to be regarded as the fourth volume of his own work. He also provided recommendations for Richard Burnham's 'Pious Memorials' and Jenks's 'Meditations'. 
Hervey died on Christmas day 1758 in Weston Favell and was buried three days later in the parish church. William Romaine, in a funeral sermon preached at St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, on 4 January 1759, gave a full account of his activities as a clergyman but left his writings to speak for themselves. Their popularity held until the middle of the nineteenth century -- 'Meditations' had reached twenty-six editions by 1800 -- and then evaporated. Critical reaction was mixed. Evangelical dissenters such as John Collett Ryland and Thomas Gibbons saw Hervey as an exponent of the true sublime. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' (30, 1760, 379) described his manner and writings, particularly his published letters, as conceited and effeminate. William Cowper thought him 'one of the most Spiritual & truly Scriptural Writers in the World', but later laughed at an acquaintance who formed his style on 'Theron and Aspasio' ('Letters and Prose Writings of William Cowper', ed. J. King and C. Ryskamp, 5 vols., 1979-86, 1.141, 2.360). John Newton warned ministerial students not to imitate him: 'though his luxuriant manner of writing has many of the excellencies both of good poetry and good prose, it is in reality neither the one nor the other' (J. Newton, 'Plan of Academical Preparation for the Ministry', 1782, 48). Modern distaste should not deprive him of his role as one of the most widely read writers of the evangelical revival. 


@@@@@


doc= 13114


Hervey, James (1750/51-1824), physician, was born in London, the son of William Hervey. After being taught at a school in Northampton, and later at home by a private tutor, he matriculated at Oxford, from Queen's College, on 19 November 1767 aged sixteen; he proceeded BA (1771), MA (1774), MB (1777), and DM (1781). He was elected physician to Guy's Hospital in 1779 and was admitted a candidate of the College of Physicians on 1 October 1781 and a fellow on 30 September 1782. He was Goulstonian lecturer in 1783, censor in 1783, 1787, 1789, 1795, 1802, and 1809, registrar from 1784 to 1814, Harveian orator in 1785, Lumleian lecturer from 1789 to 1811, and elect on 4 May 1809. He resigned from his post at Guy's in 1802. Hervey was the first appointed registrar of the National Vaccine Establishment set up in 1808. Financial independence freed Hervey from the necessity of building an extensive practice and enabled him to visit Tunbridge Wells each summer for recreational rather than professional purposes. He died in 1824. 


@@@@@


doc= 13115


Hervey, John (1616-1680), politician and courtier, was born on 18 August 1616 and baptized at Ickworth church on the 27th. He was the eldest son and heir of Sir William Hervey (died 1660) of Ickworth, Suffolk, MP for Bury St Edmunds in 1628-9, and Susan, daughter of Sir Robert Jermyn, kt, of Rushbrook, Suffolk. Hervey was attached to the household of Robert Sidney, second earl of Leicester, as ambassador to France in 1636, with whom he contracted a warm friendship. He was educated and travelled abroad, including a period at Leiden in 1637. He served as a gentleman of the privy chamber and a captain of horse in the royalist forces, raising a troop for the king, from 'c'.1642 to 1646. He compounded in 1646 for goods and chattels worth $240. In 1658 he married Elizabeth (died 1700), daughter and heir of Sir William Hervey, later Baron Hervey of Ross, co. Wexford, and Kidbrooke, Kent. She brought an estate worth $30,000. 
At the Restoration, Hervey was named a JP for Suffolk and a commissioner for assessment for that county and Westminster. Subsequently, he served in the same capacity for Middlesex and Norfolk, being named in 1673 and 1677 respectively. In 1662 Hervey was named a commissioner for loyal and indigent officers for Suffolk. But he preferred life at court to his local responsibilities, leaving the management of his estate to his brother, Sir Thomas Hervey, kt (1625-1694), later MP for Bury St Edmunds. A client of his cousin, the earl of St Albans, John Hervey was named in 1662 treasurer of the household and receiver general to the queen. On 7 December 1664 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, but never presented himself for admission. In 1675 he became a commissioner for recusants for Suffolk and, in 1677, a charter member of the Royal Fishery Company. 
Hervey was elected MP for Hythe in 1661 on the recommendation of the lord warden and the earl of Sandwich. He was not an active member. Burnet relates an anecdote about Hervey, who was much in favour with Charles II, which illustrates the parliamentary dilemma faced by court members. Having voted against the court in an important division, Hervey was rebuked by the king. The next day, upon entering the government lobby after a more compliant vote, the king remarked 'You were not against me to day.' Hervey replied, 'No sir, I was against my conscience to day' (Burnet, 2.73). Hervey was a patron of Abraham Cowley and a shareholder in the Duke of York's Theatre. He died on 18 January 1680 and was buried in Ickworth church on the 23rd. His Latin epitaph has been translated as 'distinguished in character, powerful in intellect, bountiful in favour, impeccable in judgment, abundant in blessings' (Hervey, 2.147; Henning, 3.540). He was survived by his wife, Elizabeth, who died in 1700. They had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 13116


Hervey, John, second Baron Hervey of Ickworth (1696-1743), courtier and writer, the eldest child of John Hervey, first earl of Bristol (1665-1751), and his second wife, Elizabeth Felton (1676-1741), was born on 15 October 1696 at Jermyn Street, London, and baptized on 25 October. Known as Jack in his youth, he had two half-siblings, including a brother, Carr Hervey ['see under 'Hervey, John, first earl of Bristol], and sixteen full siblings, ten of whom survived to adulthood, among them the politician and pamphleteer Thomas Hervey. 
In childhood Hervey honed his skills as a jockey and a card player. But since his health was poor, he acquired much of his formal education at the hands of private tutors at Ickworth in Suffolk, entering Westminster School only in 1712 at the age of fifteen. A year later he matriculated at Clare College, Cambridge, and in 1715 graduated MA. Queen Anne died while he was at university, and a Latin poem he penned to commemorate the accession of George I, besides being the first surviving piece of his writing, is evidence that he had already accepted the family's allegiance to whiggery. On the accession of the house of Hanover his father was made earl of Bristol. 
Following university, Hervey visited continental Europe, staying in Paris and then Hanover. The latter was an unusual spot on the grand tour, but Lord Bristol hoped that attendance on the new king, who was spending a vacation at Herrenhausen, might be politically useful for his son. In addition to George I, Hervey met two other persons at Hanover who would play important roles in his later life: the king's grandson, Prince Frederick, and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, the wife of Edward Wortley Montagu, Britain's minister to Constantinople. For a while there was talk of a career in the army, but these designs came to nothing. On 21 April 1720 Hervey married the attractive but unwealthy Mary Lepell ['see 'Hervey, Mary (1699/1700-1768)], the daughter of an army officer and one of the maids of honour to the princess of Wales. Because the marriage was financially imprudent, Hervey kept it a secret from all but his closest relatives for six months. The first of the couple's eight children was born on 3 August 1721 and given the redoubtably whiggish name of George William Hervey. Their second son, Augustus John Hervey, became a naval officer and politician. Meanwhile, by selling South Sea stock in a timely way, Hervey realized a $20,000 profit from the stock's meteoric appreciation. When his half-brother Carr died unmarried on 14 November 1723, Hervey acquired the courtesy title of Baron Hervey of Ickworth and became heir to the Bristol earldom. On 2 April 1725 he was elected MP for Bury St Edmunds, virtually a family seat previously held by his father and by Carr Hervey. 
Soon thereafter Hervey purchased a house in Great Burlington Street, London, and entered the Commons as a supporter of Sir Robert Walpole. He represented the chamber in a conference with the Lords and wrote a public tract on the government's behalf. He sealed his close political friendship with Walpole in 1727 by supporting the first minister even when most observers thought the accession of George II meant the end of Sir Robert's career. But then in July 1728, just when it appeared that political opportunities were opening up for him, Hervey left England for the continent, visiting Paris, Rome, and Florence. Publicly he pleaded ill health to explain the trip; in fact it was designed to allow him to be with Stephen Fox, brother of Henry Fox, later Baron Holland, the young man for whom he had developed a passion. On his return to England in October 1729 Hervey was a reinvigorated man and resumed his activities in support of Walpole, especially during the fierce debates over French construction at Dunkirk. On 7 May 1730, in recognition of several years of assistance, Lord Hervey became vice-chamberlain to the king's household and, consequently, a member of the privy council. 
Hervey's duties as vice-chamberlain obliged him to spend much time with Queen Caroline, a person whom he liked and respected. She reciprocated, appreciative of the pleasures that his intelligent conversation introduced into a court of dullards. Soon they were almost inseparable. Hervey hoped the vice-chamberlaincy would be a stepping stone to higher office, but, precisely because his influence with the queen was considerable and his value as a conduit between court and ministry was deemed irreplaceable, Walpole kept him in his office as long as the queen was alive. The most important professional assignment to come his way during his tenure was to oversee the arrangements for the marriage of Princess Anne, the princess royal, to the prince of Orange in 1737. But Hervey also had important political assignments, serving Sir Robert during these years as a reliable member of parliament. His loyal defence of the prime minister in the heated debates over the 'Excise Bill' in 1733 earned him elevation, in his father's barony, to the House of Lords on 12 June of that year. In subsequent years he regularly endorsed the ministry's military and financial measures, even when he privately doubted the wisdom of Sir Robert's policies. Meanwhile, in 1733 he began writing the work now known as his 'Memoirs'. 
The most celebrated aspects of Hervey's life in the early 1730s, however, turned upon three notorious quarrels. The earliest involved William Pulteney and concerned politics. In casting his political lot with Walpole, Hervey had broken with Pulteney, a rising whig politician who, before 1727, had been so close a friend to Hervey that he had stood as godfather to one of Hervey's daughters. The break became violent on 25 January 1731, when the two men, having already been associated with an exchange of personal insults in a pamphlet debate, duelled at sword-point in Green Park, London. Each wounded the other; indeed, had Pulteney not slipped before the seconds intervened, he would probably have killed Hervey. The second quarrel involved Frederick, prince of Wales, and turned in part on Anne Vane (d. 1736), a woman with whom Hervey and the prince conducted concurrent affairs in 1731. Like Pulteney, the prince began his relationship with Hervey on friendly terms, but the covert character of the simultaneous liaisons further complicated a friendship already burdened by Hervey's close ties with Frederick's distant mother, the queen, and the two men became cordial enemies. By the mid-1730s a common contempt for Frederick, bordering on hatred, bound Hervey and Queen Caroline. The third and most famous quarrel involved Alexander Pope and turned both on politics, Pope being a tory and Hervey a whig, and on sex, Pope having been a disappointed admirer of both Mary Lepell and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. It suffices for the present to say that by incurring the enmity of Pope, Hervey became one of literature's most celebrated satiric targets. 
Late in 1737 Queen Caroline died. Hervey attended her during much of her brief but difficult ordeal. Shaken by the loss of his close friend, he ended the memoirs he had been drafting for a decade. He also reminded Walpole that the passing of the queen removed the chief obstacle that had stood between him and higher office. Walpole was not unappreciative of Hervey's claim upon his good offices, but he had to contend with a second obstacle -- the hostility of the duke of Newcastle to any promotion for Hervey -- and so elevation was again deferred. Hervey was thus obliged to pay the price for too openly mocking the public awkwardnesses of the aristocratic minister. Despite the disappointment, he remained faithful to the ministry, effectively defending its Spanish policies both when the convention of Pardo was drafted and then when war could no longer be resisted; he also loyally denounced opposition efforts to require MPs to declare publicly whether they received government pensions. Walpole finally determined to face down Newcastle, and on 1 May 1740, on the resignation of Lord Godolphin, Hervey became lord privy seal. 
In his new office Hervey was entitled to attend the meetings of the cabinet council and, when the king was in Hanover, of the lords justices, but his presence was irregular. As Walpole's policy towards Spain became increasingly controversial, however, Hervey resumed his role as an unembarrassed and indomitable advocate of the ministry in the House of Lords. In return for this loyalty Walpole authorized the elevation of Stephen Fox to the rank of Lord Ilchester. But, as parliamentary opposition to the government's foreign policy mounted, Walpole's hold on power began to slip, and early in 1742 Sir Robert resigned his office. Hervey tried to retain the privy seal, but the new ministry had little trust in the sedulous defender of the fallen Walpole, and on 12 July 1742 Hervey yielded the privy seal, simultaneously declining, as a mark of his indifference to favour, the royal offer of a substantial pension. With this dismissal from the office he had so long sought, Hervey was out of the government for the first time in thirteen years. 
Politics was an abiding interest of Lord Hervey's; his comments upon it recur throughout his letters, his political tracts, and the 'Memoirs of the Reign of King George II'. Although he claimed that Tacitus and Machiavelli were his instructors about political matters, he was suspicious of the utility of political theory, and his views, while often entertainingly expressed, rarely rose above the commonplace. He defined the task of government to be the sustaining of a suitable balance between civil order and personal liberty, and he approved of Walpole's court whig administration precisely because it realized that goal. He saw potential enemies of liberty lurking in all quarters -- in an unbounded crown, in an unrestrained church, in an unregulated army, in an unchecked mob. The responsibility of governors was to find the means to confine the tendency of king, prelate, soldier, and zealot to sacrifice liberty to their own cause or need. Walpole was successful because he read human nature aright, and by recognizing that people 'feel sensibly for nothing but what is conducive some way or other to their pleasure, or their interest, or their pride' (Fox-Strangways, 132), he usually contrived to create the combination of sweeteners and threats necessary to effect the confinement. 
As a public polemicist Hervey was bold and direct, and his three greatest tracts, while striking different tones, are alike in moving quickly to an aggressive assertion of their claims. In 'Ancient and Modern Liberty Stated and Compared' (1734) he popularized the standard court whig argument that England had not been free until liberated by the revolution of 1688 and that the court whigs, as the true heirs of the revolutionary whigs, were the only qualified defenders of its legacy. In 'The Conduct of the Opposition and the Tendency of Modern Patriotism' (1734) he mocked Walpole's opponents for their blindness to the dangers of allowing an army to be insubordinate to the monarch. In 'Miscellaneous Thoughts' (1742) he defended the recently dissolved Walpole administration against charges of corruption, incompetence, and selfishness. These are not subtle works, but they were widely deemed effective. Indeed, Horace Walpole called some of Hervey's polemical efforts 'equal to any that ever were written' (Hervey, 'Some Materials', 1.xxxiv). 
Hervey's 'Memoirs', which describe various happenings at the court of George II from 1727 to 1737 (with a gap for 1730-32), are an entirely different kind of work. Though they were probably intended for a general audience, Hervey did not publish them in his lifetime, and they then languished unseen (though not unknown) for a century until the first marquess of Bristol, after suppressing some sections that spoke slightingly of the royal family, authorized their appearance in 1848. A fuller version, based on documents in the Windsor archives and including some of the earlier excisions, appeared in 1931. Even in this later edition, however, a hole remains, leading to the hypothesis that at some point someone who controlled the manuscript -- the same Lord Bristol looms large as a candidate -- destroyed some of its pages. The motive for the destruction is uncertain, though suspicion attaches itself to a concern that excessive candour about the character of Hervey's close relationship with Prince Frederick would damage the author's or the prince's posthumous reputation. 
For historians of the eighteenth century the 'Memoirs' are an indispensable work. 'I am determined to report everything just as it is', Hervey declared, 'or at least just as it appears to me' (Hervey, 'Some Materials', 2.347). Despite his resort to the third person in discussing himself as a player in the drama of court life, Hervey's 'Memoirs' are in fact very personal, direct, and even earthy. They provide ironic and amusing character sketches of the men and women who exercised power in the 1730s and memorable accounts of such events as the marriage of Princess Anne to the prince of Orange, Frederick's virtual abduction of his wife as she went into labour, and -- their great set piece -- the hideous death of Queen Caroline. They also allow the historian to understand some of the methods Walpole employed to exercise power and especially how, in collusion with Queen Caroline, he managed George II. They tell the tale of friendships shattered, policies undone, and ambitions thwarted. Because Hervey is a good story-teller, with an eye for the useful detail and an ear for good conversation, the stories are human and gripping. Hervey's is a personal view of politics, and, if his limning of Walpole pulls forward the manipulative aspect of the prime minister's character, he still wants his readers to understand that by and large Sir Robert used his immense talent at political management for essentially useful ends. 
In 1735 Alexander Pope published his 'Epistle to Arbuthnot', which contained, in its section on Lord Hervey, one of literature's most celebrated examples of venomous invective. Hervey was cast as Sporus, the castrated boy whom Nero had transformed into his wife. Pope excoriated Hervey's politics, his sexual ambivalence, and his morality. Each of his words drew blood. Hervey was a 'mere white curd of ass's milk', a 'bug with gilded wings', a 'painted child of dirt that stinks and stings', 'one vile antithesis', an 'amphibious thing', a: '
Fop at the toilet, flatterer at the board, 

[who] now trips a lady, and now struts a lord 

' He bore 'a cherub's face -- a reptile all the rest', an almost fitting body for a 'familiar toad'. He spoke only 'in florid impotence', for his 'buzz the witty and the fair annoys'. Two couplets in particular captured Pope's vision of his subject. The first was his grand gesture of dismissal: '
Satire or sense, alas! Can Sporus feel? 

Who breaks a butterfly upon a wheel? 

' The second was a summary of his contempt: '
Beauty that shocks you, parts that none can trust, 

Wit that can creep, and pride that licks the dust! 

' It was Hervey's fault that the assault occurred. Although Pope and he had long since abandoned whatever friendship they may once have had when both sought the favour of Mary Lepell, the poet had in general over the years ignored the courtier in his lacerating works. The torrent of invective that cascaded into public attention in 1735 had been invited two years earlier when Hervey, in support of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, an earlier target of Pope's verbal sword, had associated himself with the cruel allusions to Pope's physical deformity in 'Verses addressed to the Imitator of Horace'. Among its lines are these, representative both of the work's tone and of the authors' capacity: '
Like the first bold assassin be thy lot, 

Ne'er be thy guilt forgiven nor forgot 

But as thou Hat'st, be hated by mankind, 

And, with the emblem of thy crooked mind 

Mark'd on thy back, like Cain by God's own hand, 

Wander, like him, accursed through the land. 

' After the 'Epistle to Arbuthnot' appeared, Hervey acknowledged his poetic and satiric inadequacy and withdrew from all efforts to match Pope in the art of verbal warfare. Pope, however, continued to take pleasure in savaging Hervey, even after Hervey's death, and Henry Fielding resumed many of the same themes of political, sexual, and moral depravity in his Hervey-based depiction of Beau Didapper in 'Joseph Andrews' (1742). In many ways it is fair to say that through his withering barrages Pope created the persona of Lord Hervey that has endured ever since. 
In appearance Hervey was slender, a bit below average height for his era, and youthfully handsome even into his forties. The poor health that had dogged him in his childhood returned intermittently throughout his life. Though an exact diagnosis of his malady is impossible at a distance of 250 years, he appears to have been subject to epileptic seizures and to the acute pain of gallstones. The diet that he adopted in an effort to mend his body -- milk, tea, many vegetables, no meat -- was so famously bland that it became one of the peculiar habits his critics mocked. Perhaps it was some ailment and a disfiguring appearance that may have followed from it that account for another of the eccentricities for which he was famous, a fondness for applying powder to his face. (It is known by way of additional explanation for this habit that one of the facial blemishes he so disliked was a legacy of surgery he had endured while in Italy.) By the age of forty he had lost all his teeth. 
Although not a scholar, Hervey was learned in the manner of an educated eighteenth-century gentleman, proud of his command of Latin and at ease in French. His acquaintance with, in his youth, Dr Robert Freind, headmaster of Westminster School, and, in his later years, with the noted classicist Conyers Middleton, assured that he remained in contact with scholarly circles throughout his life. He even assisted Middleton in the preparation of the scholar's 'Life of Cicero', for which help Middleton lavished praise on Hervey in the dedication. 
The friendship that has left the fullest evidentiary basis -- in the form of a published correspondence -- is Hervey's tie with Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. From the days of Hervey's visit to Hanover in 1716 (and perhaps earlier) to the last months of his life in 1743 he found in Lady Mary a person in whom he could comfortably confide. They liked and disliked the same people, they took pride and pleasure in versifying, they enjoyed gossip, and they shared a somewhat ironic view of life. Above all, they accepted each other for the flawed but interesting human beings that they respectively were, Lady Mary as a woman who at times wanted to be a man and Lord Hervey as the opposite. In his last letter to her (and almost the last surviving letter he wrote), dated 18 June 1743, a declining Hervey betrayed his fondness when he wrote that 'the last stages of an infirm life are filthy roads... May all your ways (as 'Solomon' says of wisdom) be ways of pleasantness and all your paths peace... Adieu' (Halsband, 304). 
Hervey and his father remained close throughout the son's life, even though, as a country whig, Lord Bristol disapproved of Hervey's court whig politics. With his mother, however, Hervey enjoyed a less happy and ultimately poisonous relationship, in part because Lady Bristol did not like Mary Lepell, in part because she supported Frederick, prince of Wales. At one point he called her 'the vehicle of all the ills I ever complained of' (Hervey, 'Some Materials', 3.962). Hervey's relations with his wife are more difficult to assess. She was loyal, and they often appeared to enjoy each other's company; they had eight children, whom he doted upon; but she was also very visibly his intellectual inferior, and he was frequently away from her -- perhaps because she did not care for London, but perhaps too because he had other romantic interests. His callous treatment of her in his will shows that at the end they were severely estranged. 
Lord Hervey was bisexual. It is necessary to state this point directly because changing senses of propriety over the years, combined with the bite of Pope's caricature, have obscured a proper understanding of the nature of his sexual orientation. There can be no doubt that he found women attractive. In addition to his marriage to Mary Lepell, he wooed and bedded Anne Vane and claimed (along with others) to be the father of the child she bore in 1733. He may have had an affair with Lady Mary Wortley Montagu and perhaps one with Princess Caroline. But there can also be no doubt that he found men attractive. He followed Stephen Fox to Italy in 1728 and frequently lived with him over the next decade. He wrote passionate love letters to Francesco Algarotti, the multi-talented Italian intellectual whom he first met in 1736 and for whose affections his chief English rival was, of all people, Lady Mary. He may have had a sexual affair with Prince Frederick before their friendship dissolved. 
While the laws of the eighteenth century prescribed harsh penalties for men who engaged in homosexual activities, high society generally preferred being amused to being outraged when the miscreant was one of their own. Hervey, moreover, was happy to play the role of amuser, sometimes striking feminine attitudes and happily conjoining them with feminine behaviours. He was undisguisedly, even proudly, androgynous. He thus was the frequent target of salacious humour. William Pulteney called him 'Mr 'Fainlove'... such a nice Composition of the two Sexes, that it is difficult to distinguish which is more praedominant' (Norton, 149), while an anonymous tract styled him the 'Lady of the Lords' (ibid., 152). And, leaving Pope's contributions aside, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu delivered the most celebrated of the contemporary judgements when she wrote that humankind was divided into three sexes: men, women, and Herveys (Hervey, 'Some Materials', 1.xiv). 
Hervey's dismissal from government in 1742 preceded his death by only a year. He spent some of that time defending the work of the administration he had served and some of it trying to mobilize his friends and family to resist the actions of the new ministry. This latter activity cost him his friendship with Stephen Fox, who preferred place to loyalty. Hervey took ill in the spring of 1743, withdrew to Ickworth in hopes of recuperating, and died there on 5 August. He was buried at Ickworth on 12 August; Conyers Middleton later contributed the Latin epitaph for his monument. The precise nature of the disease that took his life is not known, but because he had suffered bouts of poor health since childhood, his demise was not entirely a surprise, even though he was only forty-six years of age. 
Hervey drew up a will in the last month of his life. Although conventional with respect to his children, with his eldest son being designated sole heir and the other children receiving annuities, it was astonishingly savage in its treatment of Lady Hervey. She received only the minimum required by their marriage contract -- a jointure of $300 per year -- and was further humiliated by stipulations suggesting that she might, if given freedom to dispose of property, seek to deprive their children of an inheritance. The grounds for such pettiness provoked much speculation in the succeeding months, and no generally accepted explanation for Hervey's vindictive treatment of his wife has appeared. Perhaps -- there is evidence of a measure of disorientation in his final year -- he succumbed to loss of wit before loss of life. The size of his estate is unknown, but since it was not divided upon his death and since his heirs prospered, observers concluded that it had been unencumbered. 


@@@@@


doc= 13117


Hervey, John, first earl of Bristol (1665-1751), politician and landowner, was born at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, on 27 August 1665, and baptized there on 29 September of that year. He was the second son of Sir Thomas Hervey (1625-1694), MP for Bury St Edmunds, and his wife, Isabella (died 1686), the daughter of Sir Humphrey May, vice-chamberlain of the household to Charles I. He was educated at the grammar school at Bury St Edmunds and then at Clare College, Cambridge, where he matriculated on 5 July 1684. He did not take his degree but was awarded an LLD by the university on 16 April 1705. 
On 1 November 1688 Hervey married Isabella (1670-1693), the daughter of Sir Charles Carr, bt, MP and landowner. According to Robert Halsband, the marriage was 'extraordinarily happy' and produced three children, two daughters and one son, Carr Hervey ['see below']. Isabella died giving birth to their second daughter on 7 March 1693. On 27 May the following year his father -- his 'best and dearest friend' -- also died, and Hervey inherited his estates and the office of high steward of Bury St Edmunds. He held this position as well as being deputy lieutenant of Suffolk, to which he had been appointed two years earlier (10 May 1692), and, from March 1694, one of the MPs for Bury St Edmunds. 
On 25 July 1695 Hervey married his second wife, Elizabeth Felton (1676-1741), the daughter of Sir Thomas Felton (later Lord Felton), MP for Playford Hall, Suffolk, and Elizabeth Howard, the daughter and coheir of the third earl of Suffolk. His marriage to Elizabeth, whom he described as his 'ever-new Delight', produced seventeen children. Their first child, John Hervey (later Lord Hervey), became a courtier in George II's household, and their second son, Thomas Hervey, became an MP and pamphleteer. A younger son, Henry Hervey Aston, became a poet and Church of England clergyman. 
Hervey's parliamentary and constituency career was diligent if not spectacular. Before his father's death in 1694 he appears to have adopted his family's moderate toryism, though -- possibly under the influence of his second father-in-law, Thomas Felton -- he switched his sympathies to the whigs and thereafter came into contact with powerful patrons such as John Churchill, earl of Marlborough, and his wife, Sarah. The expectation, voiced in February 1702, that Hervey was to become a Treasury commissioner ended with Anne's accession later that year. 
Hervey continued to serve as MP for Bury St Edmunds until 23 March 1703, when he was created Baron Hervey of Ickworth in the county of Suffolk. An earlier Hervey barony had become extinct on the death of William, Baron Hervey of Kidbrooke, in June 1642. He took his seat in the House of Lords on 22 June 1703, a position that owed much to the political intrigue of the duke and duchess of Marlborough. In the Lords he proved to be a staunch whig, and an eager supporter of the revolution of 1688 and the 'Act of Settlement'. Hervey displayed his support for the Hanoverians and his dislike of the tories in a number of ways: the ordering of medals of the elector and his family, his hosting of a dinner in honour of the recently disgraced duke of Marlborough, and his opposition to the treaty of Utrecht drafted by the tory government. At the accession of the elector he was created earl of Bristol (19 October 1714). 
Lord Bristol's links with the king were broken by the royal split in November 1717, when he supported the prince of Wales. Early in the following year his wife, who was a friend and correspondent of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, was appointed one of the ladies of the bedchamber to Princess Caroline. In the 1720s Bristol was an opponent of the Walpole government, and in March 1733 spoke in favour of a reduced standing army. His anti-Walpole stance led him to oppose the political position of his son John, while still defending him against the personal attacks made by William Pulteney and Alexander Pope. 
His closeness to John was in contrast to the often strained relations between Bristol and his son from his first marriage, 
Away from politics, the first earl of Bristol was a keen trainer and breeder of racehorses at his Newmarket stud. John Macky described him as 'a great sportsman, lover of Horse-matches and play... a handsome Man in his Person, fair complexion, middle stature, Forty years old' ('Memoirs of the Secret Services of J. Macky', 1733). His character was also sketched by Queen Caroline and John, Lord Hervey, in the third volume of his 'Memoirs'. Bristol was in addition an accomplished author and scholar, and his diary (1688-1742) and family correspondence (1651-1750), including occasional verse and his father's letters, were published in 1894. Bristol's wife died on 1 May 1741, aged sixty-four. He himself died on 20 January 1751 and was buried at Ickworth church on 27 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 13118


Hervey, Mary, Lady Hervey of Ickworth (1699/1700-1768), courtier, was born on 26 September 1700, according to an inscription in Ickworth church, the daughter of Nicholas Wedig Lepell ('b'. 1665/6, died in or before 1731), courtier and army officer, and his wife, Mary (died 1742), the daughter and coheir of John Brooke of Rendlesham, Suffolk. However, the baptism of a Mary Lepell, daughter of Nicholas and Mary Lepell, is recorded at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, on 16 September 1699. Her father was born in Santau, Germany, and had arrived in England from Denmark as groom of the bedchamber to Prince George of Denmark, husband of Queen Anne, in 1683. He was commissioned lieutenant-colonel in Lord Paston's regiment of foot on 1 March 1704, was colonel of his own regiment of foot from 25 March 1705, and was promoted brigadier-general on 1 March 1710. Later that year he became commander of all British forces in Spain, but in 1712 was placed on half pay. 
According to a letter written by Sarah Churchill, duchess of Marlborough, in December 1737, Mary Lepell was made a cornet by her father 'in his regiment as soon as she was born... and she was paid many years after she was a maid of honour' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 1.clii), but no Lepell other than Nicholas appears in the army lists and commission registers for the period. On about 9 February 1715, through family connections with the Hanoverian ministers of George I and her father's friendship with the duchess of Marlborough, she was appointed maid of honour to Caroline, princess of Wales. She rapidly became part of the literary and intellectual circle surrounding the princess. John Gay hailed her as 'youth's youngest daughter, sweet Lepell', and on 17 July 1717 she was mentioned in a poem sent by Gay and William and Ann Pulteney to her fellow maid of honour Mary Bellenden. Alexander Pope described how he was taken 'into protection' by the two maids of honour on a visit to Hampton Court that September; Miss Lepell allegedly 'walk'd all alone with me three or 4 hours, by moonlight' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 1.427). In March 1720 she stayed with Pope at his house in Twickenham, Middlesex, for the benefit of her health. Other friends made at the princess's court were Henrietta Howard, later countess of Suffolk, John Arbuthnot, and Philip Stanhope, fourth earl of Chesterfield. 
Mary Lepell had already refused at least one proposal of marriage, from Colonel Adolphus Oughton, a former aide-de-camp to the duke of Marlborough, in 1716. At the time she stayed with the Popes she may have already accepted John Hervey (1696-1743) as her husband. Hervey was the eldest son of John Hervey, first earl of Bristol, and his second wife, Elizabeth Felton. The two were married secretly on 21 April 1720, in order for Mary to continue to collect her quarterly payments as a maid of honour; they announced their marriage on 25 October that year and moved to a house on Bond Street in the fashionable West End of London. They had four daughters and four sons, among whom were George William Hervey, later second earl of Bristol; Augustus John Hervey, later third earl of Bristol; and Frederick Augustus Hervey, eventually fourth earl of Bristol and bishop of Derry. 
Mary became known as Lady Hervey when her husband's elder half-brother Carr died in 1723. She and her husband were perhaps the most celebrated couple in the court of the prince and princess of Wales. In the words of the second verse of a ballad by Pulteney and Chesterfield: '
Bright Venus yet never saw bedded 

So perfect a beau and a belle 

As when Hervey the handsome was wedded 

To the beautiful Molly Lepell. 
(Stuart, 64)' When Lady Hervey bought a new house for her growing family on Great Burlington Street in 1725, the duchess of Marlborough alleged that she had found the money by aggressively flirting with George I, leading the ministry and the duchess of Kendal to buy her off with $4000; Robert Halsband thought it more likely that she had instead called in her debts and asked for money from her husband's father. She was in a position to act as an intermediary for patronage requests, and in summer 1726 successfully won for an aunt's servant the reversion of a place in St Katherine's Hospital, reflecting 'I confess that my request runs somewhat high to desire that an old woman may not be forgot; it is more than most people can promise for a young one!' (ibid., 63). 
Following the accession of George II, Lady Hervey was unhappy with the continuation of Sir Robert Walpole in power, and in September 1729 tried to bring Lord Hervey into opposition alongside their old friend Pulteney, but was unsuccessful. Lord Hervey rarely mentions her in his memoirs, and she appears mainly as an obstruction to his political ambitions. Her status at court was enhanced when her husband became vice-chamberlain in 1730; her dairy allowance at Hampton Court in 1731 was the sumptuous three pats of Richmond butter and a quarter-pint of cream per day. She became estranged from Pope, but remained friendly with Pulteney even as he moved further into opposition to Walpole, and with Lady Suffolk before and after her removal from court. In 1732 she recommended to Lady Suffolk Matthew Tindal's 'Christianity as Old as the Creation', expressing her whiggish interest in rationalism; she would later name Benjamin Hoadly as a friend. 
Lady Hervey seems to have tolerated her husband's bisexuality, and became a close friend of his lover Stephen Fox, to whom she sold her house in 1730, although in 1740 she allegedly lent a later passion of her husband's, Francesco Algarotti, the money he needed to leave London and move to Berlin, thereby removing him from her husband's orbit. The 1730s saw some differences emerge between the couple. Lady Hervey damaged the friendship between her husband and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu when she testified to the sanity of the countess of Mar in April 1731; the countess's sister, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, would thus have lost custody of the countess. Despite her pregnancy with her last child, Caroline ('b'. 1736), Lady Hervey spent most of summer 1735 in France, allowing Hervey to revive his affair with Anne Vane. A few years later her mother-in-law, Elizabeth, countess of Bristol, who was close to Lord Hervey, described her as a 'fals, bold Wife' (Halsband, 239). None the less Lady Hervey continued to have responsibilities at court commensurate with her position as wife of the vice-chamberlain, and in 1738 chose servants for the household of Amalie Sophie Marianne von Wallmoden, mistress of George II. 
Lady Hervey's relationship with her husband was to observers good, but he refused to see her for several weeks before his death, on 5 August 1743, and the fashionable world was shocked by the terms of his will, which left Lady Hervey no more than her jointure of $300 a year. The will did not reflect a breach in the family. Lady Hervey lived at Ickworth with her father-in-law, Lord Bristol, almost until his death in 1751, and remained closely involved in supervising the careers of her children. Her letters to the Revd Edmund Morris, tutor to her sons Frederick and William, were written between 1742 and 1768. As edited by John Wilson Croker and published in 1821, they reveal her as widely informed of the world of letters as well as politics, frequently quoting in Latin and Italian, and concerned for the intellectual welfare of her daughters as well as her sons. In a letter of 17 December 1743 she expressed her disillusion with whig politicians, including the Pelhams and her friend Pulteney, whom she felt had been tainted by the proximity of power. Her Francophilia became more pronounced in return, and during the War of the Austrian Succession she referred to France as 'my country' ('Letters of Mary Lepel', 64). Over two years of letters, from April 1745 to October 1747, were missing from the manuscript, possibly because Lady Hervey expressed Jacobite sympathies in them. Her interest in early Christianity had led her to conclude that Catholicism was only in error as far as the authority of the papacy was concerned, and all other Catholic doctrines were not superstitious but expressions of the beliefs and practices of the early church. These freely expressed opinions, together with her increasingly obsessive enthusiasm for all things French, may have embarrassed her sons. Her eldest son, George, thought his youngest sisters, Emily and Caroline, were educated as 'rank Jacobites' (Halsband, 307), and he arranged for them to be separated from her. In 1748 she built a new town house in the French style, designed by Henry Flitcroft, in St James's Place, where she entertained a circle of cultural friends and clients which at various times included David Mallet, Edward Gibbon, Chesterfield, Charles and Sarah Lennox, duke and duchess of Richmond, and William Douglas, later fourth duke of Queensberry, among others. She was well known for holding select dinners for six people with common interests. 
The maturity of her children, and the death of Lord Bristol, allowed Lady Hervey to spend extended periods in France, where among her circle were the 'philosophe' Claude-Adrien Helvetius and Louise-Anne de Bourbon-Conde de Charolais, a granddaughter of Louis XIV. She was at Paris in October 1750 when Chesterfield commended her to his son Philip Stanhope: 'She has been bred all her life at Courts; of which she has acquired all the easy good-breeding, and politeness, without the frivolousness. She has all the reading that a woman should have; and more than any woman need have; for she understands Latin perfectly well, though she wisely conceals it. ('Letters of... Chesterfield', 4.1594)' Her friendships in France were admired and were to some extent adopted by Horace Walpole. Walpole's 'devotion to her was that of a much younger brother rather than a son, and she did not hesitate to take him down a peg when she thought it advisable' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 31.ix). Walpole later dedicated the first three volumes of his 'Anecdotes of Painting in England' to her (1762-3). She also became a friend of David Hume, making introductions for him in London and Paris, and an admirer of Jean-Jacques Rousseau. By the 1750s she had become reconciled to Pulteney and his wife, now earl and countess of Bath, and during the Seven Years' War her admiration for France was tempered by her regard for Frederick the Great. She became a friend, correspondent, and political confidante of Henry Fox, and acted as an intermediary between Fox and other politicians when Fox was attempting to strengthen his position in the administration following Henry Pelham's death in 1754. She was no friend of the old corps whigs, and expressed great hopes of George III on his accession. 
Lady Hervey suffered from gout, and in the 1750s and 1760s spent long periods immobile at her home or at Ickworth. She last visited France in 1755-6. Her sometimes unconventional behaviour had compromised her role as family matriarch, and although from 1754 she was on good terms with her eldest and second sons, she became permanently estranged from her third son, Frederick, and her daughters, particularly her eldest, Lepell Phipps, Lady Mulgrave. The reasons for the estrangement are unclear. The second earl of Bristol was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1766 under the Chatham administration, but she was unable to obtain an Irish bishopric for Edmund Morris from her son. After a long decline, she died at her home in St James's Place, London, on 2 September 1768. She was buried on 9 September at the parish church in Ickworth, where Walpole wrote a verse epitaph for her tombstone. Her will excluded her third son, Frederick, and all her daughters except her second, Lady Mary Fitzgerald, and left an annuity of $60 to her maid Amy Allen, among other bequests to servants and friends, including Henry Fox and Horace Walpole. 


@@@@@


doc= 13119


Hervey, Thomas (1699-1775), politician and pamphleteer, was born on 20 January 1699 at Ickworth, Suffolk, the second son of John Hervey, first earl of Bristol (1665-1751), and his second wife, Elizabeth Felton (1676-1741). His elder brother was the courtier John Hervey, Baron Hervey of Ickworth. Hervey matriculated on 8 June 1717 at Christ Church, Oxford, where he was a companion in dissipation and gambling to his brother Henry, both sons causing great tribulation and expense to their father. After leaving Oxford without taking a degree he was sent to Lincoln's Inn to study law, but gave himself up to a life of heavy drinking, partly to alleviate the chronic and painful ill health which dogged him all his life. In 1722 he developed an ambition to enter politics, hoping to stand for the borough of Bury St Edmunds, a seat to which he was eventually elected on 29 June 1733, replacing his brother Jack who had taken his seat in the House of Lords. He was elected unanimously and without bribery, to the great pleasure of his father, though his complete absence during the election campaign did attract adverse notice. He held the seat until 1747 when his brother Felton was elected. His mother's intense dislike for his fellow member for Bury, Colonel Norton, caused Thomas considerable family difficulties, though the story of this antipathy leading to disinheritance is untrue. He held a series of appointments at court, first in 1727 as equerry to Queen Caroline, and the following year as vice-chamberlain to the queen's household. This post ended with the death of the queen and in 1738 he was appointed as superintendent of the royal gardens. 
Thomas was increasingly prey to eccentric behaviour, which in later life developed into mental instability. According to Horace Walpole, when asked why in 1741 he had voted against his party, Hervey replied that he had no idea: 'Jesus knows my thoughts; one day I blaspheme, and pray the next' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 17.244). 
A prominent and scandalous aspect to Hervey's life was his relationship with Elizabeth, second wife of his godfather Sir Thomas Hanmer. Considerably younger than Hanmer, she eloped with Hervey shortly after a rift with her husband in 1737. She compounded the scandal by writing to Hanmer requesting him to leave to Hervey the estate at Great Barton, Suffolk, she had brought to the marriage, an audacious demand which understandably Hanmer refused. 
Elizabeth Hanmer died in 1741 leaving Thomas $1400 after settlement of his debts. He then published a notorious 'Letter from the Honourable Thomas Hervey to Sir Thomas Hanmer' which is extraordinary for its scurrilous and indiscreet accusations. Ripostes were published, and the affair caused a great public stir. The experience of publication proved infectious: 'Tom now acquired a taste for pamphleteering' (Ponsonby, 104). For the rest of his life he regularly published letters and pamphlets, with the common theme of injustices he believed he had suffered, often at the hands of his family or the courts, and which titillated the public taste for scandal. 
In 1744 Hervey married Ann, the daughter of Francis Coghlan, an Irish barrister. She was known to be a spirited woman; one day before the marriage when the couple were in Bath the novelist Fielding, seeing them across a public room, called out 'Why don't you take that bold girl into some bye-place and give her what she wants?' (Ponsonby, 105). 
The marriage is said to have taken place in the Fleet prison, not because either party was imprisoned, but because it reduced cost and official process. Thomas's father had cut off communications with him, owing partly to his marrying without the earl's consent or even knowledge. The spirited Ann lost no time in writing to him seeking financial assistance, for she was as improvident as her new husband. The request was rebuffed, but a partial reconciliation was achieved in 1750, shortly before the earl died. 
Hervey had a legitimate son, William, whom he later disinherited. His natural sons, however, he treated well: Thomas (by Lady Hanmer) and George, by an unknown mother, whose death in 1758 at Ticonderoga caused his father much grief. The marriage to Ann palled, and Thomas began publishing scandalous letters on the misery of married life. He applied to have the marriage set aside, but this device failed. Samuel Johnson, who had first met Hervey and his brother Henry in Lichfield in 1730, had retained a liking for him, and wrote expressing his concern. Hervey published his reply: 'Mr Hervey's answer to a letter he received from Dr Samuel Johnson to dissuade him from parting with his supposed wife' (1772). It is characteristically vituperative: 'Sir... you are a very good man, but you have thought fit to be an advocate for the most worthless woman that ever was on Earth' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.480). 
Much of the intemperate and contradictory behaviour of Thomas Hervey might be attributable to his lifelong ill health. In the letter to Hanmer he comments on his physical and mental frailty: 'In over two and twenty years I have never been in a natural state of mind or body... I have not been in all that time out of pain, or in the calm possession of my understanding.' His writing is eccentric and intemperate, but not without quality. In Horace Walpole's opinion Hervey's pamphleteering style 'beats everything for madness, horrid indecency, and folly, and yet has some charming and striking passages' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 38.202). 
Thomas Hervey died towards the end of January 1775 in Bond Street, London. On his deathbed he acknowledged Ann as his legal wife. Johnson commented on his death: 'Tom Hervey... though a vicious man, was one of the genteelest men that ever lived' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.341). 


@@@@@


doc= 13120


Hervey, Thomas Kibble (1799-1859), poet and journalist, was born at Paisley, Renfrewshire, on 11 February 1799, one of the sons of James Hervie, a drysalter who settled in Manchester in 1803, and his wife, Isobella Kibble. He was baptized in the parish of Abbey on 26 February 1799. After attending Manchester grammar school he was articled to Sharp, Eccles & Co., a firm of solicitors in Manchester, and subsequently to another firm in London. He then read law in the chambers of a well-known barrister, Mr (later Sergeant) Scriven and, from 1818 to 1820, at Trinity College, Cambridge, which he left without taking a degree. His best-known literary production, a long poem in two parts entitled 'Australia', was published during his second year at Trinity. Much admired both there and in London, where it appeared in new editions, along with some of his shorter poems, in 1824, 1825, and 1829, 'Australia' reads as if written for an undergraduate prize, as it in fact was; Hervey's ideas about Australia and its neighbouring islands, largely drawn from newspapers and from a few books which are cited in pseudo-scholarly notes, are fanciful in the extreme. His reputation was enhanced by lyrics such as 'The Convict Ship', 'Floranthe', and the four 'Illustrations of Modern Sculpture' (1832); some of these continued to find their way into anthologies until the mid-Victorian period. A longer poem, 'The Devil's Progress', was published in 1830. He edited and contributed to two fashionable literary annuals, 'Friendship's Offering' in 1826 and 1827, and 'The Amaranth' in 1839. On 17 October 1843 he married Eleanora Louisa Montagu ('b'. 1811?), the daughter of George Conway Montagu of Lackham, Wiltshire. The couple had a son, Frederick Robert James. 
From 1831 to 1853 nearly all of Hervey's literary energy appears to have been devoted to reviews and other articles in 'The Athenaeum', ranking in the number of his contributions with the prolific H. F. Chorley and Hepworth Dixon. The subjects of his reviews included Browning, Tennyson, Dickens, and French literature. His obituarist in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (April 1859, 433) conceded that as a reviewer he was 'characterized by a causticity of censure and a costiveness of praise, scarcely worthy of a journal of high standing'. He nevertheless became editor of 'The Athenaeum', in succession to C. W. Dilke, on 23 May 1846. Under his editorship the paper departed from its previous policy by championing humanitarian causes, among them prison reform, one of Hervey's own interests. Its sales apparently increased, at least during his last three years as editor, but the quality of its reviews deteriorated (Marchand, 76-81). The 'Gentleman's Magazine' considered that his 'acknowledged qualifications' for the editorship were counterbalanced by his 'desultory and procrastinating habits'; these it attributed to the chronic asthma from which he had suffered for many years and which led to his resignation in the autumn of 1853 (p. 432). 
In the remaining five years of his life Hervey contributed frequently to the 'Art Journal'. Together with a single article in the 'Dublin Review' (December 1836), a few brief tales in the annuals, and his contributions to 'The Athenaeum', these appear to comprise virtually the whole corpus of his published writings in prose. He died at 8 Ponsford Terrace, Haverstock Hill, London, on 17 February 1859, from asthma and bronchitis. He was survived by his wife, and was buried at Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. 
At the time of his death Hervey was preparing a collected edition of his poems. This was completed by his widow and published in 1866 as 'The Poems of T. K. Hervey', with an introductory memoir. Before her marriage to Hervey she had been an established poet in her own right, having produced a long poem, 'Edith of Graystock' (1833), a five-act play in verse, 'The Landgrave' (1839), and a number of short poems, some of which had appeared in the annuals edited by her future husband; after Hervey's death she produced a three-volume novel, 'Snooded Jessaline' (1865). 


@@@@@


doc= 13121


Hervey, William, Baron Hervey of Kidbrooke and Baron Hervey of Ross (d. 1642), naval officer, was the only son of Henry Hervey, of Kidbrooke, Kent, and his wife, Jane, daughter of James Thomas of Llanfihangel, Monmouthshire. As a young man Hervey served aboard the lord admiral's flagship during the Armada campaign of 1588, earning renown in the action off Calais. In 1596 he commanded his own vessel, the 'Darling' of Portsmouth, on the expedition to Cadiz, and was knighted by the earl of Essex. The following year he sailed on the voyage to the Azores as commander of the 'Bonaventure'. In September 1598 he was one of several candidates for the comptrollership of the navy, though he failed to secure appointment. During 1599 he served as captain of the 'Garland', in the fleet based in the Downs under the command of Lord Thomas Howard. It is possible that he played some part in the war in Ireland in 1600. He served as MP for Horsham in 1601, when he was a member of a committee which was considering the Irish situation, and for Petersfield in 1604. 
As a veteran of the Elizabethan sea war Hervey retained links with the navy during the early Stuart period. In 1618 he was a member of a committee investigating the ordnance office. On the outbreak of war with Spain in 1625 he was appointed to the council of war; he played an active role in advising the lord admiral on the Cadiz expedition. In December 1626 he became one of the special commissioners who were investigating the state of the navy. He was involved in a survey of naval vessels in January 1627, and in February he was consulted about the number of ships to be employed in the guard of the channel. Later in the year he served as rear-admiral aboard the 'Repulse' on the expedition to the Ile de Re, to relieve La Rochelle. 
Hervey acquired various offices and honours during his career. He became a gentleman pensioner at the court of Elizabeth I some time before 1587. In 1598 he was made keeper of St Andrew's Castle in Hampshire, with a fee of $19 3's'. 4died, although he surrendered the post in 1604. He was granted the office of remembrancer of first fruits and tenths in 1603. He was created a baronet on 31 May 1619 and became Baron Hervey of Ross, in co. Wexford, on 5 August 1620. He was made an English baron on 27 February 1628, reportedly to strengthen the royal cause in the upper house ('Buccleuch MSS', 3.324). As Baron Hervey of Kidbrooke he was rarely absent from the House of Lords during the session of 1628, and he sat on a wide range of committees. 
In 1598 Hervey married Mary (died 1607), daughter of Anthony Browne, first Viscount Montagu, and widow of Henry Wriothesley, second earl of Southampton (1545-1581), and of Thomas Heneage (died 1595). The negotiations concerning the match were shrouded in mystery, probably because of hostility from the third earl of Southampton, whose 'discomfort and discontentment' with the marriage were conveyed to his mother by the earl of Essex in November 1598 ('Salisbury MSS', 14.80). Following the death of his first wife in 1607 Hervey married in 1608 Cordelia, daughter and coheir of Brian Annesley of Leigh in Kent. They had three sons and four daughters before her death in 1636. Hervey was survived by only one of his daughters, Elizabeth, who married a cousin, John Hervey of Ickworth. At his death in London in 1642 he owned land in Wexford, a house at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, as well as the manor of Kidbrooke. The latter was valued at $1000 before 1614. A respected and well connected naval officer, Hervey has sometimes been identified as a possible candidate for William Shakespeare's 'Mr. W. H.'. He was buried in Westminster Abbey on 8 July 1642. 


@@@@@


doc= 13122


Hesletine, James (c.1692-1763), organist and composer, was trained by Dr John Blow of the Chapel Royal. He left the choir there when his voice broke in 1707. In January 1711 he was appointed organist of Durham Cathedral, which post he held until his death. He is reported to have been additionally organist of St Katharine by the Tower, London, meeting his obligations there by use of a deputy. Much of his music has been destroyed: in a fit of pique over some misunderstanding at Durham, he apparently tore all his own compositions from the cathedral choirbooks, but not before six of them had been published in Durham in 'A Collection of Anthems' (1749). An anthem, 'Unto thee will I cry', dated 17 September 1707, is in the British Library (Add. MS 30860), and other manuscript pieces are in Lambeth Palace Library. On 24 February 1730 he married Frances Wheler, daughter of Sir George Wheler, canon of Durham. He died in Durham a childless widower on 20 June 1763, and was buried in the galilee of Durham Cathedral. His property was claimed by a nephew and niece in America. 


@@@@@


doc= 13123


Hesilrige, Sir Arthur, second baronet (1601-1661), army officer and politician, was born at Noseley, Leicestershire, the second son of Sir Thomas Hesilrige, baronet (died 1630), of Noseley, and his wife, Frances, daughter of William Gorges of Alderton, Northamptonshire. He matriculated as a fellow-commoner from Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1617 and was admitted at Gray's Inn in 1623. In 1624 Hesilrige married his first wife, Frances, daughter of Thomas Elmes of Lilford, Northamptonshire. On his father's death in 1630 he succeeded to both the family baronetcy and its extensive midlands estates. In 1632 his first wife died and two years later he married Dorothy, daughter of Fulke Greville of Thorpe Latimer in Lincolnshire, and sister of Robert Greville, second Baron Brooke (1607-1643). His republican associate Edmund Ludlow commented of his character that he was 'a man of disobliging carriage, sower [sour] and morose of temper, liable to be transported with passion, and to whom liberality seemed to be a vice' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 2.133-4). Ludlow also, however, pointed to 'the rectitude and sincerity of his intentions' and to his constant concern 'to prevent arbitrary power wheresoever he knew it to be affected and to keep the sword subservient to the civil magistrate' (ibid.). 
From the early 1630s Hesilrige's radical political and religious views brought him into conflict with Charles I's personal-rule government. In 1632 he was summoned before the privy council for failing to pay his muster fees. While waiting to make his appearance he reportedly remarked to one of the deputy lieutenants who had presented him: 'If such a gentleman as you shall be suffered to shark the country of their money, it will be a very pretty thing' ('CSP dom.', '1631-3', 445-6). He was afterwards forced to kneel before the privy council to ask pardon for this comment and was imprisoned for a short time in the Tower of London. Through his marriage into the Greville family in 1634 he became closely associated with the puritan group led by Lord Saye and Sele and John Pym which was working in secret to oppose Charles I's government. He was heavily involved in this group's colonial ventures and was one of the original patentees of the town of Saybrook in New England. He also seriously considered emigrating to America himself at this stage. In 1635 he quarrelled with William Laud over the payment of some ecclesiastical fees and was forced to appear before the court of high commission on several occasions. In the later 1630s he publicly opposed the collection of ship money in Leicestershire. His objection to government policy during the 1630s seems to have been primarily religious in nature; at the Restoration a hostile commentator argued that religion was the 'pretence' of his 'discontent' (Gent). 
In 1640 Hesilrige was returned to both the Short and Long parliaments as one of the knights of the shire for Leicestershire, and during the next eighteen months he remained a close associate of Pym and the other leaders of the opposition to Charles I's government. He strongly supported the moves to bring Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, to trial, and when the impeachment proceedings against Strafford appeared to be faltering in the spring of 1641 he advocated the drawing up of a bill of attainder as an alternative way of finding him guilty of treason by statute. This was a very radical tactic about which initially even Pym was hesitant. Hesilrige was also one of the fiercest parliamentary critics of the Laudian church. In May 1641, following the defeat of a bill to exclude the bishops from the House of Lords, he joined with Oliver Cromwell and Sir Henry Vane in introducing into the House of Commons a bill to abolish bishops altogether. The bill was given a second reading, but was abandoned later that year. In December 1641 Hesilrige introduced the 'Militia Bill' into the House of Commons and the following month he was one of the five members whom Charles I accused of treason and attempted to arrest in the Commons' chamber. 
On the outbreak of the first civil war in 1642 Hesilrige raised a troop of horse for parliament and in October 1642 he fought at the battle of Edgehill as part of the regiment of Sir William Balfour. By 1643 he was serving as the second in command to Sir William Waller and his regiment of cuirassiers, known as the lobsters because of their three-quarter armour, and fought at both Lansdowne and Roundway Down. In both these battles he and his men were in the thick of the action; Hesilrige himself was wounded on both occasions and nearly died of the injuries he sustained during the second engagement. In 1644 he fought at Cheriton and the second battle of Newbury. 
Away from the battlefield Hesilrige played an active part in political developments at Westminster. Following Pym's death at the end of 1643, he for a time assumed the leadership of the war party in parliament. In the winter of 1644-5 he backed Oliver Cromwell in his quarrel with the earl of Manchester and in early 1645 he supported the self-denying ordinance, thereafter laying down his military commission. During the abortive peace negotiations at Uxbridge in 1645 one of parliament's terms for a settlement was that Hesilrige should be made a lord and given lands worth $2000 a year. Following the parliamentarian victory in the first civil war, Hesilrige took the side of the New Model Army in its quarrel with parliament. He was believed to have persuaded William Lenthall, the speaker of the Commons, to join the army in 1647, and after the New Model had arrived in the capital in the late summer he helped to organize the ejection from the Commons of its most prominent presbyterian critics. 
In December 1647 Hesilrige was appointed governor of Newcastle and given overall responsibility for the military forces in that region. His duties in the north kept him away from London during the crucial revolutionary months of December 1648 and January 1649. He was opposed to the army's purge of parliament and, despite his republican sympathies, did not support its subsequent decision to put Charles I on trial. He turned down an invitation to sit as one of the king's judges and subsequently refused to sign the engagement, the oath of loyalty to the new regime. He none the less took up his seat in the Rump in late February 1649, and subsequently became a prominent member of the government of the republic, serving as a member of the council of state until 1653. While he was critical of the Rump Parliament's reluctance to embrace constitutional reform, he strongly supported its constitutional role and backed it in its power struggle with the army during 1652. He vehemently opposed the army's forcible dissolution of the Rump in April 1653 and thereafter remained a bitter opponent of Cromwell and the protectorate. 
Throughout the period from 1647 to the mid-1650s Hesilrige was governor of Newcastle and as such was one of the most powerful men in the counties of Durham and Northumberland. Following his appointment he quickly established his authority over this area and helped to keep it secure for parliament during the second civil war and the invasion of the Scots in 1648. At the beginning of July 1648 he defeated a force of Northumbrian royalists under the command of Colonel Edward Grey, and the following month he recaptured the castle at Tynemouth, after its garrison commander, Henry Lilburne, had defected to the king. In October 1648 he accompanied Cromwell to Edinburgh. He was again with him in Scotland during the 1650 campaign and was given charge of the Scottish prisoners following the English victory at Dunbar. 
Hesilrige remained powerful in the north-east of England throughout the early 1650s and amassed a large personal fortune by purchasing lands which had been sequestered from local royalists and the bishop of Durham; his acquisitions included the manors of Bishop's Auckland, Easington, and Wolsingham, which between them cost him in the region of $19,000. During his period of pre-eminence in the north-east he was frequently accused of corruption and of dishonestly using his power to enrich himself. In 1650 John Musgrave published a tract entitled 'A true and exact relation of the great and heavy pressures and grievances the well affected of the northern bordering counties lye under, by Sir Arthur Haslerigs misgovernment', in which he labelled him the 'Nimrod of the North' (Musgrave, 1) and accused him of appointing delinquents to positions of power and of acquiring a vast personal fortune by extortion and the purchase of sequestered lands at a fraction of their true worth. Hesilrige was similarly accused by John Hedworth in 'The Oppressed Man's Outcry' of acting unjustly and oppressively to gain control of some collieries at Harraton in Durham which had been confiscated from the Hedworth family. He also became involved in a protracted lawsuit with the Collingwood family about the rightful ownership of the manor of Esslington in Northumberland, with the courts eventually deciding against him. 
In 1649 the Leveller leader John Lilburne claimed in the tract 'A Preparative to an Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Haslerig' that Hesilrige had attempted to murder him and had cheated him out of about $2400 'by the meer power of his own will' (Lilburne, 1). Lilburne asserted that Hesilrige had 'overstept' even Charles I's hated minister, Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, by 'traitorously subverting the fundamentall liberties of England and (in time of peace) exercising an arbitrary and tyrannical government over and above law' (ibid.). Two years later Lilburne again accused him of conducting a vendetta against his father and uncle, Richard and George Lilburne, and of unjustly sequestering some of the family's lands in Durham. In early 1652 a committee of the Rump declared that Lilburne's charges were false and sentenced the Leveller to a heavy fine and banishment. Hesilrige could also be extremely uncompromising in his dealings with the royalist clergy; on one occasion he ejected Alexander Davison and his family from the rectory of Norham in the middle of the night, throwing their belongings in the churchyard. 
Following the establishment of the protectorate in December 1653 and Hesilrige's decision to break with Cromwell, he lost influence in the north. His dominance passed to Robert Lilburne and Charles Howard, who acted as governors of York and Carlisle respectively, and as John Lambert's deputies as major-generals for the north in 1655 and 1656. 
Throughout the period from 1653 to 1658 Hesilrige remained an implacable opponent of Oliver Cromwell and his protectoral state. He refused to pay taxes not sanctioned by parliament and on several occasions had his property distrained as a result. In September 1654 he was elected to the first protectorate parliament as one of the members for Leicestershire, and in the early days of the session was one of the government's most outspoken critics. Edmund Ludlow remarked that during this period he was 'very instrumental in opening the eyes of many young members who had never before heard their interest so clearly stated; so that the commonwealth-party increased daily and that of the sword lost ground' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 1.391). When these activities prompted Cromwell to intervene and to demand that the MPs subscribe to a recognition of the government, Hesilrige refused to do so and subsequently withdrew from Westminster. Two years later he was again elected as MP for Leicestershire, for the second protectorate parliament. On this occasion he was excluded even before the assembly had met, and subsequently signed a protest about this action. In late 1657 Cromwell appointed him to the newly established other house, but he refused to accept this position and when the parliament reassembled for its brief second session in January 1658 he provocatively took up his seat in the Commons. Once again he proved a fierce critic of the government, attacking in particular the new second chamber as unconstitutional and unrepresentative. 
Following Oliver Cromwell's death in September 1658, Hesilrige was elected to Richard Cromwell's parliament, once again as member for Leicestershire. He continued to attack the protectorate, and spoke against recognizing Richard as the new head of state. By the early spring of 1659 he appears to have been conspiring with the leaders of the army to bring down the regime and he was one of those behind the army's declaration calling for the recall of the Rump. Following Richard Cromwell's resignation and the subsequent return of the Rump, Hesilrige once more began to play a very prominent role in public affairs. He was a member of both the committee of safety and the council of state. He effectively controlled parliamentary proceedings and took part in the appointment of army officers. He was also put in command of a regiment which had been taken away from Charles Howard. 
Hesilrige soon, however, fell out with his new army colleagues, both by exaggerating the constitutional authority of parliament and by taking insufficient notice of the concerns of the military with regard to appointments and indemnity. He was also very suspicious of John Lambert, whom he suspected of wanting to re-establish a military regime and to assume power himself. He was behind the move in parliament to cashier Lambert and seven other officers, an action which in turn persuaded Lambert forcibly to close the Rump for a second time. Following Lambert's putsch, Hesilrige based himself at Portsmouth and attempted to gather together a force to resist him. After the Rump had met again in late December 1659, he returned to London and resumed his position on the council of state. 
A close ally of George Monck, whose march from Scotland to London had precipitated the return of parliamentary government, Hesilrige was slow to realize that Monck did not share his republican outlook and was considering recalling Charles Stuart from exile. When he did come to see the way events were leading, he attempted to dissuade Monck from this course of action. According to some reports he tried to persuade him to take the crown himself, before dropping his opposition in return for a promise that his own life would be spared following a restoration of the monarchy. After Charles II's return in May 1660, Hesilrige was none the less exempted from the 'Act of Indemnity' and imprisoned in the Tower of London. He died six months later, on 7 January 1661, before he could be brought to trial for treason. A short character sketch published at the Restoration labelled him as a 'church-thief' and denounced him for his enthusiastic iconoclasm and plundering of church wealth. 
Hesilrige was one of the most committed and prominent republicans within mid-seventeenth-century England. He remained throughout his career a staunch supporter of the rights of the English parliament, and he opposed with equal vigour what he regarded as the unrepresentative rule of both Charles I in the 1630s and Oliver Cromwell in the 1650s. While he was undoubtedly a man of great courage and strong political and religious principles, he gained an unfortunate, but probably justified, contemporary reputation as someone who took advantage of the positions of power he enjoyed in the 1640s and 1650s both to oppress his enemies and to enrich himself. This inclination towards bullying and greed confirmed the worst prejudices of his conservative enemies about the character and origins of republicanism and did much to discredit it as a political philosophy. 


@@@@@


doc= 13124


Hesketh, Harriet, Lady Hesketh (bap. 1733, d. 1807), cousin and intimate friend of the poet William Cowper, was baptized in St Mary's, Hertingfordbury, Hertfordshire, on 12 July 1733, the eldest of three daughters of Ashley Cowper (1701-1788), clerk of the parliaments, and Dorothy, daughter of the Revd John Oakes of Bluntisham, Huntingdonshire. Her paternal uncle, the Revd John Cowper, had married Anne Donne, a descendant of the poet John Donne. 
As a child Harriet lived at Southampton Row, between Bloomsbury and Holborn, where the young William Cowper, her cousin and two years her senior, was a frequent visitor. Her sister, Theodora Jane, entered into an unhappy love affair with Cowper. Explicit evidence in letters passing between Harriet and Cowper refutes any possibility that a romantic attachment existed between them also. Accounted a beauty in her youth, she became engaged to Thomas Hesketh (1726/7-1778) of Rufford Hall, near Ormskirk, Lancashire, about 1754; they were later married in Oxford Chapel, Cavendish Square, London. Early in their relationship the couple accompanied Cowper on a visit to Southampton, where the poet spent several months recuperating from an early bout of the chronic mental illness which dogged his adult life. On 5 May 1761 Thomas Hesketh was created baronet. 
An estrangement between Harriet Hesketh and her cousin, lasting nineteen years, commenced in March 1766. Cowper's letters indicate that the breach was initiated by Hesketh. During this interval the poet sought retirement in Olney, Buckinghamshire, and Hesketh accompanied her husband for periods abroad from 1769. Sir Thomas died on 4 March 1778, aged fifty-one, after an illness lasting three years, leaving his wife in comfortable circumstances with $800 a year. Hesketh resumed contact with Cowper early in October 1785, when she wrote to congratulate him on publication of the second volume of 'Poems', and in June 1786 she visited the poet at his home in Olney. Her cheerful, generous nature helped alleviate Cowper's depression and she provided the financial means to enable him to quit his gloomy dwelling for Weston Park, a vacant house on the edge of the village, in October. She took up residence at Weston Park herself during Cowper's final mental collapse in 1793, but was unable to prevail upon Mrs Mary Unwin, who cohabited with Cowper, that he should be placed at Gretford, near Stamford, in the care of the celebrated Dr Francis Willis, the physician credited with curing the madness of George III. After Hesketh's offer to pay for Cowper's treatment was refused she nursed Cowper, to the detriment of her own health, for a period of two years. Following the poet's death in 1800 she supplied his friend William Hayley (1745-1820) with most of the materials for his biography, 'The Life, and Posthumous Writings of William Cowper, Esq.', published in 1803. 
Between April 1780 and July 1796 Hesketh was living in New Norfolk Street, Grosvenor Square. She suffered ill health in her last years and divided her time between Bath, Clifton, and Weymouth. A period of convalescence at Weymouth between August and October 1804 coincided with a visit by the royal family, amid widespread fears of a French invasion. These events form the subject of several candid letters to a female friend, Mrs Ricketts, composed at the end of August, which reveal Hesketh's redoubtable personality in advancing years, and her strongly held opinions. She was an ardent tory whose idolatrous loyalty to her sovereign, whom she called 'the king of kings', was matched only by her unbridled revulsion for the prince of Wales, whom she censured as 'a Drunken brat' (BL, Add. MS 30007, fols. 55'v'-60'v'). 
Fanny Burney, an acquaintance of Hesketh, described her as 'well-informed, well-bred, sensible... somewhat too precise and stiff, but otherwise agreeable' ('Diary and Letters of Madame D'Arblay', 1.445). In a letter to Hayley dated 28 January 1802, Hesketh admitted that she knew herself to be troublesome and impertinent but having 'acquir'd a 'decided' Character' she felt she had no alternative but to live up to it. Her conduct throughout her life and her surviving correspondence would seem to bear out her own estimate of her qualities as a friend. In a letter to Mrs Ricketts she confided: 'I have often thought that I posses[s]'d one sentiment in common with Deane Swift -- who says somewhere that 'he hates the world in general, but loves Tom-Dick-&Harry'. This is very much my case' (BL, Add. MS 30007, fol. 57'r'). She died, childless in Clifton, on 15 January 1807, and was buried in Bristol Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 13125


Hesketh, Henry (1636/7-1710?), Church of England clergyman, was born in Cheshire. He was admitted as a plebeian to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 26 May 1653, aged sixteen, and graduated BA on 13 October 1656. He was incorporated MA at Cambridge in 1664. He held the living of Ashton upon Mersey, Cheshire, between 1662 and 1663, and Long Ditton, Surrey, from 1662. From 1663 until his death he was rector of Charlwood, Surrey, having married Sarah Mulcaster, the daughter of his predecessor, the year before. In 1677 he bought the complete presentation rights to the church of Sts Peter and Paul in Nutfield, Surrey, which he later sold to William Hollingworth. On 11 November 1678 he was chosen vicar of St Helen, Bishopsgate. He also became chaplain to Charles II. Following the death of his first wife, Hesketh married again on 11 February 1687, at St Helen, Bishopsgate; his second wife was Mary Pillet of that parish. 
Hesketh was a popular preacher and several of his sermons were printed, including one given before the lord mayor and aldermen of London on 9 September 1683 after the failure of the Rye House plot, and another given in the Chapel Royal on 26 July 1685, the day of thanksgiving for the defeat of the Monmouth rebellion. In the latter sermon he attacked the distinction both between the private and public person of the king as offering a justification for resistance, and, more controversially, between giving active and passive obedience. It was not loyalty, he argued, simply to disobey the laws but submit to their penalties. He also produced a number of other works, including a case of conscience, 'The Charge of Scandal and Giving Offence by Conformity' (1683), which aimed at convincing nonconformists to return to the Church of England. He argued in this case that dissenters were already committing a greater sin, that of schism, by separating from the Anglican church than they could possibly incur by conforming and perhaps offering a scandalous example to others. 
In spite of his earlier preaching efforts in support of James II, Hesketh took the oaths to William and Mary and enjoyed ecclesiastical promotion under the new regime. He never offered any explanation for this dramatic volte-face. He was appointed chaplain to King William and in 1690 he was nominated, but not consecrated, bishop of Killala. In January 1694 he resigned the vicarage of St Helen, Bishopsgate. He appears to have died in December 1710. 


@@@@@


doc= 13126


Hesketh, Richard (1553-1593), merchant and conspirator, was born on 24 or 25 July 1553, according to a horoscope drawn up by John Dee. He was the fourth son of Gabriel Hesketh (died 1573), a landowner of Aughton New Hall, Lancashire, and his first wife, Jane, daughter of Sir Henry Halsall of Halsall. His eldest brother, Bartholomew, inherited his father's substantial estates. A Roman Catholic, Bartholomew was questioned by the privy council in 1581 for sheltering the Jesuit Edmund Campion. The second brother, Thomas Hesketh, was a duchy of Lancaster attorney and escheator at Lancaster, and rose rapidly within the duchy and at Westminster for the vigour with which he enforced the Elizabethan religious settlement in Lancashire. Both brothers were frequently listed among the guests of Henry Stanley, fourth earl of Derby, at nearby Lathom House, where the earl and his council played a prominent role in the government of the north-west of England. 
Richard Hesketh was apprenticed to Hugh Fayreclough, and in 1578 became a freeman of the Clothworkers' Company in the city of London. He seems to have been a merchant involved in the export of cloth, and in 1581 he was mentioned by John Dee in his diary as his friend and Antwerp agent who diligently searched for books and carried Dee's correspondence to his many contacts in Antwerp. Richard Hesketh probably shared the views of Dee and this Antwerp circle, including an interest in alchemy, hermetism, and religious toleration as practised by the Family of Love. 
About 1586 Richard Hesketh married Isabel Shaw and became involved in litigation on behalf of Isabel and her children from her two previous marriages to Thomas Richardson and Roger Ambrose over her considerable inherited wealth and Ambrose Hall, contested in the duchy chamber, Star Chamber, and before the privy council. In October 1589 Richard Hesketh was involved in the affray at Lea Hall, near Preston, in which Thomas Hoghton and Richard Baldwin were killed; for his part in this riot Hesketh was forced into exile for three years. He travelled through Germany to Prague, then centre of the Holy Roman empire, where a group of English exiles led by Edward Kelly then enjoyed the patronage of the emperor Rudolf II, who shared Kelly's delight in alchemy and made him an 'eques auratus'. In May 1591, however, Kelly fell out of favour; he was imprisoned and his circle threatened. Hesketh and others were offered the protection of the English Jesuit Thomas Stephenson, then resident in the College of the Clementinum in Prague. 
In 1592 Hesketh was on the payroll of the regiment of Sir William Stanley in Flanders, then fighting in the service of Spain. Listed among the 'entretenidos' or staff officers of the regiment, he was involved in the intelligence side of the regiment's work and must be the agent described in the letter of Emanuel D'Andrada to Lord Burghley. Both Colonel Stanley and Cardinal Allen were then promoting the claims of Henry Stanley, fourth earl of Derby, to the English crown. Richard Hesketh was briefed by Colonel Stanley that they had the support of the pope and the king of Spain for this claim, and by Thomas Worthington, chaplain to his company, who had experience of working in a hostile England. In the summer of 1593 Hesketh returned to England via Prague and Hamburg to merge with returning merchants. In Canterbury he was joined by Richard Baylye, also an experienced 'entretenido' in Stanley's regiment, who posed as Hesketh's servant in London and on his return to Lancashire. 
About 25 September 1593 Hesketh arrived at Lathom House, supposedly to show his passports to the earl of Derby in his capacity of lord lieutenant; unfortunately this was the day of the earl's death. Hesketh found the opportunity to propose that Ferdinando Stanley, the new fifth earl, should lead a revolt to claim the English crown before the death of the queen, and begin negotiations by sending a representative to Flanders. Ferdinando arranged to meet ten days later at Brereton Hall in Cheshire, and Hesketh was to join his entourage 'en route' for the court at Windsor. It soon became apparent, however, that Hesketh was not accompanying his lord as his courtier but as his prisoner. Hesketh was held at Ditton House near Windsor Castle and interrogated there by William Wade, clerk to the privy council. By 15 October a confession was extracted, seemingly without torture, Hesketh claiming that his sole motivation was to further the interests of his lord. As there was plague in London his trial for treason was speedily carried out by the attorney-general, Sir Thomas Egerton, on 24 November at St Albans. From the scaffold on 29 November 1593 Hesketh is said to have bitterly renounced those who had sent him on the mission, and to have denied that he was ever a Catholic. 
Four months after the execution of Richard Hesketh the apparently healthy earl of Derby died at Lathom. Ferdinando himself believed he had been bewitched, while others believed he had been poisoned as a revenge for his part in Hesketh's execution. Ferdinando had claimed that Thomas Hesketh, with the powers of the duchy of Lancaster, had strenuously opposed his rule. Ferdinando's sudden death now brought about a disputed inheritance which did enormous damage to the earldom that Richard Hesketh had sought to promote. Although later earls of Derby regained many of the lost estates and titles, they never regained the dominance they once held in the region, which now came more directly under the control of central government. 


@@@@@


doc= 13127


Hesketh, Roger (1643-1715), Roman Catholic priest, was born on 11 June 1643, a younger son of Gabriel Hesketh, gentleman, of Whitehill, Goosnargh, Lancashire, and Anne, daughter of Robert Simpson of Barker in Goosnargh. He received his education at the English College at Lisbon, where he arrived on 9 November 1660, and was ordained priest in 1665 after a dispensation because under age. He became procurator of the college on 18 July 1667 and confessor on 7 March 1672. He began to teach philosophy on 12 January 1676 and divinity on 14 September 1677. On 6 December 1678 he was appointed vice-president, and he held that office until 1686, when he was recalled to England by Bishop John Leyburn. He left Lisbon on 29 April in that year, being then a doctor of divinity. When Dr Watkinson desired to resign the presidency of the college at Lisbon, Hesketh was nominated his successor, but Watkinson was induced to retain the presidency. In 1694 Hesketh was elected a member of the old chapter and in 1710 he assisted at its general meeting. He served on the mission in Lincolnshire, probably at Hainton, the seat of the Heneage family, and died on 4 March 1715. According to Charles Dodd he wrote a treatise on transubstantiation, one of the numerous anonymous tracts published in the reign of James II. Dodd reports that it was written in answer to the prominent controversialist John Patrick, preacher at the Charterhouse, and that a reply to Hesketh's treatise was published by Edward Bernard. More recent authorities are hesitant in attributing the tract to Hesketh. 


@@@@@


doc= 13128


Hesketh, Thomas (bap. 1560, d. 1613), botanist and physician, was baptized on 15 May 1560 at Great Harwood, Lancashire, near to Martholme Hall. He was the second son of Sir Thomas Hesketh of Rufford (1526-1588) and Alice, daughter of Sir John Holcroft of Holcroft. Sir Thomas was high sheriff in 1562, and the family was prominent in the affairs of the county palatine, owning several large estates. After his father's death, Thomas inherited a part of these estates, including the honour of the castle of Clitheroe and 18 acres of land in the town where he practised as a physician and surgeon. Like many of the gentry of this part of Lancashire, he seems to have been a Roman Catholic, and he appears with his neighbours on the recusant rolls for 1594-5 and 1595-6. His religion would have debarred him from many of the public offices that his family had previously held. It appears that he never married. From 1593 he spent much time at Martholme Hall, on the family's Great Harwood estate, where his actively recusant mother also lived and kept a seminary priest, and where Thomas cultivated what must have been a remarkable garden on the banks of the River Calder. 
About this date Thomas Hesketh began to correspond with John Gerard, and he became the source of a great deal of the botanical information used in Gerard's famous 'Herball'. Hesketh also corresponded with Lord Burghley, for whom the Cheshire-born Gerard acted as gardener at his houses in the Strand and at Theobalds. Hesketh seems to have supplied many of the famous late Elizabethan London gardens and nurseries with seeds and plants from the herb gardens, moorlands, and mosses of the north of England. Many of these plants were the 'simples' or the herbs and medicines used in his Clitheroe medical practice. 
One of the ways to identify the mass of botanical information supplied by Hesketh for Gerard's 'Herball' lies in the locations of the plants listed, with the Hesketh estates and their surroundings given as the habitat for many of these specimens. One berry ('Herba Paris'), along with purple goat's beard ('Tragopogon purpureum'), red bird eyne, 'Primula veris flore rubro', and the bird cherry tree or wild black berry tree ('Prunus padus'), were all to be found at Martholme, and the double white rose could be found at Rufford, the Hesketh family's main seat. According to Gerard, Hesketh introduced the double wild crowfoot from the fields around the village of Hesketh into London gardens. Hesketh also made many plant-gathering expeditions to the remoter moorlands of Pendle, Craven, and Lunedale, where he famously recorded the cloudberry, known also as the whinberry or bilberry. On the Lancashire seashore Hesketh recorded such plants as the wild rose campion and English sea campion, but most commonly he recorded many plants in his own garden, such as pepperwort or Dittander. 
As one of the earliest north-country botanists, Thomas Hesketh recorded a landscape with a great profusion of wild plants, especially flowers. Much of this landscape was obliterated by the agricultural and industrial revolutions. With the draining of the huge moss lands that were once the predominant feature, plants such as the Lancashire bugloss, the butterwort, Lancashire bog asphodel, and many others recorded by Hesketh as growing in profusion, have now become rarities. In Clapdale, near Settle in Yorkshire, Hesketh recorded the primula which became known as 'Primula veris Heskethi', or 'Mr Hesketh's Primrose', when it was included by Johnson in the 1636 edition of Gerard's 'Herball'. It was also illustrated in Parkinson's 'Theatrum botanicum' of 1640. Some confusion surrounds 'Mr Hesketh's Primrose', which later could not be found in Clapdale, but flourished in Gerard's and Johnson's and other fashionable London gardens. Perhaps a hybrid of the primrose and cowslip, it now seems to have disappeared. 
Gerard often acknowledged Thomas Hesketh in his 'Herball'. The cloudberry, for instance, had been discovered in a mountain habitat by 'a curious gentleman in the knowledge of plants, called Mr. Hesketh, often remembered' (Gerard, 1396). The same volume noted that: 'there is a strange primrose found in a wood in Yorkshire growing wild, by the travels and industry of a learned gentleman of Lancashire called Mr Thomas Hesketh, a dilligent searcher of simples who hath not only brought to light this amiable and pleasant Primrose but many others also never before remembered or found out. (Gerard, 780)' Hesketh died at Clitheroe Castle on 7 December 1613, according to the inquisition post mortem taken there on 10 January 1614. His heir was his brother Robert. 


@@@@@


doc= 13129


Heskyns, Thomas (fl. 1540-1565), Roman Catholic priest, was born at Heskin, in the parish of Eccleston, Lancashire. He is said to have studied for twelve years at Oxford before removing to Cambridge, where he commenced MA in 1540, being then a priest and a fellow of Clare College. He graduated BTh at Cambridge in 1548. When it was proposed in 1549 to suppress Clare College in order to unite it with Trinity Hall, Heskyns signed a paper consenting to the dissolution, even though this was contrary to his oath to the college. He was rector of Hildersham, Cambridgeshire, from 1551 to 1556, and was admitted canon of Salisbury and prebendary of Torleton in 1554. He proceeded DTh in 1557. On 18 October 1558 he was appointed chancellor of Sarum by Cardinal Pole, and on 16 November the same year he became vicar of Brixworth, Northamptonshire -- a benefice in his own gift as chancellor. 
After the accession of Queen Elizabeth, Heskyns was deprived of all his offices in August 1559 for refusing to swear to the royal supremacy, and took up residence in Flanders. The often repeated assertion that he became a Dominican is based on dubious evidence. He secretly returned briefly to England in 1565, when Philip Baker, provost of King's College, Cambridge, was charged with having entertained him under cover of darkness. His most important work, published at Antwerp in 1566, was 'The Parliament of Chryste', a response to the sermon delivered at Paul's Cross in November 1559, in which John Jewel challenged his Catholic opponents to produce evidence of the antiquity of the doctrine of transubstantiation and the real presence. The book, written in 'plain' style for the general reader, prompted a riposte by William Fulke, 'Heskins 'Parleament' Repealed', printed in Fulke's 'D. Heskins... Overthrowne' (1579). The date of Heskyns's death is not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 13130


Heslop, Luke (1738-1825), Church of England clergyman, was born and baptized on St Luke's day (18 October) 1738, in Yorkshire. He was admitted as a sizar at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, on 3 May 1760 and was appointed chapel clerk on 31 October following; he also acted as temporary librarian for an interval, a responsible position for an, admittedly older, undergraduate. Heslop was subsequently elected to the Archbishop Sterne scholarship on 19 October 1764 and also held a Spencer scholarship. He became a fellow of Corpus on 26 January 1769. He was senior wrangler in 1764, and graduated BA in 1764, MA in 1767, and BD in 1775. Heslop was an unsuccessful candidate for the professorship of chemistry in 1771, but served as moderator of the university for the tripos examinations of 1772 and 1773. He was ordained deacon (Norwich diocese) on 13 May 1764 and subsequently priest, serving as curate of Gislingham, Suffolk, in 1764. 
On 31 December 1772 Heslop married Dorothy, daughter of the Revd Dr Thomas Reeve FRCP (1700-1780), and thereafter his career took shape outside Cambridge. On 28 September 1776 he was collated prebendary in St Paul's Cathedral, having been previously collated to the vicarage of St Peter-le-Poer (within the jurisdiction of the peculiar of the dean and chapter of St Paul's) on 21 June 1775. Heslop owed much to the patronage of John Green, bishop of Lincoln (1761-79) and formerly master of Corpus (1750-63), who appointed Heslop his examining chaplain and, on 2 September 1778, collated him to the archdeaconry of Buckingham, to which a prebendal stall at Lincoln (Heydour-cum-Walton) was attached. Heslop was inducted, on 9 January 1777, to the benefice of Adstock, Buckinghamshire (also in the gift of the bishop of Lincoln), which he held until 1803 with the rectory of the adjacent village of Addington, to which he was presented by Dame Anne Tynte and inducted on 31 March 1792, thereupon resigning the benefice of St Peter-le-Poer. He also acted as a magistrate in Buckinghamshire. 
In 1804 Heslop resigned his living of Addington on becoming rector of Fulmer, Buckinghamshire, on the presentation of the dean and chapter of Windsor. The same year he additionally accepted the valuable rectory of Bothal, Northumberland, which he was awarded through the influence of the third duke of Portland, his neighbour in Buckinghamshire and lord president of the council in Henry Addington's administration. Heslop resigned Bothal in 1809 on being appointed rector of the extra-episcopal parish of St Marylebone, Middlesex, also in Portland's gift. He at once removed to London to devote himself to his overgrown parish (the rectory and its patronage were sold by the fourth duke to the crown in 1817). Heslop saw the necessity of parochial reorganization. In 1820 he proposed to the commissioners for building new churches that his parish should be split into four parts with district chapels in each one, the whole under the jurisdiction of the bishop of London. In 1810 he was awarded his last piece of patronage when he was named rector of both St Stephen's and St Augustine's, Bristol. His constitution was vigorous and he hardly suffered from ill health until aged over eighty, though he held no visitation of the Buckingham archdeaconry after 1809. He died, at 27 Nottingham Place, Marylebone, Middlesex, on 23 June 1825, aged eighty-six, and was buried in the new church of St Marylebone, opened in 1817 and designed to fit into the grand Regent's Park scheme of Thomas Nash. Despite his numerous preferments he died a comparatively poor man. Dorothy Heslop died at Bury St Edmunds on 28 December 1827, aged seventy-nine, and was survived by one son and one daughter. 
Heslop was the author of two sermons and a charge (1807). He took a lifelong interest in political economy and published 'Observations on the Statute of 31 Geo. II, c. 29, Concerning the Assize of Bread' (1799); 'A Comparative Statement of the Food Produced from Arable and Grass Land and the Returns from each, with Observations on Inclosures and the Effect of an Act for Enclosing Commons' (1801); and 'Observations on the Duty of Property, Professions, & c. to Render its Assessment Simple, and to Improve it' (1805). He was awarded a Lambeth DD by Archbishop Manners-Sutton in 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 13131


Heslop, Thomas Pretious (1823-1885), physician, was born in Bermuda, the son of Thomas Heslop, a Scottish officer of the Royal Artillery, and his wife, formerly Miss Owen, a native of Dublin. He was apprenticed to his uncle, Dr Thomas Underhill, of Tipton, Staffordshire, and then continued his medical studies at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1844; he also attended courses at some of the minor Irish medical schools. In 1847 he went to the University of Edinburgh, where he took, among other courses, midwifery with J. Y. Simpson. Heslop left Edinburgh in 1848 having graduated MD, his thesis being 'On morbid conditions of the heart occurring during fever'. 
Heslop then went to Birmingham, where he spent the rest of his life. He was appointed house physician to Birmingham General Hospital in 1848, and he held this office until 1852, when he left to enter private practice in Temple Row. A shortage of patients, however, induced him to lecture on physiology at Queen's College, Birmingham, from 1853 to 1858, and to act as physician to the Queen's Hospital from 1853 to 1860. He resigned from the former after objecting to William Sands Cox's administration of the college, and from the latter in consequence of conflicts in the management of the hospital. During his time at the hospital Heslop had nevertheless had the opportunity of experimenting with certain iron salts, the results of which were the subject of his first publication, a pamphlet entitled 'Suggestions Relative to the Employment of the Tincture of Sesquichloride in Puerperal Peritonitis, Iritis, and Allied Disorders' (1858). The following year Heslop became a member of the Royal College of Physicians, of which he was made a fellow in 1872. In 1870 he was persuaded to serve a second term of office at Queen's Hospital, where he occupied the position of senior physician until 1882. 
Throughout his life Heslop also undertook several significant acts of charity. His first was the establishment in 1861 of the Free Hospital for Children, of which he remained a medical officer. He had founded the hospital with C. E. Mathews after recognizing Birmingham's excessive infant mortality levels and becoming convinced that the diseases of children could not be adequately treated in general hospitals. A decade later, in 1871, the Women's Hospital also came into existence through his initiative. A third foundation, the Skin and Lock Hospital, was established in 1880 at Heslop's expense. He was a member of the William Dudley Trust and an active participant in the Birmingham health lectures, opening the series with a paper entitled 'Ways and Means of Health' (1883). His other publications include, 'On the Present Rate of Remuneration of the Medical Officers to Sick Assurance Societies' (1867), and 'The Realities of Medical Attendance on the Sick Children of the Poor in Large Towns' (1869), both of which he read before branches of the British Medical Association. 
Heslop's interest in education was made clear in the address 'A Glance at the History and Prospects of Education' while president of the Harborne and Edgbaston Institute in 1882. Soon after arriving in Birmingham, Heslop had established the Midland Medical Society, and along with George Yates he was one of its honorary secretaries. At a later date he founded and managed the Birmingham Philosophical Society. His most important educational work, however, was done as a governor of King Edward's School, and as chairman of Mason College (of which he had been appointed a trustee in 1873). From the opening of the college until 1884 Heslop occupied the position of chairman of the educational committee; he became bailiff in 1884 and also president of the council, an office he retained until his death. In his final years he helped to establish the institution's library, providing it with 11,000 books, including several complete sets of scientific and literary periodicals. 
Heslop died as a result of heart disease, on 17 June 1885, while travelling 'on the High Road coming to Braemar from Glenshee' (death cert.). His body was transported to Dublin, where it was buried alongside that of his mother, on 20 June. Heslop bequeathed $100 to both the Queen's Hospital and the Free Hospital for Children, Birmingham, and a more substantial sum to Mason College. 


@@@@@


doc= 13132


Hessel, Phoebe (1713-1821), female soldier and centenarian, was probably born in Stepney, London. Her father was a 'drummer in the king's service' ('Circulator', 147), but further details of her parents and upbringing are unknown. A tombstone in St Nicholas's churchyard, Brighton, relates that Phoebe Hessel was born in Stepney in 1713 and 'served for many years as a private Soldier in the 5th Regiment of foot in different parts of Europe, and in the year 1745 fought under the command of the Duke of Cumberland at the battle of Fontenoy, where she received a bayonet wound in her arm. (Incompletely cited in 'N&Q', 1852, 170)' According to one account of 1825, the young Phoebe Smith accompanied her father to Flanders when her mother died, learned to play the fife, and enlisted in the regiment (cited in Wheelwright, 42-3). Other accounts describe her enlisting in 1728 to accompany a private, Samuel Golding, with whom she had 'formed a strong attachment', serving with him in the West Indies and Gibraltar (Hone, 210). One biographical sketch has the couple marrying when Golding leaves the army; she later married William Hessel, although no further details are known. Various nineteenth-century accounts portray Hessel as a well-known 'character' living in Woburn Place, Brighton, and relate stories of her soldiering reportedly recorded from her own telling. One notice of 1817 describes an encounter between the old and impoverished Hessel and the visiting prince regent ('GM', 550). Another report, on Brighton's celebration of the prince's coronation as George IV in July 1821, refers to the participation of the 107-year-old Hessel and gives a summary of her military career (Musgrave, 164-5). According to her tombstone she died on 12 December 1821. She was buried four days later at St Nicholas's Church, Brighthelmstone (Brighton). 
Hessel probably did serve in the military, like many other women, and attained a great age. However, stories of her soldiering are contradictory and legendary, conforming more to conventions of the eighteenth-century preoccupation with cross-dressing women in popular songs and prose accounts than to the official records of military history. At the same time, legends about the masquerading Hessel supply an important, if partially fanciful, glimpse of a noteworthy individual from the lowest social ranks for whom by definition more substantial documentation was not created or preserved. 


@@@@@


doc= 13133


Hessey, James Augustus (1814-1892), headmaster and Church of England clergyman, was born in St Bride's, London, on 17 July 1814, the eldest son of James Augustus Hessey and his wife, Catherine. His father, a bookseller and printer in partnership with John Taylor at 93 Fleet Street, had published early work by Keats and owned the 'London Magazine' (1821-5). Hessey was educated at Merchant Taylors' School from 1823 until 1832, when he matriculated at St John's College, Oxford. He graduated BA in 1836, taking a first class in the classical school, MA in 1840, BD in 1845, and DCL in 1846. A fellow of his college from 1832 to 1846, he was an examiner at Oxford (1842-4), and published an analysis of Aristotle's 'Rhetoric' for undergraduate use (1845). In 1839 he held the vicarage of Hellidon, Northamptonshire, relinquishing the living on his appointment to a college lectureship. 
On 23 July 1845 Hessey was appointed headmaster of Merchant Taylors' School. His period of office was one of 'unspectacular modernisation' (Draper, 163). His natural charm helped to persuade both the boys and the autocratic governing body, the Merchant Taylors' Company, to accept changes in existing customs and practices, bringing the school more into line with other public schools. He gave evidence to the Clarendon commission (28 June 1862). On 27 July 1847 he married Emma, second daughter of the stockbroker Philip Cazenove of Clapham Common. He was preacher of Gray's Inn from 1850 to 1879, and was appointed by A. C. Tait, bishop of London, to the prebendal stall of Oxgate, in St Paul's Cathedral, which he held until 1875. 
Hessey resigned the headmastership in December 1870, shortly after his appointment by the bishop of London, John Jackson (1811-1885), as one of his examining chaplains. An orthodox churchman, he was particularly active in opposing changes to the laws of marriage, publishing in 1850 'A Scripture Argument Against Permitting Marriage with a Wife's Sister' (3rd edn, 1855). He preached the Bampton lectures at Oxford, published as 'Sunday, its Origin, History, and Present Obligation' (1860; 5th edn, 1889). In 1865 and again in 1867 he was elected Grinfield lecturer on the 'Septuagint' at Oxford. His Boyle lectures for 1871-3 were entitled 'Moral Difficulties Connected with the Bible' (1871-3). In June 1875 he was appointed archdeacon of Middlesex. A scholarly and urbane clergyman he was elected in 1879 a member of the club Nobody's Friends. In 1878 and 1879 he was select preacher in the University of Cambridge. He was also one of the three permanent chairmen of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, and an active member of nearly all the church societies. In 1884 the University of the South, Tennessee, conferred upon him the degree of DD. Hessey died at his home, 41 Leinster Gardens, Hyde Park, London, on 24 December 1892. 


@@@@@


doc= 13134


Hester, John (d. 1592), distiller and translator, lived for several years in London but nothing is known of his parentage or place of birth. One Hester family, location unknown, bore arms (argent on a bend sable three swans of the field); another shield of arms (a chevron between three horses' heads erased, a crescent for difference) is appended to Hester's 'Short Discours' (1580), but the significance of this is not apparent. A follower of Paracelsus, John Hester is noticed first through his book 'The True and Perfect Order to Distill Oyles' (1575). George Baker, a London surgeon, commended four distillers, including Hester, who 'is a painful [painstaking] travailer in those matters' (Baker, preface). Hester carried on business under the sign of the Furnaces (1581) or the Stillatory (1591), at his house on Paul's Wharf, on the Thames waterfront, south of St Paul's Cathedral, in the parish of St Benet Paul's Wharf. 
Hester advertised his preparations by distributing printed broadsheets of folio size: one example (it bears Gabriel Harvey's signature and the date 1588 in ink) lists his stock-in-trade, mostly under the items' Latin names. The heading states that 'These oils, waters, extractions, or essence[s,] salts and other compositions are... ready made to be sold by John Hester', who was willing to give instruction in his art, 'for a reasonable stipend'. 'Oils' included cinnamon, aniseed, gum ammoniac, and 'Fraxini' (probably manna ash, 'Fraxinus ornus'). 'Waters' included frankincense, honey, and (spirits of) hartshorn. 'Salts' included ginger, sage, and mugwort ('Artemisia vulgaris'). 'Extracts or essences' were such as rhubarb, Alexandrian senna ('Cassia acutifolia'), and agaric (from the fungus 'Fomes officinalis'). 'The compositions of divers authors' included flowers of sulphur and oil of camphor. Many items could have appeared in an English 'materia medica' of the 1880s but 'Certain compositions of Leonardi Phirovanti' belong to this earlier period: 'La petra philosophale nostra' ('The philosophers' stone medicine'), and 'Elixer vitae' ('Elixir of life'). Although virtually all these wares were medicinal or culinary, there were rare exceptions, such as 'Divers compositions of most strange [and] terrible fireworks, made by the Sp[age]rical art' (alchemy), and 'a certain kind of pitch for trimmin[g] ships'. 
In the period 1575 to 1591 Hester was producing medical books. He edited 'A Joyfull Jewell' ([1579]) by L. Fiorovantie, and translated from the Italian by Thomas Hill, but mostly he translated books from Latin or Italian into English, including one on the 'French pox' (syphilis), and another on gunshot and other wounds. He translated two of Paracelsus's works as 'The Key of Philosophie' (1580) and '114 Experiments' (1583?). His 'Short Discours... uppon Chirurgerie', translated from the work by L. Fiorovantie, was dedicated to the earl of Oxford, and 'Sclopotarie' (1590) to Essex. 
Hester is unlikely to have been wealthy. His name is absent from lay subsidy assessments; in 1586 he was assessed for two-fifteenths at the modest sum of 8died, when the highest rate in St Benet Paul's Wharf was 3's'. 4died The dates of his death and burial have not been ascertained but administration of his estate, as late of St Benet Paul's Wharf parish, was granted to his widow, Elizabeth, on 29 August 1592. However, Hester's high reputation survived him. Gabriel Harvey, in his 'Pierces Supererogation' (1593), named six men who had been foremost in their professions: 'a mathematical mechanician' (Humphrey Cole), a shipwright (Matthew Baker), an architect (John Shute), a 'navigator' (Robert Norman), a gunner (William Bourne), and John Hester, a chemist (Grosart, 2.289). In 'The Pearle of Practise' (1595), James Fourestier acknowledged that his material had been 'Found out by I[ohn]. H[ester].', though 'Since his death it is garnished and brought into some method by a wellwisher of his' (title-page): it had even been 'wanting a name (which I have given unto it)' (ibid., dedication). As to the numerous compounds contained therein: 'The greater part of them were prepared by John Hester... a man that spent much, and endangered his body, about such works, whereof many excellent men have enjoyed the benefit.... All which as not long since I bought of the survivor. (ibid., epistle to the reader)' 



@@@@@


doc= 13135


Heston, Walter (d. in or before 1359), Carmelite theologian and philosopher, joined the order in Stamford. He studied at Cambridge University and had achieved his doctorate there by 10 September 1337, when he was licensed to hear confessions for two years in Ely diocese. He continued to lecture at Cambridge, receiving further licences to hear confessions on 21 January 1340, 27 December 1341, and 29 November 1345. Later he returned to Stamford where he was given permission to hear confessions in the Northampton deanery on 26 March 1347 and 28 October 1347. He died in Stamford some time between 1347 and 1359. John Bale describes him as 'studious and learned in religious doctrine and by no means ignorant in the secular sciences: he was gifted with a keen intelligence and clear speech, and gave himself wholeheartedly to the study of philosophy. In this field, he made valuable discoveries and was responsible for some well-prepared texts, with original interpretations and many interesting, intricate observations. (BL, MS Harley 3838, fol. 70'v')' Bale appears to have seen only one work by Heston, 'quaestiones' on Aristotle's 'De anima', in three books which he records with incipit. 
Heston has at various times been mistakenly identified with Walter Kellaw, Carmelite provincial in the 1350s, and with Walter Kesso, prior at Bruges in the late thirteenth century. Francis Peck, the historian of Stamford, claimed that Heston was prior in Stamford, and possibly lectured in the breakaway university there in 1344. But Heston was then in Cambridge, and there is no evidence that he was ever prior. 


@@@@@


doc= 13136


Hetherington, Henry (1792-1849), publisher and journalist, was born in Compton Street, Soho, London, the eldest of the three children of John Hetherington, a tailor. He may have been the Henry John William Hetherington baptized at St Anne's, Soho, on 1 September 1792, in which case his mother was probably Elizabeth Rundle, who had married a John Hetherington at the same church on 18 June 1789. Little is known about his early life. At the age of thirteen Hetherington was apprenticed to Luke Hansard, the parliamentary printer. In 1811 he married, and subsequently he and his wife had nine children. For a time he worked as a printer in Belgium. About 1815 he returned to London and established a printing business on Kingsgate Street, near Holborn. He remained there until the beginning of 1834, when he moved his business to the Strand. During the final fifteen years of his life he worked and resided at two other locations in central London. 
Hetherington's career as a journalist took form in the 1820s. He became active in the London Mechanics' Institution and in organizations which supported the ideas of Robert Owen, including the Co-operative and Economical Society, formed in 1821, and the British Association for Promoting Co-operative Knowledge, which was founded in 1829. Hetherington also took up the cause of universal suffrage, seeking to infuse it with a vision of economic and social justice. As his views became increasingly radical, he immersed himself in the political culture of working-class London. He became active in three organizations, all of which were engaged in the struggle for political democracy: the Radical Reform Association, led by Henry Hunt; the Metropolitan Political Union, whose council Hetherington served on; and the National Union of the Working Classes, which opposed the whig 'Reform Bill' of 1832 because it did not provide for universal suffrage. 
During the 1820s Hetherington was little known. He published several radical tracts and pamphlets, but none won him particular attention. Then, in October 1830, he took up the cause with which his name will always be identified: that of a penny press. The issue involved the repeal of the taxes on newspapers and other printed materials, which had first been imposed in 1712. These duties had become more onerous since 1819, when the 4died newspaper duty was applied to all journals issued on a regular basis. For Hetherington the 'taxes on knowledge' became the defining issue of his career because he thought they unfairly punished the poor and obstructed the advancement of political and economic knowledge. He began to publish weekly unstamped journals, which were illegal. The most famous and important of these was the 'Poor Man's Guardian', first issued in July 1831, in 'defiance of the 'law' to try the power of 'right' against 'might''. It remained in circulation until December 1835. 
Beginning in 1831 Hetherington engaged in full-scale political warfare against the whig government. He hired shop-owners and street vendors to sell the 'Poor Man's Guardian' and his other illegal papers, which included the 'Republican' (1831-2), the ''Destructive' and Poor Man's Conservative' (1833-4), and 'Hetherington's Twopenny Dispatch, and People's Police Register' (1834-6). He employed various ruses in the distribution of these papers, including physical disguises and the making up of dummy runs. He also gave numerous speeches to groups of radicals in London, the English provinces, and Scotland, taunting the authorities for maintaining a system of inequality between rich and poor. Repeatedly he attacked 'old corruption' and appealed to a vaguely defined working-class consciousness based on an alleged dichotomy between industrious producers and idle consumers. 
Hetherington was prosecuted several times for seditious libel and selling unstamped newspapers. He was fined, had his presses seized, and on three occasions between 1831 and 1836 was imprisoned. He spent a total of about sixteen months in the king's bench prison and in New prison, Clerkenwell. At his trials Hetherington defended himself vigorously, and printed cheap verbatim accounts of his legal battles. Other radical journalists followed his lead, and between 1830 and 1836, when the 4died stamp duty was reduced to a penny, more than 500 unstamped periodical titles were published. Hundreds of street vendors were also incarcerated for distributing illegal papers. Hetherington formed close friendships with other working-class radical reformers during this 'war of the unstamped', notably James Watson and William Lovett. While he did little writing himself, Hetherington hired talented editors for his journals, including Bronterre O'Brien ('Poor Man's Guardian') and William J. Linton ('The Odd Fellow'). 
After 1836 Hetherington remained a powerful advocate of universal suffrage and economic co-operation. He also began to champion more mainstream reform issues, such as the repeal of the corn laws and temperance legislation. Along with Watson, Lovett, and other working-class reformers, he became a leader of the moderate 'knowledge' wing of the Chartist movement which emerged in 1837. He was a founder of the London Working Men's Association, which promoted self-reformation and the 'march of intellect' as an alternative to political revolution. Hetherington toured cities and towns throughout the country as a 'missionary' on behalf of the association, helping to build up local Chartist organizations. In 1839 he was elected to represent London and Stockport at the first Chartist convention. There he attacked Feargus O'Connor's National Charter Association and advocated the fusion of the 'moral' and 'physical' wings of Chartism. He was active at the Complete Suffrage conferences of 1842 in support of this objective. Hetherington also worked closely with Lovett, W. J. Linton, Thomas Cooper, and other reformers to promote working-class literary and temperance activities at the John Street Institute in London and elsewhere. In the 1840s he took up international causes, for instance supporting the French revolutionaries of 1848 and the efforts of Giuseppe Mazzini, the Italian nationalist, to bring about the unification of Italy. He was active in the People's International League, an organization which opposed the radical ideas of Karl Marx. 
Hetherington's final years were dominated by yet another cause. This was religious freethinking, which he had advocated since the 1820s. At that time he had been involved with an organization of freethinking Christians who espoused a radical unitarianism. After being expelled by the group in 1828 he took up a modified rationalist creed based upon the ideas of primitive Christianity. In 1840 Hetherington was prosecuted for blasphemy, after publishing a cheap edition of C. J. Haslam's 'Letters to the Clergy of All Denominations'. This was a gratuitous act by the whig government; Hetherington did not specifically endorse the ideas in the book, which was largely an attack on the 'Old Testament'. At his well-publicized trial, Hetherington energetically championed the cause of religious freedom. He was convicted and sent to prison for four months. Two years later, in 1843, he reprinted a pamphlet, 'Cheap Salvation, or, An Antidote to Priestcraft', which he had first written in 1832. In it he made the case for a 'Church of Christ', devoid of superstition and priestcraft. In his 'Last Will and Testament', published just before his death in 1849 by George Jacob Holyoake and a group of secularists, he reaffirmed his belief in rational religion and requested that he be buried in unconsecrated ground. 
Hetherington possessed some of the defects common to the self-educated artisan: a lack of humour, a touch of self-righteousness, and a tendency to equate personal morality with political conviction. Francis Place, a quondam ally, criticized him for being 'one of those men whose peculiarities fit them for martyrs' (BL, Place MSS). Other reformers with whom he quarrelled, such as Richard Carlile, were even harsher in their criticism. Yet, in retrospect, it is perhaps best to see Hetherington as a man of genuine conviction and courage who sacrificed a measure of personal comfort for his beliefs. He was not an original thinker, but as a symbol of conscience in the face of numerous political obstacles he loomed large in the history of working-class radicalism. 
During his final years Hetherington fell heavily into debt. Eight of his nine children predeceased him and only his wife and one son, David, survived him. In 1849 Hetherington became a victim of cholera. Acting out of personal conviction he eschewed all medical treatment, which almost certainly hastened the spread of the disease. He died at 57 Judd Street, Hanover Square, London, on 24 August 1849, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery two days later. About two thousand friends and admirers attended the service, which consisted of speeches by radicals and freethinkers. No clergyman was present at the burial. Fittingly, the hearse which carried Hetherington's body to the cemetery was emblazoned with his own words: 'We ought to endeavour to leave the world better than we found it.' 


@@@@@


doc= 13137


Hetherington, William Maxwell (1803-1865), poet and minister of the Free Church of Scotland, was born on 4 June 1803 in the parish of Troqueer, near Dumfries, the son of Robert Hetherington, gardener, and his wife, Anne Maxwell. Having received a parish-school education, he was trained as a gardener, but entered the University of Edinburgh in 1822, and became a distinguished student. Before completing his studies for the church he published 'Twelve Dramatic Sketches Founded on the Pastoral Poetry of Scotland' (1829). These eulogies of Scottish peasantry were all inspired by or imitated traditional popular lyrics. 
Hetherington became minister of Torphichen, Linlithgow, in 1836; and on 29 May 1836 he married Jessie, daughter of the Revd Dr Meek, of Hamilton. His 'History of the Church of Scotland from the Introduction of Christianity to the Period of the Disruption, May 18, 1843', was published in 1843. It was preceded by an essay 'On the principles and constitution of the Church of Scotland', and was reprinted several times. Its avowed purpose was to defend the newly created Free Church, of which he was one of the founder members. In 1844 he was appointed to a charge in St Andrews; there he established the 'Free Church Magazine' which he edited for four years. He also contributed to religious periodicals, especially the 'British and Foreign Evangelical Review', and published sermons, poems, and some small religious and historical works. He became minister of Free St Paul's, Edinburgh, in 1848; and was appointed professor of theology at New College, Glasgow, in 1857. He was made LLD by the College of New Brunswick, Canada, and DD by Jefferson College, Pennsylvania. He died at 13 Oakfield Terrace, Hillhead, Glasgow, on 23 May 1865, survived by his wife, and was buried in the Grange cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 13138


Heton, Martin (1554-1609), bishop of Ely, was born in the London parish of St Dionis Backchurch and baptized there on 10 March 1554, the youngest child of George Heton (b. c.1515, d. in or after 1598), merchant, and his second wife, Joan ('nee' Bowes, formerly Roocke). That his mother was buried there ten days later lends credence to the statement on his memorial inscription in Ely Cathedral, composed by his chancellor William Gager, that, dying in childbirth, she had dedicated him to the service of God and the protestant cause ('Deo & ecclesiae reformatae'). In other respects, however, Gager's inscription has proved misleading, above all in twice misstating the bishop's age, giving it as thirty-six in 1589 and fifty-seven at his death. All former accounts have therefore assumed that he was born in 1552. 
Educated at Westminster School, Heton matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1571. He graduated BA on 17 December 1574 and proceeded MA on 2 May 1578, meanwhile winning a reputation as an able and subtle disputant in philosophy and afterwards in theology. Granted letters patent in 1580 for the next vacant stall in Christ Church, he was instituted canon of the seventh prebend on 2 December 1582. He proceeded BD on 6 July 1584, was nominated vice-chancellor of Oxford on 16 July 1588, and in February 1589, not yet thirty-five years old, succeeded Laurence Humphrey as dean of Winchester. Instituted by Bishop Thomas Cooper on the crown's presentation, Heton owed his promotion to Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, who at his majority in 1588 began an assiduous courtship of the London godly community and their families. 
Heton commenced DD on 6 July 1589, and when Elizabeth visited Oxford in 1592 he was one of those who preached before her at Christ Church. Present at convocation on 16 March 1593, he was one of the deans of the formerly monastic cathedral chapters who petitioned for confirmation of their grants. In August 1596 Essex perhaps considered urging Heton's claims as dean of Westminster if Gabriel Goodman were to be elevated to the bench of bishops. 
After the death on 20 September following of William Day, bishop of Winchester, fifteen Hampshire gentlemen petitioned Essex to support Heton's candidacy as his successor. Respectfully thanking Essex for securing him the deanery, they praised his preaching, his hospitality and the 'wise direction' of his life. No predecessor's 'severity' had been as effective in promoting religion ('Salisbury MSS', 14.11). In the event Essex supported Thomas Bilson, the successful candidate, and it must be doubted whether Elizabeth would have considered conferring so senior a bishopric on a man of only forty-two. 
On 3 February 1600, however, Heton was consecrated bishop of Ely, vacant since the death of Richard Cox in 1581. The promotion had been recently refused by Lancelot Andrewes, who declined to alienate episcopal estates as the price of his elevation. Sir John Harington, a courtier who was in a position to know, believed that Heton was 'compelled in a sort to take the bishoprick on these terms' (Harington, 2.111), but Thomas Fuller later observed that 'his memory groaneth under the suspicion of simoniacal compliance' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 2.199). 
The truth is more complex. Whilst the lord treasurer, Lord Buckhurst, fully admitted to Robert Cecil that he drove a hard bargain, the negotiations were carried through under the terms of the 'Act of Exchange' (1559), by which the crown was obliged, during the vacancy of any see, to compensate it with 'spiritualities' (impropriate rectories) of equivalent value if it elected to withhold any temporal possessions from the next incumbent. Although Cecil finally achieved his objective by the simpler method of granting Heton all Ely's ancient estates on the understanding that once in office he would convey to the crown those which it wanted -- hence Fuller's reference to 'simoniacal compliance' -- the agreed exchanges did in fact take place and the official valuation of the see remained at $2124 18's'. 5died, the figure at which it had been assessed in the 'valor ecclesiasticus' of 1535. 
Thus the treasury evidently did not believe that the arrangement would lead to the impoverishment of the diocese, and Buckhurst further agreed to Heton's stipulation that he would enter into bonds to pay first-fruits only on condition that Buckhurst secured him a royal warrant of exoneration. This Heton duly received on 16 May 1600. Elizabeth's stated reasons for waiving her right to more than $1900 in taxes was her usual one: that the new bishop would be 'better able to keep good hospitality and serve God and the queen' (TNA: PRO, E337/12, no. 117). Since Lancelot Andrewes finally accepted the see after Heton's death it would also seem to follow that by 1609 he recognized that Ely's financial resources had not been seriously impaired by the exchanges of ten years earlier. 
A successful and popular bishop, Heton was esteemed 'inferior to few of his rank for learning and other good parts belonging to a prelate' (Harington, 2.111). His hospitality, as at Winchester, earned him the reputation of being 'the best housekeeper within man's remembrance' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 2.199) -- further evidence, perhaps, that the government's original demands on the see had been realistic rather than outrageous. He engaged conscientiously in every aspect of episcopal government and also appeared annually as a judge at assize. He formally visited his diocese in 1601, 1604, and 1607, conducting proceedings himself and preaching regularly. His own generous hospitality was willingly returned. On progress in 1607 he and his retinue dined in the houses of local clergy, his hosts being excused their visitation procuration fees in lieu. 
As a disciplinarian Heton evidently showed great tact. He heard sensitive cases in private rather than in consistory, and was sparing in his use of the penalties available to him under canon law. After 1604, when James I reintroduced subscription to Archbishop Whitgift's articles as his badge of inclusion within the established church, Heton seems to have handled the situation with skill: he was obliged to deprive none of his clergy for nonconformity. 
James admired Heton, now grown stout, for his eloquence in the pulpit. Whilst 'fat men were wont to make lean sermons, his were not lean, but larded with much good learning' (Harington, 2.111). Although he published none, the sermon preached at Whitehall on 10 April 1603 on the text 'Come unto me all ye that labour' is preserved in summary in John Manningham's diary. Heton never lost touch with his roots within the London godly community. One of the (in the event, unneeded) sureties for his episcopal first-fruits was the future Sir Thomas Smith (died 1625), who became governor of the East India Company, and he contributed $40 towards the purchase of books for Sir Thomas Bodley's newly established library in Oxford. The fathers of both Smith and Bodley had been close associates of his own father and of his uncle Thomas Heton. 
Heton died at Mildenhall, Suffolk, where he had retired for health reasons, on 14 July 1609. His brief and curious will, made four days earlier, contains no formal or religious preamble and no bequests. His funeral was to be conducted 'without any pomp or show'. He requested a 'convenient tomb', either in Ely Cathedral or in Downham parish church. That expense discharged, his goods were to be sold and the profits divided into five equal parts, two going to his wife, Alice, and the other three to be equally divided between his daughters Anne and Elizabeth. Alice was named sole executrix, no overseers being appointed (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/115, fol. 225'v'). Since she was not granted probate until 26 April 1610 it is possible that the document was not accepted until it had been established that no more formal last will and testament existed. 
Heton was buried in the south aisle of the presbytery of Ely Cathedral. His life-size alabaster effigy wears a rich cope embroidered with figures of the apostles. As well as William Gager's Latin epitaph there are verses by his nephew George, BD of Cambridge, the son of his brother Thomas (died 1606), whom in 1600 he had appointed bailiff of the Isle of Ely. Heton's daughter Anne married Sir Robert Filmer (died 1653) and Elizabeth Sir Edward Fish of Bedfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 13139


Heton, Thomas (b. c.1520, d. in or after 1587), merchant and religious activist, was probably the Thomas Etton made free of the Mercers' Company in 1539 as late apprentice of William Locke. Such a date suggests he was born about 1520. The memorial inscription of his nephew Martin Heton suggests that Thomas was descended from the family of Heton of Lancashire. However, an alternative parentage may be provided in the will of William Heton, merchant tailor of London. Heton's will, dated 28 October 1523 and proved on 22 December, refers to 'George, Anne, and Thomas, mine own natural children', all of whom were then underage. Like his brother George Heton, he became a 'sustainer' of protestants after the accession of Mary. Unlike George, he quickly chose exile and on 4 April 1554 petitioned the council of Strasbourg for burgher rights. Thereafter he kept open house for fugitive fellow countrymen, such as James Pilkington and Thomas Sampson. In September 1557 he signed Strasbourg's letter of reconciliation with the Frankfurt exile community and on 5 December 1558 thanked the Strasbourg magistrates for their hospitality since 1554. 
On his return to the England of Elizabeth, Heton settled in the London parish of St Lawrence Jewry. In April 1560 he stood surety for Edwin Sandys's firstfruits as bishop of Worcester and in June was present at the election of elders for the re-established French protestant church in London. It was probably he rather than George whom John Jewel described later that year as his 'friend Mr Heton' (BL, Egerton MS 2533, fol. 5'r'). Heton had advanced him $307, the entire sum needed to discharge Jewel's initial instalment of his first fruits as bishop of Salisbury. 
As 'governor of the merchants' Heton was involved after 1562 in negotiations for adopting the port of Emden as an alternative to Catholic Antwerp for the export of English cloth. In these Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, acted as intermediary between William Cecil and Jan Utenhove, lay leader of the foreign protestant community in London and agent for Anna, countess of East Friesland. 
Heton remained on close terms with Thomas Sampson. Both men were appointed overseers of the will of Nicholas Culverwell in 1569, and in 1573 Sampson interceded with Cecil on Heton's behalf, asking that he be allowed to transport English cloth without paying customs duties. Strype's assumption that this indicated a terminal decline in his fortunes is wide of the mark, although it may point to a temporary set-back after the final failure of the Emden scheme. 
At the time of the sack of Antwerp by Spanish troops in November 1576, Heton was governor of the English merchant adventurers there. The poet George Gascoigne, who wrote an eye-witness account of the sack and subsequent massacre, described him as 'a comely aged man... whose hoary hairs might move pity... especially the uprightness of his dealing considered' (Pollard, 447). The English were nevertheless held to ransom and left at the mercy of Spanish troops. Two letters from Heton to the English government, describing the plight and tribulations of the Antwerp merchants and begging for assistance, are printed along with Gascoigne's 'The Spoil of Antwerp' in 'Tudor Tracts' (1903). 
In 1582, still of St Lawrence Jewry, Heton was rated at the high figure of $70 in the London subsidy assessment and in 1586 became master of the Mercers. In such circumstances Grindal's bequest to him in 1583 -- the 'fifty pounds which he oweth me' -- is not good evidence that his 'loving friend' was once more in financial difficulties (Strype, 'Grindal', 604). 
Having completed his year as master of the Mercers in July 1587, Heton makes only one further appearance in their court records, on 15 November following. Although he probably died shortly afterwards, the exact date is unknown and like his brother he seems to have left no will. The identity of his wife, who was with him in Antwerp, has not been established. The will of a contemporary namesake (Eton), citizen and grocer of London, was proved on 16 February 1571. To judge from its bequests, which included money for sermons at Kinver, Staffordshire, his birthplace, the two men were unrelated. 


@@@@@


doc= 13140


Heugh, Hugh (1782-1846), United Secession church minister, was born in Stirling on 12 August 1782, the ninth of ten children of John Heugh (1731-1810) and his wife, Anne Ross (died 1807), and grandson of John Heugh (1688-1731), parish minister of Kingoldrum, Forfarshire. His father was minister of the Viewfield church in Stirling, an Anti-Burgher congregation. Heugh attended Stirling grammar school and Edinburgh University, before entering the Divinity Hall of the General Associate Synod at Whitburn in 1799. He spent the session of 1800-01 at Anderson's Institution, Glasgow. He was licensed by the General Associate Presbytery of Stirling on 22 February 1804. Calls were received from congregations at Greenloaning, Perthshire, and Hawick, Roxburghshire, but the synod were disposed to accept that which took him to Stirling, where he was ordained as colleague to his aged father on 14 August 1806. He married, on 21 June 1809, Isabella Clarkson (died 1877), the daughter of an Anti-Burgher minister, with whom he had five daughters and two sons. 
Heugh became an influential figure in his church and was moderator of the General Associate Synod in 1819, the last before the two main bodies of seceders merged to form the United Secession church. In 1821 he was called, for the third time, to a congregation at Regent Place, Glasgow. He was loath to leave his native Stirling, and it was only by the narrowest majority that the synod preferred the call to Regent Place, to which he was inducted on 9 October 1821. In addition to an active pastoral ministry, Heugh engaged in many of the public questions and controversies of the day. He swiftly became involved in arguing the case against church establishments in the voluntary controversy, and when his own denomination became agitated over the question of the atonement he issued a pamphlet, 'Irenicum' (1845), which sought to conciliate the warring factions. While his sympathies naturally lay with the church's professor, John Brown, who was his personal friend, his action was characteristic of a man who, while he did not shrink from controversy, deplored the personal rancour which accompanied it. Among his other publications were 'The Importance of Early Piety' (1826), 'Considerations on Civil Establishments of Religion' (1833), and 'Notices on the State of Religion in Geneva and Belgium' (1844). Heugh was also a keen advocate of home and foreign missions, and he was awarded the degree of DD by the college of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in 1831. 
From 1837 Heugh's health gave cause for concern, and a trip to Geneva in 1843 was one of a number of recuperative journeys he undertook. His health finally gave way, and he died at his home, 126 Montrose Street, Glasgow, on 10 June 1846, and was buried in Glasgow necropolis on 16 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 13141


Heurtley, Charles Abel (1806-1895), theologian, born on 4 January 1806 at Bishopwearmouth, in co. Durham, was the son of Charles Abel Heurtley (1740-1806), a banker at Sunderland, and his wife, Isabella Hunter (died 1816), of Newcastle upon Tyne. After his father's death Heurtley's mother married Mr Metcalfe, shipbuilder of South Shields. On his father's side he was directly descended from one Charles Abel Herteleu, a Huguenot, who in the early days of the eighteenth century migrated from his home at Rennes in Brittany in order to secure liberty to profess the protestant faith. Heurtley, who was himself a staunch protestant, always rejoiced in his descent from one who had thus suffered for his faith. 
In 1813 Heurtley was sent to a school at West Boldon, near Gateshead, and in 1817 he passed on to another at Witton-le-Wear, near Bishop Auckland, a private school which at that time had a considerable reputation. Here he stayed for four years, and, as his guardians were extremely desirous that he should become a man of business, he was sent in 1822 to Liverpool as a clerk in the office of Messrs Brereton and Newsham, timber merchants. After nine months' trial, he was confirmed in his original purpose of going to university with a view to entering the church. Accordingly he returned to education at Louth grammar school in Lincolnshire, Sedbergh being too full to take him, and after ten months' work there was elected in 1823 to a scholarship at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, open to boys born in the diocese of Durham. 
Heurtley graduated BA with first-class honours in mathematics in June 1827, winning the Ellerton theological essay prize in the following year. He was an unsuccessful candidate for a fellowship at Oriel in 1828, but, after spending four years as second master at the newly founded Brompton grammar school (1828-31), he succeeded to a fellowship at Corpus in 1832, which he held until 1841. In 1831 he graduated MA, was ordained, and served the curacy of Wardington, near Cropredy, Oxfordshire, until 1840, when he was appointed to the college living of Fenny Compton, Warwickshire. During this period he was also reader in Latin at Corpus (1832-5), select preacher before the university (1834 and 1838), and junior dean of his college (1838). He graduated BD in 1838 and DD in 1853. On 10 April 1844 he married Jane (died 1893), daughter of Revd William Bagshaw Harrison, vicar of Goudhurst, Kent. He was Bampton lecturer in 1845, and on 2 July 1853 was elected Margaret professor of divinity at Oxford, which was tenable with a canonry at Christ Church, Oxford. He held the chair and canonry for forty-two years, combining them with the rectory of Fenny Compton until 1872. 
Learned, courteous, retiring, reading and thinking much, but writing little, Heurtley represented the older type of Oxford scholar, whose influence depended rather upon his personal relations with members of the university than upon the effect of his written works on the world at large. He set great store by his university sermons, preaching over sixty during his lifetime. He sat as one of the theological assessors in the court that tried Archdeacon Denison for unsound eucharistic doctrine (1856). He contributed to 'Aids to Faith' (1861), the orthodox response to the controversial 'Essays and Reviews'. In 1873 he entered a strong protest, on theological grounds, against the granting of an honorary degree upon Professor John Tyndall, and in the same year he protested against the precedence accorded to Cardinal Manning at the jubilee dinner of the Oxford Union. His action in these matters was typical of his theological position. He had a profound devotion to the Church of England, and conceived its position mainly on the lines of the evangelical party. But he was not a party man, as was shown in a very striking way when in advanced years (1890) he preached a sermon in the cathedral deploring hasty and unmeasured condemnation of the 'higher criticism'. His practical gifts were displayed in his parish at Fenny Compton, where he successfully organized a small company to provide a proper water supply for the village. 
Heurtley's written work consisted largely of sermons. Of these the most considerable volume is his Bampton lectures, 'Justification' (1845), in which he adopted 'a moderate and learned Evangelical Protestant position' (Toon, 60). But he also published a series of works on creeds and formularies of faith, the main subject of his study and of his lectures, of which 'De fide et symbolo' (1864) was widely used in theological colleges. His latest work, revealing his patristic scholarship, was 'A History of the Earlier Formularies of the Western and Eastern Churches' (1892). Many of his parochial sermons were published, and he was the writer of a number of tracts circulated by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. 
Heurtley died at Christ Church, Oxford, on 1 May 1895 and was buried beside his wife at Osney cemetery on 3 May. He left one son, Charles Abel Heurtley, who became rector of Ashington, Sussex, and three daughters, of whom the eldest, Isabella, married Sydney Linton (1841-1894), the first bishop of Riverina, Australia. To his memoirist Heurtley's life exemplified a combination of deep personal religion and critical theological study within the secularized academy. 


@@@@@


doc= 13142


Heveningham, William (1604-1678), regicide, was the eldest son of Sir John Heveningham (1578-1633) of Ketteringham, Norfolk, and his second wife, Bridget (died 1624), daughter of Christopher Paston of Paston, Norfolk. He matriculated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1621. During the 1620s his father was a justice of the peace for Norfolk; Heveningham was a captain in the Norfolk militia and in the 1630s served as a deputy lieutenant, justice of the peace, and sheriff (1633-4). He inherited at least fifteen manors on his father's death. On 23 November 1629 he married Catherine (died 1648), daughter of Sir Henry Wallop, an extremely wealthy resident of Hampshire and Wiltshire, and MP in numerous parliaments. Following Catherine's death Heveningham married in 1650 Mary (died 1696), daughter of John Carey, fifth Baron Hunsdon and second earl of Dover; they had one son, Sir William Heveningham (died 1674), who married Barbara, daughter of George Villiers, third Viscount Graham, and a daughter, Abigail, who married John Newton. 
Heveningham, along with his father, refused to pay the forced loan of 1627 but, unlike his father, avoided imprisonment. Later he showed more discretion when in 1637 he admitted royal agents on his lands to obtain saltpetre, and when he paid the ship money assessment for 1640. In the elections for the Long Parliament he backed a moderate candidate, John Potts, for one of the county seats against Sir John Holland. Thanks to his father-in-law's influence, Heveningham himself was elected MP for Stockbridge, Hampshire, in the Short Parliament (1640) and again in the Long Parliament (1640), but rarely attended sessions. After the civil war began he served on the county committees for Norfolk and Cambridgeshire. With Sir Edmund Moundeford, MP for Norfolk, Heveningham supervised seven Norfolk hundreds on behalf of parliament in 1642. He advanced $250 for the support of the parliamentarian garrison at Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire. 
In the 1640s Heveningham may have leant towards a presbyterian religious position and was an elder in a church of the Dunwich classis. Politically, however, he was an 'independent', favouring the claims and programme of the New Model Army in 1648. As an army sympathizer, he survived Pride's Purge (December 1648) and, with his brother-in-law, Robert Wallop, was named a judge for Charles I's treason trial. He attended thirteen sessions and, like Wallop, refused to sign the royal death warrant, though he later swore approval of the king's trial and execution ['see also 'Regicides]. An anxiety to curb military rule appears to have prompted his greater involvement in politics at Westminster in 1649. He was elected to the first two councils of state under the Commonwealth in 1649 and 1650, though he expressed doubts about the engagement, a 1650 loyalty oath required of officeholders and clergy. He was named vice-admiral of Suffolk in 1651. 
A heavy speculator in buying army debentures, Heveningham also bought several confiscated episcopal properties (the manors of Dalston, Rose Castle, and Linstock in the diocese of Carlisle), and purchased or leased various confiscated royalist properties, including Stainton Manor, Norfolk (1653), and the duke of Hamilton's Chelsea mansion. However, some of these purchases of royalist lands did not benefit him personally since they were bought on behalf of Norfolk's county committee to cover debts. He maintained a London residence at St Martin-in-the-Fields during the 1650s and became quite wealthy, probably realizing an annual income of at least $1000. 
Heveningham was perhaps the first regicide to surrender to the crown at the restoration of Charles II in June 1660, was tried in October as a regicide at the Old Bailey, and sentenced to death. His four petitions for mercy during 1660-62, supported by his wife's family connections, claimed that despite serving as a judge he had opposed the execution of Charles I. Admitting that he deserved death, Heveningham's petitions also noted his appeals before the committee for compounding on behalf of his royalist brother, Sir Arthur Heveningham, in 1656 during the interregnum. Heveningham also claimed to have contributed $500 to support Sir George Booth's royalist rising in 1659. Though Heveningham was spared execution, his wife's appeals that he be removed to her house in Suffolk failed and he remained a prisoner at Windsor Castle until his death there on 21 February 1678. His property, however, though initially confiscated, was eventually held in trust for his wife. He was buried at Ketteringham church on 25 February 1678. 


@@@@@


doc= 13143


Hewett, Sir George, first baronet (1750-1840), army officer, was born on 11 June 1750, the only son of Major Shuckburgh Hewett (1719-1759), a descendant of an old Leicestershire family, and his wife, Ann Ward; both his parents died when he was young. He was sent to the grammar school at Wimborne, Dorset, and in 1761 was entered as a cadet at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. On 27 April 1762 he was given an ensigncy in the 70th foot, whose colonel, Cyrus Trapaud, had served with his father. On 20 April 1764 he was promoted lieutenant and joined his regiment in Grenada where he commanded a detachment and two howitzers. In 1771 he was sent to New York with invalids and to recruit, and was brigade major of the troops sent to St Vincent during the Carib uprising of 1772. Returning to England with his regiment in 1774, he obtained his company (the grenadiers) on 2 June 1775, and went with the corps to Halifax, Nova Scotia, whence he was detached with his company to Long Island. In 1780 he served as part of the 2nd battalion of grenadiers at the siege of Charles Town. His company afterwards embarked as marines on board Admiral Digby's flagship, in which Prince William, afterwards William IV, was serving as a midshipman. He obtained a majority by purchase in the 43rd foot on 1 December 1781 and, as deputy quartermaster-general, accompanied a brigade of reinforcements under General O'Hara to the West Indies. He returned to New York after Rodney's defeat of the French fleet at the battle of the Saints (12 April 1782) and commanded the 2nd battalion of grenadiers until invalided home. While convalescing in Bath he met and married, on 26 July 1785, Julia (1761-1848), daughter of John Johnson of Blackheath; they had five sons and six daughters. 
In 1786, when the 43rd were stationed at Windsor, George III inspected them and Hewett received praise for their appearance. Through the king's intervention he became lieutenant-colonel of the 43rd in October 1787 and, in 1791, when commanding his regiment there, adjutant-general in Ireland, a post which he held until 1799. In 1794 he raised an Irish regiment, numbered the 92nd, which was drafted soon after. He became a major-general on 3 May 1796. He established a permanent commissariat staff in Ireland, and is credited with originating the idea of a brigade of instruction in light duties, the command of which was given to John Moore. In August 1799 he became both head of the recruiting department, with a district command at Chatham and Maidstone, and colonel-commandant of the 2nd battalion of the 5th foot. In 1801 the headquarters of the recruiting department were moved from Chatham to Parkhurst, Isle of Wight, and Hewett was appointed to command the island as part of the south-western district. He was transferred to the colonelcy of the 61st foot, on 4 April 1800. In 1803 he was made inspector-general of the royal army of reserve, and in November 1804 barrackmaster-general. In 1806 he was appointed commander-in-chief in the East Indies, sailing on 17 April 1807 and landing in India on 17 October. In May 1809 he had to take over the government of India in Calcutta while the governor-general dealt with the mutiny among the company's officers in Madras. He set up commissariat departments in each presidency, encouraged the building of cantonments, and reorganized the staff of the Madras army. In 1810-11 he organized the dispatch from India of the expeditions against Bourbon (Reunion), the Isle of France (Mauritius), and Java. He left India on 18 December 1811 and reached Lymington, Hampshire, on 12 May 1812. 
Hewett was promoted full general in June 1813, created a baronet on 6 November 1813, and the following month became commander of the forces in Ireland, being sworn of the Irish privy council on arrival. He left Ireland in 1816, and was created a GCB on 16 May 1820. In 1823 he purchased Freemantle Park, near Southampton, and settled there. He had expressed a particular desire to see the 61st, of which he had been colonel for forty years, on its return from Ceylon, but he died suddenly at his home on the day the regiment landed at Southampton, 21 March 1840. He was buried in Shirley church, near Southampton, and a monument was erected to him in the adjacent parish church of Millbrook. He was described as a tall, soldierly old man, much beloved in private life. 


@@@@@


doc= 13144


Hewett, Sir Prescott Gardner, first baronet (1812-1891), surgeon, son of William N. W. Hewett of Bilham Hall, near Doncaster, was born on 3 July 1812. Hewett was educated in Paris, where he studied painting, though subsequently he abandoned the idea of following art as a profession, turning his attention to medicine instead. While in Paris, Hewett also studied anatomy at the Ecole de Medecine and became thoroughly grounded in the principles and practice of French surgery. After his return to England he was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, on 15 July 1836, and he worked for a while as demonstrator of anatomy at the school of anatomy in Little Windmill Street, London. His excellent dissections attracted the attention of Sir Benjamin Brodie, who soon offered Hewett the post of demonstrator of anatomy at St George's Hospital, when Hewett was on the point of accepting a commission in the service of the East India Company. Hewett accepted the post at St George's, where his half-brother Cornwallis Hewett, Downing professor of physic at Cambridge, had served as physician from 1825 to 1833. Hewett became curator of the museum at St George's Hospital towards the end of 1840. He was appointed lecturer on anatomy in 1845, and on 4 February 1848 he was elected assistant surgeon to the hospital; he became full surgeon on 21 June 1861 and consulting surgeon on 12 February 1875. On 13 September 1849 Hewett married Sarah Cowell (died 1874), eldest daughter of the Revd Joseph Cowell of Todmorden, Lancashire; they had one son, Harry Hammerton Hewett (1853-1891), who survived him only a few weeks, and two daughters. 
At the Royal College of Surgeons of England, Hewett was elected a fellow on 11 December 1843. He was Arris and Gale professor of human anatomy and physiology (1854-9), a member of the council (1867-83), chairman of the board of examiners in midwifery (1875), vice-president (1874 and 1875), and president (1876). In 1863 Hewett was elected president of the Pathological Society of London, and in 1873 he was elected president of the Clinical Society. On 4 June 1874 he was chosen a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Hewett was appointed surgeon-extraordinary to the queen in 1867, serjeant-surgeon-extraordinary in 1877, and serjeant-surgeon in 1884. He also held the appointment from 1875 of surgeon to the prince of Wales. He was made a baronet on 6 August 1883. He then retired to Horsham, Sussex, where he devoted much of his time to watercolour painting and to country pursuits, though he still paid occasional visits to London for professional purposes. His collection of watercolour drawings was presented to the nation, and was exhibited at the South Kensington Museum in 1891. Hewett exhibited sixteen landscape watercolours at the Old Watercolour Society and four landscapes at the Grosvenor Gallery, London. His watercolour of Newquay Bay, Cornwall, was acquired by the Tate Gallery. Hewett died on 19 June 1891 at his home, Chestnut Lodge, Horsham. 
Contemporaries admired Hewett for both his teaching and surgical abilities. He first became known in professional circles, as one of the most able anatomists, skilful organizers, and best lecturers in London; the general public came to consider him an accomplished surgeon. He also published numerous papers on hernia, aneurysm, injuries of the head, and pyaemia, in the journals of the various societies to which he belonged. The results of his most valuable work on the injuries and surgical diseases of the head are embodied in his article, 'Injuries of the head', in T. Holmes's 'System of Surgery' (4 vols., 1860-64). 


@@@@@


doc= 13145


Hewett, Sir William (c.1508-1567), mayor of London, was born in the hamlet of Laughton-en-le-Morthen in the West Riding of Yorkshire to Edmund Hewett, whose family hailed from Derbyshire. Hewett served an apprenticeship to a clothworker from 'c'.1522 and was admitted to the freedom of the Clothworkers' Company of London at some time before 1529, when he began taking apprentices himself. Like other textilers, he was also a merchant adventurer. Several relatives, including his brother Thomas and nephew Henry, migrated from Yorkshire to work in his successful business on Candlewick Street. Stow estimated Hewett's worth at $6000 per year at the time of his death. 
Hewett became master of the Clothworkers' Company in 1543, but when he was elected alderman of Vintry ward on 16 September 1550, he refused to serve in office. The court of aldermen remanded him to Newgate, which seems to have changed his perspective about civic responsibility. Hewett represented Vintry until July 1554 and then transferred to Candlewick ward. He was elected sheriff in 1553 and, with other city leaders, countersigned the letters patent of Edward VI leaving the crown to Lady Jane Grey. Just a few months later Hewett carried out the sentences of execution on Lady Jane and her husband after Thomas Wyatt's rebellion. Given the dangers of political prominence, Hewett resisted mayoral duties until prevailed upon by a committee appointed in June 1557 to persuade him. In September 1559 he became lord mayor, the first member of the Clothworkers' Company to attain the office and the first mayor elected after the accession of Elizabeth I. As was the custom, accompanied by scarlet-clad aldermen, he was knighted by the queen after travelling by water to the court in Greenwich on 21 January 1560. 
Hewett's new post imposed many responsibilities. The privy council directed him to reform the city's morality by enforcing sumptuary laws, ending gaming, and persuading retailers to moderate their prices; he was to make weekly reports. Hewett also presided at the treason trial of Captain Chamberlain, commander of the castle in Calais, on 8 June 1560. The queen instructed Hewett later that year to affix the marks of a greyhound and portcullis to the silver testons in circulation in order to detect counterfeit money. In August 1562, along with other prominent Londoners, Hewett sat in judgment on several counterfeiters at the Guildhall; four were condemned to death. 
At some time after 1536 Hewett married Alice, the third daughter of Nicholas Leveson of Halling, Kent, a rich London mercer who was chosen sheriff in 1534. She was known for her pious and charitable works. The Hewetts had several children, but only Anne, born in 1543, survived her parents. Stow recounts that young Anne, playing near a window in her family house on London Bridge, fell into the river and was rescued by Edward Osborne, her father's apprentice, whom she later wed. Later historians called the story apocryphal, since the date attributed to the incident, 1536, is before the Hewetts' wedding, and as there is no evidence that the family ever lived on London Bridge. None the less, Osborne, later lord mayor himself, did marry Anne Hewett and inherited through her most of her father's estates. Lady Alice Hewett died on 8 April 1561 and was buried at St Martin Orgar. 
Hewett lived in Philpot Lane, but also had a country house at Highgate; in 1565 he served as one of the governors of Sir Roger Cholmeley's newly established grammar school there. His name appears on the register of admissions to Gray's Inn and his arms, inscribed with his name, are in Gray's Inn Hall. Hewett's enterprises embroiled him in litigation on occasion. John Isham, London mercer and fellow merchant adventurer, sued him for debts; Hewett sought to collect $2000 from William, Lord Dacre, in 1558 and received judgment in the exchequer following arbitration by the privy council. He represented George Talbot, sixth earl of Shrewsbury, at the baptism of Robert Dethyke, son of Sir Gilbert Dethick or Dethyke, at St Giles Cripplegate in July 1561. He also acted as a business agent for the earl: raising money, sending in accounts, and in 1563 reminding Shrewsbury that the earl's house in London needed repair. Hewett owned Parsloes Manor in Dagenham, Essex, and various estates in Yorkshire, Derbyshire, and Nottinghamshire. He died on 25 January 1567 in London and was buried next to his wife in St Martin Orgar. His will, dated 3 January 1567, was proved on 11 March 1567. He bequeathed his business, at the sign of the Three Cranes in Candlewick Street, to Thomas and Henry Hewett, and to Anne Osborne his tenements in London and Canterbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 13146


Hewett, Sir William Nathan Wrighte (1834-1888), naval officer, son of Dr William Wrighte Hewett, physician to William IV, was born at Brighton on 12 August 1834. He entered the navy in March 1847, and served as a midshipman in the Second Anglo-Burmese War of 1852-3. In 1854, while acting mate of the gun-vessel 'Beagle', he was attached to the naval brigade in the Crimea, and on 26 October was in command of a Lancaster gun in the battery before Sevastopol. A column of Russians threatened its flank, and hurried orders were sent to spike the gun and withdraw the men. Hewett boldly answered that he took no orders that did not come from Captain Lushington, the commander of the brigade; and, breaking down the side parapet of the battery, he slewed the gun round, and opened a terrible fire of grapeshot on the Russian column, then barely 300 yards distant. The effect in that part of the field was decisive. A few days later his gallant conduct at the battle of Inkerman (5 November) was reported by Captain Lushington, and he was immediately promoted lieutenant, with seniority of 26 October. He was also appointed to command the 'Beagle', in which he served during the war, especially in the operations against Kerch and in the Sea of Azov, and which he held after the peace until the summer of 1857. Hewett was one of the first recipients of the Victoria Cross, his conduct on 26 October and 5 November 1854 being equally named in the 'Gazette' (24 February 1857). Hewett married, in 1857, Jane Emily, daughter of Mr T. Wood, consul for the Morea; they had two daughters and three sons, two of whom, William Warrington Hewett and Edward Matson Hewett, became lieutenants in the navy. 
Hewett's rank had for all this time been only provisional; he then passed his examination at Portsmouth, and was appointed to the royal yacht, from which he was promoted commander on 13 September 1858. He then successively commanded the 'Viper' on the west coast of Africa, and the 'Rinaldo' on the North America and West Indies station. On 24 November 1862 he was made captain. He afterwards commanded the 'Basilisk' on the China station, from 1865 to 1869; was flag captain to Sir Henry Kellett in the 'Ocean' on the China station from 1870 to 1872; was captain of the 'Devastation' from 1872 to 1873; and from October 1873 to October 1876 was commodore and commander-in-chief on the west coast of Africa, in charge of naval operations during the Second Anglo-Asante War (1873-4), being present at Amoaful and the capture of Kumasi. He was made KCB on 31 March 1874. In time he was also KCSI, chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and a member of the order of the Mejidiye, and of the Abyssinian order of Solomon. 
In May 1877 Hewett was appointed to the 'Achilles', and commanded her in the Mediterranean and the Sea of Marmora under Sir Geoffrey Hornby. He attained his flag on 21 March 1878, and in April 1882 was appointed commander-in-chief in the East Indies. During the Egyptian campaign of 1882 he conducted naval operations in the Red Sea, notably the occupation of Suez and the seizure of the canal in August. The war in eastern Sudan again called him to the Red Sea. After the rout of Valentine Baker Pasha's Egyptian force at al-Teb (4 February 1884) Hewett landed with a force of seamen and marines for the defence of Suakin, on 6 February 1884, and on 10 February was formally appointed governor by Valentine Baker, as representative of the khedive. On 29 February he was present, unofficially, it would seem, at the second battle of al-Teb. In April, accompanied by John Wylde, he went on a mission to King John of Abyssinia, whom, by judicious concessions on trade, he induced to sign a treaty of friendship, at Adowa (3 June 1884), and to agree to assist the evacuation of Egyptian garrisons in his neighbourhood, and more especially Kassala. 
On 8 July 1884 Hewett became vice-admiral, and from March 1886 to April 1888 was in command of the Channel Fleet. He had been for some months in very delicate health, which became seriously worse after his retirement from his command; he was sent as a patient to Haslar Hospital, Gosport, where he died on 13 May 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 13147


Hewitt, John (bap. 1614, d. 1658), Church of England clergyman and royalist conspirator, was baptized at Eccles, Lancashire, on 4 September 1614, the fourth son of Thomas Hewett, clothworker, of Eccles. Educated at Bolton-le-Moors School and Pembroke College, Cambridge (where he matriculated sizar on 13 May 1633), Hewitt took no degree, and his whereabouts are largely unclear during the following years. He may have been living in London, where he married, on 18 December 1636, Elizabeth Skinner (died in or before 1649), daughter of Robert Skinner, a merchant taylor of St Botolph, Aldgate. Hewitt is next recorded during the civil wars, at Oxford, where he was created DD on 17 October 1643 and by 1649 was serving as chaplain to his brother-in-law, Montague Bertie, second earl of Lindsey; Hewitt had recently married Lady Mary Bertie (1618-1669), daughter of Robert, first earl of Lindsey (died 1642), and his wife, Elizabeth Montague (died 1655). It was perhaps at this time that Hewitt became minister of St Gregory by Paul, London, and rector of St Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street. A popular and influential preacher, his sermons were attended by many leading royalists, and Oliver Cromwell allegedly told him that he 'was like a flaming Torch in the midst of a sheaf of Corn: he meaning, I being a publick Preacher, was able to set the Citie on fire by sedition and cumbustions, and promoting designs' ('Speech and Prayer', 4). 
Hewitt's prayer-book Anglicanism was tolerated by the Cromwellian regime, but during the mid-1650s his congregation became the centre for less acceptable royalist endeavours. Hewitt was reputedly responsible for collecting hundreds of pounds for the king, and his house became a meeting place for royalists and the focal point for conspiracy. In late 1657 he became involved in a plot in which were implicated or rumoured to be implicated old royalists and presbyterians, including John Stapley of Sussex, Sir William Waller, and Sir Thomas Fairfax, who were to raise a force in support of a Spanish invasion. This plot was arguably based on wishful thinking rather than genuine potential, and senior royalists such as Ormond concluded that it was 'managed by honest but unskillful men' (Carte, 2.118). Another contemporary claimed that Hewitt was 'rather a Tully than a Cataline, and hath been more prevalent with his tongue than his brain' (Underdown, 1.718). Furthermore, the Cromwellian regime knew of the plot from an early stage, thanks to a double agent, and kept Hewitt under close surveillance until ready to make their move. When Stapley was questioned in the spring of 1658 he made a full confession, and Hewitt was arrested on 8 April and sent to the Tower. The government's powerful intelligence system ensured that, while some expected Hewitt to be acquitted, the secretary of state John Thurloe felt confident that the evidence was damning. It soon became clear that the high court of justice would make an example of the plotters, and the ground was laid by an officially inspired tract, 'The Horrible and Bloody Conspiracy'. 
Hewitt was tried on 1 June 1658, charged with 'minding and intending to embroil this commonwealth in new and intestine wars'. The prosecution said that he 'did traiterously, advisedly and maliciously plot, contrive and endeavour to stir up, force and levy war' ('State trials', 5.884). Although without counsel Hewitt was tutored by the leading presbyterian royalist, William Prynne, who later published an account of the trial as 'Beheaded Dr John Hewytts Ghost'. Under his tuition Hewitt refused to recognize the authority of the court, and he refused to enter a plea on twelve occasions, in spite of pleas by his wife. The court had little option but to sentence him to death, realizing that he was intent on becoming a martyr. Royalists such as Joseph Jane certainly considered him to have been 'very glorious in his defence', and that he was 'most heroic and Christian, no man yet exceeding him, scarce equalling' (Warner, 4.41, 55). On 4 June Hewitt petitioned for twenty days' reprieve in order to be able to make a confession, but he was granted only two days, and even the intercession of Cromwell's daughter failed to secure clemency. He was beheaded at Tower Hill on 8 June, after making a long speech in which he denied having been a plotter, and said: 'I here give up myself willingly and freely to be a state martyr for the public good, and I had rather die many deaths myself than betray my fellow freemen to so many inconveniences that they might be like to suffer by being subject to the wills of them that willed me to this death. ('Speech and Prayer', 2)' Hewitt's funeral sermon was preached by his friend Dr George Wilde. 
In death Hewitt achieved a degree of celebrity which he had not achieved in life. His scaffold speech was quickly published, as was an account of the trial, and before the end of the year there also appeared an elegy, together with editions of his works, entitled 'Repentance and conversion, nine select sermons, certain considerations against the vanities of this world', and 'Prayers of Intercession', the first of which was apparently edited by Wilde and another friend, John Barwick. However, Nathaniel Hardy, who ventured into print in order to complain about the appearance of what purported to be the text of the sermon he had planned for Hewitt's funeral, claimed that some of these works were published by interlopers, against Hewitt's wishes. 
During the parliament of Richard Cromwell, a petition was presented on behalf of Hewitt's widow (on 17 March 1659), praying for justice upon the 'murderers' of her husband. The house agreed to hold a hearing with Lady Mary Hewitt's counsel, Prynne, who chose this moment to publish the account of Hewitt's defence. However, the committee for grievances laid aside the petition, on the grounds that some of Hewitt's judges were members of parliament, and thus privileged. Following the restoration of Charles II, Lady Mary Hewitt issued another petition seeking the exception of the judges from the 'Act of Oblivion', though she added that members of the court had been asked to attend by the families of the plotters in order to assist their cause. In February 1661 Hewitt's son, who issued a petition seeking money to set up in trade, was granted a royal pension of $100. Hewitt's widow later married Sir Abraham Shipman (died 1665), and later, in 1667, Thomas Lee of Islington. 


@@@@@


doc= 13148


Hewitson, William Chapman (1806-1878), naturalist, was born in Percy Street, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 9 January 1806, the second son of Middleton Hewitson (died 1845). His early education began at Kirkby Stephen, and was completed at York, where he was articled to John Tuke, a land surveyor. About 1828 or 1829, he returned to Newcastle to pursue his career. 
Hewitson was devoted to the study of natural history, a subject for which he had developed a taste during childhood. His friends included a number of like-minded natural history enthusiasts such as the marine zoologist Albany Hancock (and his brother, John), the zoologist Joshua Alder, and the geologist William Hutton. With his fellow students, Hewitson founded a society for the study of natural history (the Natural History Society of Northumberland, Durham and Newcastle upon Tyne), which first met on 19 August 1829. He was a member of the society's committee and honorary curator of its entomological department. 
In early life, Hewitson had formed collections of British coleoptera and lepidoptera; he then devoted attention for some years to the study of birds' eggs. In 1831 he began his work 'British Oology' (1833-42), and in 1832 he undertook a journey to the Shetland Islands, and in 1833 went on an expedition to Norway to discover the breeding places of some migratory species. He was accompanied on this trip by his friends John Hancock and Benjamin Johnson, with the aim of gathering plants, birds, and insects. During their visit to the Arctic circle, they were forced by the harshness of their circumstances, to live on the birds they shot. Hewitson's diary of this expedition was used for pieces on ornithology which appeared in Sir William Jardine's 'Magazine of Zoology'. 
Hewitson moved from Newcastle to Bristol in 1840, where he was employed under George Stephenson on the railway between Bristol and Exeter, as a surveyor. However, by the end of April 1845, two uncles and his father had died, leaving him as their heir, and considerably wealthy. He took up residence at Hampstead, and devoted his life to scientific research, his poor health also playing a role in his decision to give up business. 
From about this time, Hewitson's attention became focused again on lepidoptera. He travelled with his friend John Hancock to Switzerland and the Alps, where he gathered a fine series of diurnal lepidoptera. He bought specimens from travellers and naturalists all over the globe, whose expenses he often paid, forming in the process what was probably the most complete collection of diurnal lepidoptera of his time. He published 'The Genera of Diurnal Lepidoptera' in conjunction with the entomologist Edward Doubleday (1846-52), followed by 'Illustrations of Diurnal Lepidoptera' (1863-78). He also wrote on the same subject in a number of journals. His other best-known works include the 'Illustrations of New Species of Exotic Butterflies' (1851-76) and his 'Descriptions of some New Species of Lycaenidae' (1868). Hewitson was also accomplished as an artist and draughtsman, and as a pictorial describer of butterflies and birds' eggs, he was considered unrivalled. 
About 1848 Hewitson married, but his wife died soon after. They had no children. In the same year he purchased part of Oatlands Park, Surrey, where he lived for thirty years, in a house designed for him by the architect John Dobson. Having joined the Entomological Society in 1846, he also became a member of the Zoological Society (1859) and the Linnean Society (1862). 
When Hewitson died on 28 May 1878 at Oatlands, there was no heir to his fortune. He made a bequest of $10,000 to the Newcastle Infirmary, and left his library of works on natural history, with a legacy of $3000, to the Natural History Society of Northumberland, Durham and Newcastle. He also left a large sum to the Muller Institute, Bristol. The rest of his fortune he bequeathed to various charities, and $20,000 in legacies was divided among fifty-eight of his friends. His estate at Oatlands was bequeathed to his closest friend, John Hancock, while to the British Museum was left his butterfly collection, some pictures, and watercolours, in addition to his stuffed birds. He was buried at Walton-on-Thames. 


@@@@@


doc= 13149


Hewitt, James, first Viscount Lifford (d. 1789), lord chancellor of Ireland, was one of the three sons of William Hewitt (died 1747/8), a mercer and draper who was mayor of Coventry in 1744, and his wife, Hannah: William Hewitt's will provides details of land held at Marston Trussell, Northamptonshire, and William Hewitt may be the person of this name who married Hannah Sutton at Sibbertoft (the neighbouring parish to Marston Trussell) in January 1712. James Hewitt may therefore have been born at Marston Trussell. A letter of August 1788 in which he claimed to be seventy-three years old suggests he was born in 1714 or 1715, though other sources (GEC, 'Peerage', which also identifies his mother as Hannah Lewis) give his probable birth date as 1709 and his place of birth as Coventry (G. Naylor, 'The Registers of Thorrington', 1888). From at least 1737 Hewitt was employed by James Birch, an attorney and receiver-general for Warwickshire, and in the same year he entered the Middle Temple. From 1741 he was articled to Birch; called to the bar in November 1742, he soon developed a substantial practice (TNA: PRO, IR 1/17). He stood for Coventry, unsuccessfully, in 1754 but won the parliamentary seat at the general election in 1761. In 1755 he became a serjeant-at-law, and four years later he was appointed king's serjeant. 
On 6 November 1766 Hewitt was appointed a judge of the king's bench, with the promise of further promotion, and on 9 January 1768 he received letters patent as lord chancellor of Ireland. On the same day he was created Baron Lifford in the Irish peerage, and he was made a viscount in January 1781. Lifford was lord chancellor of Ireland during the struggle between the two parliaments that resulted in the short-lived independence of the Irish legislature. He held the office for twenty-two years, longer than any of his predecessors since the time of Edward I. His income as lord chancellor was estimated at $12,000 per annum. 
Hewitt married, first, Mary (died 1765), the only daughter of the Revd Rice Williams DD, rector of Stapleford Abbots, Essex, prebendary of Worcester, and archdeacon of Carmarthen. Of their children James (1750-1830), who succeeded to the viscountcy, was dean of Armagh for more than thirty years; Joseph (1754-1794) was a judge of the king's bench in Ireland; and John (died 1804) was dean of Cloyne. On 15 December 1766 Hewitt married, as his second wife, Ambrosia (died 1807), daughter of the Revd Charles Bayley of Navestock, Essex, with whom he had further children. Lifford had intended to resign on a pension but died in Dublin on 28 April 1789, of a 'malignant sore throat' caught at the House of Lords (GEC, 'Peerage'). He was buried in Christ Church, Dublin, where there is a memorial to him. 
Lifford was known for the accuracy of his technical knowledge and for his general professional skill. He was said to be formal in manner and with old-fashioned ideas but he was also patient and urbane, and those qualities gained him general respect. He was the first lord chancellor of Ireland whose judgments have been preserved. A volume entitled 'Reports of select cases argued and determined in the high court of chancery in Ireland, principally in the time of Lord Lifford' was published in 1839; it was edited by James Lyne from a manuscript prepared by John Wallis KC. The decisions reported are from the years 1767 to 1786. Many of Lifford's judgments remained in manuscript and probably perished in the Four Courts fire of 1922 but some may survive in the library of King's Inns (Osborough, 100). 


@@@@@


doc= 13150


Hewitt, John (1719-1802), magistrate, was born in Coventry, Warwickshire, the son of John Hewitt, a city linen draper, a trade he was later to follow himself. He lived all his life in Coventry, from 1746 onwards in a newly built house in Cross Cheaping. He served as mayor in 1755, 1758, and 1760 and, as one of the city's ten aldermen, was a magistrate for some thirty years. He was probably the uncle of James Hewitt, first Viscount Lifford (d. 1789), whom he assisted by providing a lavish banquet in 1754 when the latter contested a Coventry parliamentary seat. On 7 February 1768, at Hinckley, Leicestershire, he married Catherine Dyer, the daughter of the Revd Dyer, a descendant of a former lord chief justice, Sir James Dyer. 
Hewitt was an exceedingly zealous magistrate, prosecuting felons and transporting criminals. He carried on lengthy exchanges of letters with leading government figures of the day, soliciting their support for his actions to keep the peace. The 1750s and 1760s undeniably were decades of widespread civil disorder in the midlands, especially on account of the price of bread, and Hewitt made a stand against the rioters. His experiences of the disorders seem to have encouraged him to publish in 1779 a journal of his proceedings as magistrate, which was a strange mixture of cases he had brought successfully to justice, explanations of criminal law, and descriptions of some notorious local murders and thefts. His chief ambition, however, was to catch the Coventry gang, a group of highly skilled and well-known coiners led by Thomas Lightoler, who ultimately turned king's evidence and fled to Austria, leaving his fellow criminals to be executed at Lancaster in 1768. Lightoler, originally a carpenter, and his brother, Timothy, a skilled carver, in 1752 had created a chimney-piece for Hewitt's Coventry house, after working at Warwick Castle. Hewitt also tried to stop prostitution in Coventry and to enforce appropriate behaviour on Sundays, and he published a handbook for the use of constables (1779). His writings have a distinct tone of his efforts being unappreciated by those in power, and he always seemed very anxious to contact influential contemporaries, such as Sir John Fielding. He was a trustee of several city charities and became chamberlain in 1747 and sheriff in 1750; he also served as master of the Weavers' Company (1759-61). 
Hewitt died at his home in Cross Cheaping, Coventry, on 20 April 1802, leaving no will. He was buried in the north aisle of Holy Trinity, Coventry, and was commemorated there by a flat stone that is no longer visible. 


@@@@@


doc= 13151


Hewitt, John (1807-1878), antiquary, was born in Beacon Street, Lichfield, the son of John Hewitt (1772-1848), preceptor, organist, and music teacher, and his wife, Betsy Warren. Educated at Lichfield grammar school, he studied music in his youth, and was for some time organist of St Mary's Church in that city. On 27 June 1840 he was appointed to the post of a clerk to the Board of Ordnance storekeeper, whose department, in the Tower of London, was responsible for the storage and issue of all arms and equipment for the army, including the national collection of historical arms and armour, then classified as 'obsolete stores'. This did not then have an official curator, and Hewitt, having a bent towards the study of antiquities, was apparently encouraged to take a special interest in it. In 1841 he published 'The Tower: its History, Armouries, and Antiquities; before and since the Fire', which set a new standard of scholarship for works of this kind and also appears to have been the first government-sponsored guide to any historical site in Britain. This was followed in 1855 by the first volume, and in 1860 by the second and third volumes, of his 'Ancient armour and weapons in Europe from the iron period of the northern nations to the end of the seventeenth century' (reprinted 1967), which, although it owed much to Sir Samuel Meyrick's pioneering 'Critical Inquiry into Antient Armour' (1824), can be regarded as the first modern work of scholarship on this subject. Based mainly on documentary sources, it still remains a valuable work of reference for the post-conquest period. His other major contribution to the study of arms and armour was the first 'Official Catalogue of the Tower Armouries' (1859), which established the system of classification of the exhibits still in use, although he also published numerous articles on this and other antiquarian subjects, mostly in the 'Archaeological Journal' and 'The Reliquary'. 
Hewitt had already engaged in literary pursuits while in Lichfield, and these he continued, under the pen-name Sylvanus Swanquill, during his time in London, where he enjoyed the friendship of a number of well-known literary figures. His verse was described as 'racy and descriptive, suggesting the style of the elder Hood' ('The Reliquary', 18, 1877-8, 229). He was a considerable scholar in several languages, both ancient and modern, a skilled artist, and had a wide knowledge of many subjects besides arms and armour. His publications in other fields include 'Old Woolwich' (1860), handbooks to the city of Lichfield (1874) and its cathedral (1875), and a new edition of C. A. Stothard's 'Monumental Effigies of Great Britain' (1876), with greatly expanded commentaries. Hewitt retired to Lichfield, where in 1873-4 he served on the committee of the Lichfield Industrial Fine Art and Loan Exhibition, for which he also arranged a display of microscopes. He died in Lichfield on 10 January 1878, and was buried five days later in the cathedral close. 


@@@@@


doc= 13152


Hewlett, Ebenezer (fl. 1737-1747), religious writer, lived at the New Pales in Sun Street, without Bishopsgate, London, and was for a time employed by the East India Company. Between 1737 and 1747 he wrote and published approximately twenty theological tracts, the doctrines of which, he says, brought him 'only poverty, disgrace, and loss of friends'. Hewlett's pamphlets, which often attacked trinitarian orthodoxy, include 'A Harmony in Christianity', a response to the deist Thomas Chubb's 'True Gospel of Jesus Christ' (1738); 'The Deist Turned Christian' (1740); and 'Miracles Real Evidence' (1741), which was written against Chubb's 'Discourse on Miracles' (1741). He published answers to the works of many theologians, most notably Edward Elwall, the nonconformist James Foster, Samuel Clarke, and Caleb Fleming, and did not refrain from joining in debates over Baptist and Methodist doctrines. 


@@@@@


doc= 13153


Hewlett, James (1768-1836), flower painter, was born on 15 September 1768, and was baptized on 5 November at Chippenham, Wiltshire, the son of Stephen Hewlett or Hewlitt, a gardener, and his wife, Mary. His father was an associate in boyhood of John Britton, the Wiltshire antiquary. Hewlett practised chiefly at Bath, painting flowers in watercolours in an ornate Dutch style; his paintings are noted for good drawing, colour, and botanical accuracy. One of his botanical studies was exhibited at Martin Gregory, St James's, London, in November 1999. On 14 February 1808 Farington noted in his diary that the collector 'Thomas Hope has bought a picture of Flowers by Hewlet of Bath, for 500 guineas. It was sent to the British Institution. This was mentioned a few days ago at a dinner... where Hoppner was, & it was added that Hewlet had painted another picture for which he asked 900 guineas. Hoppner out of patience sd. 'Hewlet ought to be smothered'. (Farington, 'Diary', 9.3223)' In 1814, together with the Bath painter Benjamin Barker, Hewlett purchased a plot of land on Bathwick Hill where Barker built Smallcombe Villa, which was much visited by John Britton, and Hewlett also built a property for himself. They were both visited by Queen Charlotte in 1817. He occasionally painted other subjects, such as gypsies, and contributed to the Royal Academy and other exhibitions. He painted a watercolour portrait of William Millard, the Bath peeler (Victoria Art Gallery, Bath). He moved to Isleworth, Middlesex, 'c'.1826 and died at Park House, Isleworth, on 18 August 1836; he was buried in Isleworth church, where a monument was erected by his widow, Elizabeth. There are four drawings of flowers by Hewlett in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. Another painter of the same name, whose relationship to Hewlett is undetermined, practised at Bath at an earlier date. It is difficult to distinguish their works. The elder Hewlett died at Notting Hill, Middlesex, in 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 13154


Hewlett, John (1762-1844), biblical scholar, was the son of Timothy Hewlett, of Chetnole, Dorset. After taking priest's orders he was admitted a sizar at Magdalene College, Cambridge, on 18 January 1786, at the age of twenty-four. He proceeded BD in 1796. He kept a school at Shackleford, Surrey, which he ultimately sold, became morning preacher at the Foundling Hospital, London, about 1802, and in 1819 he was appointed rector of Hilgay, Downham, Norfolk. He was at one time professor of belles-lettres at the Royal Institution of Great Britain. He died at 55 Hunter Street, Brunswick Square, London, on 13 April 1844, and was buried in the catacombs of the Foundling Chapel, London. 
Hewlett was well known for his 'Vindication of the Parian Chronicle', published in 1789, in which he displayed great knowledge of the Arundel marbles. He also took over from George Gregory (1754-1808) the editing of the 'Bible', published in monthly parts. He published various volumes of sermons and other theological works and an 'Introduction to Reading and Spelling' (1816). His chief monuments were his edition of the 'Bible' in three volumes (1812) and his commentaries on it in five volumes (1816). 


@@@@@


doc= 13155


Hewlett, Joseph Thomas James (bap. 1800, d. 1847), novelist and Church of England clergyman, son of Joseph Hewlett and Frances Batchelor of the parish of St Pancras, London, where he was born, was baptized on 31 May 1800 at St Pancras Old Church, Pancras Road, London. He was educated at the Charterhouse, London, where he was placed by the earl of Eldon, the lord chancellor. He matriculated from Worcester College, Oxford, on 13 May 1818, and graduated BA on 5 February 1822 and MA on 25 May 1826. After taking holy orders, he married. His wife was not wealthy and, unfortunately, subsequently became an invalid. Soon after, he was appointed headmaster of Abingdon grammar school. His career there was a failure, made worse by his wife's constant illness. He did not hold the post long, and his subsequent life was a prolonged struggle with poverty. 
Hewlett retired to Letcombe Regis, Berkshire, to take the curacy at Wantage, which was close by, and while there endeavoured to gain an income by writing novels. Some of his efforts include 'The Life and Times of Peter Priggins, the College Scout and Bedmaker' (1841, with illustrations by Phiz (Hablot K. Browne)), 'The Parish Clerk' (1841), 'College Life, or, The Proctor's Notebook' (1843), and 'Great Tom of Oxford' (1846). It is clear from the titles of these novels that he based much of his fiction on his own experience, but nowhere is this more evident than in 'Parsons and Widows' (1844; 2nd edn, 1857), in which he presents a semi-autobiographical portrait under the name of the Curate of Mosbury. He also contributed many articles to the 'New Monthly Magazine'. 
In 1840, through the intercession of Fox Maule (afterwards Lord Panmure), an old schoolfellow, Lord Chancellor Cottenham presented Hewlett to the rectory of Little Stambridge, near Rochford, Essex, of the annual value of $175. The climate in Essex adversely affected his health, and he died at the rectory in Little Stambridge on 24 January 1847. His body was interred at the expense of his masonic brethren of the True Friendship lodge at Rochford. As he died in relative poverty, a public subscription was taken up for the four sons and five daughters who survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13156


Hewley, Sarah, Lady Hewley (1627-1710), benefactor, was the only daughter and heir of Robert Wolrych (died 1661), attorney of Ipswich, Suffolk, and Gray's Inn, Middlesex. Her mother's maiden name was Mott. Her husband, Sir John Hewley (died 1697), whom she married some time during the 1650s, was admitted into Gray's Inn on 4 February 1638; however he suspended his legal career during the 1640s to play an active role in parliament's struggles against the king. He was the only son of a minor Yorkshire West Riding gentleman, and the couple resided in Yorkshire after their marriage, alternating between their town house in York and Bell Hall, their country residence in nearby Naburn purchased in 1663. Their two children, Wolrych and John, both died in infancy, and the bulk of the Hewleys' considerable estate was subsequently given over to charity or divided among their extended kin -- including Hewley Baines, Thomas Wolrych, and Mercy Mott -- by Sarah. 
The Hewley marriage was characterized by religious and professional compatibility and a strong sense of public duty. Both Sarah and John held strong puritan convictions before and after the Restoration; John was a legal associate -- and probably a protege -- of Sarah's father. The union facilitated their prominent role in public affairs from the 1650s onwards. John came to public prominence in York when he was employed by the corporation to administrate their purchase of the dean and chapter jurisdiction in 1656. However, he had been actively involved in county government since 1646, held the recorderships of Pontefract and Doncaster in the later 1650s, and represented Pontefract in the 1659 parliament. At the Restoration he was excluded from public office, though he maintained his nonconformist networks. However in the 1670s he once again contested Yorkshire parliamentary seats, culminating in his representation of York at the three Exclusion Parliaments on an exclusionary and reformatory ticket. True to form, he supported bills for the prevention of swearing, drunkenness, and sabbath-breaking, and security against popery. 
Of course, as a woman Sarah Hewley was unable to hold public office; however, along with other prominent York women, she was no less influential than her politically active husband. She was the first and most powerful patron of nonconformist meetings in York after the Restoration, protecting and befriending preachers and providing a meeting-place for nonconformists from across the county. She was the hub of a network of friends and associates -- or her 'sosiety', as she described it -- who were drawn from the religious and legal circles within which she and her husband moved (Raine, 11). These meetings and networks had direct political significance, as evidenced during the exclusion crisis (1679-81) when Yorkshire nonconformists assembled to pray in the houses of dissenting York matriarchs before voting for the 'whig' platform at the shire elections in York Castle. 
However, Sarah Hewley is best remembered for her charitable activities, which provided the main outlet for her reformatory and godly inclinations after the death of her husband. Although these inclinations were firmly grounded in the presbyterianism typified by Edward Bowles and Richard Baxter, the Hewleys also maintained connections with the circle of Samuel Hartlib and literary networks which included John Rushworth, Matthew Poole, Sir William Dugdale, and Andrew Marvell. The Hewley Trust, which was specifically designed as a northern charity of national significance, was founded by the deeds of 13 January 1705 and 26 April 1707: it institutionalized the support of 'poor and godly Preachers' and their 'poor and godly widows'; the education of 'young men designed for the ministry'; and the propagation of the gospel in 'poor places'; and provided a York hospital for 'widows or unmarried women' fifty-five years old or over. It was financed in large part by properties purchased from royalists by Sarah's father during the 1650s, marking it as a final legacy of the family's puritan activism of the mid-seventeenth century (North Yorkshire County RO, ZTP 1, 16-18). 
Although a board of male presbyterian trustees was appointed in 1705, it is clear Sarah maintained a powerful discretionary influence over the charity's activities until at least a year before her death. However, she was also willing to entrust other institutions with the administration of reformation and 'improvement'. She was the largest anonymous contributor to the meeting-house in St Saviourgate, York, and in her will she provided a fund of $500 to the York corporation for the annual 'laying in coals' for 'poor housekeepers [and] necessitous persons' and $200 for the maintenance and construction of schools for boys and 'poore girles' respectively. She died at her house at St Saviour's, York, on 23 September 1710, after a long illness, 'leaving my vile Body to be disposed by my Executors with as little cost and ceremony as may be' (will of Sarah Hewley, Sept 1710). She was buried in St Saviourgate Chapel, York. The charity was the subject of considerable dispute and parliamentary concern in the 1840s (see G. I. T. Machin, 'Politics and the Churches in Great Britain, 1832 to 1868', 1977). 


@@@@@


doc= 13157


Hewson, John, appointed Lord Hewson under the protectorate (fl. 1630-1660), army officer and regicide, rose to prominence from low social origins. During the 1630s he was employed as a shoemaker or cobbler in Westminster and Edward Hyde later claimed that he was also for a time a brewer's clerk. In 1642 he enlisted in the parliamentarian forces and subsequently served under the earls of Essex and Manchester. On the formation of the New Model Army in 1645 he was appointed lieutenant-colonel of Colonel Pickering's regiment and in July of that year he took part in the storming of Bridgwater in Somerset. On Pickering's death in December 1645 Hewson succeeded him as colonel. In 1646 while stationed in the Oxford area, he illegally preached several times in a local parish church, denouncing the incumbent minister as an agent of Antichrist. 
During 1647 Hewson was heavily involved in the political struggle between the army and parliament. In April he was chosen as one of the commissioners to represent the army's grievances to parliament and he subsequently presented the army's charges against the eleven presbyterian members. In November he took part in the debates of the army council at Putney, and at their close was one of those charged with drawing up instructions to be communicated to the army at the proposed general rendezvous. In December 1647 he joined his fellow officers in a prayer meeting at Windsor. 
In the summer of 1648 Hewson helped to put down the royalist uprising in Kent. His regiment fought at Maidstone, assisted in the relief of Dover, and captured castles at Deal, Walmer, and Sandwich. In December 1648 he assisted Colonel Pride in his purge of parliament and at the subsequent debates of the army council at Whitehall he argued that the magistrate had a right to enforce the moral law. He was subsequently named as one of Charles I's judges and attended the court regularly during January 1649 and signed the king's death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. 
For all his religious radicalism Hewson was a staunch opponent of the Levellers, and in May 1649 helped Cromwell crush them at Burford. The following autumn he was part of Cromwell's expeditionary force sent to reconquer Ireland. He took part in the sack of Drogheda -- subsequently commenting that if the Irish did not submit 'the lord by his power shall break them in pieces like a potter's vessel' ('Perfect Occurences'). He was involved in the relief of Arklow, helped to take Ballyronan and Leighlinbridge, and was wounded during the unsuccessful storming of Kilkenny. It may have been here that he lost an eye. In 1650 he was appointed to the strategically vital position of governor of Dublin, a post he held until 1656. 
A godly Independent and supporter of religious toleration, Hewson joined the radical John Rogers's gathered church in Dublin. Rogers later included in his tract 'Ohel or Bethshemesh' an account of Hewson's testimony before the congregation, in which he had spoken of how he had lived originally as a 'child of wrath' in a 'wicked and profane family in London' before being converted through the influence of a godly preacher (Rogers, 395-6). In 1652 Hewson was recalled to London to discuss the best way to provide godly preachers for Ireland. He strongly supported the policies of Charles Fleetwood as lord deputy, and following the latter's replacement in 1655 by the protector's son Henry he unsuccessfully petitioned for Fleetwood's return. His relationship with Henry Cromwell thereafter remained tense and uneasy and in 1656 he was ordered to return to England. 
In the summer of 1653 Hewson was chosen to represent Ireland in Barebone's Parliament. He took an active part in the assembly's work and in December was involved in the moderate members' plan to bring the assembly to an end. On the establishment of the protectorate he reluctantly supported the new constitutional order, but the republican Edmund Ludlow claimed that he was induced to do so only by the payment of his arrears of pay. In lieu of some of these arrears, he was granted land at Luttrellstown near Dublin. 
Hewson represented Dublin in the first protectorate parliament in 1654, and Guildford in the second in 1656. In spring 1657 he bitterly opposed the moves in parliament to offer Cromwell the crown. In December 1657 he was knighted by Cromwell and chosen as a member of the new second chamber, where he took his seat in January as Lord Hewson; according to Ludlow the earl of Warwick refused to take his seat in this house because it contained figures of such mean extraction as Hewson. After the resignation of Richard Cromwell, Hewson was chosen by the Rump in July 1659 as commander-in-chief of the foot in Ireland. By the autumn he was back in England and, following John Lambert's closure of parliament, was named to the army committee of safety. In December he was ordered to suppress a demonstration in London in favour of a free parliament, and in the course of the action several demonstrators were killed and about twenty injured. As a result Hewson became a target of a great deal of criticism and was satirized in several ballads and lampoons, including Thomas Flatman's 'Don Juan Lamberto', where he appeared as the one-eyed giant, Hussonius, and Edmund Gayton's 'Walk Knaves Walk', a mock sermon by his chaplain on how to wax boots. According to Samuel Pepys, in January 1660 a gibbet was erected in Cheapside with Hewson's image nailed to it. 
After the Rump's return on 26 December 1659 Hewson was deprived of his command but escaped more serious punishment. In May, as the return of Charles II became increasingly more likely, he fled to the continent. He was exempted from the 'Act of Indemnity' but remained at liberty until his death. The Oxford antiquarian Anthony Wood claimed that he died at Amsterdam in 1662, but a pedlar who was arrested and questioned in 1665 on suspicion of being Hewson stated that he had died at Rouen in 1662 or 1663. 


@@@@@


doc= 13158


Hewson, William (1739-1774), surgeon and anatomist, one of the eleven children of William Hewson (died 1767), surgeon, and his wife, whose maiden name was Heron, was born at Hexham, Northumberland, on 14 November 1739. After attending Hexham Royal Free Grammar School, he was apprenticed to his father, and was also pupil to Richard Lambert, who had formed a medical charity in a house in Gallowgate, Newcastle, which later became Newcastle Infirmary. In 1759 Hewson travelled to London, lodged with John Hunter while attending the anatomical lectures of William Hunter, and studied at St Thomas's and Guy's hospitals. He also took classes in midwifery with Colin Mackenzie and in physic with Hugh Smith. When John Hunter went abroad with the army in 1760 he left Hewson to instruct the other pupils in the dissecting room. William Hunter afterwards proposed to Hewson to take him into partnership as a lecturer if he would undertake a year's study in Edinburgh. Hewson did so, and in the autumn of 1762 he returned to London and began to share in the lectures and the profits of William Hunter's anatomical school, which was then in Litchfield Street, Soho. In 1765 Hewson went to France, Flanders, and the Netherlands to visit the hospitals, but returned to give the winter lectures on anatomy. 
In 1768 Hewson visited the coast of Sussex to study the lymphatic system in fishes, and made his researches the subject of a paper communicated in the following year to the Royal Society; his efforts were rewarded with the Copley medal. On 8 March 1770 he was elected FRS. 
Hewson's researches on the lymphatic system gave rise to an acrimonious controversy with Alexander Monro secundus of Edinburgh, who, in a letter addressed to the Royal Society, read on 19 January 1769, and in a pamphlet ('A state of facts concerning paracentesis of the thorax, &c., and concerning the discovery of the lymphatic system in oviparous animals, in answer to Mr. Hewson', 1770) claimed the priority in these discoveries. Hewson's reply was given in an appendix to his 'Experimental Inquiries', part 1. The minor point of the operation of paracentesis had no reference to the other question; and in regard to this Hewson frankly admitted that he had been anticipated by Monro. But in the more important matters he successfully vindicated his own priority. 
In 1769 William Hunter opened the celebrated anatomical school in Windmill Street, where a room was provided for Hewson, who continued in partnership as lecturer, receiving a larger share of profits than before. He also acquired a substantial practice in surgery and midwifery. On 10 July 1770 he married Mary (Polly) Stevenson (1739-1795), who described herself as having 'no pretensions to beauty, nor any splendid fortune' (Richardson, 151). She was, however, a friend of Benjamin Franklin, the American statesman and natural philosopher, who had lodged in her mother's house since he went to London in 1757. She described Hewson as being of slender build, above average height 'with a good air and pleasing countenance, expressive of the gentleness and sagacity of his mind.... His manners were gentle and engaging; his ambition was free from ostentation, his prudence was without meaness, and he was more covetous of fame than fortune. (Richardson, 175)' On his marriage Hewson moved to a house of his own in Craven Street, and this was made by William Hunter a ground for giving notice of breaking off their partnership. This was a blow to Hewson, especially as the building and anatomical museum necessary for carrying on the lectures were exclusively Hunter's property. A disagreement arose about the right of Hewson to make preparations for his own use, but this was smoothed over by the mediation of Franklin. Hewson used his leisure during the year of notice provided for by the terms of partnership in making preparations for future use in his own lectures, and the museum thus formed was so valuable that it subsequently sold for $700. In September 1772 Hewson began to lecture on his own account at a theatre which he built adjoining his home. His reputation was now so high, especially since the publication of various researches by him in the 'Philosophical Transactions' and of his 'An Experimental Inquiry into the Properties of the Blood' (1771), that he had no difficulty in attracting a large class, and he lectured for two winter sessions with great success. Early in 1774 he brought out the second part of his 'Experimental Inquiries', and his increase of reputation as a lecturer and anatomist was accompanied by a considerable increase in the size of his practice. 
Hewson was an excellent anatomist and a physiologist of great originality. His researches on the blood were valuable in establishing the essential character of the process of coagulation, and the forms of the red corpuscles in different animals. They were a good example of the experimental method characteristic of the school of the Hunters. The third part of his 'Experimental Inquiries', relating to the blood, was published after his death by Magnus Falconar, who compiled four chapters of Hewson's observations which the latter had never committed to writing. 
On 18 April 1774 Hewson wounded himself in making a dissection. Serious symptoms followed, and he died on the morning of Sunday, 1 May 1774, in his thirty-fifth year. According to Mary Hewson 'His last moments of recollection were embittered by the idea of leaving me with three children scantily provided for' (Richardson, 151). He was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, but his grave was later lost. His widow, who was left with two sons, gave birth to a daughter, Elizabeth, in the August following her husband's death; she went, on the advice of Benjamin Franklin, to America. The second son, Thomas Tickell Hewson (died 1848), after studying at Edinburgh, became an eminent physician and president of the College of Physicians in Philadelphia. Hewson's works were collected and admirably edited by George Gulliver for the Sydenham Society in 1846. A collective Latin edition, 'Opera omnia', was published in Leiden in 1795. In 1998 the remains of a number of bodies were discovered during building work at 36 Craven Street; these may have been the remnants of some of Hewson's anatomical researches. 


@@@@@


doc= 13159


Hewson, William (1806-1870), theological writer, was born on 12 April 1806 and baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 28 December in the same year, the son of William Hewson of 7 Tottenham Court New Road, London, clerk in a bank. He entered St Paul's School, London, on 9 October 1815. He won an exhibition and proceeded to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1826, where he was elected to a scholarship in 1826 and graduated BA in 1830 and MA in 1833. He was ordained deacon (London) on 6 June 1830 and priest (York) in 1831, holding the curacy of Bishop Burton in the East Riding of Yorkshire from June 1830 to 1833. He married on 2 November 1830 Mary Ann (died 1861), only child of Samuel and Mary Reckster, and widow of Lieutenant Alfred A. Yeakell. They had two children, Frances Ann ('b'. 1833) and John Singleton (1835-1850). 
From January 1834 Hewson was curate of Spofforth, Yorkshire, for one year, and then became headmaster of Sherburn grammar school, Yorkshire, in 1835, with Sunday duty as a curate in Sherburn parish. From January 1838 until June 1844 he was headmaster of the cathedral school of St Peter's, York. He had little teaching ability and presided over a decline in pupil numbers, loss of discipline, and staff unrest. The dean and chapter set up a committee to inquire into the state of the school in 1842. After the dean withdrew his support for Hewson in 1844 he was dismissed, although he was later granted a pension. 
In 1848 the archbishop of York presented Hewson to the perpetual curacy of Goathland, worth only $53 a year, with permission to reside at Whitby, as there was no house for the incumbent in the parish. Hewson succeeded in obtaining an increased stipend of $275 a year. He began to build a house, which was nearly completed at the time of his death. 
Hewson was a laborious writer, and produced twenty-six publications, mainly on comparative religion and on prophecy and its fulfilment. His method of exposition was not lucid, and his works were little read. His favourite belief was that the book of 'Revelation' was an inspired interpretation of the spirit of Jewish prophecy. He died from disease of the heart at 1 St Hilda Terrace, Whitby, on 23 April 1870, and was buried, as had been his wife and son, in York cemetery. His daughter completed the publication of her father's Hebrew and Greek scriptures in 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 13160


Hexham, Henry (fl. 1601-1650), soldier and author, born in Holland, Lincolnshire, was possibly the son of the Edward Hexham who served ten years in the Netherlands as an ensign and accompanied the English expedition to Cadiz in 1596 with the rank of lieutenant. Either his mother, or a sister of his father, was a sister of Jerome Heydon, merchant, of London, who was probably related to Sir Christopher Heydon. The cousin, John Heydon, to whom Hexham dedicates his 'Appendix of Lawes', seems to be Sir John Heydon (d. 1653), Sir Christopher's son. Further support for the connection exists in the fact that Sir Christopher's daughter, Frances, married Philip Vincent, who wrote the commendatory verses prefixed to Hexham's translation of Gerardus Mercator's 'Atlas'. 
As a young man Hexham was attached as a page to the service of Sir Francis Vere, commander of the English troops in the United Provinces; he was with Vere throughout the siege of Ostend in 1601, and his narrative of that event, which is printed at the end of Sir Francis Vere's 'Commentaries' (1657), supplies some unique details about the siege. Hexham seems to have served with Sir Francis until Vere's return to England in 1606, whereupon he remained in the Netherlands, possibly in one of the towns garrisoned by the English. Hexham's continued residency in the Netherlands accounts for his personal acquaintance with Prince Maurice of Nassau and his brother, Frederick Henry. Hexham transferred his services to Sir Horace Vere, who had succeeded his brother Sir Francis and was governor of the town of Brill in 1610 when Hexham translated into English and published his first book, a protestant religious work entitled 'The Refutation of an Epistle, Written by a Certain Doctor of the Augustins Order' -- the epistle by Dutch theologian Johannes Polyander. Hexham dedicated it to Vere and it contained an 'epistle to the Christian reader' by John Burges, minister to the English at the Hague. 
The following year Hexham published three more translations in the cause of international protestantism, including a Dutch translation of Thomas Tuke's 'The Highway to Heaven', under the title 'De konincklicke wech tot den hemel' and an English translation of Johannes Polyander's 'Dispute contre l'Adoration des Reliques des Saincts', as 'A Disputation Against the Adoration of the Reliques of Saints', dedicating the latter to the puritan-inclined Mary, Lady Vere, and signing it as from 'our garrison of Dordrecht, 18 Oct. 1611' (Hexham, 'A Disputation', sig. A2). Hexham undertook the translation 'so that the grave men of our nation may see that the ministers of other reformed churches marches with them unto the Lords combate' (ibid., sig. A3), and he hoped that even those infected with the 'deadly contagion' (ibid., sig. A3-4) of Catholicism would read it. Hexham was still in the Netherlands some twelve years later when his religious motivation in fighting for the Dutch was further confirmed by his 'A tongue combat lately happening between two English souldiers... the one going to serve the king of Spain, the other to serve the states generall' (1623), which he was prompted to write after reading a pamphlet disparaging the policies of Elizabeth I and James I and 'the truth of the reformed religion wherein I was educated' (Hexham, 'A Tongue Combat', sig. A2). 
Hexham acted as quartermaster to Vere's regiment at the relief of Breda in 1625. By October the same year he had obtained the rank of captain. He also acted as quartermaster under Vere during the siege of Bois-le-Duc ('s-Hertogenbosch) in 1629, at the capture of Venloo, Roermond, and Strale, and at the siege of Maastricht in 1631-2. After Vere's death he became quartermaster to the regiment of George (afterwards Baron) Goring, with whom he served at the siege of Breda in 1637. 
In the 1630s Hexham stopped his overtly religious publications in favour of military and other writing. His most solid literary work was his edition of Mercator's 'Atlas'. This was a translation into English of the edition by Jodocus Hondius, but Hexham made additions of his own, and was further assisted by Hondius's son, Henry. The preface is dated Amsterdam, 1 January 1636 'stilo veteri' [os], and the work is dedicated by Hexham to Charles I; it was published in Amsterdam in 1636-7 (2 vols), contains many maps and coloured plates, and remains the standard edition of Mercator. He also wrote and translated a number of battle narratives and technical military treatises. 
In 1637 Hexham contributed significantly to the theory of the art of war, by publishing 'The Principles of the Art Militarie Practised in the Warres of the United Netherlands' (1637), a work similar to Jacob de Gheyn's 'Wapenhandelinge' ('Exercise of arms') (1607); both books consisted of engraved plates representing the drill movements for pikemen, musketeers, and arquebusiers, and were specifically designed for the use of captains in the drilling of their men. Hexham's work heavily influenced 'Directions for Musters' (1638), a pamphlet printed for the use of town militias, on the eve of the first bishops' war, as part of Charles I's 'perfect militia program' (begun in 1628). Hexham's translation, 'The Art of Fortification' (1638), from the original by Samuel Marolais, is said to be the first work on fortification printed in English in which the subject is treated scientifically. 
In 1640 Hexham was in England, and on 27 July 1641 Edward, Viscount Conway, wrote to Secretary Nicholas that he had known Hexham as long as he could remember, and was sure he was a good protestant and would take the oath of allegiance and supremacy, which he did four days later, being then described as 'of St. Clement Danes' ('CSP dom.', '1641-3', 59, 60). Four days after taking the oath he was granted permission to retire to the Netherlands. Hexham therefore took no active part in the civil wars in England. After returning to the Netherlands Hexham remained in Dutch service and busied himself with his literary work. In his book on army discipline, 'An Appendix of Lawes, Articles, and Ordinances' (1643), he referred to the English civil war, writing that he wished to prevent the pillage committed on both sides by showing the means taken by the Dutch to check it; he also remarked that he had served forty-two years in the army and had never been wounded. Another important work was his 'A copious English and Netherduytch dictionarie... as also a compendious grammar of the instruction of the learner' published at Rotterdam in 1647-8, which he claimed was the first of its kind. It has a preface dated 21 September 1647. Hexham is last heard of in 1650 when he was recorded acting in the position of quartermaster to one of the regiments of the Anglo-Dutch brigade on monthly pay of 25 guilders. 


@@@@@


doc= 13161


Hey, John (1734-1815), divine, was born on 12 July 1734 at Pudsey, near Leeds, the second (eldest surviving) son and third child of Richard Hey (1702-1766), drysalter, of Pudsey and his wife, Mary (1702-1768), daughter of Jacob Simpson of Leeds, a surgeon. He maintained a lifelong correspondence with his older sister Rebecca (1731-1811), and affectionate relations with his younger brothers Samuel, William Hey (1736-1819), surgeon, Richard Hey (1745-1835), essayist, and his younger sisters, Dorothy and Sarah. His early education was at Heath, near Wakefield, after which he became a pupil of the Revd Wynne Bateman at Sedbergh School before going up to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in 1751. 
Hey graduated BA as eighth wrangler of 1755, and was ordained deacon by the bishop of Bangor in 1757 and priest by the bishop of Ely in 1760. He resided at St Catharine's College until 1758, when he graduated MA and was elected foundation fellow of Sidney Sussex College. In 1763 he won the Seatonian prize for his poetical essay 'The Redemption'; in 1765 he proceeded to the BD; and in 1775 performed a 'public act', a scholastic disputation in Latin, which was unusual by that date, for the DD to which he was admitted in 1780. He was tutor of Sidney Sussex from 1760 to 1779 and at various times filled most other college offices, including dean, praelector, and seneschal. He lectured on Greek, Hebrew, and algebra, and in the 1770s gave a series of lectures for his Sidney Sussex pupils on moral and political philosophy which attracted the voluntary attendance of undergraduates from other colleges, including William Pitt. Hey was one of the preachers at the Royal Chapel, Whitehall, from the early 1770s and curate of Madingley from 1773 to 1780, being permitted by the bishop of Ely to hold this stipendiary appointment ($30 p.a.) in conjunction with his fellowship. 
Like his college friend the Revd Thomas Twining, Hey was a devoted and knowledgeable musician, and made many friends of both sexes through singing and playing at private musical parties in Cambridge and elsewhere. In the 1750s he travelled to Bedford to hear an early performance of 'Messiah'. Despite much anxious deliberation, confided to his sister Rebecca in the 1770s, Hey never married. 
In 1780 Hey was presented to the rectory of Passenham, near Stony Stratford, by his friend Viscount Maynard, and afterwards to the adjacent rectory of Calverton through the patronage of Thomas Villiers, earl of Clarendon; he resigned his college fellowship on Lady day 1780. In 1780 he was also elected as first Norrisian professor of divinity, and was re-elected in 1785 and in 1790 for further five-year terms. Hey resided at Passenham, then a very rural parish, from 1782, when his parsonage house became vacant, until he resigned the benefice at Michaelmas 1814, ministering faithfully to his two small congregations and absenting himself only for his divinity lectures in Cambridge. 
After his Seatonian prize poem Hey published several sermons, 'Heads of Lectures in Divinity' (1794), his Norrisian 'Lectures in Divinity' (4 vols., 1796-8), 'Discourses on the Malevolent Passions' (1801), and a pamphlet criticizing a bill respecting parish registers (1811). He is reported in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' to have printed but not published 'General Observations on the Writings of St Paul' (1811), and his manuscript lectures on moral and political philosophy, in nine bound volumes, were deposited in Sidney Sussex College archives after his death by his surviving brothers. 
Hey's historical importance lies chiefly in his Norrisian lectures, reprinted in second (1822) and third (1841) editions, and widely influential in the first half of the nineteenth century. But in the latter part of that century, Hey's reputation, like that of his Cambridge contemporaries of the 'intellectual party', Richard Watson and William Paley, suffered drastic depreciation. According to Sir Leslie Stephen, Hey maintained that 'talk about the Trinity is little better than unmeaning gibberish' (Stephen, 1.426). Overton and Relton -- who seem to have had no knowledge of Hey's work -- said of him that 'he was even more inclined to liberalism in theology than either Watson or Paley' (Overton and Relton, 262). 
These readings -- or non-readings -- of Hey and his Cambridge colleagues have lately become subject to reappraisal. The purpose of Hey's Norrisian lectures was to defend subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. The key to understanding his method lies in the lecture 'Of assenting to propositions, which are unintelligible'. Its underlying assumption is that we do indeed 'have things communicated from above by Language' ('Lectures in Divinity', 2.94). Therefore if God 'sends a message, whether it be understood or not, it is to be carefully preserved' (ibid., 2.97). The church must inevitably embody 'the expression' (2.99) of Scripture 'into... doctrine or devotion' -- including creeds, which few if any can fully comprehend. 'All ranks must join in creeds, catechisms, and Liturgies' (ibid., 2.99). In assenting to that which is unintelligible -- including the doctrine of the Trinity -- they acknowledge the 'mysterious' in religion: 'a design of God not yet executed or made manifest' (ibid., 2.100). Hey's lectures were recommended to their pupils by the Tractarians. Both his scrupulous reasoning and his frank acknowledgement of mystery left their mark upon the Oxford Movement. 
Hey retired to Marylebone for the last few months of his life, died in St John's Wood on 17 March 1815, and was buried in St John's Chapel, St John's Wood. His patrons and parishioners erected a memorial tablet which corroborates other testimony to the love and esteem in which he was held by all. 


@@@@@


doc= 13162


Hey, Richard (1745-1835), essayist and mathematician, was born on 11 August 1745 at Pudsey, near Leeds, the son of Richard Hey (1702-1766), drysalter, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Simpson (1702-1768). He was the younger brother of the Revd John Hey DD (1734-1815) and of William Hey FRS (1736-1819). He matriculated at Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1764, became a scholar in 1765, and graduated BA in 1768 as third wrangler, obtaining the chancellor's medal. In 1771 he took the degree of MA as fellow of Sidney Sussex College, and in 1779 was created LLD by royal mandate. On 8 November 1771 he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple. There is a fiat, dated 7 December 1778, for his admission to the court of arches, but no warrant was issued. He was admitted into Doctors' Commons, but obtaining no practice retired from the bar. 
Hey had started his literary career with 'Observations on the Nature of Civil Liberty and the Principles of Government', (1776), but his chief work was the 'Dissertation on the Pernicious Effects of Gaming' (1783; 3rd edn 1812) by which he gained a prize of 50 guineas offered through the University of Cambridge. In 1784 Hey gained a second prize, offered by the same anonymous donor, for his 'Dissertation on Duelling', which also reached a third edition in 1812, and his 'Dissertation on Suicide' gained him a third prize of 50 guineas (1785). The three dissertations were published together in 1812. In 1792 Hey published 'Happiness and Rights', in reply to Paine's 'Rights of Man'. He also wrote a tragedy in five acts called 'The Captive Monarch' (1794) and a novel entitled 'Edington' (1796). Hey had been fellow and tutor of Magdalene College from 1782 until his marriage in May 1796 to Martha, the daughter of T. Browne. Hey's last work was 'Some principles of civilisation, with detached thoughts on the promotion of Christianity in British India' (1815). He had at various times contributed papers to the 'Philosophical Transactions' and other magazines, and he also assisted in editing a pamphlet which gives a scientific account of an Egyptian mummy, with anatomical and other details. Hey died on 7 December 1835 at Hertingfordbury, near Hertford. 


@@@@@


doc= 13163


Hey, William (1736-1819), surgeon, was born on 23 August 1736, in the village of Pudsey, near Leeds, Yorkshire, the fourth of the eight children of Richard Hey, drysalter (died 1766), and his wife, Mary (1702-1768), daughter of Jacob Simpson, a surgeon apothecary. Richard Hey (1745-1835) and John Hey (1734-1815) were his brothers. His father's family had been prosperous drysalters (suppliers of oils and chemicals to clothiers) in Pudsey for several generations. His father, known as 'honest Mr Hey', was a man of unbending probity and great piety. At every important point in his early career William followed his father's advice and benefited from his financial help. When Hey was three years old his clothing caught fire and he nearly burnt to death; the next year he wounded his eye with a penknife and lost his sight in that eye. In 1743 Hey and his brother John were sent to the short-lived Heath Academy near Wakefield, where he received an excellent education in natural philosophy, mathematics, French, and music. Hey had a lifelong love of music. In 1750 he was apprenticed to William Dawson, a surgeon apothecary in Leeds, and joined the Methodists about 1754. At this time Methodists considered themselves to be members of the Church of England and Hey was always an Anglican; he parted from the Methodists in 1781. In 1757 Hey went to London, where he became a student of William Bromfield at St George's Hospital. He was an unusually determined and able student who devoted many hours to dissection. He returned to Leeds in 1759, declined an offer of partnership from Dawson, and set up his own practice. After one year as apothecary to the Leeds workhouse Hey began to campaign for an infirmary at Leeds, serving as a surgeon in a temporary building that opened on Michaelmas day 1767 and becoming a staff surgeon when the infirmary building opened in 1771. In 1773 he became the senior surgeon, serving until his retirement in 1812. 
Hey's London training made him far better qualified than locally trained surgeons to undertake difficult operations. However, the demand for such surgery was limited, and his career was also impeded by his devout Methodism and the competition of rivals. It was ten years before he earned enough to support his growing family. Hey's marriage on 30 July 1761 to Alice ('c'.1737-1820), daughter of Margaret and Robert Banks of Giggleswick, had brought him a modest fortune and was a lifelong comfort; they had thirteen children, of whom eleven died either in infancy or early adulthood. Their daughter Margaret (died 1816) married Robert Jarratt, vicar of Wellington, Somerset, in 1797; John (died 1801) became a fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge; Robert died in 1802; and William Hey (1772-1844) became a surgeon and succeeded his father in his medical practice. About 1769 Hey formed a close friendship with the natural philosopher Joseph Priestley, who described Hey as 'the only person in Leeds who gave any attention to my experiments' (Bell, 1066). Hey published two criticisms of Priestley's theological tracts; however, this did not impair their friendship, and it was Priestley who successfully proposed Hey for a fellowship of the Royal Society in 1775. Hey injured his knee in 1773 and an injury to the same leg in 1778 left him permanently lame, forcing him to make all his professional visits in a carriage. He was never again able to stand for more than a few minutes or to walk any further than the length of a room without a crutch. 
Hey became a councilman in Leeds in 1781 and an alderman in 1786. He twice served as mayor, in 1787-8 and in 1802-3. His vigorous efforts to enforce the proclamation against vice, profaneness, and immorality (1787) created resentment in the town. Not only was Hey burnt in effigy, but a mob stopped his carriage while his wife was inside, cut the traces, and stabbed one of his horses. The episode 'much disordered' his wife's health (Pearson, 2.31), but did not deter his activities. Hey was also forced to defend the actions of his constables at the York assizes, but his legal expenses were defrayed by his friend William Wilberforce, who supported his efforts. Hey founded the Leeds Medical Society in 1768 and in the same year he became a member of the London Medical Society. He also served as president of the Leeds Philosophical and Literary Society in 1783, and was a member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. He supported the abolition of slavery, criminal law reform, the Lancastrian school movement, and various missionary activities, but deprecated some of the views expressed by the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge. Unlike Wilberforce, he opposed Catholic emancipation. He founded the 'Christian Observer' as a response to the dissenters' 'Leeds Mercury'. After his death, a volume entitled 'Tracts and essays, moral and theological, including a defence of the divinity of Christ, and of the atonement' (1822) collected several religious tracts that he had published during his life. 
Hey was a skilled, observant, and innovative surgeon. His published papers in 'Medical Observations and Inquiries' included accounts of extra-uterine pregnancy (1766), rupture of the bladder (1768), and the use of electricity to treat blindness. His electrical experiments, which took place between 1766 and 1771, may have been inspired by John Wesley's advocacy of electrotherapy as well as by his friendship with Priestley. Hey's book 'Observations on the Blood' (1779) disputed the views of William Hewson concerning the effect of inflammation on the coagulation of blood. His most important book was 'Practical Observations in Surgery' (1803). He developed small saws for trephination instead of drills; these were later named after him, as were Hey's operation, a partial amputation of the foot in front of the tarso-metatarsal joint; Hey's hernia, encysted hernia; Hey's internal derangement of the knee, a partial dislocation of the knee; and Hey's ligament, a band of fibrous tissue which forms the edge of a hole in the covering of the muscle just below the groin, through which the saphenous vein passes to join the femoral vein. He was the first fully to describe and name the soft malignant bleeding tumour known as fungus haematodes. In his last publication (1816) he argued that syphilis could be transmitted from a mother to her unborn children. 
In amputations Hey followed the work of Edward Alanson and Benjamin Bell, and strongly emphasized the importance of healing the wound by first intention (without suppuration). He also valued conservative surgery. In one dramatic case, a nine-year-old boy broke his elbow joint and humerus. Hey dissected out the broken part of the humerus and placed the arm on a pillow, bent at the elbow. The child recovered well, and could use the injured arm. Hey was an extremely gifted anatomist who gave well attended public lectures using the bodies of executed criminals. These lectures took place at the Leeds Infirmary, to which he donated the profits. Even very late in life he was so dedicated to anatomical research that he twice travelled to London to consult with Astley Cooper on the anatomy of hernias. Hey's achievement is remarkable in light of the fact that he could see with only one eye, and was barely able to stand erect for the final forty years of his life. In his prime he was reserved, inattentive, and forbidding, but as he grew older and more comfortable with his success, he became friendly, open, and cheerful. He remained alert and active until shortly before his death in Leeds on 23 March 1819. His body was placed in the crypt of St Paul's Church, Park Square, Leeds. His devoted student Richard Pearson attributed his longevity to his temperate life, even temper, and deep religious convictions. 


@@@@@


doc= 13164


Hey, William (1772-1844), surgeon, the eldest surviving son of William Hey (1736-1819), surgeon, and Alice, 'nee' Banks ('c'.1737-1820), was born in the family home, an apothecary's shop and premises in the Slip-in Yard, off the Briggate in Leeds, on 19 February 1772, and was baptized at St Peter's Church, Leeds, on 19 March. He became apprenticed to his father in 1787 and was groomed to take over the medical, surgical, and midwifery practice after the death of his elder brother Richard in 1789. From 1792 to 1794 Hey trained as a surgeon at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London, becoming a member of the Company of Surgeons in 1794. He returned to Leeds and began as a partner to his father from new premises in Albion Street. On 12 January 1796 he married Isabella Hudson (his maternal first cousin) of Huddersfield. They had five children, William ['see below'], Mary ('b'. 1798), John ('b'. 1802), Richard ('b'. 1803), and Samuel ('b'. 1805). Isabella died of consumption in August 1805; William did not remarry. In 1796 Hey sustained an injury to his ankle which caused him to be lame for four years. He was elected an officer of the Leeds House of Recovery in 1804, and five years later his father made him an equal partner. Hey succeeded his father in 1812 as the principal surgeon at the Leeds Infirmary, retaining the post until his resignation in 1830. Hey's book 'A Treatise on the Puerperal Fever' was written in 1813, but not published until 1815. 
Hey carried on the extensive midwifery practice begun by his father. The account books show midwifery receipts until 1843, six months prior to his death. He was elected as one of the original 300 fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1843. Hey took his two sons John and William into his practice, his son Richard became a surgeon in York, and his son Samuel (a bachelor) became rector of Sawley in Derbyshire. His only daughter, Mary, married John Atkinson, a solicitor in Leeds. John married, in 1824, Jane, sister of Joseph Croser, one of Hey's apothecaries. He was affectionately known by his vast family as the Governor. 
Hey was an active member of the Leeds Philosophical and Literary Society. A lifelong devout Christian he was an active member of the new St Paul's Church in Park Square, Leeds. He was a tory mayor of Leeds on two occasions and as mayor was chairman at a public meeting held on 9 January 1832 in the Mixed Cloth Hall in Leeds which had been called to discuss the reduction of the working hours of children. From March 1833 William had further periods of serious illness until his death at his home, 36 Albion Street, Leeds, in March 1844. He was buried in the family vault in St Paul's Church, Leeds, on 13 March 1844. 






@@@@@


doc= 13165


William Hey (1796-1875), surgeon, the eldest son of William and Isabella, was born at 36 Albion Street, Leeds. He was apprenticed to his father and became an equal partner after the death of his brother John in 1836. Hey married Rebecca Roberts on 13 November 1821; they had no children. On the retirement of his father in December 1830 Hey was elected surgeon at the Leeds Infirmary. He was a founder member of the Leeds school of medicine in 1831 and lectured on the principles and practice of surgery. He was president of the medical school from 1836 to 1837 and was president of the British Medical Association in 1843-4 when their annual meeting was held in Leeds. He remained on the staff of the infirmary until March 1851. Hey became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1818 and was one of the original 300 fellows in 1843. He was an active member of the Leeds Philosophical and Literary Society and did much to promote the cultivation of music in Leeds. He died on 10 May 1875 at his estate, Gledhow House, Gledhow Wood, Leeds, a substantial property to the north of Leeds town. He was buried in the vault of St Paul's Church, Park Square, Leeds. His wife predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13166


Heydon, Sir Christopher (1561-1623), soldier and writer on astrology, was born in Surrey on 14 August 1561, the eldest son of Sir William Heydon (1540-1594) of Baconsthorpe, Norfolk, and his wife, Anne ('fl'. 'c'.1540-1603), daughter of Sir William Woodhouse of Hickling, Norfolk. The family had risen in the fifteenth century through the law, and enjoyed a powerful position in Norfolk affairs, with extensive lands and a palatial mansion at Baconsthorpe. Heydon was educated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, where he associated with the young earl of Essex, and after proceeding BA in 1579 travelled widely on the continent. In 1586, while still a young man, he stood for the Norfolk county seat, probably at his father's behest, against a family rival, Thomas Farmer. Though he was defeated his father appealed to the privy council, which ordered a fresh poll, and this time Heydon was declared elected. The Commons however challenged the council's constitutional right to interfere in electoral disputes, and the election was quashed. Heydon stood again for parliament in 1588, this time successfully. 
Heydon married twice. His first wife, Mirabel, daughter of the London alderman Sir Thomas Rivet, died on 15 July 1593 aged only twenty-two and was buried at Saxlingham, another of the family estates. Heydon erected a massive and ornate tomb which virtually filled the chancel, covered with symbolic hieroglyphs and carvings explained in a treatise now lost. Like most of his family, Heydon was both extravagant and hot-tempered, and he was already embroiled in a bitter feud with his father. Deep in debt, Sir William had been forced to mortgage Baconsthorpe and only a series of royal protections kept his creditors at bay. In 1590 he decided to sell part of his property, a plan his son challenged on the grounds that the estates were entailed to him. When Sir William then threatened to demolish Baconsthorpe itself, out of spite, the younger man secured a prohibition from the privy council which condemned the plan as unnatural and likely to set a bad example. The dispute, which drew in many of the leading Norfolk families, dragged on for several years and led to a lawsuit between father and son in 1593. Sir William died the following year, bequeathing his estate to his widow instead of his son, and Heydon then went to law against her. She appealed to the queen, on whose order the lord keeper settled the dispute. Heydon was left liable for inherited debts of $11,000, adding to his own of over $3000. A second marriage, to Anne (died 1642), daughter of John Dodge and widow of John Potts of Mannington, Norfolk, in or before 1599, brought him personal happiness but a large and growing family exacerbated his financial problems. 
For many years Heydon was active in local government, serving as a justice from 1586 and again from 1598, and he was also a commissioner for musters in the late 1590s. However, his martial spirit and pressing debts eventually persuaded him to play for higher stakes. Throwing in his lot with the court favourite, the earl of Essex, he served in the Cadiz expedition of 1596, where he was knighted, and he would have joined Essex in Ireland in 1599 but for domestic entanglements. His younger brother John, who had earlier fought with Leicester in the Netherlands, did accompany Essex to Ireland, and was knighted there. By this time the Heydons were mired in both court and county rivalries, inflamed by their own combative spirit. In October 1600 Heydon challenged Sir John Townshend to a duel, averted only by the privy council's intervention. The council was too late to prevent a bloody duel near Norwich in the same month between Sir John Heydon and Sir Robert Mansell, when one of Heydon's hands was completely severed. 
The declining fortunes of Essex were reflected in the shrinking local influence of the Heydons. Sir Christopher was forced to mortgage Baconsthorpe, and his attempt to block Mansell's election to the parliament called for 1601 backfired, Mansell jeering that his rival was shunned by the leading Norfolk families. The Heydons' prominent part in the Essex revolt in February 1601, when they both led rebel troops through Ludgate, spelt the end of their public careers: John fled to the Netherlands, while Heydon went into hiding, and opened a correspondence with Sir Robert Cecil in which he offered to surrender if Cecil would promise his favour. He swore he had joined Essex on the spur of the moment, ignorant of the real design, and that while devoted to his patron he had never intended any disloyalty to the queen. He offered to pay a fine, though pleading that massive debts and fourteen children left him with few resources. Perhaps surprisingly, Cecil accepted his protestations and worked to secure a pardon. Heydon was held in the Fleet prison for a time, but was eventually pardoned on paying a fine of $2000. His brother returned to England in April 1602 to avoid outlawry. Heydon's financial plight remained desperate. In 1603-5 Sir Edward Coke wrote several times to Cecil on behalf of the brothers, asking for Heydon to be given the farm of the customs for Norfolk, and Heydon himself petitioned his neighbour Sir Bassingbourne Gawdy, Cecil, and James I to similar effect. His problems remained unresolved, and in 1614 he was forced to mortgage the rest of his estates. In 1620 Heydon came to the council's attention once more, after reporting that a group of Norfolk recusants was collecting money to aid the Habsburgs against the protestants in Bohemia and Germany. He remained a champion of militant protestantism to the end. 
Heydon enjoyed more lasting fame as a champion of astrology, an interest kindled by his friends Richard Forster, formerly physician to the earl of Leicester, and Richard Fletcher of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, mathematician, physician, and astrologer. His major publication was 'A Defence of Judiciall Astrologie' (1603), a massive work drawing on his own extensive library, in which he rebutted John Chamber's 'A Treatise Against Judiciall Astrologie' (1601); Heydon's domestic chaplain, William Bredon, himself a prominent astrologer, helped with the composition. In reply to Chamber, who had called for legislation to outlaw astrology, Heydon insisted it was a valid science, vindicated by experience and fully compatible with Christianity. His work demonstrated familiarity with Tycho Brahe and other modern authors, and he described some of his own astronomical observations with instruments made by his friend the mathematician Edward Wright. 
Heydon's work was the most substantial English defence of astrology in its time, given additional weight by his social eminence and the absence of challenges. A critical response by Chamber remained unpublished, while a rejoinder by George Carleton, later bishop of Chichester, was published only twenty years later in 1624 as 'The Madnesse of Astrologers'. In it Carleton pointed out, with some justice, that Heydon's work was more impressive for its learning than its logic. Heydon also composed an important treatise on the effects of the great conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in 1603, and later phenomena up to the comet of 1618. His commentary on European political developments was strongly protestant and in apocalyptic vein. He predicted that the Dutch would crush their Arminian and Spanish enemies, and that Spain would also lose the Indies. From the upheavals in Bohemia he concluded that the Austrian Habsburgs would fall in 1623 and Rome in 1646, leading to the ruin of the Ottomans and the rise of Christ's kingdom, 'the fifth Monarchie of the World', about 1682 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole, 242, fol. 65). In a letter to Forster in 1603 he had mused whether the conjunction, the new star, and the great eclipse of the sun in 1605 might also foreshadow 'a new Democraty or Aristocraty of the Church and Commonwealth' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 242, fol. 16), a radical idea he incorporated in his treatise which also looked for a return to apostolic simplicity. Not surprisingly, his work remained unpublished. He also composed 'An astrological discourse with mathematical demonstrations', written around 1608, a defence of astrology drawing heavily on Kepler, with a briefer account of the 1603 conjunction. The manuscript remained in the possession of Forster until his death, when it passed to the astrologer Nicholas Fiske. Fiske's attempts to publish it were blocked, but it appeared in revised form in 1650, in the more favourable climate of the Commonwealth. Elias Ashmole subsidized the venture, with William Lilly supplying an admiring preface. Heydon also compiled elaborate prognostications for 1608 and 1609, which remained unpublished. He had astronomical as well as astrological interests, and for many years maintained a warm friendship with the eminent mathematician Henry Briggs and the astronomer John Bainbridge, sending them astronomical papers, lending instruments, and inviting them to Baconsthorpe. 
Heydon died intestate in 1623 and was buried at Baconsthorpe. His widow, who died in 1642 aged seventy-five, chose to be buried beside him rather than by her first husband, in tribute to his 'conjugal affection' (Blomefield, 509). Heydon had several children by his first wife, and four daughters and a son by his second. His eldest son, Sir William, was killed on the Ile de Re expedition of 1627; his second, Sir John Heydon, also a soldier, became lieutenant-general of the ordnance to Charles I during the civil war. Sir Christopher Heydon, though blessed with many talents, was far too impulsive to succeed in public life. In the world of learning, however, he played a significant part in fostering the renaissance of English astrology, while in fusing astrology with apocalyptic protestantism he foreshadowed some of the developments of the revolutionary era. 


@@@@@


doc= 13167


Heydon, Sir Henry (d. 1504), lawyer, was the son of John Heydon (d. 1479) of Baconsthorpe, Norfolk, the well-known opponent of the Paston family, and of Eleanor, daughter of Edmund Winter (died 1448) of Barningham in the same county. A Norfolk JP from 1473, he frequently acted as a feoffee, arbitrator, and adviser for other landowners. During his career he also served on various 'ad hoc' commissions, mainly in Norfolk but sometimes elsewhere. He married, probably after 1463, Anne (died 1509/10), the second daughter of Sir Geoffrey Boleyn, a wealthy London mercer of Norfolk origin and the great-grandfather of Henry VIII's queen Anne Boleyn. Heydon inherited at least sixteen manors from his father, but began buying land in Norfolk (sometimes in competition with the Pastons) and Kent during John's lifetime. As Kent landowners the Boleyns perhaps encouraged Heydon to buy manors at West Wickham and elsewhere in the county in 1469, and he served as a JP there in the late 1480s and 1490s. A trustee for the Kent purchase was Henry Stafford, duke of Buckingham, for whose widow Heydon was an estate steward in Norfolk by the 1490s. By this date Heydon had also become steward of the household and chief bailiff of the honour of Eye on behalf of Cecily, duchess of York, whose will of 1495 he supervised. 
Although he was knighted at Henry VII's coronation, Heydon remained in Norfolk rather than obey the king's summons for help against Lambert Simnel in 1487. Later, however, he attended several court occasions, including the reception of Katherine of Aragon into England in 1501, but he was primarily a local servant of the crown, rather than a courtier. Heydon died at Baconsthorpe between 20 February and 22 May 1504 leaving eight children. He was buried beside his father in a family chapel, long since vanished, at Norwich Cathedral. John, the eldest of his three sons, became a leading Norfolk gentleman of Henry VIII's reign. 
A wealthy sheep farmer, Sir Henry could afford considerable building projects. In Norfolk he completed the castle his father had begun at Baconsthorpe, restored the church at Kelling, and constructed a causeway between Thursford and Walsingham and a new church at Salthouse. In Kent he built a fortified manor house and rebuilt the parish church at West Wickham. The church has a window, said to be a memorial to him, depicting a kneeling human skeleton and the Heydon arms. 


@@@@@


doc= 13168


Heydon, Sir John (bap. 1588, d. 1653), royalist army officer and mathematician, was baptized at Saxlingham, Norfolk, on 13 June 1588. He was the second son of Sir Christopher Heydon (1561-1623) of Baconsthorpe, writer on astrology, and his first wife, Mirabel ('bap'. 1561, died 1593), daughter of Sir Thomas Rivet or Ryvett of Chippenham, Cambridgeshire. By 1613 Heydon was keeper of the stores at Sandown Castle, Kent, perhaps owing his appointment to the patronage of Henry Howard, earl of Northampton, lord warden of the Cinque Ports. Heydon held the rank of captain and may have served abroad, perhaps as a gunner, for he acquired a reputation for his military ability and as a mathematician. He also attracted attention for his wit at court, especially for his exchanges with Lady Carey. About 1627 he married Mary Philips (died 1658), daughter of William Philips; five of their children were alive in 1653. 
John's elder brother Sir William Heydon was drowned in the expedition to the Ile de Re in 1627. John inherited the family estates and also succeeded Sir William as lieutenant of the ordnance, the senior executive officer and treasurer of the ordnance office, with a remuneration of 2.5 per cent of the business transacted. He took practical charge of the office, where the clerk, Francis Morrice, had virtually held control until disgraced in 1628. Problems arose from the office's structure and internal feuds among the principal officers. As lieutenant, Heydon was responsible for supplying the ship money fleets of 1635-9 and the armies in the bishops' wars. He also followed his brother in being appointed a paymaster of the posts and in 1629 was made one of the commissioners for forfeited bills of exchange. He was knighted in 1629. 
Heydon joined the king at York in July or early August 1642 and had charge of the royalist artillery during the Edgehill campaign. He served as lieutenant-general of the ordnance at Oxford throughout the first civil war, acting as the effective head of the ordnance office, responsible for supplying the Oxford army and garrisons with military 'materiel'. Heydon drew praise from leading royalists, including Clarendon and Sir Kenelm Digby, for his dedication and military ability, and in 1645 was mentioned as a possible governor of Oxford. His house in the Minories, London, was searched in 1642, when his books were seized. Heydon's lands were confiscated in 1642-3 and, following his unsuccessful application in 1646 to compound for his delinquency, he was in 1648 fined $294 10's'. His landed income was assessed at $147 5's'. per annum. 
Heydon was created a DCL of Oxford University in December 1642. He seems to have shared his father's interest in astrology and was a friend of Elias Ashmole. Heydon died at Heston, Middlesex, on 16 October 1653 and was buried there on 19 October. In his will he mentioned outstanding suits in chancery and debts, directing that two remaining properties in Norfolk be sold. He did not name an executor and so that task was carried out by his wife, from whom he was estranged. She was buried at St Bride's, Fleet Street, on 28 November 1658. 


@@@@@


doc= 13169


Heydon, John (b. 1629, d. in or after 1670), writer on astrology and alchemy, and occultist, was born on 10 September 1629 in Green Arbour, London, the son of Francis Heydon of Sidmouth, Devon, and Mary Chandler of Worcestershire. He was the grandson of Sir Christopher Heydon of the Norfolk branch of the family, author of the learned and influential 'A Defence of Judiciall Astrologie' (1603). He was privately educated at either Tardebigg, Worcestershire, or Golton, Warwickshire, or both. The civil war, in which his father became lieutenant-general of the ordnance to Charles I, ended his intention to attend university. His claim to have commanded a troop of royalist cavalry, though, must be accepted (as with many of his own accounts) with reservations; he would have been aged thirteen. 
In 1651 Heydon travelled abroad, perhaps as far as Spain, Italy, Egypt, and Turkey, and the following year returned and, after studying the law, was articled as an attorney at Clifford's Inn. By 1655 he was practising law at the court of king's bench, and began writing his first books (though these were not published until later). He must also have been practising astrology, however, because in 1657 or 1658 he was imprisoned in Lambeth House for foretelling Cromwell's death from his nativity. According to a letter written to the duke of Ormond on 2 March 1667, Richard Cromwell and John Thurloe went to him disguised as cavaliers and asked him for his prediction, and it was as a result of this that he was imprisoned. 
On 4 August 1656 Heydon married Alice Culpeper, widow of the famous astrologer-physician and radical, Nicholas Culpeper. He moved into her house in Spitalfields, near Bishopsgate, next door to the Red Lion. In July 1663 he was again imprisoned for several weeks -- this time, despite his staunch royalism, by Charles II for 'seditious practices' ('CSP dom.', '1663'). He was released at the instigation of the duke of Buckingham, but repeated the experience on 23 January 1667. This time he and the duke were both arrested for suspicion of plotting, the charge against Heydon being that he had obliged Buckingham by astrologically inferring the date of the king's death. 
Tantalizingly, the 'Calendar of State Papers' for February 1667 also records 'Astrological predictions on the questions to Peter ['sic'] Heydon, astrologer of London, as to whether the fanatics shall have toleration in England, and whether the English may be compelled to a neutral place for a treaty of peace'. His predictions were apparently in the affirmative. The record continues with the statement that 'though these answers are according to the rules of his art, he is committed to the Tower for them' ('CSP dom.', '1666-7', 541). 
Heydon stoutly maintained his innocence, and when the evidence became increasingly threadbare the case was dropped. It seems to have been an attempt by Lord Arlington to get his rival, Buckingham -- and, as the latter's ally, Heydon -- out of the way. At Heydon's arrest, an inventory of his goods noted five hundred books, a sword and an expensive watch; the latter two articles ended up in the possession of the paid witness against him. 
The last thing written by Heydon is dated 1670. There are no reports of him afterwards, and nothing is known of when or how he died. His chief books are: 'A New Method of Rosicrucian Physick' (1658); 'The Rosie Crucian' (1660), which supplies a Rosicrucian-Pythagorean cosmogony; 'The English Physitians Guide, or, A Holy Guide' (1662), his principal work of alchemical and mystical medicine; 'The Harmony of the World' (1662), his main metaphysical work which outlines his Neoplatonic cosmos; 'Theomagia, or, The Temple of Wisdome' (1664), which contains much astrological material; and 'The Wise Man's Crown, or, The Glory of the Rosie Cross' (1664) and 'El havareuna, or, The English Physician's Tutor' (1665), both of which concentrate on alchemy. He occasionally used a Rosicrucian pen-name, Eugenius Theodidactus. 
All these works are essentially variations on a single theme: Rosicrucianism as a universal wisdom and, as such, the way to an ultimate spiritual, physical, and social harmony. Heydon never claimed to be a member of the Rosicrucian brotherhood, a mysterious group whose actual existence has been questioned, and whose supposed 'manifestos' of 1614-15 were first translated into English in 1652 by Thomas Vaughan. Rather he was an apologist and publicist for Rosicrucian ideas -- which is to say, an amalgam of Neoplatonism, hermeticism, the cabbala, Pythagoras, Paracelsian medicine, alchemy, and astrology. To that end, he borrowed heavily, and usually without acknowledgements, from Thomas Vaughan, Francis Bacon, Sir Thomas Browne, Cornelius Agrippa (on occult philosophy), Paracelsus (on medicine), Elias Ashmole (on alchemy), and William Lilly (on astrology). For Heydon, the resulting philosophy, with its spiritual sympathies and antipathies, mystical number symbolism, and hierarchies of spirits linking any number of earthly phenomena (and ultimately ruled by God, as the One), supplied medicines equally for society, the individual soul, and the physical body, all of which were ultimately reflections of the divine order. 
The context for Heydon's arguments was the extraordinarily fertile and chaotic intellectual milieu of England in the mid-seventeenth century, in which the new mechanical and experimental philosophies, the old Aristotelianism, and the magico-religious world-view and practices of the radical sectaries, were all contending for supremacy. For many of his contemporaries, he apparently embodied much of the latter, with its 'Familistical-Levelling-Magical temper' (Hall, 199) stigmatized, especially after 1660, as 'enthusiasm'. With William Lilly, Heydon was a model for the astrologer Mopus in John Wilson's popular play of 1663, 'The Cheats'. On a more learned level, he was attacked by name in the bishop of Oxford, Samuel Parker's, 'A Free and Impartial Censure of the Platonick Philosophy' (1667), and by implication in Robert Boyle's 'Free Inquiry into the Vulgarly Received Notion of Nature' (1665), despite (or perhaps on account of) Heydon's syncretic gesture towards Boyle's belief in the production of terrestrial phenomena by the motions of corpuscles. 
Ironically, Heydon himself was far from being a radical sectary but was a lifelong, even fanatical, monarchist, who believed (to put it crudely) that a king was necessary to reflect the power of God. His monarchism and relatively well-born social status were insufficient, however, to overcome the political suspicions engendered by his 'enthusiastic' religious and metaphysical cosmology. At the same time, his politics set him at odds with the radical groupings who were similarly inclined to magic, alchemy, and astrology. 
Heydon's earlier books were apparently commended by the astrologers John Gadbury and John Booker, although there is an element of doubt, since according to John Aubrey, Heydon was not above pirating praise composed for other authors' books; within a few years, however, he was attacking and being criticized by both Lilly and Booker. He even denounced Paracelsus and Jakob Boehme, despite his borrowings from them, probably for having drawn unacceptably 'levelling' conclusions from their Neoplatonic premisses. 'The recent years of the [Cromwellian] tyranny', he complained, 'admitted stocking-weavers, shoe-makers, millers, masons, carpenters, bricklayers, gunsmiths, porters, butlers, etc. to write and teach astrology and physick' ('Theomagia', 1664, C3'v'). 
To add to the complexity of his position and seal his almost complete isolation, Heydon was himself, despite his adherence to hierarchy and his contempt for the sectaries, something of a populist in his approach. 'The Rosie Crucian' contained 'Infallible Axiomata, or, Generall Rules to know all things past, present, and to come' (title-page) and 'The Harmony of the World' described itself as 'a Discourse wherein the Phaenomenoa of Nature are Consonantly Salved and Adapted to Inferior Intellects' (title-page). Perhaps this was simply an attempt to spread the word and promote his programme, or perhaps it was partly compelled by the general hostility he met at a more learned level; in any case, together with his inveterate plagiarism and flamboyant self-promotion, the result was to alienate his last potential allies, namely conservative and royalist occultists such as Gadbury and Ashmole. The latter dismissed him as 'an ignoramus and a cheate' ('DNB'), a verdict that was probably widely accepted at the time, but has too readily obscured Heydon's complexity and historical interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 13170


Heylyn, John (1684/5-1759), theologian, was baptized on 2 August 1685 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, the eldest son of John Heylyn (died 1736), saddler, and Susanna Sherman, sister of Thomas Sherman of St Andrew's, Holborn. His father is said to have acquired a large fortune by army contracts. He was educated at Westminster School, where he became a king's scholar in 1700. He was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 7 June 1705 and was elected a scholar on 12 April 1706. He graduated BA and MA in 1709, and DD in 1728. Ordained priest, in London on 18 December 1709, he was vicar of Haslingfield, Cambridgeshire, between 1714 and 1719; Edward Rud records that Heylyn 'preach'd a very fine sermon' at the archidiaconal visitation of Dr Bentley in December 1716 ('Diary... of Edward Rud', 19). He became the first rector of the modern St Mary-le-Strand on 1 January 1724 and held that living until his death. On 2 July 1729 he was chosen lecturer of All Hallows, Lombard Street. Heylyn was a chaplain in ordinary to George II (1733-48) and was also rector of Sunbury, Middlesex (1742-7). He was collated to prebendal stalls at St Paul's on 11 October 1736, and at Westminster on 21 March 1743. 
From his indulgence in mysticism Heylyn was known as the Mystic Doctor. His principal work was 'Theological lectures at Westminster Abbey, with an interpretation of the four gospels, to which are added some select discourses upon the principal points of revealed religion' (1749). A second part of this work, entitled 'An interpretation of the New Testament', was prepared by Heylyn for the press but was not published until 1761, after his death. He also published six single sermons, one of which was delivered by him at the consecration in 1738 of his friend Joseph Butler, bishop of Bristol. 
Heylyn married twice; his second wife, Elizabeth Ebbutt of St Margaret's, Westminster, died on 9 June 1747, aged forty-nine. He himself died on 11 August 1759, aged seventy-four, and was buried six days later in the south transept of Westminster Abbey, where there is a monument to his memory. He bequeathed $1000 to the lying-in hospital in Brownlow Street. He was survived by a son, John, who was a merchant in Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 13171


Heylyn, Peter (1599-1662), Church of England clergyman and historian, was born in Burford, Oxfordshire, on 29 November 1599, the second son of Henry Heylyn (died 1622), a minor country gentleman, and his wife, Elizabeth Clampard (died 1616). He was educated at Burford grammar school and was admitted initially to Hart Hall, Oxford, in 1614, but was then elected a demy of Magdalen College in 1615; he matriculated on 19 January 1616. 
Heylyn soon clashed with other members of the college: such was his diligence in the office of 'impositor of the Hall' that, as he later reported, he was dubbed 'the perpetual dictator', and the 'heart burning' of both the other demies and the senior fellows towards him 'break out into whipping and other base usuage' (Heylyn, xiv). He gained early renown for his geographical works. After graduating BA in October 1617 he began to lecture on historical geography in the college, and was elected a fellow of Magdalen in the following year. After proceeding MA in 1620 he published his lectures as 'Microcosmos: a Little Description of the Great World' (1621) and secured its presentation to its dedicatee, Prince Charles, at Theobalds. This proved his most popular work, going through no fewer than eight editions by 1639. From his early years Heylyn was also active as a poet. At a later age he recollected his early poems with pleasure, and continued writing them into the early 1630s, when he dedicated poems to Charles I and William Laud. He had a particular taste for satire, enthusiastically translating epigrams by Martial as well as composing a Latin comedy, 'Theomachia', and a derisory poem against Barten Holyday entitled 'Whoop Holiday', and in 1625 he composed a lengthy satirical account of his trip to France, which went through several editions in the 1650s. 
Heylyn's background was not that of a straightforward divine. Moreover, despite his later association with the Laudian movement, there is no obvious indication of early associations with such ideas. On the contrary his earlier connections would seem to have been with figures more linked to puritanism. One of his kinsmen was the famous puritan sheriff of London and member of the feoffees for impropriations, Rowland Heylyn; his early schoolteacher, Edward Davys, retained his living during the protectorate; he studied at the godly inclined Magdalen College; one of his tutors was the 'verie zealous and pragmaticall Puritan' (Heylyn, 'Memorial', xii) Walter Newberry; and he received early patronage from the puritanically inclined earl of Danby, and support from the Calvinist dean of Winchester, John Young. The religious views apparent in the early editions of the 'Microcosmos' are those of a conventional anti-Catholic Calvinist, and include many opinions that he would later condemn, including the claim that the pope was Antichrist, that continental iconoclasm was praiseworthy, and that the Albigensians were worthy predecessors of English protestants. 
Heylyn's progress seems to have been disrupted by a disputation at the divinity schools in Oxford in 1627, where he incurred the wrath of the regius professor of divinity, John Prideaux. While Heylyn later sought to present this conflict as an ideological clash, this seems to be a profitable gloss on what seems more to have been a combination of misunderstanding and personal animosity. The most important consequence of this event is that it may have first brought Heylyn to the attention of his later patron William Laud, whose patronage he was actively soliciting by 1629, the year he proceeded BD. Heylyn had in the meantime been ordained in 1624 and married, on 28 October 1628, Letitia, daughter of Thomas Highgate of Hayes, Middlesex, whose elder sister had already married Heylyn's elder brother. He continued to hold his fellowship for a year after the marriage, leading to later charges that he had married clandestinely. Heylyn's anxious search for preferment in the wake of his marriage led to a trip to the Channel Islands in 1629 as chaplain to the earl of Danby, but he used the opportunity to send an expose of the disorders of Guernsey presbyterianism to Laud (undoubtedly against Danby's wishes). His search for public employment under Laud continued in 1630, when he prompted the government's attack upon the feoffees for impropriations in a very public and highly provocative sermon in Oxford, a copy of which he sent, bound in vellum, to Laud. Again, Heylyn demonstrated his ability to discern puritan subversion where others had not thought to find it, and condemned his kinsman Rowland Heylyn in the process. 
Heylyn also sought to appeal to the king, to whom he became a chaplain-in-ordinary in 1630. As well as publishing anonymously a curious work -- 'Augustus' -- which described how Augustus Caesar used devious methods to establish an absolute monarchy, Heylyn adopted a more direct and less controversial route in the form of his 'History of St George' (1631) with an eye to Charles's particular and well-known enthusiasm for the Order of the Garter (the work was presented to the king by Laud in February 1631). Heylyn was soon put to work as a hitman against the regime's opponents. In 1632 he was charged in the king's name with reviewing William Prynne's 'Histriomastix', and came up in record time with a vitriolic review which secured Prynne's prosecution for sedition. In the previous year Heylyn had been presented to a prebendal stall in Westminster Abbey (as well as a living in Hemingford Abbots) clearly with the intention that he should dig up information on Laud's opponent, the dean, John Williams. Within seven months he was already offering to secretary of state Sir John Coke information against Williams which he had wheedled out of the civil lawyer Dr William Spicer. Two years later he again played a prominent role in the drawing up of thirty-six articles of complaint against the dean by the prebendaries. At the hearing of the commission into the grievances in February 1636 Williams commented prophetically 'If your Lordships will hear that young fellow prate, he will presently persuade you that I am no Dean of Westminster'. Just a matter of months after this hearing Heylyn embarked on a pamphlet battle with Williams over the government's altar policy, in the course of which he composed what were the principal defences of this Laudian policy, 'A Coale from the Altar' (1636) and 'Antidotum Lincolniense' (1637). 
Heylyn also levelled his guns at Laud's opponent and his own nemesis, the Oxford regius professor of divinity John Prideaux. Having himself proceeded DD on 13 April 1633 and been licensed to preach, he accused Prideaux of heterodoxy after the act that summer, and the following year he mischievously published in translation an earlier lecture that Prideaux had given on sabbatarianism. Heylyn supplied his own preface to the work and presented the lecture as if it defended the newly reissued 'Book of Sports'. His own substantial defence of the 'Book of Sports' -- 'History of the Sabbath' -- was submitted to the press the following year, to be followed by a general defence of the policies of the personal rule in 1637, the 'Briefe and Moderate Answer': each was an officially sponsored apologetic work, the former designed to complement the work of Bishop Francis White, the latter the published speech of Archbishop Laud. He also made a substantial contribution to Laud's judgment in the case of Henry Burton, John Bastwick, and William Prynne. 
In career terms these various pieces of hatchet work and polemical writing paid major dividends. Further crown appointments followed: Heylyn was presented to the rich benefice of Houghton in Durham in 1633, which he substituted for that of Alresford, Hampshire, allegedly on the specific instructions of the king, so that he would be nearer to court to do his bidding. Here he substantially expanded the parsonage house and built a new chapel. 
After the imprisonment of Williams, Heylyn was appointed treasurer of the Westminster chapter in December 1637, and was soon afterwards appointed to the parsonage of Islip, which he exchanged for the rectory of South Warnborough, Hampshire (a living in the gift of St John's College, Oxford, and the exchange therefore conceivably aided by Laud's intervention). Soon afterwards, however, he and his family at Alresford fell seriously ill. On Heylyn's recovery he immersed himself in researching the history of the Church of England. It was presumably about this time that he made substantial notes on proceedings of convocation, copies of which survive at Lambeth Palace Library. He also contributed materials to Laud's revised and expanded version of his 'Conference with Fisher'. Like other Laudians he did not write official defences of royal policy during the Scots crisis, as the defence of episcopacy fell to Joseph Hall, although he contributed his own 'The History of Episcopacie' (1642) under the pseudonym of Theophilus Churchman. 
Heylyn attended the notorious convocation of 1640, where he seems to have played an important role in proposing and drawing up a standard set of visitation articles to be adopted for the whole country and in proposing the canon calling for greater observance of the king's accession day, as well as providing the necessary precedent of 1586 to justify the continued sitting of convocation after the dissolution of parliament. 
The assembling of the Long Parliament in November 1640 made it likely that Heylyn, like other supporters of the Laudian regime, would be called to account for his actions. He was confronted first by John Williams, the released dean of Westminster, who dramatically interrupted a sermon that Heylyn was giving in the abbey by knocking on the pulpit with his staff and exclaiming 'No more of that point'. Heylyn's account of their subsequent exchanges claims that they reached a cautious cease-fire. At the same time Heylyn found himself cross-examined before a committee investigating Prynne's prosecution, which found him guilty as a delinquent, although the failure to prosecute Heylyn any further may have been partly due to his pointed reminder to Charles of 'how much it doth concerne the king in honour to justifie the intimacion of his owne commands' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/476/97). After composing a paper justifying the right of the bishops to take part in the trial of the earl of Strafford, Heylyn retired to Alresford. 
It was there, late in 1642, that Heylyn found his house attacked by the troops of Sir William Waller, who had orders to bring him a prisoner to Portsmouth. Heylyn escaped and joined the king at Oxford, where he was instructed to remain and to write on the king's behalf. He was the first editor of the royalist newsbook 'Mercurius Aulicus', which began with Heylyn's characteristic claim to be seeking to deliver the dispassionate and objective truth. He was reportedly happy to pass the work on to Sir John Berkenhead when this was recommended by Sir Kenelm Digby in September 1643, although he returned to work on it for a few weeks in June 1644 during Berkenhead's absence. Later in 1643 Heylyn wrote 'The Rebells Catechism', as well as 'The Stumbling Block of Schisme', although the latter work was not published until the 1650s. He responded to news of Laud's execution with a heartfelt 'Briefe Relation of the Death and Sufferings of... L. Archbishop of Canterbury' (1645) which celebrated him in verse as a martyr. In the meantime Heylyn was declared a delinquent by the Commons in 1644, was sequestrated from Alresford in 1644 and from South Warnborough in 1645, and had his estates and goods seized, and his books carried away to Portsmouth. In early May 1645 Heylyn gained the king's leave to retire to Winchester, although he soon had to flee to stay with friends in Wiltshire, before settling at Minster Lovell, Oxfordshire, in 1648 the seat of his deceased elder brother, which he farmed of his nephew for several years. 
There Heylyn resumed his writing. He published the strongly clericalist 'The Undeceiving of the People in the Point of Tithes', his substantial commentary on the creed ('Theologia veterum'), and perhaps his most famous work, the 'Cosmographie'. Published in 1652 this was an enormous and highly popular expansion of his earlier 'Microcosmos' into a folio volume of nearly a thousand pages, and was sufficiently well regarded that the council of state saw fit to obtain a copy for their better instruction. In the meantime Heylyn had compounded for his sequestrated estate in December 1646, and contrived to live sufficiently well (in comparison with other deprived clergy, and despite the complaints of his successor at Alresford) to purchase, in 1653, Lacy's Court, near Abingdon, Berkshire, within convenient distance of Oxford. Here he built a small private chapel in which prayer book services were conducted and he also became occupied in local affairs, successfully intervening with the courts to prevent the demolition of the church of St Nicholas, Abingdon. He was less fortunate in his attempts to avoid the decimation tax, however. 
Heylyn's taste for combat also began to emerge once more in his published work as he became involved in a number of controversial exchanges with several authors, picking over the bones of the religious and political history of the pre-war period, and sometimes defending his own actions. His anonymous 'Observations on Mr Hamon L'Estrange's Life of Charles I' (1656) were attacked in their turn, and further defended in Heylyn's 'Extraneus vapulans' (1656). Another opponent was Nicholas Bernard, who had published an exposition of the late Archbishop James Ussher's views on the sabbath, which opposed the work of Heylyn (among others). Heylyn replied with his 'Respondet Petrus', which the council ruled should be burnt for its attack on the morality of the fourth commandment, although Heylyn claimed that this sentence was not in fact carried out by the London authorities to whom it was entrusted. The 'Respondet Petrus' also contained attacks on another historian, William Sanderson, whose 'History of Charles I' Heylyn also attacked in a further work, 'Examen historicum'. It was in this latter work that Heylyn also famously took up the cudgels against Thomas Fuller's 'Church History', accusing him of pro-puritan bias. Other opponents whom Heylyn confronted in these works included Henry Hickman, Richard Baxter, and John Harrington. In every case Heylyn showed himself to be an unapologetic defender of the ecclesiastical policies of the personal rule and an implacable critic of its puritan opponents, whom he considered to be directly responsible for the calamities that had overtaken the country. 
It would be misleading, however, to imply that Heylyn had retreated into a scholarly shell, wedded to discredited ideas and apathetic to the prevailing political situation. His 'Ecclesia vindicata' of 1657 suggests a more intriguing agenda. A collection of a number of works published in the 1640s, along with almost all his previously unpublished works, it is a compendium of defences of the Church of England as Heylyn saw it. Despite its uncompromising tone, however, it is not presented as a simple rant in the wilderness. It is dedicated, curiously, to his old (and hitherto neglected) Burford schoolmaster, perhaps singled out because he was the only acquaintance of Heylyn's who had retained a living in the interregnum church. A copy of the work in the Bodleian Library (Bodl. Oxf., 4 degree Rawlinson 152) contains a further remarkable manuscript dedication by Heylyn to no less a figure than Oliver Cromwell. Doubtless buoyed up by hopes that Cromwell would accept the crown Heylyn argued that a re-establishment of the Church of England would provide the most effective support and accompaniment to a civil settlement. A presentation copy of his 'Examen historicum' also survives bearing an unsigned manuscript dedication to Richard Cromwell, although, like the 'Ecclesia vindicata', the text provides an unapologetic endorsement of Laudian policies. 'The Stumbling-Block of Disobedience' (1657) had initially been intended for the royalist cause, but Heylyn published it as a warning to the leaders of the Commonwealth not to trust popular spirits. In other works, such as the 'Observations', Heylyn also demonstrated a less than wholehearted dedication to the Stuart monarchs (and Charles in particular), in contrast to his consistent devotion to Laud's memory. Charles might have died for the Church of England, but Heylyn was not convinced that the Church of England should die for the Stuart dynasty (although he was shrewd enough to present another copy of the 'Ecclesia vindicata' to Charles II with a completely different manuscript dedication, as well as contributing historical introductions to two collections of Charles I's works in the period immediately prior to the Restoration). 
With the restoration of Charles II in 1660 Heylyn was restored to his livings, but did not receive any further promotion, despite his undoubted expectations. As subdean of Westminster he presented the royal sceptre to the king at the coronation, but this constituted the limit of his role in the Restoration. Many reasons may lie behind his lack of promotion: his blindness (the 'Cosmographie' of 1652 was the last book which he completed with his own hand, and by 1660, while he could discern shapes, he was unable to read or write); his lack of obvious patrons at court; his 'very mean port and presence' and lack of courtly graces (according to Anthony Wood); or perhaps his inflexible nature at a time when compromises needed to be sought with presbyterians. Despite his acid remark 'Much good may it do the new Bishops: I do not envy them' (Barnard, clxxxii), Heylyn did what he could to ensure that the political power of the church was re-established: in correspondence with the earl of Clarendon he urged the calling of convocation so that the church would be re-established on a proper footing rather than re-emerging from the Savoy conference; he advised on the organization of the convocation itself (although he did not participate as a member); and in a sermon commemorating the Restoration in 1661 he warned of the urgent need to ensure that churchmen were present on the privy council. 
Heylyn's most important contribution to the Restoration church, however, came in the form of the trilogy of historical works that he completed during these final years. Principal among these was 'Ecclesia restaurata', his history of the English Reformation, which he had first begun to research in the late 1630s. It provides an emphatically Laudian view of the Reformation, withering in its attacks on the excesses of the Edwardian reformation, and presenting a settlement that was essentially complete by 1560, although threatened by the emerging puritan movement, whose advent looms over the final pages of the work. His 'Aerius redivivus' (published posthumously) took this account of the misdeeds of the presbyterian movement forward in a European context, and presented the upheavals of the civil war and interregnum as the culmination of a puritan plot that could be traced back to the earliest days of the vestiarian controversy; Calvinism was presented as the natural ally of civil unrest. The final and most famous part of the trilogy was Heylyn's biography of Laud, 'Cyprianus Anglicus'. Not only a sustained apology for the life and policies of the archbishop this work also provides a historical defence of the Laudian church itself. It is prefaced by an account of the English Reformation which emphasizes its moderate Melancthonian nature, so that both the Arminian doctrine and the ceremonial policies of Laud and his followers can be represented as a heroic and rearguard defence of the historical orthodoxies of the English Reformation in the face of puritan sabotage. Heylyn did not live to see the publication of these final two works, however: he died in Westminster on 8 May 1662 and was buried under the subdean's seat in Westminster Abbey. His wife survived him, dying about March 1667. 
The polarized view of the Church of England that Heylyn propounded has meant that he has been alternately praised and vilified by succeeding generations of scholars and churchmen. His works found their most enthusiastic audiences in the midst of the polarized religious politics of the 1670s and 1680s. His major works were regularly reprinted in the 1670s, and in 1681 a substantial collected volume of his previous works was published, followed by two biographies. He was attacked by John Locke and Algernon Sidney, and his monument in the abbey was defaced, but he was eulogized by many tories. His 'Ecclesia restaurata', with its condemnation of the excesses of the Reformation, was alleged by Gilbert Burnet to have played a role in converting the future James II to Catholicism. In the eighteenth century his 'Historia quinquarticularis' was translated into Dutch and praised by the Arminian party, and acted as a focus for contemptuous attacks on his reputation by Augustus Toplady and others during the controversies over the Calvinism of the Church of England. In the nineteenth century he was listed as an authority in John Keble's 'Tract 78', and his 'Ecclesia restaurata' was published by the Ecclesiastical History Society in 1849, but the Anglo-Catholic movement seems to have had mixed feelings about him. He was listed as a divine whose works were intended to be included in the 'Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology', but these volumes never appeared. 
While there has been no shortage of writers ready to accept Heylyn's view of the lineage of high-church Anglicanism, it has also been common to treat him as merely an unscrupulous polemicist. It would be unfair, however, simply to disregard Heylyn's scholarly pretensions. He was certainly no theologian, but he did regard himself as a historian, and in this guise he devoted himself to the service of the church and state. His works display an increasing obsession with the view that all disputes could ultimately be reduced to matters of historical fact, and, for all his distortions, he usually deployed a more assured command of much greater bodies of materials than did his rivals. His conviction that scholarship should serve direct political purposes was in step with the convictions of the time. The fact that he is so often presented by historians as a uniquely cynical and untrustworthy scholar, rather than one among many in a tumultuous age, may perhaps be explained by the fact that his rendering of events has become so influential. Heylyn's partisan view of the Church of England and her Reformation has proved so persistently attractive and influential among high-church Anglican groups that the need to focus on his shortcomings and distortions has always seemed an urgent task. 


@@@@@


doc= 13172


Heylyn, Rowland (1562-1632), ironmonger and church benefactor, was born in Shrewsbury, the son of David Heylyn, who was of Welsh ancestry, and his wife, Alice. After attending the free school there from 1571 he went to London, where in 1576 he became an apprentice ironmonger. He was admitted to the company in 1584 and subsequently served twice as its master, in 1614 and 1625. Elected an alderman from Cripplegate in April 1624, later that year he was also elected sheriff of London. At an unknown date he married Alice (died 1641), daughter of Richard Aldworth of Reading; they had no surviving children. 
A man of deep religious convictions, Heylyn was a particularly good example of a puritan layman whose sense of vocation moved him to take an active role in the church and in society. According to John Stow he was responsible for printing the 'Bible' in Welsh 'in a more portable bulk' (Beaven, 2.178). In 1626 he became one of the feoffees for impropriations, a group of puritan lawyers, ministers, and merchants whose goal was to buy up church livings and staff them with godly divines. Heylyn, who can be considered as one of the two most important lay members, served as treasurer and then in 1629 as president; in 1628 the feoffees met at his house. He raised funds, and in an early list of donors is listed as giving $500, the largest single donation. In 1628 he obtained for the feoffees the advowson of the vicarage of St Alkmund in his native Shrewsbury, a lease of the tithes of St Mary's, and a barn at Cotton near the same town. Ironically, it was his kinsman Peter Heylyn who, as chaplain to Archbishop William Laud, waged a determined and vocal attack against the group, describing them as plotters and conspirators. 
From 1631 Heylyn served as president of the Bethlem and Bridewell hospitals. His will, dated 5 September 1629, contains many charitable benefactions. He left significant sums for the poor to the corporation of Shrewsbury and for imprisoned debtors in London, and sums for the ill and indigent, as well as a large donation for poor ministers. His books were donated to Shrewsbury Library. His generosity to the Ironmongers' Company included a gift for young men and a stipend for a yearly sermon on the date of the Gunpowder Plot. 
Heylyn died in London in February 1632. His will was proved on 15 February by his widow, who inherited much of the residue of his estate; the remainder went to his sisters, nephews, nieces, and cousins. The feoffees did not long survive him, being suppressed by Laud in 1633. 


