@@@@@


doc= 13173


Heyman, Sir Peter (1580-1641), politician, was born on 13 May 1580, the eldest son of Henry Heyman (died 1613) of Sellinge, Kent, and his wife, Rebecca, the daughter and coheir of Robert Horne, bishop of Winchester. Admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1597, he studied under the puritan William Bedell. Shortly afterwards he served as a volunteer in Ireland, and was rewarded by the queen with some land there. By 1606 he had married Sarah (died in or before 1613), the daughter and coheir of Peter Collett, a Merchant Taylor of London, with whom he had four children. Heyman was probably the William Hamond knighted on 20 December 1607. He married again in November 1613, when he took as his wife Mary, the daughter and coheir of another Merchant Taylor, Randolph Wolley, with whom he had six children. He succeeded to his patrimony in 1614. 
Heyman was returned to the 1621 parliament as member for Hythe, the borough closest to Sellinge, after being recommended for the seat by the lord warden of the Cinque Ports, Lord Zouche. During the winter sitting he expressed dissatisfaction at the absence from the Commons of one of its leading figures, Sir Edwin Sandys, suspecting that it stemmed from the king's displeasure. Although the house received an assurance on 23 November from secretary of state Sir George Calvert that Sandys had not been committed for anything he had said or done in parliament, Heyman, on 27 November, repeated his demand that Sir Edwin be sent for. Consequently, he and William Mallory were dispatched to fetch Sandys or to obtain from him a written statement signifying whether his commitment was connected with parliament. The paper with which they returned was never reported because the king reiterated the assurance already given by Calvert, and on 19 December Heyman was ordered by the house to burn the document. 
Heyman courted further royal displeasure in early 1622, when he was summoned before the council for refusing to contribute to the benevolence raised for the defence of the Palatinate. As a punishment -- and since he also declined to serve as a soldier at his own expense -- he was made to accompany Sir Arthur Chichester's eleventh-hour diplomatic mission to Heidelberg. He represented Hythe again in the Commons in 1624, when he seconded Mallory's proposal of 1 March to forbid the clerk of the Commons from entering the names of members responsible for motions. He also helped to draw up the charges of impeachment against the lord treasurer, Lionel Cranfield, earl of Middlesex, and was among the deputation sent to Archbishop Abbot to express the house's concern at the publication of Richard Montagu's anti-Calvinist tract, 'A New Gag for an Old Goose'. Following the prorogation he captained a company of foot in Ireland, and though he returned to Kent to help muster the soldiers raised for Mansfeld's expedition his continued absence in Ireland meant that he was not elected to parliament in 1625. On relinquishing his commission in 1626 he resumed his parliamentary career. As member for Hythe he deplored the handling of the war with Spain, denied that shortage of money was to blame for recent failures, and supported the attempt to impeach the duke of Buckingham. Following the dissolution he was summoned before the council for refusing to contribute to the forced loan, but escaped imprisonment. 
Heyman was re-elected for Hythe in 1628, when he participated in the debates on the liberties of the subject, expressing concern on 6 June at the king's first, unsatisfactory answer to the petition of right. He earned notoriety on 2 March 1629, when he rounded on the speaker, Sir John Finch, a fellow Kentishman, after Finch attempted to adjourn the house in obedience to the king's commands despite the wishes of many members. Heyman considered the speaker first and foremost the servant of the Commons, and 'bitterly inveighed against him, and told him he was sorry he was a Kentishman, and that he was a disgrace to his country and a blot to a noble family' (Notestein and Relf, 105). He was so incensed that he proposed that Finch should be brought to the bar and a new speaker chosen in his stead. The following day he and eight others were summoned to appear before the council to answer for their effrontery. Through the favour of Dudley Carleton, Viscount Dorchester, secretary of state, he was freed soon afterwards, but he was then swiftly recommitted to the Gatehouse prison on the instructions of the king. When asked what he would have done had he been ordered as speaker to announce the adjournment, he declared that he would have thrown himself at his majesty's feet and have given him to understand that, 'in respect he was the Speaker, he was the most improper and unfit person to deliver any such message, and therefore have supplicated his Majesty to command some other to perform that part' (BL, Lansdowne MS 93, fol. 138). Charges were subsequently laid against him in Star Chamber, and on 22 May he put in his plea and demurrer. However, soon afterwards he was released after making a full submission, though he continued to be attended by one of his gaoler's men. 
In 1640 Heyman was elected for Dover to both the Short and the Long parliaments. He died intestate early in 1641 and was buried at Sellinge on 11 February. He was succeeded by his son Henry, who had taken his former seat at Hythe and recently purchased a baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 13174


Haynes, Simon (d. 1552), clergyman and religious reformer, was educated at Queens' College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1515/16, MA in 1519, BTh in 1528, and DTh in 1531. He became a fellow of Queens' in 1516, and was president from 27 July 1528 to 1537. He had been ordained in February 1521, and on 28 November 1528 was admitted to the rectory of Barrow, Suffolk. In March 1530 he helped to secure his university's endorsement of Henry VIII's case for a divorce. In 1532-4 he was vice-chancellor. 
On 29 January 1535 Haynes was instituted to the vicarage of Stepney, Middlesex (held until 1537). In the same year he was an official anti-papal preacher in Cambridge and from August to December accompanied Christopher Mont on a special embassy to Paris. Haynes was immediately rewarded with the grant of a canonry of Windsor (21 December 1535). On 6 April 1537 the king further nominated him to the deanery of Exeter, vacant and in the crown's gift by the deprivation of Reginald Pole. The conservative chapter objected to Haynes's appointment, and controversy at once arose over its technicalities. He became, as was necessary, first a canon on 21 June, and was elected dean on 16 July. On 27 July he also obtained the rectory of Fulham, Middlesex (held until his death). Quarrels with the Exeter chapter over his rights and emoluments, and about liturgical customs he wished to abolish, were temporarily composed in January 1538. From April to August that year Haynes went (in the unlikely company of the staunchly conservative Edmund Bonner) on a mission to Charles V in Spain, with the hope of dissuading the emperor from attending a general council which might unite Catholic Europe against England. Also in 1538 he acquired the rectory of Newton Ferrers, Devon (which he held until his death). He was also master of St Anthony's Hospital, London. 
Haynes had already diagnosed the south-west as 'perilous' country and its clergy as unlearned, few of them 'well persuaded' ('LP Henry VIII', 12/2, no. 557). Now, as the king's commissioner, he set about preaching reform and destroying images throughout the diocese of Exeter. He made a few converts among the citizens of Exeter itself, but was for the most part, in the words of John Hooker, 'marvellous hated and maligned at' (Whiting, 75). In his cathedral he caused particular outrage by despoiling the tomb of the revered Bishop Edmund Lacy. In April 1539 he became a member of the short-lived council of the west. Throughout the 1530s he drafted reformist schemes: in 1537 at the time of the compiling of the 'Bishops' Book', and in 1539 when he noted what he might have said in parliament against the 'Six Articles Bill'. He also planned to replace the Exeter chapter with a body of preachers, and to make the cathedral more of an academic college with university links. In some ways this anticipated the new cathedral foundations of the 1540s. To one of these, Westminster, Haynes was appointed canon in the foundation charter of 17 December 1540. He was given one of the best houses, and was regularly resident. He was also active at Windsor, and investigation into suspected heresies there in 1543 brought him before the privy council on 15 March. He was committed to the Fleet the following day, and renewed complaints against him from the Exeter chapter were simultaneously investigated. He was released on 5 July without charge, but was reprimanded for 'sowing... many erroniows opinions' ('APC', '1542-7', 150). 
In Edward VI's reign Haynes was increasingly employed: in 1547 as justice of the peace for Devon and visitor of the cathedral and diocese of Exeter, and in Lord Northampton's divorce case, in 1549 as visitor of Oxford University and the colleges of Windsor and Winchester, and in 1549 and 1551 on the heresy commissions. He may have had some hand in the 1549 prayer book; he was certainly sent back to the west in the aftermath of the disorders this provoked. But he was now more often at Westminster, where as treasurer he found economic as well as religious motives for disposing of church ornaments. As soon as clerical marriage was permitted (1549) he took Joan (died 1587), daughter of Nicholas Wallron, as his wife. Their elder son, Joseph, was born in the following year; for him and his younger brother, Simon, their father mapped out a detailed educational curriculum (for the most part achieved, since they both went to Cambridge). Haynes made his will on 12 July 1552 and was dead by 24 October. He bequeathed lands at and near Mildenhall, Suffolk, which was probably his birthplace. His widow married first William May, dean of St Paul's, who died in 1560, and then Thomas Yale, dean of arches; she died on 12 September 1587. 


@@@@@


doc= 13175


Heyrick, Richard (1600-1667), Church of England clergyman, was born in London on 25 May 1600, the third son of Sir William Herrick (Heyrick) (bap. 1562, d. 1653), a London goldsmith and alderman, and his wife, Joan Mary (or May). In 1614 he entered Merchant Taylors', London, the school attended by his lifelong friend and career associate, Thomas Case, and in 1617 entered as a fellow-commoner St John's College, Oxford, from where he graduated BA in 1619 and proceeded MA in 1622 and BD at some undisclosed date. On 14 January 1625, he was chosen a fellow of All Souls: a crucial factor in obtaining this prize was the king's recommendation, which, in turn, should be traced to his father's loans to the crown. About this time Heyrick was ordained and on 9 June 1626 he took up the benefice of North Repps, near Cromer, in Norfolk, where Case served as his curate. Heyrick married in Norfolk, probably soon afterwards, Helen (died 1642), daughter of Thomas Corbet of the county, with whom he had four sons and three daughters. 
Like Case, Heyrick developed a career interest in the Manchester area. Indeed, his life exemplifies a certain tension between high principle and ambitious careerism. Perhaps on 14 November 1626, Charles I awarded him the reversion of the wardenship of Manchester's collegiate church, a position whose value was estimated variously at between $700 and $70. For Heyrick to secure this position when it became vacant in 1635 required not only a powerfully composed petition from him but also intervention by Archbishop William Laud -- high-church patronage which seems ironic in the light of his subsequent career. Heyrick combined the wardenship with other church appointments in Cheshire and near Manchester. 
Despite his secure position within the church establishment, from the time of his appointment as warden Heyrick 'quickly assumed a leading role in Lancashire puritanism' (Richardson, 45n.). He attacked puritanism's adversary Catholicism from at least 1638 and in 1641 was preaching vehemently against Lancashire's 'infectious' 'Popery... multiplied abundantly' as a result of Catholic gentry patronage. His strident anti-episcopal tone aligned him with the Long Parliament, which in 1642 made him one of the two Lancashire ministers to be consulted on ecclesiastical affairs, and by 1643 he had emerged as a proponent of the presbyterian form of church government. This in Lancashire crystallized out of earlier puritanism which was centred on Manchester, 'a town famous for religion ever since the Reformation' as Heyrick himself put it (Richardson, 9-10), where prototypes of presbyterian church organization were created both in the 1580s and 1630s. With a ministerial colleague Heyrick was also appointed by parliament to look into the doctrines and financing of the Lancashire clergy. 
By the mid-1640s Heyrick's activities were divided between Lancashire and London, where he was principally occupied as a member of the presbyterian-dominated Westminster assembly of divines. However, when in the north-west, while prominent in the establishment of the presbyterian system in 1646, Heyrick at that time declared himself 'so perfect a Lattitidinarian that the Episcopall, Presbyterians and Independents might all preache, yet each by Divine right' (Shaw, 2.13): although his attitude offended clergy of the region who sought a more exclusively presbyterian form of church government, Heyrick's remarks were aimed at devising a comprehensive ecclesiastical system to embrace mainstream protestants, probably with the aim of countering Lancashire's deeply embedded Catholicism. Yet in a fast sermon, of the same year, 'Queen Esthers Resolves' (1646), he pleased his audience of MPs with his thunder against 'the Tyranny of Prelacy', meaning episcopal Anglicanism ('Fast Sermons', 23.342). The authorship of the harmonious consent of 1648, an accord between London and Lancashire presbyterian ministers on upholding the presbyterian solemn league and covenant and suppressing dissidence, is attributed either to him or to his ministerial colleague, Richard Hollinworth ('bap'. 1607, died 1656). 
Heyrick's presbyterian-parliamentarian views stopped well short of a republican position and in April 1647 he lodged a strong protest when, at a meeting of clergy of the area, a proposal in favour of government without a king was mooted. Until the beginning of the 1650s these political convictions did him no harm and when the Manchester collegiate church was dissolved in 1650 he was compensated with the award of a pension of $100 a year out of sold college lands. In the following year, though, along with Case, he was imprisoned for his involvement in Christopher Love's presbyterian-royalist plot: he may have been spared disaster as a result of association between Cromwell and the north-western presbyterian lay leader George Booth. By 1654 he was back in favour and on the Lancashire commission for ejecting unworthy ministers and teachers, and in 1658 he was involved in a controversy over presbyterian excommunication. 
Although Heyrick did not actively support Booth's 1659 royalist rising, he was, predictably, an ardent advocate of the Restoration, at which point powerful patronage, this time in the person of the presbyterian-inclined second earl of Manchester, came to his aid to reinvest him with the wardenship. He seems to have refused the anti-presbyterian oaths in the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662 but he did not scruple to use the 'Book of Common Prayer', while his bold claim that the warden's post had been granted to him inalienably in discharge of royal debts succeeded in keeping him in place. 
Heyrick died in Manchester on 6 August 1667, a wealthy man in money ($1095) and acreage. His second wife, Anna Maria, daughter of Erasmus Breton of Hamburg, with whom he had had four daughters and two sons, commissioned a 'comely monument' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.780) in the collegiate church where he was buried on 9 August, with a florid Latin tribute by Thomas Case. This memorial gave Heyrick a reputation for indifference to preferment. Cast as an 'amiable man' (Raines, 127), he was in fact a combative careerist capable of pressing home his own case with great force and possessed a knack of finding influential patrons at key moments of his career. At the same time, though, Heyrick was a vigorous and eloquent preacher, whose sermons could be both earnest and learned. 


@@@@@


doc= 13176


Heyrick, Thomas (bap. 1649, d. 1694), poet and clergyman, was baptized at Market Harborough, Leicestershire, on 4 March 1649, the son of Thomas Herrick or Heyrick, tradesman, of Market Harborough, and great-nephew of the poet Robert Herrick. He was educated at the local grammar school and matriculated in 1667 as sizar of Peterhouse, Cambridge, his BA dating from 1671 and MA from 1675. After ordination as deacon in September 1672 and as priest in December 1681 he became curate and lecturer of St Dionysius, Market Harborough. When in addition he obtained the mastership of his old school, where he instructed some sixty boys in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew, the three posts assured him a comfortable income. 
After publishing two sermons (1681, 1685), Heyrick brought out anonymously, in response to Dryden's 'The Hind and the Panther', a verse satire called 'The New Atlantis' (1687) which in three books derided the state of English Catholicism and lampooned its new apologist. A second edition issued in 1690 under a new title and his own name also failed to provoke any reply from the victim. In the following year the Cambridge press published his 'Miscellany Poems', a collection mainly distinguished by its celebration of fishing and hunting, and its pictures of the more exotic forms of wildlife, from crocodiles and whales to peacocks and the 'Indian Tomineios'. The final item in the volume, introduced by a separate title-page, is a sixty-seven-page Pindaric ode entitled 'The Submarine Voyage' that describes Neptune's court and the marine life of the seven seas. 
Heyrick was buried at Market Harborough on 9 August 1694. A post-mortem inventory was drawn up on 21 August (Leics. RO, PR1/99/89), administration being granted three days later to his widow, Rebecca (Leicestershire district probate registrary, 1694, no. 56). 


@@@@@


doc= 13177


Heysham, John (1753-1834), physician and demographer, was born on 22 November 1753 in Lancaster, the son of Gyles Heysham, shipowner, and Anne Cumming, daughter of a substantial yeoman 'statesman farmer' of Holme, Westmorland. The Heyshams were a junior branch of the Cornet (later Gernet) family, ancient lords of the manor of Heysham parish, Morecambe Bay. Heysham was educated in the Quaker school at Yealand, near Burton, Westmorland, followed by apprenticeship to Mr Parkinson, surgeon, at Burton, Westmorland, from 1769 to 1774, while being tutored in classics and mathematics by D. R. Hutton, the vicar of Burton. He then spent three years under Alexander Monro 'Secundus', Joseph Black, and the great nosologist William Cullen, at Edinburgh's celebrated medical school, taking his MD in 1777 through a thesis on rabies. After a year visiting London and Holland, including the Leiden medical school, Heysham settled in Carlisle, Cumberland. On 4 May 1789, in London, he married Elizabeth Mary Coulthard (1765-1803), the only child of Alderman Thomas Coulthard, a wealthy tanner and twice mayor of Carlisle; they had four sons and three daughters. 
Though Heysham's private practice was never worth more than $400 a year, his professional income was augmented through his many business interests, which included land ownership, a cotton works (Cowan, Heysham & Co.), an iron foundry, and chairmanship of both the Carlisle Canal Company and Carlisle Gas and Coke Company. He also held numerous public offices; he was county commissioner for assessed taxes, commissioner for lighting and improvements, and chairman of the police commissioners. Until the election of 1832, when he backed reform, his political allegiance had always been to the all-powerful Lowther tories, from which followed a lucrative commission as magistrate in 1808 and then appointment as a deputy lieutenant of the county. 
Heysham was a strong, energetic man who traversed the fells of the Lake District regularly, becoming the area's premier naturalist and ornithologist. He was elected an associate of the Linnean Society at its second meeting in 1788 and provided a major contribution on the subject to W. Hutchinson's 'History of Cumberland' (2 vols., 1794). Heysham was on close terms with the area's principal landed families and Carlisle's eminent churchmen -- Archdeacon Paley and the cathedral's successive deans: Percy, Law, and Milner. These connections were of great assistance in his promotion of the town's public health. With Percy's help, a dispensary for the poor was founded in 1782 and the wealthy Robert Mounsey of Castletown provided a fever hospital. 
Heysham is principally remembered, however, for his 'Observations on the Bills of Mortality in Carlisle' (1780-88), accessibly reproduced in Glass, 'The Development of Population Statistics' (1973). This was a meticulous public health and demographic record of Carlisle in the 1780s which significantly improved upon John Haygarth's pioneering medical survey and census of Chester in 1774. Heysham took a census of the age and sex of every household member in 1780 and in 1787, while carefully recording the date, age, sex, and cause of every fatality from 1779 to 1787. Apart from aiding his own medical practice, this subsequently enabled the actuary of the Sun Life Assurance Society, Joshua Milne (with Heysham's vital assistance, recorded in Lonsdale's appendix detailing their correspondence) to publish in 1815 the only accurate life table for an English population for the entire period before the 1840s. The Carlisle table was rapidly adopted commercially and officially as a money saving replacement for Richard Price's faulty Northampton table. Heysham's path breaking survey directly inspired James Cleland's important innovation in 1821, whereby Glasgow became the first rapidly industrializing city in the world to have its health record rigorously monitored. 
Heysham was, in fact, generally innovative in his approach to medicine. He was a leading advocate of both inoculation and Jennerian vaccination against smallpox. He anticipated by half a century the practice of feeding, rather than starving fevers, advocated in his 'Account of the Jail Fever or Typhus carcerum; as it Appeared at Carlisle in the Year 1781' (1782). His focus from the start on a sophisticated health survey and the leading role he took in promoting collective public health measures amounted to his informal adoption of the role of town medical officer of health, over half a century before such a position had been statutorily defined. Heysham died at his home in St Cuthbert's Lane, Carlisle, on 23 March 1834 and was buried in St Mary's Church. A memorial window was placed at the east end of the south aisle of the cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 13178


Heytesbury, William (d. 1372/3), logician and natural philosopher, was probably born in Wiltshire. He was educated at Oxford, and was a fellow of Merton College in 1330. He was active in college life: in 1337 or 1338, for instance, he travelled with a colleague from Oxford to his college's church at Ponteland in Northumberland, and the record of their journey shows that they covered 246 miles in seven or eight days, at an average speed of over 30 miles a day, and also provides details of their food and drink, the fodder bought for their horses, and the cost of crossing the rivers of Trent and Ouse. In 1338/9 Heytesbury was college bursar. In 1341 he was named a Queen's College foundation fellow, but he was still a fellow of Merton in 1348. Records from the same year show that he was a doctor of theology. He was chancellor of the university probably from Whitsun 1370 to Whitsun 1372, and possibly also earlier, from 1352 to 1354. Outside Oxford he held a variety of ecclesiastical benefices, mainly in Kent, though he was also canon of Salisbury and of Chichester. His longest association seems to have been with Ickham, Kent. He first became rector there in 1354, and it was in Ickham church that he requested burial, in a will drawn up in December 1372 and proved on 5 February 1373. He travelled outside England at least once, for in 1349-50 he was imprisoned in France 'by the king's adversaries' ('CClR, 1349-1354', 152), probably while on his way to the papal court in Avignon. 
No theological writings by Heytesbury are known, but he was an extremely successful writer of textbooks in logic and natural philosophy. Readers particularly admired his extensive use of sophisms -- puzzle cases (often quite bizarre) designed to test the validity of logical principles -- and his main contribution was his application of this procedure to natural philosophy. Along with the other 'Oxford calculators' or Merton calculators (notably Richard Swineshead, Thomas Bradwardine, and John Dumbleton), Heytesbury was instrumental in developing the logic of continua and infinite divisibility, and in applying quantitative analysis to such qualities as heat and colour. Although Heytesbury mainly used the techniques of supposition theory and propositional analysis to solve his sophisms, he none the less helped prepare the way for the wider application of mathematics to the physical world. 
Heytesbury's three main works are the 'Regulae solvendi sophismata', the 'Sophismata', and 'De sensu composito et diviso'. The 'Regulae', written in 1335 for the use of first-year logic students, contains separate chapters on insolubles (semantic paradoxes); the epistemic terms 'scire' and 'dubitare'; the supposition or reference of relative pronouns; the terms 'incipit' and 'desinit'; maxima and minima; and the three categories of place, quantity, and quality (these being the categories in which motion occurs). Thirty-three manuscripts which contain all or part of the 'Regulae' are known, and there are three early printed editions (1481, 1491, 1494). Apparently only partial adaptations of the work were used in England in the later fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The work 'Termini qui faciunt' is an adaptation of chapter 2, and 'De terminis relativis' of chapter 3. One version of the latter is by Richard Lavenham, and another was printed as part of the 'Libellus sophistarum ad usum Cantabrigiensium' (1497, 1501-2, 1510, 1524). An adaptation of chapters 2-5, 'De probationibus conclusionum', possibly by Heytesbury himself, survives mainly in Italy and was twice printed there, once separately (Pavia, 1483), and once as part of the large Venice edition of 1494. The 'Regulae' was particularly popular in Italy. The Paduan logician Gaetano da Thiene wrote a full commentary which was printed in 1483, and which formed part of the edition of 1494. Mesino de' Codroncho and Angelo da Fossombrone, who both wrote in Bologna at the end of the fourteenth century, commented on parts of chapter 6, as did Bernardus Tornius. These commentaries all appeared in the edition of 1494, and Angelo's commentary, of which a separate edition had appeared in 1482-3, was printed with Gaetano's in the volume of 1483. 
Heytesbury's other main works were also more popular in Italy than in England, though an epitome of the 'Sophismata' was prepared at Merton College in 1388. The 'Sophismata' was included with the three Italian editions of the 'Regulae', and Gaetano da Thiene's commentary on the 'Sophismata' was printed along with his commentary on the 'Regulae' in 1483 and 1494. Partial commentaries were written by Gaetano's contemporaries, Simon de Lendenaria (printed 1494) and Paolo da Pergola. 'De sensu composito et diviso' (printed with the 'Regulae' in 1491 and 1494) was the subject of three Italian commentaries printed together in 1500, and of a fourth by Benedetto Vettori (Bologna, 1504). 
Heytesbury's other works include a treatise on consequences, printed in 1517 along with treatises by Richard Feribrigge and Ralph Strode, and known in England mainly through an adaptation by Robert Alyngton called 'Iuxta hunc textum'. This adaptation was printed in both the Oxford and Cambridge versions of the 'Libelli sophistarum'. The 'Sophismata asinina', known in four versions, is an early collection of sophisms each of which proves the claim 'Tu es asinus' ('You are an ass'). The 'Termini naturales', a beginner's text on definitions and divisions in natural philosophy, is known in several adaptations, including one by John Garisdale. Finally there are the brief 'Casus obligatorii' and the 'De propositionibus multiplicibus'. Two separate works on insolubles have been attributed to Heytesbury, but one is an anonymous reworking of his text and the other is by John Venator. 'De veritate et falsitate propositionum', also attributed to Heytesbury, is in fact by Henry Hopton. 
In the fifteenth century Heytesbury's work was found on the official curriculum in many European universities, including Erfurt, Leipzig, Padua (1496), and Vienna. However, his most enthusiastic readers were in Italy, as the history of commentary and printing shows. 


@@@@@


doc= 13179


Heywood, Sir Benjamin, first baronet (1793-1865), banker, was born at St Ann's Square, Manchester, on 12 December 1793, the eldest son of Nathaniel Heywood (1759-1815), a banker, and his wife, Ann, the daughter of Thomas Percival MD FRS. Thomas Heywood (1797-1866) and James Heywood (1810-1897) were his younger brothers. After attending Glasgow University (1809-11) he entered his father's bank. He was admitted a partner in 1814 and eventually became head of the firm and, from 1828, its sole proprietor. In 1816 he married Sophia Ann (died 1852), the daughter of Thomas Robinson of The Woodlands, Manchester; they had numerous children, of whom several died young. A man of considerable piety, Heywood took a keen interest in the welfare and education of the working classes. He was one of the founders of the Manchester mechanics' institution and served as president from its inception in 1825 until 1840; on his retirement from this office, the various addresses which he had delivered were published (1843). 
Heywood was elected MP for Lancashire in 1831 as a whig, to support the government measure for reform, but he felt that his health was suffering, and when parliament dissolved after passing the 'Reform Act' in 1832 he retired from this aspect of public life. He was, however, active in the Manchester Statistical Society, and conducted an inquiry into the condition of the working classes in Manchester which was made public in 1834. He was created a baronet on the occasion of Queen Victoria's coronation in 1838, and in 1843 he was elected FRS. In 1860 Heywood left the bank and passed the business to four of his sons. After several years in declining health he died at his home, Claremont, near Manchester, on 11 August 1865, and was buried, alongside his wife and deceased children, at St John's Church, Pendlebury, Manchester. His eldest son, Thomas Percival Heywood, succeeded as second baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 13180


Heywood, Ellis (1529-1578), author and Jesuit, was born in London, third of five children of John Heywood (b. 1496/7, d. in or after 1578) and his wife, Joan (died before 1574), daughter of John Rastell and Elizabeth More, Sir Thomas More's sister. Educated early at court, where his father (a protege of More) was a playwright and music tutor, Heywood later attended Oxford. In 1548 he was elected fellow of All Souls College and graduated BCL on 18 July 1552. Thereafter he departed England to become secretary to Reginald, Cardinal Pole, in Italian exile. In 1556 at Florence, Heywood published 'Il Moro', a dialogue dedicated to Pole. In the humanist tradition of treatises on the 'summum bonum', the book represents Thomas More after he resigned as lord chancellor, jesting and conversing philosophically at his house in Chelsea, his imprisonment impending. 
Before publishing 'Il Moro', Heywood had returned to England on the succession of Queen Mary; from 1554 he was prebendary of Eccleshall in Lichfield Cathedral. After the advent of Elizabethan protestantism, with his father and mother he departed England again, joining other members of his family in 1564 at Louvain. His uncle William Rastell, dying on 27 August 1565, bequeathed to Heywood the bulk of the family's estate. Near the end of 1566 he visited his brother Jasper Heywood, a Jesuit stationed at Dillingen in Bavaria, proposing himself to join the Jesuits and in turn to will them his inheritance. Despite concerns about his health Heywood was received into the Society of Jesus at Dillingen in December 1566. After several Bavarian postings he was transferred to Antwerp, where he served until his final days. 
Before this last phase of Heywood's life he is said to have visited England, possibly to protect property against government confiscation. He returned without success to Antwerp in 1573; by 1574 his estate was forfeit to the crown. Heywood's ageing father was admitted into the Antwerp Jesuit community, but with other Jesuits both father and son were deported from Antwerp in May 1578, narrowly escaping death at the hands of Dutch troops and fleeing again to Louvain, where Ellis died on 2 October 1578. 


@@@@@


doc= 13181


Heywood, James (bap. 1687, d. 1776), writer and poet, son of John Heywood, was born at Cheetham Hill, Manchester, and baptized at Manchester on 21 February 1687. He was educated at the Manchester grammar school. For many years he carried on the business of a wholesale linen draper in Fish Street Hill, London. He was a governor of St Bartholomew's, Christ's, Bridewell, and Bethlem hospitals, and was elected alderman of Aldgate ward, but paid the customary fine of $500 rather than serve the office. In his earlier years he contributed to 'The Freethinker', 'The Plain-Dealer', and other publications, and a letter of his is printed in no. 268 of 'The Spectator'. These pieces, with some verses, he collected in a small volume, 'Letters and Poems on Several Subjects' (1722; 2nd edn, with additions, 1726). The poems had previously been published with the title 'Original Poems on Several Occasions' (1721). Many of his poems are addressed to 'Lucinda', and other titles include 'Advice to a Bashful Lover' and 'To a Very Old Batchelor'. His letters, which are mostly humorous, deal with contemporary conduct, especially that between the sexes. Heywood made no secret of his own keen interest in the female sex. He wrote: 'For my Part, when I see a beautiful young Lady, the sight of her diffuses a secret Satisfaction, and strikes my Mind with an inward Joy, and causes a sudden cheerfulness, and a Secret Delight' (Heywood, 51). 
Heywood is alluded to by Steele in 'The Guardian' as a politician and brisk little man, who had the habit of twisting off the buttons of persons he conversed with. He died at his house in Austin Friars on 23 July 1776, aged eighty-nine. His wife, Catherine, referred to in his will, predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13182


Heywood, Jasper (1535-1598), poet and Jesuit, was born in London, fourth of five children of John Heywood (b. 1496/7, d. in or after 1578) and his wife, Joan (died 1574), daughter of John Rastell and Elizabeth More, Sir Thomas More's sister. Heywood was a schoolmate to Princess Elizabeth at court, where his father (a protege of More) was a playwright and music tutor. He went to Oxford in 1547, graduated BA on 15 July 1553, and was elected a fellow of Merton College, gaining repute as a 'quaint poet' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.663). On 4 April 1558 his promising career at Merton ended when, in conflict with authority as usual, he had to resign his fellowship after repeated admonitions by the college's warden. Nevertheless Heywood proceeded MA on 10 June 1558 and was in November elected to a fellowship at All Souls College following in his brother Ellis Heywood's footsteps. 
At All Souls Heywood justified the esteem accorded him by publishing the first English translations of three tragedies by Seneca -- 'Troas' (1559), 'Thyestes' (1560), and 'Hercules furens' (1561) -- thus making an important contribution to the development of Elizabethan and Jacobean drama. Some of Heywood's poems of this period were later published in Elizabethan miscellanies. Heywood's tenure at All Souls ended when, refusing to comply with Elizabethan religious reforms, he left Oxford to live briefly at Gray's Inn with his uncle William Rastell. He then went into exile at Rome, where he became a Jesuit on 21 May 1562. In Rome Heywood taught and studied for the priesthood until he was sent to the university at Dillingen, Bavaria, in March 1564. On 1 September 1564 he graduated BTh and was ordained a priest on 16 October. Heywood was later chosen to preach on 15 June 1567 at a synod of the diocese of Augsburg held for the purpose of promulgating reforms of the Council of Trent. Having defended a dissertation on the seven sacraments he graduated DTh from Dillingen on 12 August 1567. He professed the fourth vow of the Jesuits on 25 July 1570. 
During the 1570s Heywood grew discontented with his situation in Bavaria, deprived of the stimulating intellectual culture he had enjoyed at Oxford and Rome. He suffered from gout and experienced terror at night, an affliction he called a 'demon' (Duhr, 229), which was not cured by exorcism. A further vexation was friction with his Jesuit superior, Paul Hoffaeus, in a controversy over the contracting of loans at 5 per cent interest by Bavarian merchants. Heywood, with many Jesuit colleagues, thought the loans usurious. 
In the spring of 1580, while Heywood was in Munich attached to the court of Wilhelm V, duke of Bavaria, he met Edmund Campion, passing from Prague toward Rome to undertake the secret Jesuit mission to England. Campion later wrote to the pope that Heywood could be valuable to the mission. Heywood himself travelled to Rome at the end of 1580, lobbying his case against the 5 per cent loans over the head of Hoffaeus. But Heywood's energetic opposition did not prevent the success of Hoffaeus's policy. With a letter from the pope to Duke Wilhelm, Heywood was reassigned to the English mission. Having left Rome on 6 May 1581 Heywood arrived at Newcastle in June, then travelled toward London to meet Campion and Robert Persons, both in England since the previous spring. Returning after twenty years in exile, Heywood brought to the English mission an outlook and style of missionary work quite different from those of Persons, his superior. Born and bred at the court of Henry VIII, Heywood had personal acquaintance not only with Queen Elizabeth but with other aristocrats in England and abroad -- experience that led him, unlike Persons, to think of the mission as largely a matter of influencing great noble houses. This contrast is partly reflected in Heywood's re-entering England through Newcastle, the port controlled by Henry Percy, eighth earl of Northumberland, a leading pro-Catholic peer. 
By the time Heywood came south to meet with Persons, Campion had been arrested, a severe loss to the mission. After the uneasy meeting Heywood returned to the north, where pro-Catholic feeling ran strong. In three months he was able to convert hundreds to Roman Catholicism. In October 1581 he returned to London bearing alms for imprisoned Catholics from the northern nobility and gentry. By this time Persons had retired to France for consultations about the crisis of the mission, leaving Heywood in charge. 
In December 1581 Campion was executed. Alone, as deputy superior of the mission, Heywood followed his success in the north with a campaign at Oxford and Cambridge designed to make the universities 'perpetual aqueducts' (Jesuit Archives, Rome, Anglia 30.1, 119) through which would pass young English scholars bound to finish their studies at continental seminaries. Heywood also took up Persons's earlier contact with the Spanish ambassador, Mendoza, himself in touch with Northumberland and the pro-Catholic lords. One of Mendoza's concerns was to divert the stream of Heywood's 'aqueducts' toward filling the need for officers to lead a contingent of English exiles and deserters attached to the duke of Parma's army in the Spanish Netherlands. These troops were to take part in an invasion of England and restore Catholicism. In this plan, Northumberland's participation was thought essential. 
For his part Heywood worked to develop contacts with what he called 'big fish'. By early 1583 he had made efforts toward reconciling to Catholicism the three most ancient earldoms of the realm, in the persons of the earls of Arundel, Derby, and Northumberland. Politically the most important of these was Northumberland, who at this time dispatched his trusted aide, Captain William Pullen, to be ordained a priest at Rheims and then to serve as chaplain to the company of English fugitives in Parma's army. Arundel and Northumberland themselves, after contact with Heywood, were formally converted to Catholicism. Despite these successes, Heywood encountered increasingly severe difficulties dealing with a split among the Catholic priests in England. Those ordained abroad sought to conduct affairs by regulations of the Council of Trent; but Marian and earlier priests insisted that, until Tridentine reforms were promulgated in England, the ancient rules of English Catholicism should pertain. These tensions, aggravated under government persecution, culminated in a synod called to settle differences, at which Heywood's attempted rulings were challenged and protested so sharply that he was recalled for consultation with Persons in France. 
Heywood had embarked at Rye and was approaching Dieppe when a squall drove his ship back to Queenborough. On 9 December 1583 he was arrested and sent to London for imprisonment in the Clink. On 5 February 1584 he was indicted for treason and on 8 February was transferred into the Tower and subjected to torture. On 6 May his trial was begun but suspended 'sine die'. At Christmas 1584 Heywood was visited in the Tower by his replacement on the Jesuit mission, William Weston, disguised as a family member in the company of Heywood's sister Elizabeth Donne. Heywood's nephew John Donne was present on this occasion and witnessed a discussion between Weston and Heywood about petitioning the queen for toleration of Catholicism. 
On 21 January 1585 Heywood, with other priests, was deported to France. Travelling from Rouen to Paris to Rheims, he was debriefed by Persons but was judged 'out of step' and prevented from returning to England. Instead he was summoned to Rome, where he arrived in June 1585. In April 1586 he was sent to Naples, where, determinedly protesting against the policies of Persons, he remained until his death on 19 February 1598. 


@@@@@


doc= 13183


Heywood, John (b. 1496/7, d. in or after 1578), playwright and epigrammatist, is thought to be the son of William Heywood, a lawyer of Coventry who acted as a temporary coroner there in 1505-6. His mother's name and family are not known, but his father's association with the Rastell family at Coventry was important later in John's life. It is known that John had three brothers: William (died 1568), a yeoman of Stock in Essex, was his elder; and Richard (1509-1570) entered Lincoln's Inn in 1534 and died prosperous, bearing arms. The third was Thomas, an Augustinian friar pensioned at the dissolution from St Osyth's monastery in Essex, who was arrested in April 1574 'for saying masse'; the long-standing suggestion that Thomas was executed on 14 June (Reed) has subsequently been challenged on the grounds that a letter from the privy council (dated August 1574) lists the friar as still alive and apparently in prison (Flynn). 
Most of John Heywood's early years remain obscure, though Anthony Wood claims that he found his studies at Broadgates Hall, Oxford, rather uncongenial. He must in youth have acquired musical skills: one unsupported tradition holds that he was a chorister. The first positive references to him at the court of Henry VIII call him a singer: as such he was granted six quarterly payments of $5 between Michaelmas 1519 and Christmas 1520, making an annual salary of $20. By 1525, when the quarterly payment rose to $6 13's'. 4died, he was designated a 'player of the virginals', and this remained his denomination for many years afterwards in court documents. An annual pension of $10 was set up in November 1528, and though the records are not continuous he received this at least until 1551. As the 1528 warrant indicates that he was 'discharged from the King's court', this pension probably marked a change of status, perhaps a release from regular employment. From then on it is apparent that his activities diversified considerably from the profession of musical performer; it is not clear that he had ever composed music, though some of his lyrics have survived. 
By the time this pension was set up Heywood was approximately thirty, his family connections had developed considerably, and there are signs of prosperity and a social status which could hardly have resulted solely from his musical duties, whatever they may have comprised. When Sir Thomas More became a privy councillor in 1518 he already had a connection with Heywood, and the latter's initial steps at court may have stemmed from his patronage and growing influence in the early 1520s. In any case there was already a closer family tie, as John Rastell had married More's sister Elizabeth (probably before 1504), and Heywood himself married the Rastells' daughter Joan (died before 1574) at some point before 1523. It was in that year that Heywood became a freeman of the city of London in the Stationers' Company, the common council having received a letter from the king in support. Meanwhile John Rastell had been gaining royal favour on his own behalf: a man of many parts, he had worked at the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520, and created a pageant in Cheapside for the visit of the emperor Charles V in 1522. This dramatic interest, together with his status as a stationer -- his activity in the printing business went back at least as far as 1512 -- were doubtless of value to his son-in-law. Rastell built a house with a stage in Finsbury Fields in 1524, and at some point after 1526 he printed 'Gentleness and Nobility', a play of his own composition, which may have contained a contribution by Heywood. Most of what survives of Heywood's work as a dramatist apparently dates from the next few years. 
The marriage of Joan Rastell and John Heywood produced at least four children. Both Ellis Heywood (1529-1578) and Jasper Heywood (1535-1598) had successful academic careers at Oxford before becoming Jesuit priests in exile. Jasper was especially distinguished in the field of drama, publishing translations of two plays by Seneca; Ellis was gifted in languages. Joan Heywood married Christopher Stubbe; John and his wife conveyed property in Tottenham to them in 1542, possibly as a marriage settlement. Elizabeth Heywood married John Donne, a successful London ironmonger, and gave birth to the poet John Donne (1572-1631). Like their children John and Joan remained lifelong Catholics, and this loyalty played a large part in Heywood's subsequent fortunes, and in his literary output. He managed to survive political and religious turmoil in Tudor court circles, occasionally being paid for specific musical and dramatic entertainments, until he and his wife went into exile to Brabant in 1564. There are very few personal writings to indicate what Heywood felt about these changes, but it seems clear from subsequent events that the crisis of Henry VIII's heretical break with Rome over his divorce caused Heywood much concern, and that his personal loyalty to Princess Mary was publicly rewarded when she became queen. Through these years he must have been anxious over the fates of his immediate family: the imprisonment and execution of More, his wife's uncle (1535); the death of John Rastell, her father, imprisoned as a protestant heretic (1536); and the exile of her Catholic brother William Rastell (1508-1565) in the reign of Edward VI. During this time Heywood acquired land and property in Middlesex, Essex, and Kent, and achieved a higher social status. In 1530 he became a common measurer of the Mercers' Company in the city of London. At new year 1533 he received a royal gift of a gilt cup. 
Heywood's political and religious interests during the remainder of the reign of Henry VIII may be judged by two elements: his activities as a playwright up to 1534 and his indictment for treason in 1544. The canon and dating of the plays have been objects of much conjecture. Besides the possible contribution to 'Gentleness and Nobility' six complete plays are attributed to him. Of these 'Witty and Witless' remained in a manuscript, not in Heywood's hand, with his name at the end. 'The Play of the Wether' (1533) and 'A Play of Love' (1534) were both printed by William Rastell (son of John Rastell) and named Heywood on the title-page. 'Four PP' was similarly named, but the first extant edition is by Thomas Middleton ('c'.1544). William Rastell also printed 'Johan Johan' (a translation and adaptation of 'La farce du paste') and 'The Pardoner and the Friar' in 1533, both anonymous. Dates of composition remain conjectural, and there is no positive evidence about if and when performances took place, though a stage direction in 'Witty' mentions the expected presence of the king. There is little doubt that Heywood was actively engaged in performance later on, and the probability remains high that he was similarly involved in these years of tension surrounding the controversy over protestantism and the king's divorce. 
The comic style of the plays, with their persistent interest in the clash of different points of view, has led to their being characterized as debates rather than as true drama, but recent criticism and performances have shown that there is much that is visual in them and that they frequently contain structures and situations which gain enormously by being physically enacted on a stage. The cunning blend of characters of different types, together with the versatile and resourceful dialogue are important features in performance. There is also a tendency to include extensive passages of dramatic narrative at key points in the plays, such as Vice's tale of the mocker mocked in 'Love', and these provide an opportunity for performance skills including movement and the imitation of dialogue by the narrators. Although the subject matter is often centred on apparently trivial comic topics like the appropriateness of the weather, or whether a witty or a witless man has more pleasure in life, there are underlying issues which come close to the heart of major contemporary controversy. Heywood avoids the morality play structure popular in many interludes, but consistently engages with his subject matter in such a way that Catholic doctrine is upheld. Though he is often satirical about some practices like the exploitation by pardoners (following Chaucer verbatim in some passages) his main objectives seem to be to see the world so as to vindicate his Catholic beliefs, albeit sustained and tempered by a humanism which probably goes back to Erasmus, via the early work and opinions of Sir Thomas More. In real life he was well known for his jesting and his witty inventiveness, as witnessed by his biographer Pitseus, even in the form of a deathbed quip; his treatment of doctrinally serious matters in the plays is always coloured by the same predisposition. Sometimes the jokes seem dangerously near the mark, as when the devil, attired for tennis in his shirt, seems to suggest the king himself in 'Four PP', but this boldness in invention may have been found allowable and indeed valuable in life at court and on stage. 
While a purely allegorical interpretation of Heywood's work has not been found to be consistent, there are internal grounds for believing that the characterization of Jupiter in 'Wether' is based upon Henry VIII, and when one considers the probable date of composition early in 1533, it seems that the argument about the weather may really be directed at the religious controversy surrounding Henry's marriage to Anne Boleyn in January. As Jupiter is enjoined to judge the weather from his own authority, so Henry is covertly urged to rise above the factions surrounding him and leave religion where it was. From Heywood's viewpoint at this time the shift to protestantism was not necessarily inevitable. Perhaps the comic tone of this statement of Heywood's concern is also to be associated with an attempt to mollify the growing storm, for More had resigned the chancellorship and his opposition to change was now revealed in a series of trenchant polemics. 
For the rest of the 1530s Cromwell was in power, and Heywood's objections were apparently muted, except for his loyalty to Princess Mary, to whom he wrote 'A Song in Praise of a Lady' (1534, printed in 'Tottel's Songes and Sonnettes', 1557). After Cromwell's fall in 1540, however, Heywood took a public step which might well have been disastrous. With John More he became involved in a conspiracy to discredit Cranmer. As a result he was attainted, lost a good deal of his property, and must for some time have been in mortal danger. He was pardoned, and had to make a public recantation at Paul's Cross on 6 July 1544 of what were now regarded as heretical views regarding the royal supremacy. 
Perhaps as some kind of peace offering a few months later Heywood wrote a play for Cranmer, 'The Parts of Man', some lines of which are preserved in the autobiography of his pupil, Thomas Whythorne. Heywood was concerned with entertainments at court on a number of other occasions. Cromwell paid him for a 'Masque of King Arthur's Knights', which was performed twice in February 1539. For Princess Elizabeth he and Sebastian Westcott presented a play using the children of St Paul's in February 1552. In the following year his 'play of children' had to be postponed from Shrovetide to Easter on account of the failing health of King Edward. In August 1559, after Elizabeth's accession, there was another performance of a play using children at Nonsuch, but by then, as will be seen, the political climate was beginning to turn against him. 
Probably Heywood's best years were spent under Queen Mary. At her coronation in 1553 Stow records that Heywood was in St Paul's Churchyard where he 'sat in a pageant under a vine and made to her an oration in Latin and in English'. In this same year he received a gift of $50 from the queen. Some witty exchanges with Mary personally are recorded by William Camden and Ben Jonson. On her marriage to King Philip of Spain the following year he wrote a ballad beginning 'The eagle's bird hath spread his wings' in celebration. In 1555 his pension was increased to $50 per annum. Just before Mary's death this was cancelled and replaced by a grant of the manor of Bulmer, near Malton in Yorkshire. 
A number of literary activities were now coming to fruition. Heywood's allegorical poem 'The Spider and the Flie' was printed by Thomas Powell in 1556. Apparently it had been started some years before, and as Mary was a central figure in this political and religious fiction, Heywood must have judged that this was a good moment to finish it. He has an authorial presence in this poem, reflected in a number of pictures in the original text showing him observing events. The frontispiece provides us with a full-length portrait of him in academic address, showing that he was a tall man. 
Apart from a handful of lyrics, Heywood was also hard at work on his proverbs and epigrams. Beginning with 'A Dialogue Containing the Number in Effect of All the Proverbs in the English Tongue' in 1546, he built up a series of epigrams on proverbs in hundreds over editions in 1549, 1555, 1556, 1560, and 1561, culminating in his 'Works' of 1562 (the plays were not included). Though perhaps not containing all the known English proverbs, the collection, estimated at over 1260, was indeed the largest to have appeared. It derived from many sources, including Erasmus's 'Adages' (1508), but there is a sense that Heywood's sensitive ear for demotic speech played a significant part. The 'Works' were well enough liked to be reprinted in 1566, 1576, 1587, and 1598. 
At the beginning of Elizabeth's reign Heywood was prosperous and for a time he seems to have maintained some status in court entertainment, but the commission set up to enforce the 'Act of Uniformity' against Catholics in 1564 precipitated a crisis for Heywood and his circle. He fled to Brabant on 20 July, leaving his interests in the care of his son-in-law, John Donne. Early in the 1570s commissions were set up enquiring into the possessions of exiles, and the transference of money must have been interrupted. Heywood, a widower, 'being now 78 years of age... a poor, honest, quiet old man', wrote to Burleigh from Mechelen on 18 April 1575 asking for help with the arrears (Reed, 237-8). Ellis Heywood had taken up a position at the English College in Antwerp, and John joined him there in 1576. The final crisis came two years later when the college was sacked. John and Ellis fled to Catholic Louvain, where Ellis died on 2 October 1578. John followed shortly afterwards, jesting to the last. His wit, which the protestant John Bale had acknowledged in his 'Summarium' long before in 1548, was subsequently celebrated by Gabriel Harvey, William Webbe, George Puttenham, John Harington, Camden, and Jonson. His contribution to English comedy has proved to be inimitable. 


@@@@@


doc= 13184


Heywood, Nathaniel (bap. 1633, d. 1677), clergyman and ejected minister, fourth son of Richard Heywood (1595/6-1677) of Little Lever, near Bolton, Lancashire, and his first wife, Alice Critchlaw ('c'.1593-1657), was born at Little Lever and baptized at Bolton parish church on 16 September 1633. Heywood's father was a fustian weaver who subsequently became a landowner in Bolton with mining and milling interests. Nathaniel's parents were strongly puritan, and another presbyterian minister, the diarist Oliver Heywood, was one of his elder brothers. 
From school at Horwich he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, entering in May 1648 and graduating BA in 1652. He was brought to a spiritual commitment under the preaching of Samuel Hammond. He spent some time in London before he went to study for two years under Edward Gee, rector of Eccleston, Lancashire. There he met and married Elizabeth Parr, a relative of Richard Parr, bishop of Sodor and Man, and Gee's predecessor. They had nine children, and she outlived him. 
Heywood was called to Illingworth Chapel, Halifax parish, where he suffered many hardships and setbacks, having 'not sought the peace of the place, but the good of it' (Ashurst, 7-8). He received a call from Ormskirk, Lancashire, and in January 1656 the classis met in Wigan to hear the petitions of parishioners from Ormskirk and Illingworth, finding in favour of Ormskirk. Heywood was presented to the vicarage on 7 August 1656 by the countess of Derby, installed by the fifth classis of Lancashire, and approved by the parliamentary commissioners. His ministry was active and successful. A royalist in politics, he welcomed the Restoration with a sermon on thanksgiving day (10 May 1660), taking an odd text ('2 Samuel' 19: 30). He was urged by the local gentry to print it but refused. Heywood was ejected from the living by the 'Act of Uniformity' but continued to preach in the church until a Mr Ashworth, a local teacher, was installed. Heywood's biographer commented that the new vicar was non-resident and that 'Mr. Heywood still seemed to have the sole charge of that Town and parish', as well as preaching in Wigan, Warrington, Liverpool, Preston, and Eccleston (Ashurst, 14). 
On the declaration of indulgence of 1672 Heywood was licensed as a presbyterian to minister at the chapel at Bickerstaff 'adjoining Lady Stanley's house' and one at Scarisbrick. To protect him from the effects of the annulment of the indulgence in 1673, Lady Stanley had the service of common prayer read before his sermon. His fiercely anti-Catholic sermons enraged local Catholics and may have had something to do with the ferocity of the persecution he experienced: in the first four months of 1674 he had thirty-four warrants presented against him. Later in the year he recorded that meetings could still be held in both chapels, though the congregation 'met in fear'. In late December 1674 he was taken by soldiers at Bickerstaff, despite Lady Stanley's personal attempt to intervene. He was tendered the Oxford oath by the JPs and given until the next quarter sessions at Wigan to consider his response, when the oath would be put to him again. Although he was supported by Lady Stanley and Henry Houghton in Wigan, what saved him was the affection of the people of Ormskirk. The 'Five Mile Act' could not be applied because no one could be found to swear that he lived in Ormskirk. 
Heywood died at Ormskirk on Sunday 16 December 1677. It was a measure of the respect and affection in which he was held that his funeral sermon was preached by the ejected nonconformist John Starkie in Ormskirk parish church, 'no man forbidding him; nay all that were any way concerned consenting'. He was buried on Wednesday 19 December in the vault of the Stanleys of Bickerstaff in the chancel of Ormskirk church. His elder brother Oliver Heywood described him as 'the flower of our family for learning, parts, piety, singularly beloved of God and man, sorely afflicted, seasonably delivered' ('Rev. Oliver Heywood', 1.38). Heywood's biographer, usually taken to be Sir Henry Ashurst, but perhaps Oliver, emphasized Nathaniel's allegiance to the presbyterian party: 'he was (according to his Education) a strict Presbyterian', avoiding the extremes of prelacy and congregationalist democracy (Ashurst, 71). 'He loved and used sound speech that cannot be condemned, as well as sound and orthodox Truth: standing at an equal distance from Arminians on the one hand, and Antinomians on the other' (ibid., 90-91). Heywood published nothing but after his death two of his sermons were printed, with the title 'Christ Displayed' (1679). 
The younger 
Heywood was married three times. His first wife, Isabel Lynford of Brinscall, near Blackburn, died in childbirth in January 1688. From the son whom she died giving birth to, Benjamin Heywood of Drogheda, descended Sir Benjamin Heywood and the Heywood banking family of Liverpool, Manchester, and Wakefield. Nathaniel then married Rebecca Angier of Warrington, a marriage pointing to ties of kinship within the nonconformist ministry. Nathaniel's uncle Oliver had married the daughter of the puritan clergyman John Angier, whose nephew and grandson, both named Samuel, were ministers at Dukinfield near Manchester and Toxteth Park Chapel near Liverpool respectively. Rebecca's place within the family is unclear, but 'S. A.' (almost certainly the latter Samuel) baptized the son born to her and Nathaniel in April 1695. Nathaniel, his uncle recorded, 'greatly rejoyced in having a living wife and son Nathl. Lord's Day after left her well, preacht; in afternoon sent for out of chapel after he had been half an hour, ran fast, found her dead, April, 1695' (Turner, 64). Heywood's third marriage, the licence for which was dated 24 May 1699, was to Mary Trueman of Liverpool. He died on 26 October 1704 and was buried at Ormskirk two days later. Administration of the will was granted to his widow on 12 May 1711. 


@@@@@


doc= 13185


Nathaniel Heywood (1659-1704), Heywood's eldest son, Presbyterian minister, was born on 6 June 1659 and baptized at Ormskirk eight days later. He entered Richard Frankland's academy on 25 April 1677 and graduated MA from Edinburgh University in 1680. He then studied with his uncle Oliver, becoming a chaplain to a Mr Dickins in Staffordshire in 1683-4. He was ordained at Attercliff, Yorkshire, on 1 June 1687, by Oliver Heywood and Richard Frankland, and probably succeeded in his father's ministry about this time. He suffered from melancholia and experienced lengthy illnesses, which prevented him from preaching. At the Lancashire quarter sessions held at Ormskirk on 22 July 1689 he registered 'Bury's House nr Ormeske... for a pl. of meeting for him the sd Nathanial Heywood & his Congregation' (Register of dissenting meeting-houses, 1689, Lancs. RO, QDV 4). He is probably the Mr Heywood mentioned in the United Brethren minutes for the meeting held at Manchester on 4 September 1694. 


@@@@@


doc= 13186


Heywood, Oliver (bap. 1630, d. 1702), clergyman and ejected minister, was the third son of Richard Heywood (1595/6-1677), yeoman, of Little Lever in the parish of Bolton, Lancashire, and his first wife, Alice Critchlaw (1593-1657) of Longworth; he was baptized in the parish church at Bolton on 15 March 1630. The neighbourhood had a long tradition of evangelical protestantism stretching back to the Edwardian preacher and Marian martyr John Bradford, and Oliver's parents were leading members of the puritan godly, ensuring that the sign of the cross was not used at their son's baptism. Oliver's mother participated in iconoclasm at Bolton in 1641 and introduced her son to the round of sermon attendance characteristic of puritan piety. His father, who prospered in the cloth trade, also built up a library of godly authors and reformation classics and Oliver was sent to Bolton grammar school and to study with William Rathband, the suspended curate at Little Lever. By his own account, however, his most important teacher before going up to Cambridge was a Mr Rudal, probably George Rudhall, schoolmaster of Horwich in the adjacent parish of Deane, from whom he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was admitted in July 1647. His tutor there was Alexander Akehurst, who later became a Quaker, and Heywood joined fellow students in a religious society which met in the rooms of Thomas Jollie, who became a lifelong friend and associate. As a student he was greatly influenced by the preaching of Samuel Hammond at St Giles's Church. 
Heywood graduated BA in 1650 and returned home intending to enter the household of John Angier of Denton, Lancashire, as part of his further training for the ministry. He soon began to preach in the neighbourhood and at Skipton in Yorkshire, near where other members of the family lived. As a result of this, and on the recommendation of his uncle, Francis Critchlaw, Heywood came to the attention of the congregation at Coley, one of twelve chapelries in the extensive parish of Halifax and, after preaching there at Michaelmas, he accepted the invitation to become its preacher on 26 November 1650 at a stipend of $30 a year, $20 of which came from contributions by the congregation. The parish of Halifax, and its chapelries, had been a noted puritan centre before the civil wars and at his arrival there Heywood would find several like-minded clergy in the area. Even so he was very young to assume ministerial responsibilities but, although under age, was ordained by the Bury classis on 4 August 1652. He soon enjoyed the support and company of his brother Nathaniel Heywood, who had been appointed to the chapelry of Illingworth in the same parish and with whom he shared a house, and of another old Cambridge friend, Eli Bentley, who became assistant minister at Halifax in 1653. On 24 April 1655 Heywood married Elizabeth (died 1661), the daughter of John Angier, in her father's church at Denton, and they moved to live at Northowram. In the same year Heywood introduced a monthly celebration of the communion to Coley for the first time since the outbreak of the civil wars and in 1657 he linked this to the setting up of an eldership and presbyterian church discipline. This split the congregation, with many of the more prosperous members opposing him, though the majority remained on his communicants' list. Despite these divisions Heywood persisted in establishing the discipline and was determined to remain at Coley, rejecting offers to undertake ministries at York and Preston which his reputation as a pastor and his wide connections among the northern godly had put his way. 
By the late 1650s Heywood had become a royalist presbyterian and was arrested and threatened with deprivation for refusing to give public thanksgiving for the suppression of the insurrection led by George Booth in 1659. When he heard of Monck's declaration for the king he recorded the news in his diary with a psalm of praise, but the Restoration soon brought his official ministry to an end. He quickly ran into conflict with Richard Hooke, the new vicar of Halifax, over rights of baptism in the outlying chapelries, and at the beginning of 1661 a private fast he was conducting was stopped by authority. Within his own congregation there was a group, headed by Stephen Ellis of Hipperholme, the most substantial resident, who wanted to restore the 'Book of Common Prayer' and a copy was placed before Heywood in the church on 25 August 1661. Heywood ignored it and was cited before the church courts on 13 September for nonconformity; proceedings dragged on until 29 June 1662 when he was suspended from ministering within the diocese. He continued to preach for a few weeks but was excommunicated following the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662, the decree being read at Halifax and Bolton. His first wife died on 26 May 1661, leaving him with two young sons, John and Eliezar, another having died in infancy; on 27 June 1667 he married Abigail Crompton, daughter of James Crompton of Breightmet in Lancashire, who died in 1707. 
Heywood was formally excluded from preaching but, in the years immediately following, his extensive family connections and his reputation led to his being invited to several pulpits on both sides of the Pennines. In addition he continued to hold conventicles and private fasts in the homes of presbyterian gentry and farmers throughout the region and at York, where Sarah, Lady Hewley, was a supporter. Following the 'Five Mile Act' he left his home at Coley and became an itinerant preacher throughout the north, returning in January 1668 to his old chapel, where he preached to a large congregation. He was arrested on 13 March 1670 after preaching at Little Woodhouse near Leeds, but released two days later; however, in July his goods were distrained to meet the fine required under the 'Conventicle Act', which had just come into force. Following the declaration of indulgence in 1672 he took out two licences as a presbyterian teacher, one for his own house at Northowram and the other for the house of John Butterworth of Warley in Halifax parish. On 12 June over 100 of his former congregation entered into a church covenant with him, which though presbyterian in inspiration was sufficiently broad to enable the members of the congregational chapel at Sowerby, leaderless since the death of Henry Root, to join with them on 19 June. On 29 October that year Heywood took part in a presbyterian ordination in the house of Robert Eaton, another ejected minister, at Deansgate, Manchester. 
The licences were revoked in February 1675 and Heywood set off on his travels once again, covering several hundred miles a year on his preaching tours. His labours were critical in keeping the dissenting congregations in touch with each other, and on 8 July 1678 he assisted at the first presbyterian ordination in Yorkshire. During these years he was also active in furthering his message through print, and published a number of books of practical divinity in the puritan mode which he distributed widely, and for free, among his friends and congregations: among the more important of these were 'Heart-Treasure' (1667), based on sermons preached at Coley and dedicated to the congregation there, 'Closet Prayer, a Christian Duty' (1671), and 'Life in God's Favour' (1679), and the distribution lists for these provide a valuable insight into dissenting networks and patrons throughout the north. He continued this pattern of roving ministry from the base at his house in Northowram, occasionally harassed by the authorities but escaping serious persecution until 1685. On 16 January that year he was arrested for riotous assembly at his house and he spent the rest of the year, until 19 December, as a prisoner in York Castle for his refusal to pay the $50 fine. 
The declaration of indulgence granted by James II in 1687 provided Heywood with the opportunity to regularize his position once again, and he set about building a meeting-house in Northowram on land he had provided, which was opened on 8 July 1688; a school was added in 1693. The meeting-house was licensed under the 'Toleration Act' on 18 July 1689. Throughout his life Heywood was interested in cases of witchcraft and possession, noting many in his diaries and attending fasts and prayers associated with some cases. In September 1689 he joined with several other nonconformist divines in attending fasts associated with the case of Richard Dugdale, the Surey Demoniack, but took no part in the defence of those ministers subsequently implicated in what was later revealed as a fraud. 
In September 1691 Heywood played a leading role in introducing into Yorkshire the 'happy union' between Presbyterians and Independents agreed in London earlier that year, preaching to a meeting of ministers and licensed preachers of both denominations at Wakefield on 2 September when heads of agreement were adopted. Further meetings were arranged throughout the West Riding at which ordinations were arranged and preaching licences granted. Having weathered his difficulties with the established church Heywood spent much of the 1690s concerned about the extent to which he perceived some of his fellow dissenters had departed from the strict Calvinist tradition in which he had been formed, and though his views on individuals remained for the most part characteristically generous he regretted the falling away in doctrinal orthodoxy which the 'Toleration Act' had permitted. He continued his pastoral activities and preached throughout the Pennine region throughout the decade, being viewed as something of a patriarchal figure by younger colleagues, many of whom sought his advice and whose pulpits he often shared. The extent of his labours in this work were recorded by him in a list covering the years from 1665 until his death: in 1690, in addition to his Sunday preaching, he preached 135 sermons, conducted forty fasts and seventeen days of thanksgiving, and travelled a total of 1100 miles, a lesser distance than he recorded in the three previous years. In 1700 his asthmatic condition deteriorated but he continued to preach forty-five weekday sermons, conduct twenty-two fasts and three days of thanksgiving, and attend eight conferences of ministers, travelling in all 145 miles. 
By this date, though more closely restricted to his Northowram congregation, Heywood's wider ministry was maintained through the writing of seven treatises and an extensive correspondence of 147 letters written in that, his seventieth year. This public preaching ministry was complemented by a pastoral one in which Heywood's status as a healer and the reputation he had for powerful prayer meant that he was often asked to attend those who were ill or in distress, one on occasion being so moved by the tears of a mother for her son who had been hanged that he went off to pray with her and her family. More commonly he regularly attended the elderly and women in childbed, and was frequently asked to give advice on personal matters by nonconformists throughout the region, many of them calling at his home in Northowram. Despite his failing health Heywood continued to preach in his meeting-house there, though from 5 December 1701 he had to be carried to it in a chair -- as had Calvin, he noted in his diary. He died at Northowram on 4 May 1702 and was buried three days later in Halifax parish church, being laid in his mother's tomb in Holdsworth's chapel in the south aisle. It says much for his reputation throughout the region that the funeral was attended by a large gathering of clergy, from both the established church and the dissenting congregations. 
Heywood's life formed a bridge between the puritan tradition of early and mid-century England, the years following the Restoration when dissent was outlawed and many ministers, Heywood included, suffered imprisonment as a result of their preaching, and the years after the revolution of 1688 when toleration was granted and dissenting ministers could operate from settled congregations with their own chapels. Though never party to discussions at national level in a significant way Heywood was the pre-eminent figure in northern nonconformity throughout these years and, as such, his life itself represents a key point of access to the religious history of the period, but even more important than the events of his life is the way in which Heywood recorded them. 
This he did in a variety of volumes which owed much to the well-established puritan tradition of recording and interpreting God's providences to both the individual and the wider community, and Heywood's wide kinship networks and public position within dissent make his volumes uniquely important for their mix of both public and private. That mix is revealed in the writings themselves which consist of a diary, begun with his removal from Coley in 1666 following the 'Five Mile Act' and continuing until his death, an autobiographical account of the years preceding that, reflections of providences and 'returns of prayer' covering the years from 1682 until his death, commonplace notes from the sayings of other preachers, biographical notes of his family, notes of church covenants and ministerial meetings in the West Riding, and a 'register' of his congregation giving biographical sketches of his neighbours, his fellow dissenters, and other notable individuals. Taken together they reveal more than the internal preoccupations of a dedicated Calvinist minister -- an abiding awareness of the force of evil in the world, manifested through witchcraft, drunkenness, or other licentious behaviour, and a conviction that prayer and fasting were the only sure means of overcoming this, and a recording of divine judgement on the ungodly, and the providential reconciling of the misfortunes of the godly; they also record his public activities -- relations with his congregation, with his wide cousinage within dissent, and with the authorities in both church and state. In these writings Heywood reveals the depth of his providential Calvinism and the extent to which the events of mid-century had formed his views. Delighted as he was by the declarations of indulgence by Charles II and James II, he noted with concern the implications of these royal edicts for parliamentary government, and the encouragement they gave to papists, one group which always remained outside his inclusive humanity. 
Heywood's ministry was founded on prayer, recorded almost daily in his diary and often conducted in company with others. This lay at the heart of his healing ministry, and his conviction in its power led to much deliberation on the workings of God's providence, both in his personal life and in the public life of the church, as well as in the lives of the common stock of humanity. This was revealed in his close recording and meditations on the sudden deaths of those whom he knew personally or of which he learned from others, and especially on those of the ungodly persecutors of nonconformists. Such stress on divine intervention in the world brought Heywood into conflict with the Anglican clergy of the area, and in particular with Dr Hooke, who increasingly looked to natural causes in the explanation of misfortune. Heywood himself eventually became more cautious about invoking divine intervention, especially in cases which related to members of the established church, but it remained true that his life was marked by a constant awareness of his own and his associates' relationship with their maker. This clearly drew on the puritan tradition of the earlier seventeenth century, but it also reflected his contemporary position for much of his life as a minister barred from following his true vocation and regularly harassed by the authorities for attempting to practise it. He recorded his views in 'Israel's Lamentation after the Lord' (1683) when he wrote, 'It is dreadful indeed to see debauchery in the land abounding, and the basest of men vent personal malice against God's dearest children for no other fault than worshipping God, and praying for their persecutors' (p. 390). It is no surprise that he began his diary after the introduction of the 'Five Mile Act'. 
Heywood was a prominent figure among his fellow ministers, often presiding at their meetings. He recorded the lives of his contemporaries, providing Edmund Calamy with much material for his study of those ejected in 1662. He published a life of his father-in-law, John Angier, and also wrote a biography of Richard Frankland, who ran the dissenting academy attended by his sons. His pastoral writings continued to the end of his life, with a flurry of publications, most of which he financed himself, from the later 1690s when his health made travel less easy. They continued in the vein of practical divinity established in his earlier works, though with an increasing concern with preparation for death, comfort for mourners and the after-life, and they make frequent reference to the writings of contemporaries such as Richard Baxter and Henry Newcome, as well as reminding his readers of their heritage going back to the Marian martyrs. It was this which formed the argument of his final volume, entitled 'The Two Worlds; Present and Future, Visible and Invisible' (1701) and dedicated to his relations living in Lancashire, in which he urged them to hold fast to the observance of their ancestors. 
Heywood's sons both proceeded to the ministry, John at Rotherham and Pontefract, and Eliezar in the Sheffield area. Heywood's income from his congregation was always modest but he acquired an extensive library, numbering 265 titles when listed in 1664 and valued at $20 at his death. This he left to be divided between his two sons, his widow first having choice of ten volumes. He also acquired lands in Ovenden and Sowerby in the parish of Halifax to add to his property at Northowram and to the estate at Little Lever which he had inherited. His widow was given a life interest in certain of the properties and the estate then passed to his two sons, with the house in Ovenden going to a grandson, Timothy. Heywood's goods were valued at $132 at the time of his death, and reveal a modest if well-appointed house, with a portrait of himself hanging in the parlour. No monument was erected to him, though the chapel in Northowram, rebuilt in the nineteenth century, bears his name. In the absence of an epitaph his own review of his life, written on 15 March 1695, can stand as an assessment of his motives and achievement: 'that I should be a publick preacher above 44 yeares, have such measure of health, liberty, opportunitys, more then most of my brethren, some good successe and fruit of my poor labours, marry famous Mr Angier's daughter, print so many bookes, injoy so many comforts of life, bring up two sons to be ministers, build a chappel, help so many ministers and Christians in their necessitys by my self and others, and yet have a competency my self and wife to live upon, nothing more improbable then these things and many more experiments I might produce, which I record not for ostentation but to set off the riches of grace. ('Oliver Heywood', ed. Turner, 3.297)' 



@@@@@


doc= 13187


Heywood, Peter (1772-1831), naval officer, was born at the Nunnery, near Douglas, Isle of Man, on 6 June 1772, the youngest of the seven children of Peter John Heywood (1739-1790), deemster of the Isle of Man and son of a former chief justice there, and Elizabeth, daughter of James Spedding of Whitehaven, Cumberland. His uncle was Captain Thomas Pasley RN, and probably for this reason Heywood entered the navy, on 11 October 1786, after schooling in Cheshire and Westmorland. Friendship between the Heywoods and Richard Betham, William Bligh's father-in-law, persuaded Bligh to take Heywood as a volunteer aboard the 'Bounty' on 27 August 1787 and on 28 October to promote him to midshipman. 
When the mutiny broke out on 28 April 1789, Heywood's attitude was ambiguous. At his court martial he claimed to have been asleep, without knowledge of the mutiny until that moment, and then kept below by force until the launch was ready to receive Bligh and his party. But later statements, by John Adams in 1825 and in the journal of James Morrison, boatswain's mate, indicate that Heywood knew of Christian's plans to desert or take the ship by force. Heywood was unable, convincingly, to refute statements that he had laughed at Bligh while held captive, had held a cutlass and helped hoist out the launch. In the confusion of the moment he may well, as a boy of sixteen, have done so. He admitted at his trial that he was afraid of going to almost certain death in the launch with Bligh and since it could not hold all those who wished to go, remained in the 'Bounty' ['see 'Bounty mutineers]. 
The mutineers landed at Tahiti and then split into two parties, some, including Heywood, remaining on land, and the others taking to sea again in the 'Bounty'. When, on 23 March 1791, the 'Pandora', under Captain Edward Edwards, arrived in search of the mutineers, Heywood at once surrendered. The remainder were arrested by the next day and all fourteen were immediately put in irons, and into a specially built roundhouse, nicknamed 'Pandora's box', 11 by 18 feet, built on the after part of the quarter-deck, ventilated through two small iron gratings. Here they were kept under a 24-hour guard, though on full rations. Captain Edwards was afraid the prisoners would infect his own crew with mutiny and his harsh treatment was meant to prevent this. Nothing was discovered of the mutineers who had quitted Tahiti in the 'Bounty', despite a prolonged, though increasingly perfunctory, search. On 28 August the 'Pandora', while negotiating the Endeavour Strait, struck on the reef since known by her name. Three prisoners were released to man the pumps and all the remaining prisoners, bar one, were released in the last minutes, but four were drowned as the ship sank rapidly. For nineteen days the survivors remained on a small nearby key, preparing to sail on to the nearest European settlement, the Dutch colony of Timor. All were in great distress but the prisoners were left naked, without shelter or sufficient food. Both at Batavia, and on the passage to the Cape of Good Hope in a Dutch merchant ship, this severe treatment continued. Yet at Batavia, Heywood was permitted to send his family the first news of his survival they had received. 
At the Cape, Heywood was transferred to the 'Gorgon', where he was allowed daily exercise on deck, and was less rigorously confined. On arrival at Spithead on 19 June 1792 Heywood was sent on board the 'Hector' (74 guns) whose captain, afterwards Sir George Montagu, a close friend of Captain Pasley, treated him with humanity. Pasley arranged legal advice for his nephew and a counsel, Aaron Graham, former deputy judge-advocate at courts martial on the Newfoundland station. But in letters to Heywood's sister, he regretted that Heywood had made no public protestation of loyalty during the mutiny and at best had appeared neutral, which alone was sufficient to condemn him. Heywood's request for a separate trial was rejected and on 12 September he, with the other prisoners, was court-martialled on the 'Duke'. Heywood was fortunate in his connections for, among the members of the court, were Captain George Montagu and Captain Albermarle Bertie, a relation by marriage, both of whom had already shown him much kindness, while his family used all the interest at their command to support and protect him. The trial lasted for six days, and on 18 September they were all sentenced to death; but Heywood was strongly recommended to mercy and received a royal pardon on 27 October. 
Lord Hood, who had been president of the court, advised Heywood to continue in the service, and offered to take him with him in the 'Victory'. But on 17 May 1793 he joined his uncle Pasley's ship, the 'Bellerophon', later moving to the frigate 'Niger' with Captain Legge. On 23 September 1793 he was moved into the 'Queen Charlotte', bearing the flag of Lord Howe, with Sir Roger Curtis, captain of the fleet, Captain Sir Andrew Snape Douglas, and Captain Sir Hugh C. Christian, all of whom had been members of the court martial, and who remained his friends and patrons. In the actions of 28 and 29 May and 1 June 1794 Heywood acted as captain's aide-de-camp, and on the return of the fleet to Spithead was one of the two midshipmen appointed to attend the side when the king came on board the 'Queen Charlotte'. 
Once doubts as to Heywood's fitness to hold naval rank after his court martial were resolved, Lord Howe gave him an acting commission as lieutenant in the 'Robust' in August 1794, which was confirmed on 9 March 1795, when he was appointed to the fire-ship 'Incendiary'. On 23 June he was lieutenant of the 'Nymphe' in the action off Lorient. He joined the East India station in the 'Fox', early in 1796, remaining in her until 18 June 1798 when he was moved with his captain and cousin, Pulteney Malcolm, into the 'Suffolk' bearing the flag of Vice-Admiral Rainier. Heywood had been recommended to Rainier by Earl Spencer, then first lord of the Admiralty, who believed Heywood's conviction should not debar him from further promotion, especially in consideration of his subsequent good behaviour. In August 1800 Heywood was accordingly promoted commander of the bomb-vessel 'Vulcan' and thereafter by acting orders from Rainier commanded various post ships until 5 April 1803, when he was confirmed in post rank. In January 1805 as a result of ill health and the death of his eldest brother, Admiral Rainier gave him leave to return home, warmly commending his services and character. 
On 20 October 1806 Heywood was appointed flag captain to Rear-Admiral George Murray in the 'Polyphemus' first at the Cape of Good Hope and later in the River Plate. In May 1808 he commanded the 'Donegal' off Brest and in the Bay of Biscay. While in company with the 'Caesar' and 'Defiance', on 25 February 1809 he attacked and destroyed three French frigates, part of a squadron which had escaped earlier from Brest and taken shelter in Sables d'Olonne. For this he received the Admiralty's thanks, on 18 March, and in the following May took command of the 'Nereus', a newly built frigate, in which he went out to the Mediterranean, and in April 1810 brought Lord Collingwood's body back to England. In retirement Heywood considered Collingwood had been a brave, able, refined, and cultivated man, equal in merit to Nelson, whom he thought a 'rough kind of fire-eater'. 
Heywood remained in the 'Nereus', employed on the east coast of South America, receiving the thanks of British merchants at Buenos Aires twice in 1811 and again in 1813, for his protection of their interests. He returned to England, in October 1813, in the 'Montagu' to take command in the North Sea until April 1814. Having accompanied Louis XVIII to France and evacuated part of the British army from Bordeaux, at the subsequent naval review the 'Montagu', wearing the flag of Sir Thomas Byam Martin, led the fleet in manoeuvres before the allied sovereigns. 
On Napoleon's escape from Elba, Heywood, still in the 'Montagu', joined Lord Exmouth in the Mediterranean on 20 May 1815, and transported British and imperial troops from Naples to Genoa and Marseilles. Heywood then served as senior officer at Gibraltar until February 1816 when he rejoined Exmouth in his first mission to the Barbary States. The 'Montagu' was paid off at Chatham on 16 July, and Heywood did not serve again, though in 1818 he was offered the command of the Canadian lakes and later the post of Admiralty hydrographer, for which he successfully recommended Rear-Admiral Francis Beaufort. This offer indicates the respect in which his abilities as a hydrographer were held. While in the East Indies he had surveyed much of the east coast of Ceylon and the adjoining mainland. Admiralty charts published later were based on this work Heywood presented to the Admiralty in 1805. In South America he carried out a number of surveys, the best known being of the River Plate. His work here and in the East Indies was used by James Horsburgh, hydrographer to the East India Company. After his court martial Heywood had prepared a Tahitian vocabulary, based on over two years' contact with the language. This useful work was presented to the first British missionaries sent there in 1796. Though it survives only in fragments, chiefly in the correspondence of the London Missionary Society, it is historically important for the period when the European impact on Tahitian culture was first felt. 
On 31 July 1816 Heywood married Frances Joliffe (1782-1863), the daughter of Colonel Graham of Stirlingshire and widow of an East India Company servant. Mrs Joliffe may have heard of Heywood from her uncle Aaron Graham, but she first met him in the scientific and literary circle she entertained at Dulwich, where she lived with her only child, Diana, and which included Sir Joseph Banks and other fellows of the Royal Society. After their marriage the Heywoods lived first at Clapham, then at Highgate, where their house was a centre for political, religious, and literary discussions. Among their friends were Sir Thomas Phillips, collector of manuscripts, and San Martin, the South American patriot, and they were early patrons of the painter Clarkson Stanfield. Heywood was attached to his stepdaughter and in 1830 promoted her marriage to Captain Edward Belcher RN. 
Heywood was at his best in conversation with small groups of friends, when 'his serious sort of countenance... brightened in argument' ('United Service Journal', 1831, 481). A contemporary description of him as 'rather above middle size, of a spare habit' (ibid.) but with good features, is confirmed by his portrait. In politics he was a whig who favoured Roman Catholic emancipation. He became ill in 1827, possibly with a heart complaint, since he reputedly found Highgate Hill too taxing. For this reason, in 1829, the family moved to the recently built Cumberland Terrace, where Heywood caught a chill in 1831. He died there, at number 26, after a short illness, on 10 February and was buried on 18 February in the crypt of the chapel of St Michael, Highgate School. A plaque to Heywood was unveiled at the chapel in 2008. 
Heywood once declared he would be glad to live his life over again, exactly as it had been. For most men, the mutiny on the 'Bounty' and its aftermath would have proved an irreparable block to future advancement, but strong naval interest and connections, in the customary eighteenth-century manner, ensured Heywood not only a pardon but an honourable and modestly distinguished career, with few of the gaps in employment and thus promotion most naval officers experienced. Heywood did not forgive Bligh for jeopardizing his life, and his lengthy contribution to Marshall's 'Royal Naval Biography' in 1825 is, in part, an attack on Bligh's fitness to command, in justification of Heywood's part in the mutiny. This provided the basis for the subsequent, traditional picture of Bligh as an incompetent tyrant, reinforced by, among others, Lady Belcher in her book of 1870 on the mutineers. Yet Heywood's advancement was also the result of his professional abilities, and he formed one of a group of more scientific naval officers devoted to improvements in charting and surveying an expanding empire and to wider intellectual and liberal concerns. 


@@@@@


doc= 13188


Heywood, Robert (1573/4-1646/7), poet, was probably born in Heywood, in the parish of Bury, Lancashire, the eldest son of Peter Heywood of Heywood, gentleman (died 1600) and his wife, Margery (died 1602), daughter of Roger Gartside, gentleman. He was educated locally, and on 11 July 1589, aged fifteen, he entered Brasenose College, Oxford, although he does not appear to have gained a degree. He subsequently returned to Lancashire and upon his father's death in 1600 he inherited the estate of Heywood Hall and property throughout south-east Lancashire. 
At some point before 1607 Heywood married Margaret Ashton (died 1665), daughter and coheir of John Ashton of Penketh, Lancashire, gentleman. The couple settled at Heywood Hall, which was reportedly rebuilt in 1611, and had six surviving children. From this point onwards Heywood gradually acquired wealth and an improved social standing. In 1618 he was appointed high constable for Salford hundred in Lancashire, and by 1622 he was listed as the second wealthiest landowner in his parish. In 1631 he paid $10 for his distraint of knighthood fine. 
Heywood also secured a local reputation as a prominent patron of godliness and learning. Between 1618 and 1624 he procured joint ownership of the advowsons of the nearby parishes of Radcliffe and Middleton, Lancashire. The later appointment of two puritan ministers in these parishes suggests that he moved easily within nonconforming circles. About 1640 he rebuilt Heywood Chapel, which lay upon his estates, at an estimated personal cost of $150. At that time he was also composing poetry, although only one work has survived. His 'Observations and Instructions, Divine and Moral' was a lengthy visionary piece, divided into five 'centuries' that reflected his own godly perspective on the nature of faith and works. It may have been this work that attracted the scholar and poet Richard James to Heywood Hall during his tour of Lancashire about 1636. In his 'Iter Lancastrense', James recalled fondly to Heywood 'the fairnesse of thy seat and courtesie', and his welcome there: '
Such things I sawe and thought, in Lancashire, 

At Heywood hall to trading Rachdale neere. 

My safe bould harbour Heywood, much I owe, 

Of praise and thanks to ye where ere I goe. 
(James, 2, 12)' After the outbreak of the civil wars in Lancashire, Heywood supported the parliamentarian cause, although he played no active part in the conflict. He became vexed by the behaviour of his sons Peter and John, both of whom were prominent local royalists, and in his final will of 8 October 1646 he stated that their legacies were to be paid only after their submission to parliament. He was buried in Bury parish on 19 January 1647. His godly reputation was affirmed by a distant relative, the nonconformist divine Oliver Heywood, who remembered him as 'a pious reverend old gentleman and an excellent poet' ('Oliver Heywood', 1.17). 


@@@@@


doc= 13189


Heywood, Samuel (1753-1828), judge and author, was born on 8 October 1753 at Liverpool, the eldest of four children of Benjamin Heywood (1731-1795), merchant, and his wife, Phoebe ('b'. 1729), daughter of Samuel Ogden of Liverpool. He was educated at the dissenting academy at Warrington, where the prevailing religious ethos tended towards Unitarianism, and subsequently at Trinity Hall, Cambridge. At Trinity Hall he incurred the displeasure of the college authorities, and in particular the future bishop Samuel Hallifax, by absenting himself from Anglican worship in the college chapel. In order to avoid the subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' required on graduation at Cambridge, he did not take a degree. Making the law his career, he studied at the Inner Temple, was called to the bar in 1778, and became a serjeant-at-law in 1794. He practised extensively on the northern circuit, where he became friendly with John Scott, the future Lord Eldon, and John Lee. His vehement dissenting and whig principles were amusingly recounted by Eldon, who quoted Lee as saying:'Well, Sam... thou art, in Truth a Dissenter! dissenting more than anybody I ever knew! -- for thou agreest with nobody about any thing!' (Lincoln and McEwen, 112). 
Heywood married Susanna ('bap'. 1758, died 1822), the daughter of John Cornwall, merchant, of London, at St Bride's, Fleet Street, on 1 January 1781. They had one son and four daughters; only their daughter Ann, who married Colonel Granville Eliot, survived Heywood. The debates over the attempts to secure repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' in the late 1780s spurred Heywood into a powerful attack on the system of religious tests which were designed to exclude dissenters from public office. This took the form of 'The Right of Protestant Dissenters to a Compleat Toleration Asserted' (1787; 2nd edn, 1789), a scholarly history of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' infused with a radical polemic against the Anglican hegemony. Writing under the pseudonym A Layman, he concluded: 'We may congratulate a country on the wonderful uniformity which takes place as to the employments within this Act, when not even a bug can be destroyed within the purlieus of the royal household but by the hallowed fingers of a communicant; nor a post letter conveyed to any part of the kingdom by horses belonging to a Protestant Dissenter. (p. 76)' In 1790 he took his arguments further in 'High Church Politics', in which he blamed a 'high church party', and Bishop Samuel Horsley in particular, for bringing a new climate of intolerance into public life. 
His opinions and his prowess in expressing them brought Heywood to the centre of radicalism in religion and whiggism in politics. He supported, and was a trustee of, the Unitarian chapel opened by Theophilus Lindsey in Essex Street, London. He became a friend of Charles James Fox, and contributed material to the latter's 'History of the Early Part of the Reign of James II' (1808) and, in his 'Vindication of Mr Fox's History' (1811), defended his late friend's book against the strictures of the Pittite George Rose. He was consulted by Charles Grey, Lord Howick, in 1807 over the Catholic relief (and its possible extension to dissenters) proposed by the 'ministry of all the talents'. It was through Grey's influence that Heywood was made a judge of the Carmarthen circuit in 1807 and hence became one of the very few professed dissenters to hold national office under the 'Test Act' (Ditchfield). He already enjoyed the reputation of an expert on electoral law, publishing 'Digest of the Law Concerning County Elections' in 1790 and 'Digest of the Law Respecting Borough Elections' in 1797. 
Heywood was taken ill with 'paralysis' -- probably a stroke -- while on circuit at Haverfordwest in August 1828. He died at Tenby on 11 September and was buried at Bristol on 19 September. He lived just long enough to see the repeal of the sacramental provisions of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' which he had so sharply denounced. His career, like that of his friend John Lee, symbolizes the political alliance between whigs and dissenters, and the rising social status of the legal profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 13190


Heywood, Thomas (c.1573-1641), playwright and poet, was probably born late in 1573 in Lincolnshire. On 3 October 1623 he gave his age as '49 or thereabouts' and as '50 yeares, or neare upon' (Sisson, 58), and on five separate occasions in his writings he refers to himself as a native of Lincolnshire. A. M. Clark presents convincing evidence, much of it unknown to earlier biographers, that the dramatist was the son of Robert Heywood ('c'.1543-1593), rector of Rothwell and Ashby-cum-Fenby, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Elizabeth. The family came originally from Mottram, Cheshire, but Robert Heywood moved to Lincolnshire after being ordained by the bishop of Chester in 1562; he had been educated at Magdalene College, Cambridge. Heywood's paternal uncle Edmund Heywood (died 1624) worked for many years in the office of the exchequer and was granted a coat of arms before 1616. 
Thomas Heywood matriculated as a pensioner from Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1591; in 1658 William Cartwright claimed that he had been a fellow of Peterhouse. Heywood later wrote in 'An Apology for Actors' (1612) that during his time at Cambridge he saw 'tragedyes, comedyes, historyes, pastorals and shewes, publickly acted, in which the graduates of good place and standing have bene specially parted' ('An Apology', 28). However, his education was probably cut short by the death of his father in February 1593, after which he moved to London and plunged into the literary scene there. Thus began a literary career astonishing not only for its length (nearly fifty years), but for the sheer range of Heywood's output, covering nearly all the genres available to him. 
Heywood's first published effort was a narrative poem, 'Oenone and Paris' (1594), drawn from Ovid's 'Heroides' and to a lesser extent from Lucian. Both classical authors would exert a strong influence on Heywood throughout his career. The poem is also a close imitation of Shakespeare's 'Venus and Adonis' (1593), marking the beginning of Shakespeare's pervasive influence on Heywood's writing. It has been argued that Heywood wrote early versions of several later plays in 1594-5 (particularly 'The Rape of Lucrece', based partly on Shakespeare's poem, and 'The Four Prentices of London'), and it may have been about this time that he contributed to 'Sir Thomas More' (BL, Harley MS 7368), a play whose Hand D is widely accepted as Shakespeare's. 
The first concrete evidence of Heywood's playwriting is a payment in Philip Henslowe's 'Diary' in October 1596 for 'hawodes bocke' ('Henslowe's Diary', 50), by which time he was probably also working as an actor. On 25 March 1598 Heywood signed an agreement to act exclusively for Henslowe over the next two years, and between December 1598 and February 1599 he wrote at least two plays for Henslowe's Admiral's Men: 'War without Blows and Love without Suit' and 'Joan is as Good as my Lady' (both now lost). In the autumn of 1598 Francis Meres's 'Palladis tamia' listed Heywood among 'the best for Comedy' along with other writers for Admiral's Men. 
Heywood's one surviving play from this period -- the two-part 'King Edward IV' (first printed 1599, with five later editions) -- was performed not by Henslowe's company, but by the rival Derby's Men. Both parts are distinguished by features which would become characteristic of Heywood's drama: episodic plots, sympathetic treatment of tradesmen and apprentices, strong female characters, and a focus on Christian mercy and forgiveness rather than revenge. Part one depicts King Edward mingling among his loyal subjects in disguise (in the manner of Shakespeare's 'Henry V'), then wooing and winning goldsmith's wife Jane Shore as his mistress. Part two opens with Edward's conquest of France, but is mainly concerned with Jane Shore's fall from grace under Edward's successor Richard III, and the mercy shown by her loyal husband, Matthew, and by Edward's widow, Elizabeth. 
By the autumn of 1601 Heywood had become a leading member of the earl of Worcester's company of players, which became Queen Anne's Men in 1603. This company moved among the Boar's Head, Rose, and Curtain theatres before finally finding a permanent home at the Red Bull in 1607. Meanwhile Heywood had married and settled in St Saviour's parish, Southwark. His wife's name is unknown, but 'contra' Clark, he was not the Thomas Heywood who married Anne Buttler, servant, in St Antholin's in 1603. As Thomas 'Hayward', player, he had at least four children baptized at St Saviour's: Mary (5 October 1600), Joseph (5 June 1603), Alice (16 September 1604), and Richard (5 September 1605). He was probably also the father of Frances (4 March 1598) and Edie (23 December 1610). With a stable family life and a steady income as a sharer in the Queen's Men, Heywood entered into the most productive period of his dramatic career. Several of the plays he wrote at Henslowe's Rose in 1602-3 are preserved only as titles '1 Lady Jane', 'Cutting Dick', 'Christmas comes but once a year', 'The Blind Eat many a Fly', but many more of his plays from this era survive, showing him exploring favourite themes and blossoming as a playwright. 
Heywood achieved his greatest popular success (and ensured his modern reputation) with his domestic dramas. These recall medieval morality plays in their structure, generally contrasting a prodigal spouse with a patient, virtuous one, but they add layers of complexity. The earliest of Heywood's domestic plays, the dark comedy 'How a Man may Choose a Good Wife from a Bad' ('c'.1601, printed 1602) tells the story of Arthur, who tries to poison his loyal wife in order to marry a prostitute but unwittingly gives her a sleeping potion instead. While fleeing from the authorities, he meets his wife but does not recognize her, and only when Arthur is about to be executed for his crime does the wife reveal herself and save him. In 'The Wise Woman of Hogsdon' (written 'c'.1604, published 1638), by contrast, Heywood turns the prodigal husband story into a farce. Reluctant groom Chartley flees on the eve of his wedding to gamble with his dissolute friends, but the wise woman of the title (actually a witch) orchestrates a series of comic plots whereby Chartley contracts marriage with two other women but ends up married to his original bride. Heywood may have had a hand in 'The Fair Maid of the Exchange' (written 'c'.1602, published 1607), another domestic comedy with a strong heroine, but is probably not its primary author. 
The masterpiece among Heywood's domestic plays is the tragedy 'A Woman Killed with Kindness' (written 1603). The play begins with the marriage of Anne Acton to John Frankford, but here (as in 'Edward IV') it is the wife who is prodigal, having an affair with Frankford's best friend, Wendoll. Upon discovering the affair Frankford curbs his impulse for revenge and instead banishes his wife to his country estate with full provisions. Remorseful, Anne starves herself to death, but not before receiving Frankford's forgiveness on her deathbed. In a parallel sub-plot, Anne's brother Sir Francis Acton pays the debts of his disgraced enemy Sir Charles Mountford, whereupon Mountford offers Acton his virtuous sister Susan in marriage. The play was printed in 1607 with Heywood's name on the title-page for the first time, and with a self-deprecating prologue reflecting the modesty which was to be a hallmark of Heywood's writing. 
Among Heywood's most interesting plays from this period are a series of adventure-romances, all written in the first decade of the seventeenth century but not published until many years later. The earliest of these, 'The Four Prentices of London' (written 1599-1600, published 1615) opens with Godfrey of Bulloigne and his three noble brothers living in London as apprentices after their father's dispossession. They set off on a crusade to Jerusalem carrying the arms of their respective trades (a feature later satirized in Francis Beaumont's 'Knight of the Burning Pestle'), trailed by their disguised sister Bella Franca, and encounter many improbable adventures before their reunion and ultimate victory in Jerusalem. 

'Fortune by Land and Sea' and 'The Fair Maid of the West, Part 1' (both written either in 1601-2 or in 1609) are more ambitious, being aptly described by Clark as 'half adventure play, half domestic tragicomedy' (Clark, 213). In both plays a middle-class hero (young Forrest and Spencer respectively) kills a powerful adversary in a tavern duel and is forced to flee overseas, and each hero loves an impossibly virtuous heroine (Anne Harding and Bess Bridges) with whom he is reunited after a series of wild adventures. 'Fortune' centres its twin plots around the feuding Forrest and Harding families, while 'The Fair Maid' focuses squarely on Bess Bridges, who rises from barmaid to become captain of a warship, exemplifying the kind of heroic woman who fascinated Heywood throughout his career. 'Fortune' was not printed until 1655 (attributed to Heywood and William Rowley), 'The Fair Maid' not until 1631, when it appeared along with its much later sequel (written 'c'.1630). 
Heywood also continued to integrate domestic situations into plays about royalty, as he had done in 'Edward IV'. In 'The Royal King and the Loyal Subject' (written 'c'.1600, printed 1637), he adapts a novella from 'Painter's Palace of Pleasure' about a king cruelly testing the loyalty of his steward, but changes the setting to England and adds a sub-plot with close parallels to 'How a Man may Choose' and 'Fortune by Land and Sea'. Heywood is probably also the author of the manuscript play 'Tom a Lincoln' (BL, Add. MS 61745), a romance about the eponymous bastard son of King Arthur and his own two sons. It is based on Richard Johnson's 1607 pamphlet of the same name, but is also influenced by Shakespeare's 'The Winter's Tale' and 'The Tempest'. 
Heywood's favourite monarch, however, was Queen Elizabeth. His two-part drama about Elizabeth, 'If you Know not me, you Know Nobody' ('c'.1604-5, first printed 1605-6), is a veritable smorgasbord of his favourite themes. Part one (based closely on John Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments') deals with the trials of Elizabeth during the reign of her half-sister, Mary, ending with her triumphant accession to the throne. In part two the focus shifts to Sir Thomas Gresham, who builds the Royal Exchange while his prodigal nephew John cavorts with French prostitutes. Hobson the honest haberdasher teaches everyone the true meaning of charity before, abruptly, Queen Elizabeth is saved from assassination and defeats the Spanish Armada. The results, while less than satisfying dramatically, were extremely popular: part one went through eight printed editions, and part two went through four. All these editions were published anonymously, but Heywood was to recycle the material of part one many times in the coming decades, in works such as the prose 'Gunaikeion' (1624) and 'England's Elizabeth' (1631), and the rhymed 'Life and Death of Queen Elizabeth' (1639). 
Heywood's next play, 'The Rape of Lucrece' (printed 1608), was also very popular, despite being a distinct oddity to modern eyes. It is a Roman revenge tragedy about the bloody rise of Tarquin Superbus and his wife, Tullia, and their fall at the hand of Brutus after Tarquin's son Sextus rapes Collatine's chaste wife, Lucrece. The rape itself closely follows Shakespeare's poem, leading Holaday to date the earliest version of the play to 1594, though 1606-7 is a more generally accepted date. The play contains many lighthearted songs, most sung by the nobleman Valerius, which many critics have found jarring and out of place. Five editions were printed by 1638, the last of these containing five additional songs. 
Perhaps inspired by the success of 'Lucrece', Heywood next made a bid for literary respectability by immersing himself in the classics. In 1608 he published a prose translation (from the French of Lois Meigret Lyonnais) of Sallust's 'Conspiracy of Catiline' and 'War of Jugurtha', with a prefatory epistle translated from Jean Bodin's 'Methodus ad facilem historiarum cognitionem' and a dedication to Sir Thomas Somerset, the son of the earl of Worcester. Perhaps about this same time, an anonymous edition of Heywood's youthful translation of Ovid's 'Ars amatoria' appeared, entitled 'Love's School'. Though Heywood later complained angrily that it had been published without his consent, this translation became extremely popular, going through at least twelve printings in the seventeenth century. 
More ambitious than either of these was 'Troia Britannica' (1609), an original narrative poem of seventeen cantos, dedicated to Heywood's former patron the earl of Worcester. It begins with the Creation and goes through classical mythology and the fall of Troy, ending with a whirlwind history of Britain, from Brute's founding of London (or 'New Troy') to the accession of James I. Heywood drew on various classical and modern sources for this poem, including Chapman's translation of Homer, and also inserted several Ovidian poems and digressions praising music and poetry. 
Soon afterwards Heywood set out to dramatize classical mythology in a series of spectacular, pageant-like plays known as 'The Ages'. 'The Golden Age' (printed 1611) tells the story of Saturn, Titan, and Jupiter; 'The Silver Age' (printed 1612) concerns the further adventures of Jupiter and the early labours of Hercules; 'The Brazen Age' (printed 1613) concerns the later labours of Hercules, and Jason and the golden fleece; and the two-part 'The Iron Age' (printed 1632) tells the story of the Trojan War, strongly influenced by Shakespeare's 'Troilus and Cressida'. Large portions of these plays (especially 'The Golden Age') are dramatizations of 'Troia Britannica', though there is also much new material, which Holaday ('Ages') suggests may be recycled from lost plays for Henslowe. 'The Ages' became quite popular; according to Heywood's preface to 'The Iron Age', they were performed by two companies combined (probably the King's and Queen Anne's) and 'thronged three severall Theaters' ('Iron Age', ed. Weiner, 2). 
Heywood's first and best-known original prose work, 'An Apology for Actors' (written 'c'.1608, printed 1612) is a spirited and learned defence of the theatre against its enemies, filled with classical allusions and anecdotes, but also quite valuable for discussing recent stage history. It was published with a dedication to the earl of Worcester and commendatory verses from fellow playwright John Webster, fellow actors Richard Perkins, Christopher Beeston, and Robert Pallant, and John Taylor the Water-Poet. In a famous epistle to the printer, his friend Nicholas Okes, Heywood complains about William Jaggard's sloppy printing of 'Troia Britannica' and Jaggard's inclusion of two poems from that work in the third edition of Shakespeare's 'The Passionate Pilgrim' (1612), causing Shakespeare to be 'much offended' with Jaggard. 
In 1612 Heywood wrote a commendatory poem for his Cambridge contemporary Henry Peacham's 'Minerva Britanna', followed by a funeral elegy for Prince Henry (1613), dedicated to Worcester and printed together with elegies by Webster and Cyril Tourneur. A few months later he published 'Marriage Triumph' (1613), a poem honouring the marriage of Princess Elizabeth and the elector palatine. In 1614 he edited the play 'Greenes Tu quoque' by John Cooke, praising both the deceased author and the recently deceased star of the play, fellow Queen's Man Thomas Greene. Heywood himself was praised in print by Webster, Thomas Freeman, and Richard Brathwaite between 1612 and 1614, and in 1614 he probably also travelled to Venice and Germany in the entourage of another former Cambridge contemporary, the earl of Southampton, as suggested by Holaday ('Low Countries'). About this time he also began compiling 'The lives of all the poets modern and foreign', which he worked on intermittently for two decades but unfortunately never published. 
After this burst of activity and recognition, however, Heywood drops virtually out of sight for nearly a decade, publishing nothing between 1615 and 1624. This withdrawal from literary life may have resulted from the troubles of his acting company, Queen Anne's Men, which went into a long decline after the death of its leading actor and manager, Thomas Greene, in 1612. Heywood was one of several sharers who received black cloth for Queen Anne's funeral in May 1619, but the company was moribund by then; for the rest of his life Heywood belonged to no single company, though he often wrote for his former fellow actor Christopher Beeston's companies at the Cockpit. By October 1623 Heywood was living in St James's, Clerkenwell, London, where he remained for the rest of his life. His wife was still alive in 1624, when his uncle Edmund's will left a bequest to 'Thomas Heywoode and his wife', but on 18 January 1633, a 'Thomas Hayward & Jane Span' were married in St James's, Clerkenwell (Clark, 102). 
In 1624 Heywood ended his long literary silence with 'Gunaikeion, or, Nine Books of Various History Concerning Women'. This 466-page folio volume celebrates strong women throughout history, from mythological goddesses to earthly leaders such as Queen Elizabeth and Queen Anne, both of whom Heywood praises highly. In the dedication to his former patron the earl of Worcester, Heywood implies that he has had financial difficulties, and in the Latin colophon he claims that the book was conceived, written, and published within seventeen weeks. Some of the book is recycled from Heywood's earlier writing, but it also draws on a wide variety of other sources, documented by Martin and Clark. In the following year, Heywood published a 'Funeral Elegy' for King James, also dedicated to Worcester, and in 1628 he wrote a commendatory poem for Matthew Mainwaring's 'Vienna'. 
Heywood was also writing plays again by this time, but not yet publishing them. On 2 September 1624 Sir Henry Herbert licensed 'a new Play, called 'The Captive, or, The Lost recovered': Written by Hayward' (Merchant, 19) for performance by Lady Elizabeth's Men at the Cockpit. This play, normally known as 'The Captives', survives only in Heywood's autograph manuscript (BL, Egerton MS 1994, fols. 52-73). The main plot, based on Plautus's 'Rudens', involves two Englishwomen imprisoned in a Marseilles brothel who escape from their evil pimp after a shipwreck and eventually marry their rescuers; the darkly farcical sub-plot, paralleled in 'Gunaikeion', depicts the corpse of a murdered abbot being used as a prop in a twisted series of revenge plots. 'The Escapes of Jupiter', an adaptation of scenes from 'The Golden Age' and 'The Silver Age', immediately follows 'The Captives' in BL, Egerton MS 1994 (fols. 74-95), and is also in Heywood's handwriting. Heywood has often been credited with yet another play preserved in the same manuscript, but in a different hand: 'Dick of Devonshire', an adventure play with a romantic sub-plot, based on the Spanish adventures of Richard Pike of Tavistock in 1625-6. 

'The English Traveller' exhibits close similarities to 'The Captives', and must have been written about the same time, though it was not published for nearly a decade. Like 'The Captives' it has one plot drawn from Plautus (here 'Mostelleria'), and another retold in 'Gunaikeion'. The main plot is superficially parallel to that of 'A Woman Killed with Kindness', except that the prodigal woman is married to one man (Wincott) while being courted by another (Geraldine); she thus betrays both men, and is generally a much less sympathetic figure. In the complementary sub-plot a prodigal son destroys his absent father's house through debauchery, but is ultimately forgiven when the father returns from his travels. 
After virtually abandoning print for fifteen years, in 1631 Heywood began preparing several of his unpublished early plays for the press, adding a fascinating and sometimes conflicting running commentary on the publication process itself. In part one of the two-part 'The Fair Maid of the West' (printed 1631), Heywood notes that his plays have been published not in 'a large volume; but singly (as thou seest) with great modesty, and small noise' (Turner, 4). Yet in the following year, in the two-part 'The Iron Age' (printed 1632), Heywood announced his intention to publish all five 'Ages' plays in an elaborate annotated volume, an intention which he never realized. In 1633 he published 'The English Traveller' with a famous preface in which he claims to have had 'either an entire hand or at the least a main finger' in 220 plays, saying that this one had only come 'accidentally to the press' and that 'it never was any great ambition in me to be in this way voluminously read' (Merchant, 108). Heywood also edited a reissue of Sir Richard Barckley's 33-year-old 'Discourse of the Felicity of Man' (1631), and the first edition of Marlowe's 'Jew of Malta' (1633), adding prologues and epilogues for the play's recent revivals at court and at the Cockpit. 
Also in 1631 Heywood wrote and published the first of his lord mayors' pageants, 'Londons jus honorarium', for the Haberdashers' Company. By the end of the decade he had written and published six more lord mayors' pageants, all steeped in classical lore as well as religious imagery: 'Londini artium & scientarium scaturigo' (1632, for the Haberdashers'); 'Londini emporia' (1633, Clothworkers'); 'Londini sinus salutis' (1635, Ironmongers'); 'Londini speculum' (1637, Haberdashers'); 'Porta pietatis' (1638, Drapers'); and 'Londini status pacatus' (1639, Drapers'). Heywood had been a booster of apprentices and tradesmen since his earliest plays, and his commentary in the printed editions shows him to have been on good terms with the guilds which sponsored the pageants. 
Religious imagery and themes had always informed Heywood's work, but they became especially prominent in the 1630s -- not only in his pageants, but in his second long narrative poem, 'The Hierarchy of the Blessed Angels', published in 1635 in a 630-page folio dedicated to Queen Henrietta Maria. This learned poem's nine books are each named after an angel or archangel; it begins by arguing for the existence of God, describes the elaborate Christian hierarchy of angels and spirits, and recounts the temptations offered by evil spirits. Among the many digressions is a famous one in which Heywood warmly recalls famous English poets, including Shakespeare, Jonson, and Marlowe. At roughly the same time that he was writing about evil spirits for 'The Hierarchy', Heywood collaborated with Richard Brome on the journalistic play 'The Late Lancashire Witches' (1634), written for the King's Men and published quickly to capitalize on a recent witchcraft scare in Lancashire. The same authors also apparently collaborated on the lost plays 'Sir Thomas Skink' and 'The Apprentice's Prize'. 
The religious convictions displayed in 'The Hierarchy' were both sincere and orthodox; Clark's argument that Heywood became a puritan late in life has been decisively refuted by Holaday ('Puritans'). Heywood waged a public battle in the 1630s against William Prynne, the puritan author of the anti-theatrical diatribe 'Histriomastix' (1633), who had attacked Heywood and his 'Apology for Actors' by name. Heywood had promised a reply to Prynne in the 'English Traveller' preface (1633); in the preface to 'A Maidenhead Well Lost' (printed 1634), he further denounces 'that most horrible 'Histriomastix'', and in 'A Challenge for Beauty' (printed 1636) he alludes to Prynne's 1634 imprisonment and punishment. Heywood never did reply at length to 'Histriomastix', though Clark argues that he satirized Prynne in his play 'Love's Mistress, or, The Queen's Masque' (performed 1634, printed 1636). 
The three plays just mentioned exhibit many similarities to Heywood's earlier work, but they abandon his usual middle-class protagonists in favour of royalty and courtly spectacle. 'A Maidenhead Well Lost' is a dark comedy featuring Heywood's typical sexual misunderstandings and concern with honour, but its Italian court setting and loose morality mark it as distinctly Caroline. 'A Challenge for Beauty' involves a hero (Lord Bonavida) who is banished overseas and falls in love with a strong woman (Hellena), much as in Heywood's early adventure plays. But the characters are all Spanish courtiers, and Baines considers the play a parody of the Fletcherian tragicomedies so popular in the Caroline era. The openly allegorical 'Love's Mistress', based on Apuleius's 'The Golden Ass', recalls Heywood's 'Ages' plays but adopts the conventions of the Caroline court masque. It was quite successful, being presented before the king and queen three times in eight days with scenery designed by Inigo Jones, and was revived after the Restoration. 
Following the publication of these new plays Heywood undertook to preserve more of his earlier works for posterity. In 1637 he issued 'Pleasant Dialogues and Dramas', a miscellaneous collection of mostly occasional verse dedicated to Henry Carey, earl of Dover. This volume includes translations of fifteen of Lucian's dialogues, fragments of two plays and a masque performed for Carey, prologues written for court performances of Heywood's plays, and various elegies, epitaphs, and acrostics. Heywood next published his early plays 'The Royal King and the Loyal Subject' (1637) and 'The Wise Woman of Hogsdon' (1638), and revised versions of 'The Rape of Lucrece' (1638) and 'If you Know not me, you Know Nobody' (1639) with prefaces complaining about the low quality of the earlier editions. He also wrote prefaces for several old plays published by his friend John Okes, including Henry Shirley's 'The Martyred Soldier' (1639). 
In addition to all this, Heywood published an astonishing quantity of new material in these last years, albeit nothing of any literary merit. He wrote commendatory verses for Mary Fage's 'Fames Roule' (1637); Thomas Jordan's 'Poetical Varieties' (1637); Shakerley Marmion's 'Cupid and Psyche' (1637); Randulph Mayeres's 'Mayeres his Travels' (1638); Humphrey Mill's 'A Night's Search' (1640); and James Yorke's 'The Union of Honour' (1640). He also wrote more than a dozen prose works, many largely recycled from his earlier writings. These include, among others, fantastic broadsides ('The Three Wonders of the Age', 1636); defences of women ('Curtain Lecture', 1637); religious pamphlets ('The Black Box of Rome Opened', 1641); and the royally commissioned 'True Description of his Majesty's Royal Ship' (1637). His last substantial work was 'Nine the most Worthy Women of the World' (1640), published in a handsome quarto with admiring verses from friends. Heywood was buried on 16 August 1641 at St James's, Clerkenwell, bringing to a close one of the most prolific and varied careers in the history of English letters. 
Heywood's reputation gradually faded in the decades after his death. Because his works were not published in folio like those of Shakespeare, Jonson, and Fletcher, and because several of his most popular works were published anonymously, his canon remained dispersed and uncertain; even at the end of the twentieth century Pearson's outdated 1874 edition remained the closest thing to a collection of his works. Despite Lamb's famous characterization of Heywood as 'a sort of prose Shakespeare' (C. Lamb, 'Heywood', 99), critics in the nineteenth and early twentieth century tended to be lukewarm in their praise, if they gave it at all. However, the flowering of feminist and new historicist criticism in the late twentieth century brought a new appreciation of Heywood for his vigorous defence of women and his interest in the lives of ordinary people. Revivals of his plays, including Stratford productions of 'The Fair Maid of the West' (1986) and 'A Woman Killed with Kindness' (1991), demonstrated the skill of his theatrical instincts. Though Heywood is unlikely to ever match the popularity of Shakespeare or Jonson, his works provide an invaluable glimpse into the literary world in which he worked, and his insights into human nature can still be affecting after 400 years. 


@@@@@


doc= 13191


Heywood, Thomas (1797-1866), antiquary, third son of Nathaniel Heywood (died 1815), banker, and his wife, Ann Percival (died 1847), younger brother of Sir Benjamin Heywood, and elder brother of James Heywood, was born at Manchester on 3 September 1797. He was educated at Manchester grammar school, which he entered on 2 August 1811. In 1818 he became a partner in his father's bank, but retired in 1828 as a result of the changed circumstances following his elder brother's assumption of control. He purchased Hope End, Ledbury, Herefordshire, where he lived until his death. Heywood married, on 2 October 1823, Mary Elizabeth (died 1870), daughter of John Barton of Swinton, Lancashire; they had one son and two daughters, the youngest of whom was Mary Elizabeth Sumner, founder of the Mothers' Union. 
Before leaving Manchester Heywood had collected a remarkable library of local books, which was dispersed in 1835: his collection of tracts and pamphlets is now in Chetham's Library, Manchester. He served the office of boroughreeve of Salford in 1826, and that of high sheriff of Herefordshire in 1840. He was an early member of the council of the Chetham Society, to which his financial knowledge was a valuable asset, and edited several of its publications. Three of these -- 'The Norris Papers' (1846), 'The Moore Rental' (1847), and 'The Diary of the Rev. Henry Newcome' (1849) -- still have some value. He was also the author of a small number of antiquarian articles in journals. 
Heywood died at Hope End on 20 November 1866 and was buried at Wellington Heath, Herefordshire. His general library was sold in Manchester in 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 13192


Hibbart, William (bap. 1725, d. 1808), printmaker, the son of James Hibbart, was born in Bath and baptized there on 29 November 1725. He practised in the city for over fifty years, etching and engraving book illustrations, maps, plans, and bookplates. He was apprenticed to the Bath engraver Jacob Skinner in 1738, but was greatly influenced by the presence of Thomas Worlidge in the city between 1744 and 1766; his small etched portraits imitate Worlidge's drypoint technique. The majority of these portraits appear as frontispieces, typical examples being his two portraits of Richard Nash ('Beau Nash') for the 1762 and 1763 editions of the 'New Bath Guide'. An etching, 'The Knights of the Baythe, or, The One Headed Corporation', satirizing Ralph Allen's role within the Bath council, dated 1763 and fancifully signed William O'Gaarth, is attributed to Hibbart. A handsome brass commemorative plaque signed by him and dated 1764 is still affixed to the wall of the Pump Room in Bath, next to the Tompion clock. His maps are generally confidently executed, especially his etching of Thomas Thorpe's 'A Map of 5 Miles Round the City of Bath' of 1773. Not all of Hibbart's work was so successful: the amateur artist Coplestone Warre Bampfylde greatly disliked Hibbart's etchings after his illustrations for the poet Christopher Anstey's 'An Election Ball' and was not placated by Anstey's assurance that 'Mr Hoare [the Bath portrait painter William Hoare] has taken a great deal of pains and has corrected many parts of them...' (Som., ARS, DD/GC 103). 
Hibbart married Elizabeth Hibbart (1724-1797), who was probably a cousin, in 1748. A trade card designed by Bartolozzi for 'Hibbert, Engraver' of 8 Bridge Street, Bath, and engraved by J. Hibbert must have been for his son John (1768-1848), who invariably spelled his name Hibbert rather than Hibbart and took over his father's business; a copy of the card is now in the Banks collection in the British Museum. Another son, Charles (1765-1819), also a printmaker, travelled to Rome with the painter Thomas Barker in 1790; he was later convicted of forging banknotes and was hanged at Ilchester in 1819. Hibbart died on 13 July 1808 in Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 13193


Hibberd, (James) Shirley (1825-1890), journalist and writer on horticulture, was born in the parish of St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, the son of a retired sea captain who had served under Nelson. He attended the Old Meeting House School, Stepney but, following the early death of his father (who had connections with the printing trade), he gave up his intention to have a career in medicine, and was apprenticed to a Stepney bookseller, though he retained his scientific interests and gave lectures on chemistry. He was also a speaker and writer advocating temperance and vegetarianism. In 1850, after several years of bookselling, he married Sarah Elizabeth Voyer (1823/4-1880), an author and compiler, the daughter of a bookseller and gold engraver. They moved to Pentonville, and turned to horticultural journalism, in which he soon became a leader of middle-class fashionable taste. His earliest essays were on brambles, quickly followed by a practical gardening book, 'The Town Garden: a Manual for the Management of City and Suburban Gardens' (1855). Sensing a market among the advice books and gardening manuals of the era, Hibberd followed up with the very successful 'Rustic Adornments' (1856) and 'Garden Favourites' (1858). In 1858 he became the first editor of the newly established magazine 'Floral World', which he managed until 1875 with considerable success. From then onwards he turned his energies towards writing popular gardening manuals, making horticultural experiments, and creating a succession of specialist gardens in various parts of north London. In Stoke Newington he created one garden for fruit, another for vegetables, another for roses, and so on. Eventually lack of space encouraged him to move to 74 The Hermitage, a private road in Muswell Hill. By the time of his death this too was filled with his gardens. 
Hibberd reported the results of his experiments in a series of fluent and engagingly personal books which contributed greatly to the new, highly decorative, ornamental fashion in gardens. He wrote with the experience of trial and error. His 'Profitable Gardening' (1863), 'Rose Book' (1864), and 'Fern Garden' (1869) were particularly successful. Among other things, Hibberd grew shrubs and trees in pots, built up a collection of specimen hollies and ivies, gave a number of popular lectures, and wrote on greenhouse design, interior flower arrangements, water gardens, seats, arbours, Wardian cases, and ferneries. As a social historian of internal and exterior furnishings his work is almost unchallenged. From 1861 he was also connected with the 'Gardener's Magazine', becoming editor towards the end of his life. He was an active member of the Royal Horticultural Society, often exhibiting specimen plants from his own collection and judging others, and also wrote on seaweeds and aquarium plants. In the 1880s, his fame as a practical plantsman was sufficient for him to be consulted by the government about potatoes and the potato blight. 
Hibberd wrote 'An Epitome of the War' (1856), an account of the Crimean War, before concentrating on botanical writing. His wife suffered long periods of ill health, and there were no children of the marriage. Following her death, he married in 1884 his cook, Ellen Mantle (1855/6-1885), who was over thirty years his junior, but she died within days of the birth of their daughter. Hibberd died at 1 Priory Road, Kew, on 16 November 1890 and was buried six days later in Abney Park cemetery at Stoke Newington. The 'Gardeners' Chronicle' printed an obituary with a portrait, regretting that he was 'a victim to his own zeal' ('Gardeners' Chronicle', 22 Nov 1890, 596). 


@@@@@


doc= 13194


Hibbert, George (1757-1837), merchant, was born on 13 January 1757 in Manchester, the fifth son of Robert Hibbert, merchant, of Manchester, and his wife, Abigail, daughter of William Scholey of Leeds. His grandfather and father were prominent merchants in Manchester, and his uncle Thomas Hibbert was one of the leading planters and merchants in Jamaica. He was educated in Liverpool and at the Revd Booth's school in Woolton, Lancashire. With $1500 from his father on coming of age, he moved to London in 1780 and became a junior partner in the West Indies house of Hibbert, Purrier, and Horton, at 9 Mincing Lane, which was headed by his elder brothers Thomas and Robert. On inheriting $1000 at the death of his father, he married Elizabeth Margaret Fonnereau, daughter of Philip Fonnereau, on 30 August 1784. Together they raised five sons and nine daughters. During the 1780s and 1790s Hibbert pursued the work of his firm, by 1800 known as Hibberts, Fuhr, and Purrier and highly regarded in the Jamaica trade. In the 1790s he assumed direction of the firm. At the same time he and two brothers formed a separate partnership, which operated from the same address, but appears to have been more involved in finance. The former firm was concluded in 1815, but the latter survived his death. 
At the age of forty Hibbert entered public service. He was elected an alderman of London in 1798 and served until 1803; most notably, he sided with the government by successfully backing a resolution in favour of a tax on property in 1798. The following year, he began his lifelong tenure as a director of the West India Dock Company. Several times chairman, he became the leading proponent, alongside Robert Milligan, of completing the new dock scheme. He manoeuvred for a seat in parliament in 1802, but to no avail; he was luckier in 1806, when he was selected without opposition for Seaford, Sussex. In the Commons, he took strong stands as a member of the opposition. He was most noted for his opposition to the abolition of the slave trade, which was memorialized in 'The Substance of Three Speeches on the Abolition of the Slave Trade' (1807). By 1810 he had accepted the demise of the trade, and was calling for measures to end it in a more effective manner. In 1806, and again from 1807 to his retirement in 1812, he was parliament's principal West Indies supporter: he backed the continuation of the tax exemption on dividends for foreigners in 1808; he backed a ban on grain distillation in 1809; and he supported the provision of free labour from the East Indies to the West Indies in 1811. After his retirement from parliament in 1812, Hibbert acted as the agent for Jamaica until 1830, and headed the West India Committee as its chairman. In both capacities, he ardently argued the case of Caribbean planters and merchants. 
Hibbert was also a renowned collector of paintings, sculpture, and books, and at his house in Clapham he brought together a unique collection of botanical exotica. In 1805 he helped to found the London Institution. In 1811 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and, the following year, a fellow of the Society of Arts. In 1819, as a member of the Roxburgh Club, he edited Caxton's translation of Ovid, 'Six Books of Metamorphoses'. Later he edited the anonymous 'Narrative of a Journey from Santiago de Chile to Buenos Ayres' (1824), and supported the publication of 'Correspondence between George Hibbert, esq., and the Rev. T. Cooper, relative to the condition of the negro slaves in Jamaica' (1824). When his wife's uncle Rogers Parker died in 1828, he succeeded to Parker's Munden estate near Watford, to which he removed after auctioning off most of his art and library. He died there on 8 October 1837 and was buried at Aldenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 13195


Hibbert, Henry (d. 1678), clergyman, was born at Marple in Cheshire, the son of William Hibbert, gentleman, and his second wife, Alice, daughter of Geoffrey Mottershead of Mottram, Cheshire. He matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford, on 21 January 1620 and graduated BA in 1622. He was instituted in 1625 to the vicarage of Preston in Holderness, Yorkshire, where he remained undisturbed until the outbreak of civil war when he fled from the parliamentarian forces, who removed him from his living. He served briefly as a chaplain in the royalist army and in 1643 he petitioned the crown for the living of Hotham, which had been abandoned by the incumbent. By 1647 he had made his peace with parliament and was back in Cheshire as vicar of Mottram, where his mother's family resided, but by 1651 he had returned to Yorkshire as minister at Settrington in the East Riding. He was appointed vicar at Holy Trinity, Kingston upon Hull, in 1652, when he seems to have held presbyterian views, although his fellow minister John Shaw did not make him welcome. For the next few years the ministers and congregations at Hull were divided between the presbyterians and the Independent followers of John Canne, chaplain to the garrison there, so that the chancel and nave of Holy Trinity were partitioned by a brick wall to provide separate spaces for worship for each group. While at Hull Hibbert published 'Waters of Marah' (1654), based on two funeral sermons for the children of William Lyne, who had died the previous year. 
At the Restoration Hibbert was removed from Hull, possibly as a result of his unwillingness to conform, but his views soon adapted to the new regime. On Restoration day 1661 he preached a loyal sermon at St Paul's Cathedral before the lord mayor, which was published as 'Regina dierum, or, The Joyful Day'. He was made a chaplain to James, duke of York, to whom his theological treatise, 'Syntagma theologicum' (1662), was dedicated, and honours soon followed. He was made a BD at Cambridge in 1664, as a member of St John's College, and a DD of Oxford the following year. In 1662 he had been instituted to the rectory of All Hallows-the-Less in London, and on 22 September that year was added the vicarage of St Olave Jewry. He was collated to the prebendal stall of Chamberlainwood in St Paul's on 12 January 1669, which he held along with his parochial livings until his death in September 1678. He was buried in St Olave's Church on 24 September. Hibbert had married Mary, daughter of William Kirkman of Toadhole in Derbyshire, with whom he had two sons who died young and seven daughters, four of whom survived him, as did his wife, who died on 1 November 1705. Hibbert's career provides an example of one who negotiated the religious troubles of mid-century effortlessly, and he died a prosperous cleric. 


@@@@@


doc= 13196


Hibbert, Robert (1769-1849), philanthropist, was born on 25 October 1769 in Jamaica, the third and posthumous son of John Hibbert (1732-1769), a Jamaica merchant, and his wife, Janet (died 1778), daughter of Samuel Gordon. Following his mother's death he returned to England and was enrolled at Eton College in 1779. For a period in the 1780s he was a pupil, at Nottingham, of Gilbert Wakefield, who greatly influenced him. When Wakefield was imprisoned in 1801 for political pamphleteering, Hibbert sent him $1000. 
Hibbert entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1787, where he formed a lifelong friendship with William Frend and graduated in 1791. He went to Kingston, Jamaica, the same year as partner in a family business. There he married, on 12 September 1792, Elizabeth Jane (1776-1853), daughter of John Nembhard MD. There were no children of the marriage. Hibbert and his wife returned to England in 1803, and in 1806 he bought the estate of East Hyde, near Luton, Bedfordshire. In 1819 he founded a charity at Luton to provide almshouses for twenty-four widows. 
In Jamaica Hibbert owned slaves and was unconvinced by the arguments of Frend that this was immoral. In 1817 he sent out a Unitarian minister, Thomas Cooper, as a missionary to his slaves; he stayed in Jamaica until 1821 in the attempt to improve their moral and religious condition. Controversy attended the publication of Cooper's report describing his failure. Hibbert sold his Jamaica holdings at a loss in 1836, having previously disposed of his Bedfordshire estate in 1833 and moved to London. He died at his home, 13 Welbeck Street, London, on 23 September 1849, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Hibbert's importance centres on the deed he executed in 1847, to come into effect after his death and that of his wife. A trust was to be set up to apply the income from capital 'in such manner as the trustees deem most conducive to the spread of Christianity in its most simple and intelligible form, and to the unfettered exercise of the right of private judgment in matters of religion'. He saw this formula as synonymous with Unitarianism, and the trust was originally called the Antitrinitarian Fund, the object of which was to provide divinity scholarships to encourage learning and culture among heterodox ministers. 
However, his legal adviser, Edwin Wilkins Field, widened the founder's purpose, and in the early decades of the trust's history, after its formation in 1853, was mainly instrumental in expanding its scope. Throughout its history the trust has consistently supported pioneering ventures. An annual Hibbert lecture was commenced in 1878, given by a leading thinker of the day and subsequently published. These became an established institution, and, while they were discontinued for periods in the twentieth century, were reintroduced on BBC radio in the 1980s. 
The 'Hibbert Journal' was first published in 1902 under the editorship of Revd L. P. Jacks, who remained in the post until 1947. Unique at its inception, it was for half a century one of the main theological and philosophical journals published in the United Kingdom; the 1909 issue, entitled 'Jesus or Christ?', is considered a key document in twentieth-century theological scholarship. The journal ceased publication in 1968. 
The trust has consistently given grants towards learned publications, and supported scholars and fellows at universities both in the UK and abroad. Since the 1850s the trust has given regular support to Manchester College, located first in London and then at Oxford, and its students. During the Second World War it set up Hibbert Houses at several places in the Middle East to provide for the welfare and support of military personnel, an activity which continued into the 1960s within Great Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 13197


Ware, Samuel Hibbert- (1782-1848), antiquary and geologist, eldest son of Samuel Hibbert, linen yarn merchant, of Manchester, and Sarah, daughter of Robert Ware of Dublin, was born in St Ann's Square, Manchester, on 21 April 1782. He was educated at a private school ('c'.1792) and at the Manchester Academy ('c'.1795) under Dr Thomas Barnes. He had little taste for his father's business, and turned to literary pursuits, writing prologues for the Manchester theatres, election squibs for his friend Colonel Hanson, a pamphlet on commercial credit, and some doggerel verse. On 23 July 1803 he married Sarah, daughter of Thomas Crompton of Bridge Hall, Bury, Lancashire; they had three children before she died in 1822. 
From 1809 to 1813 Hibbert held a lieutenant's commission in the 1st Royal Lancashire militia. After his father's death in 1815 he went to Edinburgh, and took the degree of MD in 1817 at the university with a dissertation entitled 'De vita humana', but he never practised. He lived in Edinburgh many years, and enjoyed the friendship there of Sir Walter Scott, Sir David Brewster, and others, as well as taking part in the work of the learned societies there. He had in 1805 been elected a member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, and contributed papers to its meetings. 
In 1817 Hibbert visited Shetland, where he discovered 'chromate of iron' and undertook a geological survey of the country. For this discovery the Society of Arts awarded him in 1820 the Iris gold medal. In Shetland he also discovered what he described as 'native hydrate of magnesia'. In 1822 he published his 'Description of the Shetland Islands', in which he described the local geology and antiquities. 
Hibbert contributed various papers to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, of which he was secretary from 1823 to 1827, with responsibility for obtaining contributions for meetings and preparing them for publication. He remained an active member of the society, editing volumes and helping run the museum, under what were sometimes difficult conditions. A paper on 'Spectral illusions', read by Hibbert before the Royal Society of Edinburgh, led to his 'Sketches of the philosophy of apparitions, or, An attempt to trace such illusions to their physical causes' (1824), which ran to a second edition (1825). This provoked an anonymous reply in 'Past Feelings Renovated' (1828), which aimed to 'counteract... any sentiments approaching materialism' aroused by Hibbert's essay. In 1824, at the request of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, Hibbert delivered at Manchester a course of lectures on geology, and in 1827 a further course for the Manchester Royal Institution. 
On 8 January 1825 Hibbert married Charlotte Wilhelmina (died 1835), widow of William Scott, receiver of customs in the Isle of Man, and daughter of Lord Henry Murray. They had three children. She accompanied him on many of his tours of Scotland and the continent, and executed drawings for his papers. He and his family also spent two or three years abroad, chiefly visiting the volcanic districts of France, Italy, and northern Germany, and he published a 'History of the Extinct Volcanoes of the Basin of Neuwied on the Lower Rhine' (1832) on his return to Edinburgh. 
In 1833-4 Hibbert published his chief antiquarian work, 'The History of the Foundations in Manchester' (3 vols., vol. 3 being in two parts). He described Christ's Hospital, Chetham's Hospital, and the free grammar school, using in part material compiled by the Revd J. Creswell. The architect John Palmer and the biographer William Robert Whatton also contributed to the work. 
Hibbert left Edinburgh in 1835, and, after living for a time at York, settled on a small paternal estate at Hale Barns, near Altrincham, Cheshire. In 1837 he assumed by royal licence the surname and arms of Ware, as representative of Sir James Ware, the historian of Ireland. In 1842 he married his third wife, Elizabeth Lefroy, daughter of Captain Anthony Lefroy. He was a member of the first council of the Chetham Society, and edited one of its early volumes, 'Lancashire Memorials of the Rebellion in 1715' (1845). His last work was 'The Ancient Parish Church of Manchester and why it was Collegiated' (1848), the manuscript of the final part of which was lost after his death. This work is often referred to as the final volume of his earlier 'History'. 
Hibbert-Ware died at Hale Barns on 30 December 1848 of bronchitis, from which he had suffered for several years. He was buried at Ardwick cemetery, Manchester. Hibbert-Ware's eldest son, Titus Herbert (1810-1890), was called to the bar in 1844, and published 'Precedents of Conveyances' (1846). His second son, Dr William Hibbert, an army surgeon, died in Afghanistan in 1839. 


@@@@@


doc= 13198


Hibbs, Richard (1812?-1886), writer on poverty, came from Hampshire, and studied at St John's College, Cambridge (of which he was scholar), matriculating in 1837 and proceeding BA in 1841 and MA in 1844. He took orders in 1842 and was curate of Bishop Hatfield, Hertfordshire (1841-3), and of Corton, near Lowestoft (1843-8); teacher and preacher at Lowestoft (1848-52); curate of St Paul's, Covent Garden (1852); and assistant minister of St John's Chapel, Edinburgh (1852-4). His connection with this last terminated somewhat suddenly. A bitter controversy with the incumbent led him to establish the New Church of England Chapel, St Vincent Street, where he ministered for some years and of which he published an account (1858). He was subsequently British chaplain at Lisbon, Rotterdam, and Utrecht. Hibbs's chief work, founded on personal investigation, is 'Prussia and the poor, or, Observations upon the systematised relief of the poor at Elberfeld in contrast with that of England' (1876; 4th edn, 1883). Besides separate sermons, he also published works on Scottish church controversies and baptism, and 'God's Plea for the Poor' (1851). He died at his home, 13 St Lawrence Road, North Kensington, London, on 26 March 1886, his wife, Fanny, surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13199


Thomas de Hibernia (d. c.1270), a Franciscan friar also from Ireland, has often been confused with Hibernicus. He spent the greater part of his career in Italy where he studied under Peter de Hibernia. He was the author of the 'Promptuarium morale', a text on pastoral theology, but he was apparently reluctant to enter the priesthood himself -- so much so that he is said to have cut off his own left thumb to make himself ineligible. He died 'c'.1270 and was buried in the convent at Acquila. Thomas Hibernicus has also been wrongly identified with another Franciscan, Thomas Palmer, or Palmerstown, from Palmerstown, Kildare, who was active in England in the later fourteenth century. He was a member of the Winchester convent in 1371, prior provincial of the order in England from 1393 to 1396, and prior of the London convent from 1397 to 1407. He probably died in 1415. 


@@@@@


doc= 13200


Hickeringill, Edmund (bap. 1631, d. 1708), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born in Aberford (near Leeds) where he was baptized on 19 September 1631. His father, Edmund Hickhorngill, the subject of a public proclamation in 1638 for absenting himself from church, was a recusant and the favoured servant of the papist Sir John Gascoigne. After attending Pocklington School, Yorkshire, on 17 June 1647 Hickeringill was admitted as pensioner to St John's College, Cambridge, where some of the principles he would later display were, perhaps, instilled by his tutor Zachary Cawdrey. After the Restoration Cawdrey, although a conforming and beneficed Anglican minister, was nevertheless considered 'guilty of sinfull popularity and coaxing the Dissenters Party' in Chester, and produced a discourse on conformity to the established church, 'on principles granted by the Non-Conformists' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 34, fols. 26-7). Hickeringill graduated BA in 1651 and on Lady day was intruded as junior fellow into Gonville and Caius College by the parliamentary committee for regulating the universities -- probably at the instigation of his tutor. Despite a mission to London by the master, William Dell, 'to reverse if possible the Orders' (C. Brooke, 'History of Caius College', 1985, 133), Hickeringill proceeded MA in midsummer 1652. On 24 August, having undertaken adult baptism, he was admitted to the communion of Thomas Tillam's newly founded Baptist congregation at Hexham in Northumberland, and on 20 December the church 'ordained brother Hickhorngill a minister, and their messenger in Scotland' (Underhill, 251). He arrived at Dalkeith on 30 December whence, having been handed over by General Monck to be chaplain in Robert Lilburne's regiment of horse, on 8 January 1653 he began a series of letters to the Hexham congregation relating his progress. 
Hickeringill soon perceived that to elements within the rank and file his position as chaplain was a 'chief stumbling-block' from the way of God, and desired of Lilburne some other employment 'whereby I might live without making the gospel burdensome' (Underhill, 308). In March 1653 he joined a Baptist congregation at Leith, but by May his religious opinions were in turmoil: he became a Quaker and went missing. He returned to Dalkeith on 12 July 'in a swaggering garb', declaring that his devotion was worn threadbare, and that he had 'left his religion in England' (Underhill, 330). The Hexham congregation excommunicated their 'alas! deluded' messenger, but it was reported that Hickeringill -- a 'desperate atheist' -- cared 'not a fig' for this sentence (ibid., 328, 330, 331). 'Full of joy in his God', he propounded 'no other rule to himself but his reason' (ibid., 331). Despite resuming his chaplaincy, he nevertheless omitted from his duties any sacerdotal functions, so that he 'would neither pray nor preach, otherwise than by common discourse', and was granted instead a military commission as lieutenant to Captain Gascoigne in Colonel Daniell's regiment (Underhill, 331). Although his links with the Baptists were apparently severed, his religious mission did not end here. In Gelsland, Hickeringill was one of a number of 'Military Independent Officers', men of 'more Witt and Ingenuity then solidity and serious Religion', who 'in their Buff-Coats and Armour' preached in vacant cures around Carlisle. A hostile account of their ministry, noting their capacity for sowing schism, commented that they 'talked to the people what they saw fitt' (Nightingale, 1.376). 
By his own account Hickeringill remained four years in Scotland, where he was 'governor and deputy governor' of Finlarig and Meikleour castles, Perthshire, and was 'one of the first and last justices of the peace that ever were in Scotland' (Hickeringill, 'Works', 3.29). Entering next into foreign service, he accepted a commission as captain under Major-General Fleetwood, then ambassador to Sweden. He departed Hull for Hamburg with a company of 125 mercenaries, was made governor of Buckstaho, a Swedish garrison in Bremen, and was present at the siege of Elsinor. He sailed to Spain and Portugal, was active throughout the West Indies, and made a stay in Jamaica ('Letters to Thoresby', 2.10-12). Prompted to return to England at the Restoration, Hickeringill curried favour by drafting and publishing in 1661 an account of Jamaica dedicated to Charles II. In reward Charles made him secretary of state for Jamaica under Baron Windsor 'then going governour', a post worth $1000 a year. Awaiting departure for the Caribbean, however, Hickeringill performed an enigmatic volte-face: why he 'left the Secretaries place (so very profitable and honourable) to be a Divine, I do not know', puzzled his editor (E. Hickeringill, 'Jamaica Viewed', 1705, preface). He was 'persuaded into orders' by Robert Sanderson, bishop of Lincoln, nicknamed (Hickeringill claimed) the 'presbyterian bishop' (Hickeringill, 'Works', 2.379). Sanderson and Gilbert Sheldon, the bishop of London, apparently considered him particularly suited, in the wake of the St Bartholomew's day ejections, to minister to the burgeoning nonconformity in Colchester, Essex ('Letters to Thoresby', 2.15). Following brief preferment as vicar of St Peter's there, Hickeringill was instituted on 21 October 1662 to the neighbouring rectory of All Saints, which he would hold until his death, and on 22 October to the vicarage of Boxted, 10 miles to the north. He settled in nearby Wickes and married; his wife's name was Mary, and they had four daughters and two sons, Thomas and Matthias. 
Following his ordination Hickeringill swiftly signalled his loyalty to the royal supremacy but also his dissidence from episcopal authority. In a sermon on 30 January 1662 he likened the royal martyr to the biblical figure of Naboth, an innocent vintner stoned to death for blasphemy. Yet at the same time in Boxted he began a habit of adapting Church of England ceremonial to his own standards. In 1664 he was prosecuted in the court of arches by a number of the village's dissenting (probably Quaker) parishioners for omitting to recite the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' before his congregation in the words and manner stipulated by the 'Act of Uniformity'. Reciting the articles before his congregation, Hickeringill had interjected into the ceremony a list of heterodox beliefs which contradicted the established articles, so as to underscore the divisiveness of the church's liturgy. The irony of nonconformist parishioners' stipulating precise adherence to the Anglican rubric is a symptom of Hickeringill's equivocal relationship with the orthodox communion. In pursuing a local policy of comprehension, which undermined the national religious settlement, he won over moderate nonconformists but alienated more uncompromising dissidents. By 1663 his dispensation to hold the Boxted living was withdrawn, and his relations with his dissenting parishioners had descended into a series of violent skirmishes. Abandoning Boxted in 1664, he received a new presentation to All Saints under the great seal of England. His turbulent reputation did not diminish: in 1668 he was ejected from his house near Wickes in Essex, where he was perpetual curate, by a clamorous uprising of more than forty people from three villages, and the same year the Colchester borough assembly advised the bishop of London that he was 'not a man of peaceable and quiet temper', and thus not suitable for presentation to an additional living (Essex RO D/b5, Gb5, fol. 10). In 1673 he appeared as pamphleteer with an attack against Andrew Marvell's 'Rehearsal Transpros'd' and the philosophy behind religious separatism. 'For all our worship of God; prayers, praises, and preachings, observing Lords Days and Sacraments', asked Hickeringill, 'Is He the better for them?' (E. Hickeringill, 'Gregory, Father Greybeard', 1673, 67). Dissenters placed empty doctrine before the king's laws; instead, he proposed that adherence to a minimalist creed could make all fanatics good conformists. He dramatized this theme on 9 May 1680 when, in a caustic sermon before the lord mayor, Sir Robert Clayton, in the Guildhall chapel, London, he hurled the curse of Meroz on all who, like his bishop, Henry Compton, slighted the law by allowing latitude to dissenters. This sharp reproach, which Hickeringill acknowledged was contrary to his 'natural tenderness and inclination' towards nonconformists, displayed instead his antipathy towards the meddling of bishops in civil affairs; a symptom of which, he claimed, was that English clergymen treated as a piece of apocrypha the best example of loyalty in the 'Bible'. For Hickeringill, concerned with the political status of doctrines and beliefs, all rebellion came cloaked in religious dress. He challenged both bishops and nonconformists, who concurred that domination was founded in grace. 
This enmity with his diocesan was to shape Hickeringill's subsequent career: through litigation or print he was in almost constant dispute with the forces of ecclesiastical authority. Compton set aside the tithes of St Botolph's, Colchester, which had (since 1544) been enjoyed by the rectors of All Saints, in favour of a more compliant clergyman. Ignoring the edict, Hickeringill established himself in open competition with his local rival for church business: he poached tithes, proposed to 'rout' a neighbouring cleric from his livings for a $20 fee, offered to marry at reduced rates and without banns or licence, and intercepted funeral processions in order to read the service. He posed as a barrister, teaching his neighbours how to avoid the exactions of the spiritual courts, and between 1680 and 1683 unleashed a virulent print attack on episcopacy and the legality of church courts. Compton pursued him with a stream of litigation: on 3 March 1681 Hickeringill was tried, before Judge Baron Weston at Chelmsford assizes, on an indictment of twenty-four charges of barratry. He mounted his own defence, and in a display of legal acumen trounced the prosecution's rising star, Sir George Jeffreys. The case was dismissed, although the tory press reported his conviction for perjury. Compton next had him cited to the court of arches to answer charges relating to his deviant ministerial conduct around Colchester, but when he appeared before Sir Robert Wiseman on 8 June 1681, he adopted the sectarian gesture of refusing to remove his hat, and would speak only in Greek, the language (he claimed) of the canon law. When a court official grabbed the offending headgear, Hickeringill snatched it back, and upon the announcement that his carriage amounted to a non-appearance, he denounced the arches as 'no Court of Law', and threatened to prosecute Wiseman according to statute for citing him outside his own diocese (Hickeringill, 'Works', 1.176). Wiseman stopped the proceedings. Upon a second appearance on 21 November Hickeringill submitted a written defence, which four days later was allowed. The consequence of his Erastian protest was, on 8 February, to be bound over to good behaviour in king's bench, for 'his unmannerly deportment before the Court of Civil Law' ('CSP dom.', '9 Feb 1682'). 
Compton settled the score by prosecuting Hickeringill for slander, 'scandalum magnatum', under the statute 2 Ric. II c. 5. The cleric had defamed his bishop with 'several false news and horrible lyes' (Hickeringill, 'Scandalum magnatum', 8) at an Easter election of parish officials, although in his defence Hickeringill claimed to have been quoted out of context. Furthermore, he had failed to address his superior with the customary epithet of 'Right Reverend Father in God'. He subsequently compounded his insubordination by using the occasion of his trial, at Chelmsford assizes on 8 March, as a public platform to derogate the 'Black Regiment' of bishops (ibid., 15). Jeffreys, again counsel for the prosecution, elicited a conviction and a $2000 fine against Hickeringill, which Compton earmarked for the rebuilding of St Paul's. For celebrating clandestine marriages Hickeringill was suspended for three years. In the aftermath he sent (and then published) a letter to Compton which, purportedly seeking an accommodation through flattery, in fact boldly restated the grounds of his original dissidence. He refused to pay the fine and, offering to pay Compton's legal costs, challenged a retrial. Finally, on 27 June 1684, Hickeringill received restoration and exemption from the punishment upon a public recantation in the court of arches of the 'scandalous, erroneous, and seditious principles' of several of his publications (Luttrell, 1.312). The dean of the arches offered to Sancroft 'to burne with mine owne hands' each of the books in public (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 32, fol. 70). The fine's remission, however, came too late to secure Hickeringill a $20,000 fortune: his uncle Dr Troutbeck, Charles II's surgeon in the north and sometime translator of Erastus, had altered the disposal of his estate, 'lest any of the lawn-sleeves should lay their fingers on't' (Hickeringill, 'Works', 3.117). Hickeringill's redemption was short-lived. His sermon in 1685 on 'Philippians' 2: 10 -- 'At the name of Jesus, every knee shall bow' -- was a pretext for the tory recorder of Colchester and activist against nonconformity, Sir John Shaw, to complain to his friend the chancellor of the diocese. Hickeringill was charged with preaching against Anglican ceremonial, and peremptorily suspended. Petitions to the king, and a letter of 'apology and defence' to Sancroft -- in which he compared the Romanist doctrine of infallibility with the Church of England's prescriptions on ceremonies and matters 'indifferent', and made a strong historical defence of dissent within a fallible church -- were to no avail (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 32, fol. 232). Only in 1688, 'about a month before the Dutch landed', was he recalled (Hickeringill, 'Works', 2.380). 
On 15 January 1691 Hickeringill became chaplain to the whig Edward Howard, earl of Carlisle, and the following day was granted dispensation to hold the vicarage of Fingringhoe, adjoining Colchester. In 'The Survey of the Earth' (1705) he implicated the Church of England in a long historical tradition where true religion was supplanted by superstition: the common prayer in particular was cited as containing pagan beliefs. Though Hickeringill was now old, Compton had him cited before the ecclesiastical court for its authorship in November (Luttrell, 5.607), and, perhaps as a consequence, in March 1706 Hickeringill published a 'Letter Concerning Barretry, Forgery and the Danger and Malignity of Partial Judges and Jurymen'. In 1707 he was tried for forgery in his capacity as tax assessor for the parish of Wickes. For altering the rate books, and 'as a specimen of his morality', he was fined $400. 'He carried himself with that indecency to the court', noted Hearne, 'that he was thought to be mad' (Hearne, 'Collectanea', 2.33). His final court appearance, on 1 November, was in queen's bench on an information against him for writing libels. 
Hickeringill died at his home, Pond Hall, near Wickes, on 30 November 1708. Buried in his church of All Saints, he suffered a final indignity when the lengthy epitaph on his tombstone was defaced. The words 'Reverendus admodum Dominus' ('a master greatly to be respected') and praise of his military ability and literary success were erased -- Colcestrians believed -- by Compton. 
Hickeringill used print culture as an alternative forum for articulating his resistance to episcopal ecclesiology. He was the author of some thirty individual tracts, for which he became notorious; the 'great scribbler of the nation'. The odium he incurred, from the likes of the censor Sir Roger L'Estrange, was premised upon his skill at political disguise: throughout his pamphlets he intruded a critique of ecclesiological pretensions and practice in the form of protestant orthodoxy. 'Naked Truth the Second Part' (1681), taking its name though not its theme from Bishop Herbert Croft's work, denounced all independent ecclesiastical jurisdiction. The church's power was defined by 'regnum', but its courts operated under the myth of a 'jus divinum': they were relics of popery. Hickeringill used his scholarly research into history and law to underpin a practicable assault on priestly authority. He taught, for example, that it was not 'sacrilege' for parishioners to withhold tithes ('Naked Truth', 29-30). Similar themes appeared in his 'The Test or Tryal of the Goodness and Value of Spiritual Courts' (1683), where readers were urged to take no notice of their summons to the church court. At the pamphlet's end, to prevent extortion, appeared a 'just table' of clerical fees with the slogan 'And no more!'. 
At the same time Hickeringill launched theological and dogmatic attacks on established church practice, exposing and undermining the cultural foundations of sacerdotal authority. 'The Black Non-Conformist' (1682) revealed church ceremonial to be intimate with political power. There was a characteristic dose of rationalism: the historical appearance of bishops in the world was commensurate with the invention of ceremonies and eschatological supernaturalism. The central charge -- that English bishops were nonconformists, as practising popish ceremonies contrary to the king's ecclesiastical laws -- was extended in his 'Ceremony-Monger' (1689). Prelates maintained the ignorance of Anglican congregations by imposing blind devotion and implicit faith. It was this concentration on the whiggish theme of 'priestcraft' which distinguished his thinking from Reformation ecclesiology. The 'Lay Elder' (1695) went beyond Erastianism, in suggesting that the distinction between the laity and a priestly caste itself was fraudulent, without historical or scriptural pedigree. Central to its priestcraft was the church's monopoly on interpreting scripture. In 'Priestcraft; its Character and Consequences' (1705?) he undermined inerrant and inspired exegesis, by exposing the variations and contradictions of scriptural texts. For his description of the corruption of the 'Bible' from primitive Christian purity through its duplicitous transmission by priests, he was charged by some with blasphemy. This notion of an overarching clerical conspiracy, mapped out over centuries, was a core theme in contemporary and later deist tracts. Hickeringill's bad press denotes a coarse appeal: in 'Reformator Vapulans' (1691) Tom Brown portrayed him (negatively) as a popular oracle. 
Hickeringill is an ambiguous figure: his position as conforming clergyman of the Church of England sits ill at ease with his conduct and writing. Contemporaries portrayed him as an opportunist who 'would change note or coat if it was possible to get into some fatter pastures' ('Observations on Meroz', 1680, 26). In 1710 his writings were read out in open court during the state trial of Henry Sacheverell, as evidence that the church was in danger from a blasphemous coven of 'false brethren' ('Trial of Henry Sacheverell', 216). In historiography his example has been used to illustrate the evolution of a tradition of interregnum puritan thought into deism after the Restoration (Emerson, 396-7). Hickeringill here represents a cadre of figures who, having lost their faith, marginalized a seam of radical thought that had previously been central to national discourse. Yet Hickeringill promoted his writings as remedial rather than revolutionary, and throughout his trials was concerned to preserve his status as a true and sincere clergymen. More recently it has been suggested that, rather than demonstrating the peripheral nature of heterodox beliefs, Hickeringill's conduct (parochially, in print, and in the courts) illustrates the difficulty for the ruling elite in making routine the acts of conformity which symbolized religious order. Hickeringill used the authority of clerical office as a platform for both dissent, and the fabrication of order and compliance. Orthodoxy in Hickeringill's case was not a category of doctrinal authenticity that could be imposed by his superiors, but was attempted in a process of negotiation between the agencies of priest, laity, and ecclesiastical institution. 


@@@@@


doc= 13201


Hickes, Francis (1565/6-1631), translator, was probably born in Shipston, Worcestershire, the son of Richard Hickes (died 1621) and Anne Ingram. His father was appointed the queen's arrasmaker in 1569 ('CPR, 1566-9', no. 2573; TNA: PRO, LC 5/49, fols. 317-19) and may have come to England as a Flemish emigr;e. In 1575 Francis was appointed in survivorship with his father in a renewed grant of the office of arrasmaker, with responsibility to supervise the maintenance of the monarch's tapestries ('CPR, 1572-5', no. 3268; TNA: PRO, LC 5/49, fols. 317-19). Hickes matriculated at St Mary Hall, Oxford, on 27 March 1579, aged thirteen, and graduated BA on 30 April 1583. After graduation he appears to have spent most of his life in Barcheston, Warwickshire, and Shipston, where he devoted himself to translations from Greek into English. Probably about 1593 he married Elizabeth Munday, daughter of Thomas Munday, of Bagshot, Surrey; they had four children. Elizabeth died in 1616 and was buried at Barcheston on 25 May. 
None of Hickes's works was published during his lifetime, but in 1634 his 'Certain Select Dialogues of Lucian, together with his True History' was published in Oxford, with additions by his son Thomas ['see below']. Thomas described his father as 'no profest scoller' but 'a true lover of Schollers, and Learning', whose translations were '[h]is studie or rather his recreation' (Hickes and Hickes, sig. A3'r'). Two more translations from Greek are extant in manuscript: 'The history of the wars of Peloponnesus, in 8 books, written by Thucydides the Athenian' and 'The history of Herodian, beginning from the reign of the emperor Marcus'. These manuscripts were presented to the library of Christ Church, Oxford, by Thomas Hickes, and are still held among the library's collections. 
Hickes is said by Wood to have died in a kinsman's house at Sutton in Gloucestershire on 9 January 1631, and to have been buried in the chancel of the parish church at Brailes, Worcestershire (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.491). There is, however, no reference to his burial in the Brailes parish registers, and no will survives. 
Wood writes that Hickes's son 
Wood records that in addition to his proficiency in Greek, Thomas Hickes had a reputation as a good poet and an excellent limner (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.584); he contributed Latin verses to the Oxford volume, 'Camdeni insignia' (1624). Thomas Hickes died, unmarried, at Christ Church on 16 December 1634, and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral. No monument to him survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 13202


Hickes, Gaspar (1605-1677), clergyman and ejected minister, son of a Berkshire clergyman, matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, on 26 October 1621, aged sixteen, graduating BA in 1625 and proceeding MA in 1628. He was ordained priest at Bristol on 24 December 1626 and in 1628 appears to have been beneficed. Instituted vicar of Launceston on 23 September 1630, he was also vicar of Lavnells from 1630 to 1636, and, resigning Launceston, from 1632 vicar of Landrake: all of these livings were in Cornwall, and the last was in the home parish of Francis Rous, the godly former MP. At an unknown date Hickes married, but little is known about his wife, Julian. Probably through the influence of Sir John Maynard and of Rous, then MP for Truro, on 20 April 1642 Hickes was named to parliament as one of the two Cornish divines whose advice should be sought on ecclesiastical matters. As the royalists gained ascendancy in Cornwall, he retired to London; he was a member of the Westminster assembly of divines from July 1643, and in October 1644, as one of the 'plundered ministers', was placed in possession of the vicarage of Tottenham, which was worth less than $50. Additionally a grant of $100 per annum was assigned to him out of the revenues of St Paul's chapter in the parish. 
While known for his preaching, Hickes went into print only when commanded and as a result only three of his sermons survive. In his fast sermon 'Glory and Beauty of God's Portion' (1644) Hickes encouraged the Commons towards militant action, reminding them that 'the prophecies in the 'Revelation' seem to foreshew that the ruine of Antichrist shall in a good part be brought to pass by the sword' (p. 42). Hickes used his funeral sermon of 26 June 1645 for William Strode as an opportunity to further encourage godly parliamentarians: 'The Life and Death of David' (1645), dedicated to Sir Edward Barkham and Lady Barkham, emphasizes the need for action, saying, 'You that live, while ye have time and strength, work on' (p. 26). The following January he warned the House of Lords against growing secure amid success in a fast sermon, 'The Advantage of Afflictions' (1646). Hickes later returned to Landrake, and as the leading presbyterian divine in the county was appointed in 1654 assistant to the commissioners for Cornwall for ejecting scandalous ministers and schoolmasters. In October 1658 he was a member of the Cornish Association. Dispossessed of his benefice in 1662, Hickes continued to minister in the area. At some point after 1670 he was prosecuted under the 'Conventicle Act' for unlawful preaching. When the justice of his own district refused to convict he was taken further west, where he was convicted and fined $40. He appealed, but without any result beyond increasing the substantial costs of the proceedings. He was granted a licence as a presbyterian in April 1672. In 1677 he died, and was buried in the porch of the parish church on 10 April, when many of the 'godly party' attended. In his will dated 9 February 1674 Hickes left bequests to his brother Edward and 'the children of my brothers and sisters', and his estate first to his wife and then to Gaspar Geffrey. The suggestion that Gaspar Hickes (died 1714), captain of a Yarmouth man-of-war, was a possible son (Laughton, 141) is thus unlikely. 


@@@@@


doc= 13203


Hickes, George (1642-1715), bishop of the nonjuring Church of England and antiquary, was born at Moorhouse, Newsham, in the parish of Kirby Wiske near Thirsk in Yorkshire, on 20 June 1642, the second son of William Hickes, originally of Ness in the parish of Stonegrave, Yorkshire, a landowning farmer at Moorhouse, and his wife, Elizabeth Kay (or Key), daughter of George Kay, rector of nearby Topcliffe. Hickes was the fourth child of seven and had two brothers, an elder brother, John Hickes (1633-1685), later a nonconformist minister, and Ralph Hickes ('c'.1651-1711), who became a physician. After some time at school in Thirsk, Hickes, when aged about ten, was sent to the free school of Northallerton where he was taught by the royalist schoolmaster Thomas Smelt. The devotional writer John Kettlewell, later Hickes's close friend, was also a pupil of Smelt's at Northallerton. Smelt taught and reinforced the loyalist principles traditionally adhered to by the family of Hickes's mother. To his later friend and biographer, Hilkiah Bedford, Hickes remembered in admiration that: 'He [Smelt] was wont to take all occasions from the Classick Authors to instill into his upper boys due notions of the sacred Majesty of Kings, & the wickedness of Usurpers, as his scholar G. H. us'd frequently to mention, particularly what he us'd to say of Agathocles in Justin's 'History' by whom they all understood that he meant the then Protector. In his upper Class which read Homer, he us'd to take occasion from that Author to speak of Kings as God's Ministers & Vice-gerents, & not the People's, to whom they were not accountable. (Bedford, 2)' Hickes was to suffer considerably from his father's adherence to Cromwell and often felt he had to compensate for this 'sin' of rebellion 'by doing the utmost in his power through the whole course of his life to serve the Royal cause & that of the Church, which had been so much disserv'd by his father' (ibid., 5). In 1658 Hickes went to live with his brother John, then minister of Saltash, Cornwall, and was bound apprentice to a Plymouth merchant. However, John realized his younger brother's 'genius was to learning, & not to trade' (ibid., 3). After consulting George Hughes, rector of Plymouth, John advised his father to send George to Oxford, where he entered St John's College as a battler in April 1659. 
Under the puritan president, Thankful Owen, Hickes refused to take sermon notes or attend young scholars' meetings for spiritual exercises, his royalist Anglicanism making him despair of a university education. Attending the visitation following the restoration of Charles II, however, Hickes decided to stay at Oxford and migrated to Magdalen College as servitor to Henry Yerbury, one of the restored fellows. On 24 February 1663 he graduated BA, after which he migrated to Magdalen Hall. On 23 May 1664 he obtained the Yorkshire fellowship of Lincoln College, and he proceeded MA on 8 December 1665. He became deacon on 10 June and priest on 23 December the next year. From about 1665 to 1673 Hickes worked as a tutor of Lincoln College. He was incorporated at Cambridge on 8 July 1668. It was during this early period of some seven years at Lincoln that he laid the foundations for his later career as a leading philologist and Anglo-Saxon scholar. 
At Lincoln College, Hickes met the linguistic scholar Thomas Marshall, who had been appointed a fellow in 1668 after his publication, together with his teacher Francis Junius (Francois du Jon), of the Gothic and Anglo-Saxon versions of the gospels, including Marshall's 'Observationes in evangeliorum versiones perantiquas duas, Gothicas scil. et Anglo-Saxonicas' (Dordrecht, 1665). Marshall, in correspondence, also introduced Hickes to John Fell, canon and dean of Christ Church and vice-chancellor of the university. Fell, a strong university man and renovator of the university press, together with other scholars that he grouped around him (Edward Bernard, Samuel Clarke, Henry Dodwell, John Pearson, and others), was responsible for a revival of patristic, historical, and philological learning. In the early 1670s he commissioned Marshall, then living in the Netherlands, to acquire punches, matrices, and type for the newly built printing house, the Sheldonian Theatre. Through Fell, and also on the advice of Hickes, Marshall subsequently became rector of Lincoln in 1672. In those years a need began to be felt for a new Anglo-Saxon dictionary and grammar (William Somner's 'Dictionary', including Aelfric's grammar, of 1659, was hardly available at the time). Among his other language studies Marshall set to work on such a grammar (Bodl. Oxf., MS Marshall 78). Inevitably Hickes was influenced by and indebted to these efforts by Junius, Fell, and Marshall. 
However, for the time being Hickes's interest in philology was cut short when he fell seriously ill and was advised to rest. To recuperate he travelled abroad in October 1673, accompanying one of his former Lincoln College students, Sir George Wheler, a royalist scholar and traveller, on part of his grand tour. At Wheler's invitation Hickes visited Paris, Blois, Montpellier, Nimes, Marseilles, Lyons, and Geneva among other places. In Paris Hickes met the eminent protestant scholar Henri Justell who (before the revocation of the edict of Nantes) told Hickes 'many secret matters, particularly that of the intended persecution of the Hugonots, & of a design in Holland & England to extirpate the Royal Family of the Stewarts' (Bedford, 8). Through Hickes, Justell, secretary to Louis XIV and later Charles II's librarian at St James's, presented his father's valuable late sixth-century manuscripts of acts and canons of the early church to the Bodleian Library (MSS e Museo 100-102). At Geneva the Anglican Hickes refused the protestant sacrament from Francois Turretin because he doubted its validity. However, his sermon 'The True Notion of Persecution' (1681) shows that Hickes also felt somewhat sympathetic to the cause of the persecuted Huguenots whom he did not wish to associate with the English dissenters. 'A Letter from beyond the Seas to One of the Chief Ministers of the Non-Conforming Party' (1674) was Hickes's anonymous letter to his dissenting brother John, written from Saumur. Hickes returned to England in 1674. 
Hickes proceeded BD at Oxford on 14 May 1675 while he was rector of St Ebbe's Church. In the same year his friend John Kettlewell was elected fellow of Lincoln College, largely through his influence. He preached a sermon (published as 'Peculium Dei', 1681) at St Mary's 'to confute the many dangerous doctrines & opinions antient & modern, grounded upon the misunderstanding of the Jewish Oeconomy & the Mosaick Law' (Bedford, 33), for which he was praised by Richard Allestree, regius professor of divinity, and Kettlewell. In August 1676 Hickes met the learned and controversial John Maitland, second earl and first duke of Lauderdale, who offered him a chaplaincy. Maitland, who had considerable influence on King Charles II, was on his way to Edinburgh as secretary of state for Scotland to safeguard constitutional affairs against the interests of the Scots covenanters and defend the re-established episcopal church against Scottish presbyterianism. After consulting John Fell, by then bishop of Oxford, Hickes accepted the position despite some misgivings concerning Maitland's debauched courtly lifestyle. In Scotland it was Hickes's task to introduce the liturgy and support Maitland's policies. Thus Maitland commissioned Hickes's 'Ravillac redivivus' (1678), an account of the trial of the covenanter James Mitchell, who had attempted to assassinate James Sharpe, the archbishop of St Andrews. Through Sharpe, Hickes was offered a DD at St Andrews for this work. That same year Hickes together with Alexander Burnet, archbishop of Glasgow, reported to the court in London on Scottish ecclesiastical affairs. 
Besides these official duties Hickes continued to pursue philology and antiquarian interests -- as is evident, for example, from his correspondence with Thomas Smith, then chaplain to Sir Joseph Williamson, secretary of state. Williamson founded a collegiate lectureship in Saxon studies at Queen's College, Oxford, for William Nicolson in 1679. Hickes also appears to have studied Hebrew to be able to discuss 'Rabbinical learning' ('Remarks', 1.268) with Maitland. His 'Ravillac' also betrayed his steady interest in Anglo-Saxon etymology and English dialects. Hickes stayed for some time with Maitland at Ham House, Surrey, where he met William Hopkins, prebendary of Worcester, who was improving the cathedral library at Worcester and who had visited Sweden to study the septentrional languages. 
On 13 September 1679 Hickes married Frances Marshall ('c'.1633-1714), daughter of Charles Mallory of Rainham, Essex, and widow of John Marshall, citizen of London. Frances had a royalist background. They had no children. On 17 December that year Hickes was created Oxford DD. He was at the beginning of a promising career in the established church. 
For the next seven years Hickes preached and published on ecclesiastical controversies and developed his patristic scholarship. In the aftermath of the Popish Plot Hickes preached several sermons in the prevailing anti-Catholic climate, among them 'The Spirit of Popery Speaking out of the Mouths of Phanatical Protestants' (1680) for which, as well as for his service in Scotland, he was given a prebendary of Worcester by the king. Also in 1680 Archbishop Sancroft presented him to the vicarage of All Hallows Barking. In the next year Hickes gave up his fellowship of Lincoln, becoming chaplain to Charles II. 'A Sermon Preached on the 30th of Jan' (1682) on the Anglican doctrines of divine right, passive obedience, and non-resistance caused consternation among dissenters in the church of St Mary-le-Bow and publication was resisted (unsuccessfully) by the court of aldermen. In the same year, 1682, a work was published of seminal importance to the revival of Anglican patristic theology and scholarship which was deeply to influence Henry Dodwell, Hickes, and the nonjuring movement after the revolution of 1688. To the nonjurors John Fell's edition of St Cyprian showed that the principles of primitive Christianity (the Cyprianic principles) paralleled those of the post-Reformation episcopal Church of England envisioned as a divine society with independent jurisdiction in spiritual matters. Also in 1682 Hickes's sermon 'A Discourse of the Sovereign Power' was answered by 'Julian the Apostate' (1682) by the nonconformist Samuel Johnson. Hickes was becoming aware of increasing opposition to his Restoration principles, especially from John Tillotson, then dean of Canterbury. At Sancroft's request Hickes answered Johnson with 'Jovian' (1683). In these years (1681-4), in the aftermath of the exclusion crisis, the influential commission for ecclesiastical promotions elected bishops and deans who could be trusted to be loyal to the king's brother and heir, James, duke of York. Hickes was promoted to the deanery of Worcester in August and installed on 13 October 1683. He declined the bishopric of Bristol the following year. 
In 1685 Thomas Marshall died and Hickes wished to succeed him as rector of Lincoln College. He obtained Fell's support but was not elected. According to Anthony Wood, John Radcliffe thought Hickes 'a turbulent man and that if he should be rector they should never be at quiet' ('Life and Times', 3.142). In April that year Hickes attended the coronation of the Catholic King James II. The year ended tragically for him when on 6 October his brother John was executed for his involvement in Monmouth's rebellion. Hickes had tried but failed to obtain a pardon. After his father's 'sin' of rebellion, he had to contend once again in a most personal way with the moral forces of familial love and belief in non-resistance. In 1686 Hickes resigned All Hallows and became rector of Alvechurch, near Worcester. His Stuart loyalties were firm, but so was his anti-Catholicism. Early that year he had preached a sermon, 'An Apologetical Vindication of the Church of England' (published 1687), for which he was summoned to the king. Hickes had cast suspicion on the so-called strong box papers, but James proved to him that Charles II's papers on his conversion to Catholicism were genuine. James proceeded with his campaign to put Catholics in Oxford colleges. After Fell's death the Catholic convert John Massey succeeded to the deanery of Christ Church, and at Magdalen a Catholic president was appointed. In 1687 Hickes opposed the declaration of indulgence that granted full freedom of religious observance to Catholics and protestant dissenters. When Bishop William Thomas of Worcester was ill Hickes publicly declared that he would not summon the chapter to elect a Catholic successor on his death. 

'[Hickes] was no sooner settled at Worcester but being then about 45 years of age he apply'd himself to the study of the ancient Septentrional Languages, of which by indefatigable pains he made himself a perfect Master in one year, & at the same time compiled his Anglo-Saxon & Moeso-Gothick Grammar. (Bedford, 22)' For Hickes the affairs of English politics and religion came together with his historical and linguistic studies in the years leading up to the revolution of 1688-9. One of Fell's earlier cherished plans had been a publication of Junius's Old English-Latin dictionary, based on the Junius manuscripts which had come to the Bodleian in 1677 together with the Junius fount of type. The dictionary was to be accompanied by Marshall's Saxon grammar. After Marshall's death this task devolved upon William Nicolson, who had copied the Junius manuscripts with a view to publication but had left for Cumberland in 1681 (Nicolson's copy would come to the Bodleian in Fell's collection in 1686). According to Hickes's later friend, the Saxonist Edward Thwaites, Fell subsequently assigned the grammar to Hickes. At Worcester, where the cathedral library was rich in Saxon charters and where his association with William Hopkins was renewed, Hickes continued his philological studies and mastered Anglo-Saxon. Hickes now had access to the newly acquired Junius manuscripts at Oxford and was influenced by Junius's ideas about the history of the Germanic languages. With the encouragement and support of Arthur Charlett, delegate of Oxford University Press, and the scholar John Mill, Hickes's Old English grammar was printed (using Junius's type) and published at Oxford as 'Institutiones grammaticae Anglo-Saxonicae et Moeso-Goethicae' (1689); yet not without Mill's drastic curtailment of Hickes's dedication to the by then suspended Archbishop Sancroft. In the following decade ecclesiastical and scholarly interests were combined and inextricably connected in Hickes's life in a manner characteristic both of antiquarian research in general and of Hickes's methods as one of its leading proponents. Hickes 'belonged in a sense to an age earlier than that in which he lived, since his mind, encyclopedic in its range, refused to specialize and so entangled his learning with his life, that it is difficult to regard him solely as an historian or philologist, or solely as a divine' (Douglas, 78). 
With the confusion among scholars, clergy, and lawyers attending the unprecedented circumstance after the revolution of both a king 'de facto' (William) and a king 'de jure' (James II), several ideological theories on the settlement and kingship were expounded. Hickes's 'Institutiones' was undertaken as he wrote later 'purely out of zeale to make known the Language, Customes, Laws, and manners of our ancestres, and so to set our English antiquities in a good light' (Harris, 'Chorus of Grammars', 402). Nevertheless Hickes made a political statement by presenting in the same work a Saxon coronation oath (copied from Bodl. Oxf., Junius MS 60) as historical evidence of divinely ordained kingship that invalidated, in his view, whig historians' arguments about the 'original contract' between the king and his people as a basis of good government, a contract which justified resistance (or even active rebellion) if a king proved to be a tyrant. 
On 1 August 1689 Hickes was, as dean of Worcester, suspended for refusing to take the oath of allegiance to William and Mary. On 1 February 1690 he was deprived but remained in possession until May 1691 when William Talbot was granted the deanery by King William. Hickes refused to accept his deprivation and wrote a claim of right which he pinned over the entrance to the choir in Worcester Cathedral. Soldiers took the document down and sent it to Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham and secretary of state. A warrant for high misdemeanour was issued after a debate in the council. Hickes's house was searched but Hickes had gone into hiding in London; he was outlawed on 11 August 1691. 
In the following years Hickes further pursued his philological studies in correspondence with Arthur Charlett, Edmund Gibson (who published his edition of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' in 1692), and William Nicolson, thinking of an expanded second edition of the 'Institutiones'. He also contributed to the nonjurors' defence of the deprived bishops. Among other tracts he countered William Sherlock's influential ideas about divine providence ('The Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Princes', 1691), which propagated acceptance of and loyalty to William III by the providential right of a non-hereditary king, in his anonymous 'Vindication of Some among Ourselves Against the False Principles of Dr. Sherlock' (1692), a legitimist defence of hereditary monarchy. In May 1693 Sancroft, wishing to continue the apostolic succession among nonjurors, sent Hickes to James II at St Germain to obtain permission to appoint suffragans in line with Henrician statute. Delayed by illness Hickes finally returned to London on 4 February 1694. He was secretly consecrated suffragan bishop of Thetford on 24 February 1694 by the deprived bishops William Lloyd of Norwich, Francis Turner of Ely, and Thomas White of Peterborough. (A second nonjuror, Thomas Wagstaffe, was consecrated suffragan bishop of Ipswich.) When Gilbert Burnet attacked the deprived bishops in his funeral sermon on Archbishop Tillotson, Hickes published 'Some Discourses upon Dr. Burnet and Dr. Tillotson' (1695), once more anonymously. Hickes's depreciation of his adversary Tillotson gave great offence. 
During the years of his persecution Hickes lived in insecure and impoverished circumstances. He suffered from ill health and was frustrated by a lack of progress in his scholarship, being forced to move about the country to hide from the authorities. Friends such as Charlett supplied him with books. Hickes stayed at Bagshot with the Jacobite Colonel Grymes (James Grahme or Graham) and worked on an answer to Burnet's 'Reflections on... 'Some Discourses'' (1696), with which Burnet had continued his argument against the deprived bishops, until in February the assassination plot broke out and he was forced to leave Bagshot (Grahme was arrested 3 March). Hickes stayed in various places, notably at Shottesbrooke with the Jacobite Francis Cherry for three months in the summer of 1696. A later friend, the nonjuror antiquary Thomas Hearne, remembered: 'the house was one night (about twelve a Clock I think) beset, on purpose to apprehend him, but he got out at a back door, passed through the Gardens into the Church Yard & escaped safe to Bagshot to Collonel Grymes's, & his wife followed. ('Remarks', 10.237)' Subsequently Hickes stayed at Ambrosden with White Kennett, then vicar of Ambrosden and rector of Shottesbrooke, for five weeks in June-July 1696. He lived in a house at Sandford and after a period of illness and fever moved to Gloucester Green, Oxford, where he composed his 'Declaration... Concerning the Faith and Religion in which he Lived and Intended to Die' (published posthumously, 1743). In 1697 he went to live with the Jacobite antiquary William Brome at Ewithington in Herefordshire, where he stayed for more than a year. In 1698 Hickes was back in London and living in Ormond Street, where he would remain for the rest of his life. It was this troublesome decade in Hickes's life which saw the production of his most important and influential work of scholarship, the 'Thesaurus' (1703-5). In May 1699 Chancellor John Somers obtained an act of council for Hickes by which the attorney-general was ordered to cause a writ of 'nolle prosequi', to be entered to cease all proceedings against him. 
'If the work of Junius had been in part the mainspring of this [Anglo-Saxon] movement, its leader was to be Hickes, and the enthusiastic scholars who were to surround him all wore in some measure the livery of his majestic mind' (Douglas, 65). In the 1690s Hickes's 'Institutiones' gradually grew from a grammar (it had already included Runolfur Jonsson's Old Icelandic grammar and Edward Bernard's 'Etymologicon Britannicum'), via an idea about a second edition with additional studies, to a full-blown history of the English language and a monumental work of Old English and medieval Germanic culture and history, archaeology, numismatics, philology, and bibliography, for which he enlisted the scholarly assistance and expertise of a range of English, Swedish, and Danish scholars. It was to be called 'Linguarum veterum septentrionalium thesaurus grammatico-criticus et archaeologicus'. 
Continuing with his philological and linguistic studies of Old English, Gothic, Dutch, Francic, and later Old Icelandic, Hickes ever widened his scope and developed insights into the interrelated northern languages. This interest from his Oxford days became a passion now that he was in his fifties. 'For as I take it', he explained to Charlett in 1694, 'there are four old origenall European languages the Greek, the Sclavonick, the Gothick, and the Celtick, or ancient Brittish, and he that understands them all, as an ingenious Welshman that hath learned Greek, may easily do, will be able to illustrat the Harmony of Languages ancient, and modern, Latin also comprehended, because it is little els, but Greek. He will also thereby be enabled to illustrat many things in antiquity, which yet ly in darknesse, and the discoverys he will find himself able to make in these thinges will be so delightfull to him, that he will scarse be sensible of his paines. (Harris, 'Chorus of Grammars', 151)' Together at Ambrosden in 1696, Hickes worked with White Kennett, who had been pursuing his own antiquarian studies for his 'Parochial Antiquities' (1695), on an 'Etymologicon Anglicanum'. Correspondences with Nicolson, Gibson, Hopkins, and Thomas Smith continued and through Charlett, Hickes was introduced to Humfrey Wanley, then an assistant at the Bodleian and later Harley's librarian and a leading Saxonist and palaeographer. In fact, Wanley was to become more of a co-author, with contributions throughout the 'Thesaurus' and fully responsible for the 'Catalogue' of Anglo-Saxon manuscripts which eventually appeared as volume 2. 
Many others became involved. The connoisseur Sir Andrew Fountaine (assisted by Ralph Thoresby) contributed an essay on Anglo-Saxon and Anglo-Danish coins and William Elstob his edition of the 'Sermo Lupi'. The Scandinavian Christian Worm offered assistance when at Oxford in 1696-7, and though he left England rather abruptly he remained an important influence on Hickes's pursuit of runic materials. Contacts with Danish and Swedish scholars, among them Jonas Nicolaus Salan, Petrus N. Salan, and Johann Peringskoold the elder, who sent a catalogue of manuscripts in the Antikvitetsarkiv, Uppsala, were established mostly through the correspondence of Edward Thwaites. Thwaites, professor of Greek and an inspiring teacher of Old English at Queen's College, Oxford, was responsible for much of the proof-reading, the production of the book at Oxford University Press, the finances (the project was published by subscription), and the distribution of the 'Thesaurus'. 
Hickes improved Jonsson's Old Icelandic grammar for the 'Thesaurus' and expanded his Anglo-Saxon grammar with six new chapters, which: 'deserve a full-length study in themselves, constituting as they do the first history of the English language and a remarkably early survey of Old English literature and poetics. Hickes's sensitivity ranged far beyond the merely linguistic, and his understanding of early Germanic poetry was extraordinary for the time. (Harris, 'Chorus of Grammars', 79)' In 1699 Hickes began his 'Dissertatio epistolaris' (for vol. 1), a remarkable study to which other Saxonists also contributed and in which Hickes argued the use of philology for the understanding of pre-conquest history, the Saxon laws, and the institutions of the country. Its discourse on the charters and the methodology needed to ascertain their authenticity (Wanley's contributions were crucial here) inaugurated the study of diplomatic for England (as Mabillon had done for France). Thus the work of Hickes and his co-workers in the field provided a 'chorus of grammars', a corpus of historical linguistics and comparative philology as well as the sources of history and the critical apparatus needed for historical and literary scholarship to make a great leap forward. It would take about a century, however, before scholarship would again attain Hickes's erudition and technical level. 
After the 'Thesaurus' was finally published, and after the preparation of the 'Conspectus brevis' (1708) nominally by William Wotton, but mostly executed by Hickes himself in order to boost the sales of the 'Thesaurus', Hickes's studies in Saxon and medieval Germanic philology were exhausted and he consciously stopped his efforts. During the reign of Queen Anne he continued as a patristic scholar, a nonjuror controversialist (with regular contributions to the renewed political debate on the succession question after he obtained the 'nolle prosequi'), and a 'bonus pastor' to the nonjuring community which now faced an additional oath of abjuration of the hereditary Stuart, James, the Pretender. He offered important moral support to, among others, the antiquary Thomas Hearne. Especially after the death of William Lloyd, deprived bishop of Norwich, when Henry Dodwell and the Shottesbrooke nonjurors returned to the established church in 1710 Hickes was intent on leading, as bishop, pastor, and theologian, what he considered was the surviving remnant of the true apostolic church. 
Hickes's theology, like Dodwell's, based itself on Cyprianic principles and sacerdotal power. Yet where Dodwell's ultimate concern was with the church as a society receiving sacramental grace through apostolic succession and independent of secular power, John Kettlewell and Hickes insisted on a vision of the apostolic church which excluded not only Roman Catholics and presbyterians but also the great majority of Anglicans who no longer adhered to its doctrines of divine hereditary monarchy, passive obedience, and non-resistance. In this confessional and sectarian model (though it adopted Dodwellian principles), the consecration of new nonjuror bishops, and therefore separation, continued to be justified. Hickes published his views in such works as 'Two treatises: one of the Christian priesthood, the other of the dignity of the episcopal order' (1707, an answer to the deist Matthew Tindal's 'Rights of the Christian Church', 1706), and 'The Constitution of the Catholic Church and the Nature and Consequences of Schism' (published posthumously by Nathaniel Spinckes, 1716). After Wagstaffe's death Hickes was the only nonjuror bishop left, and it became necessary to consecrate new bishops to ensure the succession and the continuity of the surviving remnant of the Anglican church. Three new bishops, Samuel Hawes, Nathaniel Spinckes, and Jeremy Collier, were consecrated by Hickes and two Scottish bishops, James Gadderar and Archibald Campbell, at St Andrew's, Holborn, on Ascension day 1713. After Hickes's death his 'Constitution' provoked attacks on the nonjurors from White Kennett ('A Second Letter to the Lord Bishop of Carlisle', 1716), Benjamin Hoadly, and Nathaniel Marshall in the wider context of the Bangorian controversy. 
Hickes's life was plagued with spells of severe illness. In addition, his wife, Frances, in the early 1700s suffered from a long debilitating disease. She died on 3 December 1714. Hickes died of stone on 15 December 1715 at Westminster. He was buried in St Margaret's churchyard, Westminster, on 18 December. He bequeathed his manuscripts and letters to the nonjuror Hilkiah Bedford, his closest friend since the death of Kettlewell. A sale catalogue of his books was published in 1716. According to Hearne, Hickes desired Bedford to write his biography, which Bedford started but left unfinished. A number of Hickes's works were published after his death, among them Francis Lee's 'Memoirs of the Life of Kettlewell' (1718) with an introduction by Hickes and based on materials and reminiscences of Robert Nelson and Hickes. 
The emphasis in studies about Hickes from the days of his biographer Bedford to late twentieth-century scholarship has clearly shifted from a preoccupation with the churchman and nonjuror to one with the Anglo-Saxon scholar. No doubt posterity owes most to Hickes's achievements as a Saxon scholar, even more so because the discipline declined and much of the early Saxonists' expertise was lost for most of the remaining part of the eighteenth century. Hickes's 'Thesaurus', as R. L. Harris proves, remains a landmark of scholarship today. But as David Douglas has observed, the importance of Hickes needs to be recognized as combining in one remarkable man religious and theological thought on the one hand, and often (but not exclusively) religiously motivated and high-principled antiquarian scholarship on the other. This combination was characteristic not only of Hickes as a leading philologist but of many contemporary antiquarian scholars of the Augustan age, although few equalled the versatility and depth of Hickes's learning. 


@@@@@


doc= 13204


Hickes, John (1633-1685), clergyman, ejected minister, and rebel, was born at Moorhouse Farm in Newsham, near Kirby Wiske, Yorkshire, the son of William Hickes of Stonegrave, Yorkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Kay of Topcliffe, Yorkshire. After being educated at Thirsk he graduated BA from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1655, was a fellow there, and in 1656 became minister at Ballyroan, Queen's county. On 2 October 1657 he was appointed curate at Saltash, Cornwall, and, beginning in 1659, he also served as rector of nearby Stoke Damerel, Devon, following the death of German Gouldson (Goldstone). He was ejected from Stoke Damerel prior to 17 November 1660, when a new rector was installed, and subsequently from Saltash, where his successor subscribed under the 'Act of Uniformity' on 5 August 1662. Hickes remained at Saltash, and was one of six dissenting ministers living there in 1665. Following the passage of the 'File Mile Act', he moved to Kingsbridge, Devon, where he associated with the dissenting ministers James Birdwood, Christopher Jellinger, and Edmund Tucker. He and his first wife, Abigail (1632-1675), daughter of John Howe, minister of Loughborough, Leicestershire, and sister of the presbyterian minister John Howe, had five children: John; William, who became rector of Broughton Gifford, Wiltshire; Abigail, who was baptized at Saltash on 1 December 1667; Catherine; and Elizabeth, wife of the martyrologist John Tutchin. 
After justices in Devon and Cornwall began enforcing the 1670 'Conventicle Act', Hickes chronicled some of their activities in 'A True and Faithful Narrative, of the Unjust and Illegal Sufferings', published anonymously in 1671. Calling for royal intervention, he denounced informers as unreliable witnesses, argued that meetings held openly were not seditious conventicles, insisted that penal laws be applied justly and rationally, and asserted that religious persecution harmed the country's economy. Having been charged with murder after a magistrate died, allegedly as the result of forcibly dispersing a conventicle in his house, Hickes went into hiding between 11 September 1670 and February 1671. When the king saw Hickes's 'Narrative' he was irate, but in December 1671 Thomas Blood, whom Hickes would have met in Ireland, intervened on his behalf. On 2 January 1672 Charles II pardoned Hickes and such dissidents as Ralph Alexander, Robert Perrott, Nicholas Lockyer, and Blood's son for all acts of treason and other crimes committed since 29 May 1660. 
For much of 1672 Hickes remained in London, assisting numerous dissenters to obtain licences under the declaration of indulgence; of his 515 applications (282 from Devon), 86 were successful. Most of those he helped were presbyterians and congregationalists, though at least one, Adam Pearse of Exeter, was a Baptist. Many were from the south-west but others were from as far away as Yorkshire, Northumberland, and Lancashire. Hickes acquired a general licence for himself as a presbyterian on 2 April, and licences for his house at Kingsbridge on 11 April, a new meeting-house there on 30 September, and (if actually issued) his house at Hatton Garden, London, on 23 December. On 6 April 1672 he and Thomas Martin of Plymouth presented the king with a declaration of thanks from seventy-two nonconforming ministers in Devon, and he probably wrote or influenced similar statements from Cornwall and Wiltshire. Hickes also persuaded Charles to remit a third of the fines levied on dissenters in the west for holding conventicles. 
The persecution deeply impressed Hickes, who addressed it again in the epistle to 'A Discourse of the Excellency of the Heavenly Substance' (1673), in which he protested that nonconformists suffered more at the hands of fellow protestants than did Catholics. He also noted that during the preceding decade he had been forced to find employment outside the ministry and had found little opportunity to study. After the indulgence was cancelled he continued to preach, and in August 1673 was fined $20 for doing so at Exeter. On 4 July 1674 the bishop of Exeter, Anthony Sparrow, noting that he had persuaded the lord keeper to restore a JP dismissed because of Hickes's complaints, protested to the chancellor that Hickes was disturbing the peace. By 1675 Hickes was ministering to a congregation at Portsmouth, where magistrates disrupted his conventicle on 14 October 1677 and fined the owner of the house. Following the death of his first wife in 1675, he married a widow, Elizabeth Mills (died 'c'.1705), the daughter of John Moody, a Portsmouth maltster, and his wife, Elizabeth Arnold. They had two children, Elizabeth ('b'. 1678), who married Captain Luke Spicer of the Royal Navy, and James ('b'. 1679). In 1681 or 1682 Hickes moved to Keynsham, Somerset. 
Convinced that Monmouth was Charles II's legitimate heir, Hickes joined the duke at Shepton Mallet, Somerset, on 24 June 1685. He later insisted that he had not recruited men for Monmouth's forces or recommended that the duke assume the title of king at Taunton. When the rebellion collapsed, he and the attorney Richard Nelthorpe fled, taking shelter with Dame Alice Lisle at Moyles Court, Ellingham, on the edge of the New Forest. There they were captured by Colonel Thomas Penruddocke. Hickes was tried by George Jeffreys and his colleagues on 23 September. As he faced execution, having been convicted of aiding the rebels, he told his wife that he would die because he had defended protestantism and English liberties. After efforts by his brother George Hickes, dean of Worcester, to obtain royal mercy failed, Hickes was executed at Glastonbury on 6 October 1685. A month later his brother-in-law, Daniel Moody, a master gunner in the Royal Artillery, petitioned for his sister's estate, valued at $100 per annum plus $2000 in goods, which had been forfeited when Hickes was convicted. The latter, Moody claimed, had employed sinister artifices to persuade his father to make a will favouring his sister. 


@@@@@


doc= 13205


Thomas Hickes (1598/9-1634) was born in Shipston in the parish of Tredington in Worcestershire (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.584), but there is no record of his birth in the Tredington or Shipston parish registers. Thomas matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, on 13 December 1616, aged seventeen, and took his BA on 11 May 1620 and his MA on 23 January 1623. In 1630 he became a chaplain at Christ Church, Oxford, an appointment attributed by Wood to the patronage of Brian Duppa, then dean of Christ Church and vice-chancellor of Oxford University (ibid.). Hickes's edition of his father's translation of Lucian is dedicated to Duppa, with the assurance that Hickes is 'so farre indebted to your favours, that my thankfulnesse cannot willingly omit the occasion of expressing itself' (sig. A2'r'). As well as the dialogues translated by Francis, this volume includes Thomas's 'Life of Lucian, Gathered out of his Own Writings', and his notes on his father's translations. In his letter 'To the honest and judicious reader' Hickes hints at plans to publish more of his father's works 'to propagate his owne memorie, which may chance to last longer in this small monument of his owne raising (or in some larger hereafter) than in the hardest marble posteritie can erect him' (sig. A3'v'). His own notes to the dialogues, which testify to an extensive knowledge of Greek literature, are justified as an attempt to make his father's translations comprehensible even to 'the meanest capacities... otherwise, the English, would be to many, almost as much Greeke as the Originall' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 13206


Hickey, Diarmuid (1586-1641), Franciscan friar, was born in the diocese of Killaloe in Thomond, Ireland. The O'Hickeys were hereditary physicians to the O'Briens of Thomond and lived on both sides of the Shannon estuary. Other details survive concerning his background. He used the name 'Dermitius Thadaei... filius' showing that his father's name was Tadhg. His brother Cormac was archdeacon of Killaloe and prior of Inis Cathaigh (Scattery Island in the estuary), and he wrote to him in Irish in 1626 naming other family members, possibly seven other brothers and one sister: Turlough, Una, Tadhg, Brian, Conor, Richard, Andrew, and James; Cormac was then staying with Richard and his family at Dunmoylan in north Limerick. Antony Hickey was, on one occasion, listed among the Franciscans from Connaught, while Bonaventure Baron said he was 'Tuamensis' meaning, perhaps, from the diocese of Tuam; Hickey had, in fact, lived near Tuam town. He himself said that he grew up with his cousin Malachy O'Queely, later archbishop of Tuam, who came from Drinagh, co. Clare. 
Hickey studied in Paris with O'Queely. He attended the Irish College at Douai and, when twenty-one, joined the Irish Franciscans at the recently founded St Anthony's College, Louvain, on 1 November 1607, as one of the first novices there. He received orders up to the diaconate at Mechelen in March-April 1609, and the priesthood on 6 March 1610. He attended the general chapter at Rome in 1612 as a respondent defending theological theses. He taught theology at St Anthony's, Louvain, was on the house council in 1616, and was 'praeses' or acting superior in 1617. He taught philosophy at Aix-la-Chapelle and theology at Cologne for some part of the years 1617-19, but was in Louvain in February 1618 when he signed an approbation for Aodh Mac Aingil's (Hugh MacCaughwell's) 'Sgathan Shacramainte na hAithrighe'. 
In 1619 Hickey was called to Rome to assist Luke Wadding, at the friary of San Pietro in Montorio, in his project of restoring the literary and historical glory of the Franciscan order. One of the best Irish theologians of his day, Hickey answered the attacks on the Franciscans that had appeared in the 'Annales ecclesiastici', volumes 13 and 14, of Abraham Bzovius OP, continuator of Baronius, published at Rome in 1616-17. Hickey's lengthy response, 'Nitela Franciscanae religionis', was completed before January 1626, but not published until 1627, under the name Dermitius Thadaei. A few years later he and Wadding were faced with the hostility of Patrick Cahill and Paul Harris to the religious of Ireland. On 22 June 1625 he became the first lecturer at the newly opened St Isidore's College in Rome, and later became a consultor for Roman congregations concerned with the doctrine of the immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the revision of the Roman breviary, and the ritual of the Greek church. He was also an agent at Rome for some Irish ecclesiastics. He edited three volumes of the works of Angelo del Paz OFM (who had died in the friary at San Pietro in Montorio in 1596) with Wadding, who thought very highly of him, and edited volumes 9, 10, and 12, on 'Quaestiones in lib. IV sententiarum', for Wadding's edition of John Duns Scotus. He left manuscript commentaries on Scotus, on moral and ascetical theology, on the immaculate conception, and on the stigmata of St Catherine of Siena. When he was appointed definitor-general in 1639 he was described as a jubilate lector of Ireland and minister provincial of Scotland. He was a large and amiable man, a favourite conciliator, beloved by all including Pope Urban VIII, who lamented his death on 26 June 1641 at St Isidore's at the age of fifty-five: he had struck his ankle on a step and a fatal infection had set in. He was buried in St Isidore's, and Wadding wrote his epitaph. 


@@@@@


doc= 13207


John Hickey (1751-1795), sculptor, fourth son of Noah Hickey, younger brother of Thomas, was born in Dublin on 7 November 1751. He entered the Royal Dublin Society Schools in 1764, before becoming a pupil of the wood carver Richard Cranfield in Dublin. In 1776 he went to England, enrolling at the Royal Academy Schools, where he obtained a gold medal in 1778. From 1777 to 1794 he exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy, his subjects including, besides mythological scenes, busts of his patron Edmund Burke (1785 and 1791, the earlier sent to India and included in Thomas Hickey's portrait of William Hickey in the National Gallery of Ireland), and of Mrs Siddons as Cassandra (1786). In 1786 he was appointed sculptor to the prince of Wales, and the following year he exhibited at the Royal Academy a model for a colossal figure of Time for Carlton House. A list of monuments executed between 1775 and 1790 is given by Gunnis. He died in London on 13 January 1795 'owing to having lain three days in a damp bed' (Farington, 'Diary', 2.295), and the contents of his studio were sold at Christies on 15 March 1798. 


@@@@@


doc= 13208


Hickey, Thomas (1741-1824), portrait painter and traveller, was born in Dublin in May 1741, the second son of Noah Hickey, a confectioner in Capel Street there. Between 1753 and 1756 he studied at the Royal Dublin Society Schools, where he won several prizes. His earliest portraits, chalk drawings of 1758 and 1759, are in the National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin. In April 1762 George Dance reported him in Rome 'a very agreeable young man' (Ingamells, 496) who had been recommended by one Captain Smith and William Dance (a miniaturist, brother of George). He was still there in April 1765, living in the strada Felice, and in May 1765 he visited Naples. He was said to have been one of those artists who paid court to Angelica Kauffman (who was in Rome from January 1763 to June 1765). In May 1767 he was back in Dublin, where he exhibited with the Society of Artists during 1768-70, before moving to London. He exhibited portraits at the Royal Academy (1772-6), and in 1775 his sitters included the duke of Cumberland and the actress Mrs Abington (Garrick Club, London). In December 1776 he moved to Bath for two years, where he painted two full-length portraits of masters of ceremonies, William Dawson and William Brereton (both engraved). 
On 26 March 1780 Hickey received permission from the East India Company to go to India, and on 6 July Sir Joshua Reynolds wrote on his behalf to Warren Hastings, recommending 'a very ingenious young painter' who wished 'to make a trial of his own abilities' (Archer, 206). Hickey sailed from Portsmouth on 27 July but the convoy of five vessels was captured by the French and Spanish on 9 August. Hickey was taken to Cadiz but released as a non-combatant; he made his way to Lisbon where, for three years, he established a profitable practice as a portrait painter. In 1782 he was living in 'four handsome rooms on the ground floor of Mrs Williams' hotel' ('Memoirs', 2.386). The elegant 'Girl Leaning on a Piano' in the Tate collection belongs to this period. At the close of 1783 he left Lisbon and arrived at Calcutta in March 1784. 
For three years Hickey had considerable success, living in 'a large handsome house in the most fashionable part' ('Memoirs', 3.202) and enjoying the patronage of the attorney William Hickey (who was not related). The 'Indian Lady' of 1787 (National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin), possibly Jemdanee, William Hickey's 'bibi', remains one of his finest pictures. Late in 1786 the painter John Zoffany returned to Calcutta, and Hickey's practice declined. He turned to compiling a 'History of Ancient Painting and Sculpture', the first, and only, volume of which was published in 1788; future volumes, the 'Calcutta Chronicle' announced in February 1789, would have to await further research by the author in Europe. From February 1789 Hickey had some success in Madras, but he was back in Calcutta by 1790. In January 1791 he sailed home. 
Hickey again encountered a lack of business, although he was able to exhibit the portrait of a nobleman at the Royal Academy in 1792. He was preparing to return to India in February when he received an invitation from Lord Macartney, whose portrait he had previously painted, to accompany him on a diplomatic mission to Peking (Beijing). The mission lasted from September 1792 to September 1794, during which Hickey entertained Macartney with shrewd and clever conversation, but devoted more time to writing than to drawing or painting. 
On his return, Hickey spent four years in London and Dublin, without any marked success. Early in 1798 he returned for the last time to India with his two daughters (but nothing is recorded of his marriage). They had left London by 23 February 1798 and arrived at Madras later in the year. The Anglo-Mysore wars, establishing British ascendancy in southern India, were then in their final throes; in May 1799 Tipu Sultan was slain and Seringapatam was taken. Hickey found himself the only portrait painter on the spot and his services were urgently sought. He made chalk drawings of fifty-five British officers (Stratfield Saye House, Hampshire) which were much admired, and he intended to paint a series of large history paintings describing the last Mysore war, which never materialized. Portraiture took up all his time: in 1799 he painted a full-length portrait of Lord Mornington, the British supreme commander, for the Exchange at Madras (Apsley House, London); a series of sixteen Indian dignitaries for Government House, Calcutta, was completed in 1805, and there were many portraits of British inhabitants, of which the full-length of William Kirkpatrick (National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin) was perhaps the most accomplished. 
In 1804, when a history of the East India Company was being contemplated, Hickey unsuccessfully proposed himself as the company's historical and portrait painter with responsibility for describing the different Indian inhabitants and their surroundings. In May 1807 he moved to Calcutta where he stayed five years, although only one portrait has been identified from this period. In December 1812 he was invited back to Madras, where he settled with his elder daughter. He was much employed in repairing paintings and few of his portraits survive from these years. The last was of the celebrated Indologist the Abbe Dubois in 'Bramanical costume', painted in 1823 (Madras Literary Society). Hickey died at Madras in May 1824 at the age of eighty-three. 
Throughout his restless career Hickey never quite attained eminence as a painter, and he was frequently concerned over his prospects. Though his drawings could be vigorous, his paintings, particularly the whole-length presentation pieces, tended to be wooden; 'combination & general effect are the great difficulties', wrote Lord Sydenham in 1800, 'and we are yet to know whether Mr Hickey possesses these requisites' (Archer, 221). It is, however, apparent that Hickey's personal charm and erudition, quite apart from his extensive experience of the world, considerably helped his social progress. 




@@@@@


doc= 13209


Hickey, William (1787-1875), writer and philanthropist, was born in Murragh, co. Cork, the eldest son of Ambrose Hickey DD, rector of Murragh. After spending five terms at Trinity College, Dublin (1804-5), he was admitted a pensioner of St John's College, Cambridge, on 7 March 1806 and then became a scholar there. His father was admitted fellow-commoner at the same college three days later. Hickey took a BA at both Cambridge and Dublin in 1809, and took an MA at Dublin in 1832. 
In 1811 Hickey was ordained, and he became curate of Dunleckny in the diocese of Leighlin. In 1813 he married Henrietta Maria, only daughter of John Steuart, of Steuart's Lodge, co. Carlow. He moved in 1820 to become vicar of Bannow, in the diocese of Ferns. While there he built a glebe house, restored the fabric of the church, and with Thomas Boyce of Bannow House founded Bannow agricultural school on a farm of 40 acres. With Boyce he also established the South Wexford Agricultural Society, the first of its kind in Ireland. In 1826 Hickey moved to the rectory of Kilcormick, where he built a new church and a schoolhouse, and initiated the building of roads and bridges. In 1831 he was advanced to the rectory of Wexford, and finally, in 1834, to Mulrankin. He was also rural dean of Tacumshane. 
Hickey was concerned about the poor condition of the Irish farmer. As early as 1817 he produced a pamphlet entitled 'State of the Poor in Ireland'. His first substantial work on farming was written, like his subsequent publications, under the pseudonym of Martin Doyle. It was originally issued in the 'Wexford Herald' in the form of letters to the editor, as 'Hints to small farmers', and after publication in a collected form in 1830 it passed through many editions, of which the last appeared in 1867. For the rest of his life a steady stream of practical handbooks on agriculture and gardening appeared. His many publications included 'Hints to Small Holders on Planting and on Cattle' (1830), 'Practical Gardening' (1833), 'A Cyclopaedia of Practical Husbandry' (1839), 'Small Farms: a Practical Treatise Intended for Persons Inexperienced in Husbandry' (1855), and 'Cottage Farming' (1870). Hickey also contributed regularly to several periodicals, including 'Blackwood's Agricultural Magazine', the 'Gardeners' Chronicle', and 'Chambers's Journal'. With Edmund Murphy he launched the 'Irish Farmer's and Gardener's Magazine' in 1834. He also edited 'The Illustrated Book of Domestic Poultry' (1854). 
Hickey was a member of the Royal Dublin Society, and was awarded their gold medal in recognition of his services to Ireland. Between 1863 and 1873 he received a series of grants from the Royal Literary Fund. He died comparatively poor on 24 October 1875 at Mulrankin. His granddaughter was the writer Emily Henrietta Hickey. 


@@@@@


doc= 13210


Hickman, Charles (1648-1713), Church of Ireland bishop of Derry, was the son of William Hickman of Barnack, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Abigail (died 1699). He was educated at Westminster School and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA (1671), MA (1674), BD (1684), and DD (1685). Thereafter he held a series of prestigious appointments: chaplain to Charles II's illegitimate son Charles, duke of Southampton; chaplain to Baron Chandos, whom he might have accompanied on his embassy to Constantinople in 1680; and chaplain to the lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1684. He was rector of Farnham Royal, Buckinghamshire, during 1688-1703, and from July 1692 lecturer at St James's Church, Westminster, as well as serving as chaplain-in-ordinary to William and Mary, and later Anne. He was appointed bishop of Derry in 1703 (patent 19 March, consecrated 11 June). Henry Cotton says that Hickman was chaplain to the earl of Rochester, lord lieutenant from 1701 to 1703, which would account for his promotion to an Irish bishopric at this time. However, the official order for his appointment ('CSP dom.', '1703-4', 283) identifies him simply as one of the queen's chaplains-in-ordinary. 
Hickman became a prominent spokesman for the high-church party that emerged in Ireland in the years following his appointment. Addison, reporting in 1709 on proceedings in convocation, claimed that Hickman and Bishop Thomas Lindsay of Killaloe were 'the two firebrands... who have a great influence on the majority of their own order and many of the lay gentlemen of the kingdom' ('The Letters of Joseph Addison', ed. W. Graham, 1941, 168). Comments by Hickman's predecessor at Derry, William King, though not mentioning him by name, imply that he was non-resident (TCD, MS 750/4/1, pp. 311, 326). King also complained that Hickman had 'entirely rooted up and destroyed a large flourishing wood, which I with care and cost had planted whilst at Londonderry' (C. S. King, 'A Great Archbishop of Dublin', 1906, 228). Hickman published volumes of collected sermons in 1706 and 1713, as well as several single sermons. In 1703 he married Anne, daughter of Sir Roger Burgoyne of Aynhoe, Northamptonshire, who predeceased him. They had one daughter, Anne. He died at Fulham on 28 November 1713 and was buried in the south aisle of Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 13211


Hickman, Francis (b. 1662/3), classical scholar, was the fourth son of Sir William Hickman, baronet, of Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, and Elizabeth, daughter of John Nevile of Mattersey, Nottingham. In 1676 he became a king's scholar at Westminster School, and in 1681, aged eighteen, entered Christ Church, Oxford. In 1685 he graduated BA, and MA in 1688. He became a nonjuror at the revolution of 1688, but did not lose his student's place at Christ Church, because, according to Anthony Wood, his name was not mentioned in the 'Act of Deprivation'. In 1693 Hickman delivered the Bodleian oration at Oxford University. His only known literary remains are two Latin poems in the 1741 'Musae Anglicanae' (edited by Vincent Bourne, vol. 2, 108-13), upon the death of Charles II and upon an exploit of the duke of Ormond in Ireland. Hickman also co-operated with Francis Atterbury's 1682 Latin translation of John Dryden's 'Absalom and Achitophel'. The date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 13212


Hickman, Henry (bap. 1629, d. 1692), clergyman, ejected minister and religious controversialist, was baptized on 19 January 1629 at Old Swinford, Worcestershire, the son of Richard Hickman (died 1656/7), a clothier, and his wife, Rose, 'nee' Male. With substantial assistance from his uncle Henry Hickman, a salter of London, he was educated at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1648. Hickman then entered Magdalen College, Oxford, becoming a demy on 29 October 1648. On 5 March 1649 he was admitted as a fellow by the parliamentary visitors; on 14 March 1650 he was incorporated BA and proceeded MA the same day. Licensed as a preacher, he was lecturer at Brackley, Northamptonshire, by the time he arrived at Steane about 1650 or 1651 to teach logic to Nathaniel Crewe, later Baron Crewe of Steane and bishop of Durham. 
Hickman was friendly with John Spilsbury, also a fellow of Magdalen, vicar of Bromsgrove, Worcestershire from 1654 to 1660, and with Richard Baxter. On 12 September 1653 Hickman was appointed vicar of Brackley; on 7 January 1654 he wrote to Baxter that 'I have withdrawn myself from the university' to officiate there, and that he did not intend to involve himself in the controversies which Baxter's works were stimulating (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.122-3). He was, however, unable to suppress his taste for theological battle. In a university disputation of 1657, having obtained Baxter's advice on the validity of Catholic ordination, Hickman argued that 'the Church of Rome, for aught he knew, was a true church'; this did not find favour with Vavasor Powel, who at All Saints, Oxford, on 15 July 1657, riposted that 'the Pope would provide him with a mitre and the Devil with a frying-pan' ('Calamy rev.'). In May 1657 Hickman was invited to become pastor of Stoke Newington but he declined in the hope of a benefice close to his college; he was admitted rector of St Aldates, Oxford, on 29 July 1657, and proceeded BD on 29 May 1658. On 20 July 1659 Hickman wrote thanking Baxter for his book, probably 'The Holy Commonwealth', remarking that he could not tell whether most to admire his 'judgement or your courage' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.401). Baxter wrote to William Mewe on 6 September 1659 that 'my friend' Hickman was his only active ally in refuting their various opponents (ibid., 1.407-8). 
Of Hickman's voluminous polemical writings, sometimes issued anonymously or under the pseudonym Theophilus Churchman, the exchanges with Thomas Pierce and Peter Heylin are perhaps most notable. In the first preface to Pierce's 'An Impartial Inquiry into the Nature of Sin' (1660) the author denounced Hickman as a brother in spirit of 'the rigid scotized thorow paced Presbyterians', accusing him of holding the heresy of some high Calvinists that God was the author of sin, and of thus 'laying the foundation of perfect Libertinism and Rantism'. Hickman replied to Pierce in 'A justification of the fathers and the schoolmen that they are not self condemned for denying the positivity of sin' (1659). In 'Plus ultra' (1661) and other works he also challenged Peter Heylin's version of the history of English protestantism. He was outraged, for example, that Heylin should 'lay his pelagian eggs in the nest of our first reformers', and denounced as unreliable William Barlow's anti-puritan account of the Hampton Court conference of 1604 ('A Review of the Certamen epistolare', 1659). Hickman also ill-advisedly questioned the legality of Heylin's marriage. 
After the restoration of Charles II in 1660 Hickman lost his post at St Aldates and was ousted from his university fellowship on 6 August 1662. At a dinner with the diarist Samuel Pepys on 21 August 1662 he complained bitterly of the high-handed ejections initiated by vengeful returned Anglican fellows. Soon afterwards he crossed to the Netherlands and took refuge with Matthew Newcomen, the ejected lecturer of Dedham, acting as an assistant preacher in the English church at Leiden in 1664. A Henry Hickman appears under the date 13 July 1663 as a student of the University of Leiden. On 26 March 1666, however, his name featured on a list of English subjects whom the government sought to have returned to stand trial for their activities during the interregnum. Hickman did return, but seems not to have been dealt with severely. However, he quickly became involved in a long and labyrinthine struggle in the court of chancery against Alice Hickman, over the estate of her husband Henry, his uncle and former benefactor. In 1666-7 Hickman became a tutor in the house of William Strode, of Barrington, Somerset, a presbyterian and former MP, with a salary of $10 a year 'and his diet' (Reade, 'Gleanings', 55). Strode died in December 1666, leaving $2500 and an additional $1000 due on a mortgage to his daughter Joanna. On 30 November 1667 Hickman, then of St James's, Clerkenwell, was licensed to marry Joanna (died 1692), who was then aged twenty-six; this presaged the launch of another lawsuit. On 24 November 1668 the couple filed a petition in chancery against her brothers for claims under her father's will. In response William Strode alleged that after his father's death Joanna and Henry had removed gold and other valuable property from the house, and he further accused Hickman of secretly marrying Joanna to get her fortune. It was probably after his marriage that Hickman opened a school at Dusthorp, near Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, to which Oliver Heywood and Adam Martindale sent their sons. He probably lived at the nearby parish of Belbroughton (where John Tristram, his sister's husband, was the patron); he baptized a son, William, there on 28 October 1668. Probably about this time he founded a library at Stourbridge grammar school. 
Hickman returned to the Netherlands in 1674 and became pastor of the English church at Leiden. Here it was expected that he would place himself under the discipline of the Dutch classis, but 'no action was taken because Hickman could not understand the Dutch language, and it was decided to wait 'until Hickman understands Dutch better'' (Sprunger, 416). On 18 April 1675, as pastor of the English church in the city, he was admitted to study medicine at Leiden University. On 19 March 1683, at the office of the public notary in Leiden, Henry and Joanna Hickman willed that most of their estate should pass to their children, making special arrangements for property in Warwickshire and for Hickman's library. They both died in Leiden in 1692, Henry about Michaelmas, and Joanna a few weeks later. On 10 March 1693 the prerogative court of Canterbury granted the administration of their estate to their son William, who the following week made his own will before returning to the Netherlands. 


@@@@@


doc= 13213


Hicks, Baptist, first Viscount Campden (1551?-1629), mercer and moneylender, was the third son of Robert Hicks (died 1557), a rich London citizen. He was probably educated at St Paul's School, and then at Trinity College, Cambridge. He was brought up in, and inherited, his father's flourishing mercer's business at the White Bear in Cheapside. The influence of his elder brother, Sir Michael Hickes (1543-1612), a secretary to Lord Burghley and an intimate of Robert Cecil (later the earl of Salisbury), provided him with opportunities to supply the court with silks and mercery, as well as to make loans to the crown and to courtly persons, among them the earl and countess of Shrewsbury, the earls of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Chandos, Anthony and Francis Bacon, and Sir Fulke Greville. 
Baptist Hicks complained more than once to his brother about his undeserved reputation for hard dealing, 'when others... goe awaye with the gaines and yet byte to the bone' (BL, Lansdowne MS 89, no. 32). He was one of the most important individual lenders to the early Stuart kings, his loans to whom amounted to at least $33,000, not including some of his contributions to syndicated loans, which cannot be precisely quantified, nor the extended credit which he gave for silks and luxury items for the royal household and wardrobe. About this last involvement he expressed concern in a letter to his brother on 9 January 1607: 'I would to god that I had never procured yt' (BL, Lansdowne MS 90, no. 3). In 1609 he obtained a lucrative concession as one of a number of contractors for the purchase and resale of royal lands. His importance to the crown was demonstrated in November 1611, and on other occasions, when royal intervention was instrumental in saving him from serving as alderman. 
In 1584 Hicks married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard May, merchant tailor of London. According to Stow, each of their two daughters and coheirs had a fortune of $100,000 (Stow, 760-61). Soon after 1608 Hicks purchased the manor of Campden in Gloucestershire, where he erected a noble mansion near the church; the 'outside' of the house was said to have cost him $29,000. The building was destroyed during the civil war. In 1612 he became involved in a long but ultimately successful dispute with Lionel Cranfield (later the earl of Middlesex), over the profits of the rectory of Campden. In 1611-12 he built at his own cost a sessions house in Clerkenwell for the Middlesex magistrates. This became known as Hicks Hall. 
Knighted in 1603, shortly after James I's accession, Hicks was one of the first knighted citizens to continue keeping shop after being honoured. On 1 July 1620 he was created a baronet. He served as MP for Tavistock in the parliament of 1621, and for Tewkesbury in the parliaments of 1624, 1625, 1626, and 1628. In 1625 he was appointed a deputy lieutenant for Middlesex, and on 5 May 1628 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Hicks of Ilmington, Warwickshire, and Viscount Campden of Campden, Gloucestershire. The titles were inherited by special remainder by his son-in-law, Edward, Baron Noel. 
Campden died in London on 18 October 1629, aged seventy-eight, and was buried, on 4 November 1629, in Campden church, where a magnificent monument of black and white marble was erected, with reclining effigies of himself and his wife (who survived him). His epitaph stated that he gave $10,000 to charitable uses, though a later estimate reckoned this sum at $7058. Among the parish churches to benefit from his generosity were those of Campden, Tewkesbury, Hampstead, his City church of St Lawrence Jewry, and Kensington, where in 1612 he had built another country house conveniently near the City. Other benefactions included the building of a market house, the endowment of twelve almshouses in Campden, and bequests for the poor, both there and in Kensington. 


@@@@@


doc= 13214


Hicks, Henry (1837-1899), geologist and alienist, was born at St David's, Pembrokeshire, on 26 May 1837, the son of Thomas Hicks ('b'. 1807), surgeon, and Anne (died 1884), daughter of William Griffiths of Carmarthen. He was educated at the cathedral chapter school at St David's and at Guy's Hospital, where he became MRCS (in 1862) and an Apothecaries' licentiate. (He also took an MD from St Andrews in 1878.) He began practice at St David's and on 2 February 1864 married Mary, daughter of P. D. Richardson, vicar of St Dogwell's. In 1871 he moved to Hendon as a general practitioner, but subsequently began to specialize in psychiatric medicine and opened a clinic for female patients, eventually transferring to spacious premises at Hendon Grove. 
In the 1860s Hicks undertook the care of the palaeontologist John Salter, who had resigned from the geological survey under a cloud with incipient mental illness. Hicks and his patient found a common interest in geology and collaborated in several investigations in Pembrokeshire. Important finds of Lower Palaeozoic fossils were made, and Hicks and Salter began to establish the idea of there also being Precambrian rocks at St David's which had once formed an island in a Cambrian sea and around which the Cambrian strata had been deposited. This idea was developed with claims of Precambrians in the Malvern hills, north Wales, and elsewhere. 
Hicks was a follower to some extent of the ideas of 'chemical geology' of the North American geologist T. S. Hunt, according to which one might, from chemical principles, deduce a series of chemical processes occurring in the earth's early oceans which had led to the formation of strata in a determinate sequence. Such ideas were poorly received in Britain, and Hicks found himself at odds with the scientific establishment in the persons of Andrew Ramsay and Archibald Geikie concerning the rocks of St David's, and specifically whether the crystalline rocks of Salter's Precambrian 'island' were or were not intrusive. In this controversy, Hicks's opponents accused him of invoking faults too readily to account for his field observations, and he was also charged with making correlations between distant rocks on the basis of insufficient lithological resemblances. 
Besides doing much work on the Lower Palaeozoic rocks of south Wales, with numerous fossil finds, especially near Llanfirn farm, Abereiddi Bay (today the type area for the 'Llanvirnian' division of the Ordovician), Hicks divided the claimed Precambrian rocks of Pembrokeshire into three lithological units, 'Dimetian', 'Pebidian', and 'Arvonian', which could also be recognized in north Wales; however, this threefold division had few supporters. With his interest in Precambrian rocks, Hicks also participated in the so-called highlands controversy, concerned with the age and structure of the rocks of the north-west highlands of Scotland. It was Hicks who, in 1878, reopened the question, which had been settled in favour of the views of the survey officers Roderick Murchison and Archibald Geikie, developed in the 1860s. Though Hicks did not solve the structural problem successfully, his role in the debate was undoubtedly significant. 
Hicks also wrote on Pleistocene geology, in which he became interested when mammalian remains were discovered in the valley below his house in Hendon. Following excavations in cave deposits in north Wales, he concluded that there was evidence of preglacial humans in that part of the world. This suggestion, like many of his other ideas, quickly involved him in controversy. His other main research interest had to do with the so-called 'Morte Slates', near Ilfracombe. He visited this area in 1890, discovering fragmentary fossils, which he took to be Silurian. His suggestion -- which has not been accepted subsequently, the rocks being regarded as Upper Devonian -- was that the rocks had been emplaced by thrusting into younger strata. However, his work on the area was incomplete at the time of his death. 
One of the best-known amateur geologists of his day, Hicks was renowned for his skill at finding fossils and his forceful expression of controversial views. He was secretary of the Geological Society in 1890-93 and president in 1896-8, having been awarded the society's Bigsby medal in 1883. He was president of the Geologists' Association in 1883-5 and was elected FRS in 1885. Besides his geological and medical work, Hicks involved himself in sanitary and educational matters, in church affairs, and in Conservative Party organization. He died unexpectedly of heart disease at Hatchcroft House, Hendon, on 18 November 1899, being survived by his widow and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 13215


Hickes, Sir Michael (1543-1612), administrator, was born on 21 October 1543, the first of six children of a mercer, Robert Hickes or Hicks (died 1557), of the White Bear, Cheapside, London, and Julian (died 1592), daughter of William Arthur of Somerset. The Hickes family had a long history as yeomen in neighbouring Gloucestershire, and it seems likely that Robert married before digging up his west country roots and setting off for London, where he established a retail mercery. Michael had five younger brothers, though only two, Clement and Baptist Hicks (1551?-1629), survived until manhood. Their father died in 1557 and his will reveals a moderate prosperity which enabled Michael to go up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1559. 
It is not clear how long Hickes stayed at Trinity -- he did not graduate -- but he was certainly in residence in 1562. It was no doubt largely through his years at Trinity that Hickes acquired the extensive knowledge of the classics that enabled him to sprinkle his later correspondence with Latin epigrams. During the 1560s Trinity College was an important centre of puritanism at Cambridge. Thomas Cartwright, one of the leaders of the early Elizabethan puritan movement, was a fellow there while Hickes was in residence, and the two men got to know each other. Hickes's closest friends at university, men like Vincent Skinner and John Stubbe, were also puritans, and it is clear that he shared their religious views. In March 1565 he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn, where Stubbe and Skinner had preceded him. He maintained his interest in the law long after he had ceased to be a student. In 1577, four years after his entry into Lord Burghley's service, he received a call to the bar, though there is no evidence that he ever practised as a lawyer. 
In 1573 Hickes entered the household of William Cecil, Lord Burghley, and embarked on a career which led to political influence and personal affluence. Four years later, serving alongside Henry Maynard, he became one of Burghley's two principal secretaries. He was patronage secretary, helping his master to deal with the flood of requests for favours and assistance which assailed Burghley from all corners of the land. Hickes dealt with suits of a very varied nature: requests for wardships, petitions from towns, university patronage, assistance with official government business, matters connected with the country's customs administration, legal requests, ecclesiastical causes, and petitions connected with building operations in London. The range of these suits to Hickes reflected his master's role as chief minister of the crown, a position which gave Burghley the greatest role in the distribution of the queen's patronage. 
Hickes's position as middleman gave him great opportunities to extract gratuities from grateful clients. They knew that favours had to be paid for, and sometimes promised large sums, as much as $100, for Hickes's help. It is probable in fact that during the 1590s he 'received more gratuities than any other servant in England' (Neale, 76). Hickes sat in four parliaments during his years as Burghley's secretary -- those of 1584, 1589, 1593, and 1597 -- but we have certain knowledge of only one speech which he made in the Commons, and there is no indication that he ever played a prominent role in the house. He was almost certainly the author of the so-called 'Anonymous Life' of Burghley, published within a few years of the latter's death and the most important literary source for his career. 
During his years in Burghley's service Hickes forged a firm friendship with his master's younger son and political heir, Robert Cecil. In the 1590s the two men, working sometimes behind Burghley's back, resorted to a number of dubious practices in their dealings with suitors, and the personal and political friendship between the two continued into James I's reign. After 1608 their friendship cooled, though at the very end of Cecil's life the old intimacy was renewed. Early in 1612 a multiplicity of distressing symptoms suggested that Cecil was terminally ill. Towards the end of April it was decided that he should take the waters at Bath, and Hickes accompanied him in the role of close friend, staying with him until his death on 24 May. 
In December 1594 Hickes married Elizabeth Parvish ('nee' Colston), the prosperous widow of a London merchant, who bore him two sons, William and Michael, and a daughter, Elizabeth. She had a life interest in her late husband's country house at Ruckholt in Essex and Hickes spent much of his later life there, devoting a good deal of his time to local administration. He was feodary of Essex (the local representative of the court of wards) between 1598 and 1601; receiver-general of crown lands in Essex, Hertfordshire, London, and Middlesex between 1603 and 1604; and chief steward of nine royal manors in Essex after 1608. From 1609 until 1612 he once more played a role in central administration as a deputy in the alienations office, which dealt with the fines levied on those who wished to sell freehold land or land held in chief of the crown. 
Both Queen Elizabeth and James I visited Ruckholt, the former in 1597 and the latter in 1604. Shortly after James's visit Hickes was knighted, on 6 August 1604. He died at Ruckholt on 15 August 1612 of a 'burning ague' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.379), and was buried at Leyton church, Essex. At the time of his death he owned property in London, Nottinghamshire, and Gloucestershire, and he had, during his lifetime, made considerable sums from the profits of office holding and from the moneylending activities which he undertook for many years. 


@@@@@


doc= 13216


Hicks, William (bap. 1621, d. 1660), religious writer, was baptized at Kerris in the parish of Paul, Cornwall, on 2 January 1621, the son of Nicholas Hicks, gentleman. He was educated partly at grammar school in Exeter, Devon, and partly at Liskeard, Cornwall, and was then sent to Oxford. He matriculated commoner from Wadham College on 9 March 1638, where he attended the courses in logic and philosophy but from where he did not graduate. 
In early 1642 Hicks's name appeared near the head of those who subscribed to the protestation in Paul. According to the hostile Anthony Wood: 'he was by his relations put in arms against the king, and in short time became so fanatical in his opinion that he was esteemed by some to be little better than an anabaptist. So that being looked upon as a zealous brother for the cause, he was made a captain in the trained-bands, and became very forward against those of the loyal party. (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', new edn, 1813-20, 3.489)' Hicks's own writings suggest that by the late 1650s he was indeed a Baptist, citing in support of belief in the truth of Christ's promised second coming and the thousand-year rule of the saints 'the general consent of most of the Baptized Churches for it, as may appear in a Confession of Faith of divers Churches in Wiltshire, Glocester, Somerset, Dorset, and Devon' (Hicks, 'Quinto-Monarchiae', epistle dedicatory). Hicks shared the millenarian enthusiasm and widespread interest in the books of 'Daniel' and 'Revelation' of the 1640s and 1650s. The millennium was the theme of Hicks's book, published in 1659 and re-issued in 1661, 'Apokalypsis apokalypseos, or, Revelation Revealed: being a Practical Exposition on the Revelation of St John'. The doggerel motto beneath his frontispiece portrait placed Hicks firmly within the mainstream of protestant millenarian writing, conjuring the names of Thomas Brightman, Joseph Mede, and John Napier: '
Though Brightman, Napeir, Mede are gone to rest, 

Their Sp'rite yet lives redoubled in thy Breast: 

Yee, that have cast th'Apocalyps to ground, 

Because so dark, mysterious and profound, 

Why take it up againe, and use this Glasse, 

Twill then no longer for a Mystrie passe. 

' Hicks, like his predecessors, held the pope to be Antichrist: 'The work of this present generation for all Christian Worthies to set their hands and heart to, being (as I conceive) if not to the downfal of the Throne of the Beast, yet at least to the Eclipsing of the Austrian Sun, the great Pillar of the Antichristian State. (Hicks, 'Revelation Revealed', epistle dedicatory, sig. a2)' However, as is revealed by the essay which formed the second part of the book (with a separate title-page, dedication, and epistle to the reader, but thereafter with pagination continuous with the rest of the volume), he was an opponent of the radical Fifth Monarchists. In 'Quinto-Monarchiae... or a friendly complyance between Christ's monarchy, and the magistrates', he sought to demonstrate how their misreading of the biblical texts led them to a presumptuous belief in the role of the saints in bringing about the second coming. They had misunderstood many of the prophecies, applying to the present times passages which 'rather wholly relate to that most happy and glorious Millenary Kingdom of Christ, wherein Christ, with all his Saints shall reigne and triumph over all their Enemies, before the end and final Judgement' ('Quinto-Monarchiae', 'To the Christian reader'). Until that time the duty of the saints was not to rule -- or to usurp or overthrow the Christian magistrate, who had his own duties in the struggle against Antichrist -- but to struggle against sin and popery through the spiritual weapons of prayer and the 'Bible'. The millennium was approaching, but not yet come, and its timing was in God's hands alone. The Fifth Monarchists: 'not weighing the various dispensations of God's Providence, through heedlessness, or the temptations of the Evil One... [they] are carried out to the opposing of Magistracy, an Ordinance of God, that they may bring about (as they conceive) the predeterminate Counsels of God's commands... Revealed things pertain unto us; but unrevealed things (times and seasons) pertain unto God until the times of their manifestation come. ('Quinto-Monarchiae', epistle dedicatory)' Appropriately, given Hicks's respect for magistracy, 'Revelation Revealed' was dedicated to a recent lord mayor of London, Sir Richard Chiverton, whose family came from Kerris. Even more significantly, 'Quinto-Monarchiae' was dedicated to his fellow Baptist, Colonel Robert Bennet, governor of nearby St Michael's Mount and a powerful and loyal subject of the protectorate in Cornwall who was 'a clear example of a religious radical who was relatively moderate and pragmatic in his politics' (A. Woolrych, 'Commonwealth to Protectorate', 1982, 220). 
Wood reported the rumour -- current in Cornwall and in Exeter College, Oxford, he claimed -- that Hicks was not actually the author of 'Revelation Revealed': that he had found the manuscript of the book among the papers of his dead kinsman Alexander Harry, sometime fellow of Exeter College, Oxford, and rector of Roche, Cornwall, and published it under his own name. Hicks died at Kerris at the beginning of March 1660, and was buried in the parish church at Paul on 3 March; the administration of his estate was granted to his widow, Margaret, in July. 


@@@@@


doc= 13217


Hicks, William (fl. c.1630-1682), editor of miscellanies, was generally known as Captain Hicks, and identified himself on title-pages as a native of Oxford. In 1671 he described himself as a resident of Shipton-on-Cherwell, 'some four short miles from Oxford' (W. Hicks, 'To the reader', 'Oxford Drollery', 1671). Though the titles 'Oxford Drollery' and 'Oxford Jests' may have led readers to assume 'that they were written by a scholastical wit', according to Wood he was born in St Thomas's parish, Oxford, 'of poor and dissolute parents', and was 'bred a tapster'. In the 1640s he 'became a retainer to the family of Lucas in Colchester' (presumably the household of Sir John Lucas, who became Lord Lucas in 1645) and later served as 'clerk to a woodmonger in Deptford' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.490). Evidently he had enough education to be able to make jokes about Latin grammar and vocabulary in 'Grammatical Drollery' (1682). Hicks was awarded the title of captain at the time of the Restoration as reward for 'training the young men, and putting them in a posture of defense'. Wood describes him as 'a sharking and indigent fellow while he lived in Oxon, and a great pretender to the art of dancing (which he forsooth would sometimes teach)' and dismisses his writings as 'little trivial matters meerly to get bread, and make the pot walk' (ibid., 3.490). 

'Oxford Jests' was published in 1671 (Wood mentions a 1669 edition, not extant) and reprinted in 'refined and enlarged' editions in 1684 and later; a second collection by Hicks, 'Coffee-House Jests' (1677), was even more popular, with five editions by 1688. The second of Hicks's compilations to be published ('I now appear a second time in Print', he says in the rhyming preface to the reader) was 'Oxford Drollery; being new poems, and songs. The first part, composed by W. H. The second and third parts being, upon several occasions, made by the most eminent and ingenious wits of the said university' (1671). Hicks's own poems, described by the 'Dictionary of National Biography' as 'often somewhat licentious', largely consist of comic songs to existing tunes, with titles such as 'The New Scolding Wife'. Poets included in parts two and three include Richard Lovelace, John Suckling, and William Cartwright. 'London Drollery, or, The wits academy, being a select collection of the newest songs, lampoons, and airs alamode' (1673), another miscellany edited by Hicks, includes an exchange of poems, 'On Captain Hicks his Curiosities of Nature: by a Young Lady' and Hicks's 'Answer to Madam E. C. upon her Curious Art in Cutting Figures in Paper'. A later collection of verse (this time mostly of Hicks's own composition) is an amusing Latin primer, 'Grammatical Drollery, consisting of poems & songs. Wherein the rules of the nouns & verbs in the accedence are pleasantly made easie' (1682). 'The Battle of the Verbs' is representative: '

'Incipio' doth begin the battle... 

Poor 'timeo' is afraid, and 'fugio' shuns 

The Battle, 'sequor' follows, 'curro' runs. 

' Several miscellaneous poems ('A Mock-Song to Beauty', for example) are also included in the volume. 


@@@@@


doc= 13218


Hicks, William (1831-1883), army officer, was born on 29 April 1831, and entered the Bombay army as ensign in December 1849. He served as lieutenant (1856) with the 1st Beluchi battalion in the campaign of 1857-9, as staff officer in the Punjab movable column, and with General Penny in the Rohilkhand campaign, subsequently serving under Lord Clyde. Promoted captain in 1861 he served in the Abyssinian expedition of 1867-8 as brigade major in the 1st division, attaining the rank of lieutenant-colonel in 1875, and honorary colonel in 1880. 
Recommended by Valentine Baker Pasha, then commanding the Egyptian gendarmerie, Hicks was dispatched in February 1883 to command the Egyptian army in the Sudan in the suppression of the Mahdi's revolt. When he left Cairo on 7 February with a staff of European officers, the British government and its representatives in Egypt were criticized for allowing him to depart on so hazardous an enterprise with only some ten to twelve thousand troops, many of whom had taken part in the recent rebellion under Arabi Pasha. Hicks reached Berber by way of Suakin, and from there proceeded up the Nile to Khartoum, where he joined his army. A reconnaissance under Colonel the Hon. J. Colborne to Kawa showed the proximity of the enemy, and on Hicks's arrival there an advance into Sennar was resolved on. On 24 April they marched, five thousand strong, with four Nordenfeldt guns, upon Jebel 'Ain, and on the way met, on 29 April, a Mahdist force of four or five thousand. Hicks's force won a victory so decisive that, on arriving at Jebel 'Ain in June, no enemy was to be found. The province of Sennar was deserted by the Mahdi's troops; the chiefs were assembled and addressed by Hicks with tact in a spirit of conciliation. With the situation apparently tranquil, the army returned to Khartoum. 
Later in the year the Mahdi's influence was rapidly spreading in the direction of al- 'Ubayd, and Hicks determined to advance to the attack, a decision subsequently much criticized. On 9 September, with more than ten thousand men of low military quality, he left Omdurman and ascended the White Nile to Dueim, from there striking across the desert to al- 'Ubayd. Against his will, he was accompanied on his desert march by large bodies of Arabs or Sudanese, who apparently had the approval of the Egyptian governor-general of the Sudan. These men were undoubtedly in league with the Mahdi, while Hicks's chief guide, as afterwards appeared, was in communication with the enemy. On 1 November Hicks and his army, without water and lost in forest country unknown to them, were betrayed into an ambush at Kashgil, where the enemy, commanded by the Mahdi, fired on the Egyptians from a dense cover. Despite extreme thirst, the Egyptians fought for three days. On 5 November their ammunition gave out, and the Mahdists charged the Egyptians and speared the wounded as they lay. Hicks led his mounted staff in a final charge in which he and his comrades were all killed. Following this debacle, Charles George Gordon was sent to the Sudan to superintend the withdrawal of remaining European and Egyptian forces. Hicks was survived by his wife, Sara Sophia. 


@@@@@


doc= 13219


Hicks, William Robert (1808-1868), asylum superintendent and humorist, was born at Bodmin, Cornwall, on 1 April 1808, the son of William Hicks (died 1833), a schoolmaster of Bodmin, and Sarah, daughter of William and Margaret Hicks. He was educated under his father until 1824, and then under a Mr Harvey at Plymouth. From 1832 to 1840 he kept a boys' boarding-school in Honey Street and on the Castle Hill, Bodmin, and was noted for his extensive knowledge of mathematics. In 1834 he became clerk of the Bodmin board of guardians and superintendent registrar. In that same year, he married Elizabeth, daughter of George Squire of Stoke Damerel, Devon. 
In 1840 Hicks was appointed domestic superintendent of the Cornwall County Lunatic Asylum, clerk of the asylum, and clerk to the committee of visitors at Bodmin, and soon after was also named clerk to the highway board. The earl of Devon later procured for him the additional situation of auditor of the metropolitan district asylums. When Hicks became connected with the Bodmin asylum he found the old system of management prevailing, and, in conjunction with the medical superintendent, introduced more humane modern methods. One patient who was chained in a dark cell as a dangerous lunatic turned out to be a wit and a philosopher. He was found to be harmless, and employed to take care of the pigs and do other useful work. In 1865-6 Hicks was mayor of Bodmin, when he revived the custom of beating the bounds of the town (Maclean, 229). 
Hicks was a witty speaker, and especially famous for telling a story. He was popular in Cornwall and Devon, and had an established reputation in London, being known as the 'Yorick of the West'. His memory was excellent, and he was an admirable mimic. His wit, musical talent, and good taste in art made him a favourite in society, especially in company with his old friend George Wightwick, the architect. Many of Hicks's narratives were in the Cornish dialect, but he was equally adept in the Devon, as well as in the peculiar talk of the miners. Among his best-known stories were 'The Coach Wheel', 'William Rabley', 'The Gallant Volunteer', and 'The Dead March in 'Saul''. His best-known story, 'The Jury', referred to the trial in 1817 of Robert Sawle Donnall, accused of poisoning his mother-in-law, when each of the jurors gave a different and ludicrous reason for acquitting the prisoner. On 31 December 1860 Hicks resigned his connection with the lunatic asylum, retiring on a full pension. He died at Westheath (a residence which he himself had built), Bodmin, on 5 September 1868, and was buried at Bodmin cemetery on 9 September. He was survived by his wife who married her second husband, J. Massey, in 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 13220


Hickson, William Edward (1803-1870), author and educationist, was born in Westminster, London, on 7 January 1803, the son of William Hickson and his wife, Matilda, 'nee' Underhill. His father became a wealthy boot and shoe manufacturer with a wholesale business at 20 West Smithfield, London. Between 1806 and 1812 the business moved to Northampton, where the family were active in the Baptist Sunday school movement. Hickson's account of his own youthful years recorded that he was 'a pupil of Joseph Lancaster; a Sunday School teacher; a 'Bible' Christian... an enthusiastic promoter of Co-operative Associations. Editor in 1826 of the first Co-operative Magazine published in this country' ('Tracts for Inquirers', No. 1). However, no details of his formal schooling have yet been found, though he was much influenced by his grandfather (another William) who died in 1822. The reference to Lancaster probably only concerns a lecture given in the Hickson home in 1810. As eldest son Hickson entered the family business, but he also attended meetings of the Aldersgate Street Literary and Scientific Society, and formed friendships with other young London radicals, including John Stuart Mill. On 15 September 1830 he married Jane Brown (died January 1871); they had no children. 
A pioneer of musical education, Hickson opposed John Hullah and his 'fixed doh' method of teaching sight singing, and advocated instead beginning with melodies themselves. 'The Singing Master' (1836) contained instructions for teaching singing both for schools and for families; a lecture delivered on 29 May 1838 before members of the Sunday School Union on the use of singing as part of the moral discipline of schools was published later that year. 'Part Singing, or, Vocal Harmony for Choral Societies and Home Circles' appeared in 1842, 'A Musical Gift from an Old Friend' in 1859. 
Hickson served on the royal commission appointed in 1837 to inquire into the condition of the unemployed handloom weavers, and in 1840 wrote a separate report which advocated the repeal of the corn laws and the promotion of national education. In 1849 he produced a substantial pamphlet which sought to refute the population theories of Thomas Malthus. He argued not only that the valley of the Mississippi could provide sufficient corn and cotton to feed and clothe the whole population of Europe, but also that moral and physical problems could be overcome by developing human intelligence. 
Hickson was a leading member of the Central Society of Education, and of its committee of management. In 1837 the society published, anonymously, his 'Schools for the Industrious Classes', which advocated a central board for education, model and normal schools for training teachers, and the separation of religious and secular instruction. In 1839 he undertook a tour in Belgium, Holland, and north Germany to study their national school systems, and in the following year his report on the tour was published in pamphlet form under the title 'Dutch and German Schools'. 
In 1840 Hickson gave up his business career and purchased the radical quarterly, 'The Westminster Review', which he also edited, writing many of the articles himself. Educational reform took pride of place, but other prominent concerns included child labour, the repeal of the corn laws, the condition of women, and municipal, legal, and medical malpractice. After 1846, when the title was changed to 'The Westminster and Foreign Quarterly Review', Hickson's crusading tone was moderated, and in 1851 he sold the 'Review' to John Chapman for $300. 
Although in his later years Hickson (who had in 1836 been a founder member of the Reform Club) remained interested in reform questions, as evidenced by his 'Tracts for Inquirers', published in 1867, he also became concerned with metaphysical issues. He suffered from asthma for many years and died at his home, Manor House, Fairseat, Stansted, Kent, on 22 March 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 13221


Hieron, Samuel (bap. 1572, d. 1617), Church of England clergyman and devotional writer, was born in London and baptized at St Peter-le-Poer on 10 August 1572, the son of Roger Hieron, Heron, or Herryn, schoolmaster and later vicar of Epping, Essex, who was a friend of John Foxe the martyrologist. Initially taught by his father, in July 1584 he was admitted to Eton College, where he became a king's scholar in 1586. On 24 August 1590 he was admitted to King's College, Cambridge, where he was elected a fellow in 1593 and graduated BA in 1595. Encouraged and financially assisted in his studies by Sir Francis Barrington of Barrington Hall, Essex, Hieron also benefited much, according to his biographer John Quick, from the godly atmosphere then prevailing at Cambridge. As a result, according to his other biographer, Robert Hill, when he first preached in the college chapel 'he seemed rather a Bachelor of Divinity than a Bachelor of Arts, rather a Divine of forty, than one of four and twenty' (Quick, 56). 
Ordained deacon in London on 21 December 1595, Hieron became a notable preacher in the city: exactly where is unknown, but he later acknowledged in 'The Christians Journall' (1609) Barrington's 'kind watering' of his 'first endeavours in the Ministerie' (A2). He once delivered a sermon in the Chapel Royal at Whitehall which Queen Elizabeth, punning on their respective names as 'heron' and 'mountain', reputedly considered to have soared higher than that of the previous preacher, George Montaigne. However, he declined offers of preferment in the city churches and at the inns of court and returned to Cambridge to proceed MA in 1598. The following year he resigned his fellowship and on the presentation of Henry Savile, as provost of Eton, was on 4 July instituted to the vicarage of Modbury, Devon. About this time he married Mildred, whose other name is unknown: their first child, Roger, was baptized at Modbury probably in March 1600; five further sons and three daughters were baptized there between 1601 and 1616. 
Hieron rapidly established a pioneering preaching ministry which drew a large cross-section of south Devon society, and which was respectfully remembered in the later seventeenth century as having laid the foundation of a vigorous tradition of puritan nonconformity in the area. Its hallmarks are evident in his earliest printed works, 'The Preachers Plea' and 'An Answere to a Popish Ryme, Lately Scattered Abroad in the West', which appeared in 1604. The former proclaims the saving and sanctifying work of sermons through a 'homely and coarse discourse' between a minister and a pious man; the latter seeks to make the protestant response to Catholics' criticisms accessible through simple verse. Both carry learned marginal notes, but in the conviction that 'plain-ness' was 'the best eloquence' ('Truths Purchase', 1606, dedication) Hieron deliberately reined himself in: 'I have bound myselfe to studye so to speake, as that I may not exceede the conceit of common hearers' he explained in the dedication to 'The Spirituall Sonneshipe' (1611). 
Implacable against wicked popes, 'carnall Cardinals' ('An Answere', C2'v'), the mass -- 'a grosse device, defaming Christ' (ibid., C1'v') -- and Roman idolatry, Hieron rejected the charge of sectarianism, and clung to the Church of England: '
We doe not hang on Calvins sleeve 

Nor yet on Zwinglius we beleeve 

And Puritanes we doe defye 

If right the name you do apply 

All giddy Sects among us crept 

We wish out of our Church were swept; 
(ibid., B3)' Yet, although his works confirm that 'he was not absolutely against the use of a Forme of prayer' (Quick, 59), in his Sunday morning and afternoon services 'he never confined himself to the use of the publick liturgy, nor did he at all conforme unto the Ceremonys' (ibid., 60). On one occasion when he wore a surplice the adverse reaction of his congregation was reported to have induced him to abandon it altogether. Such practices, together with his conviction, as expressed in 'The Dignitie of Scripture' (1607), that nothing must be added to scripture, and his promotion in the west country of the millenary petition, five times led to his suspension by the normally moderate bishop of Exeter, William Cotton. Each time Sir William Strode went to London to plead on his behalf; each time, according to Quick, he returned with a discharge and a new preaching licence. Similarly, friends in Plymouth arranged for the printing and distribution of his clandestine 'A defence of the ministers reasons for refusall of subscription to the Book of Common Prayer and of conformitie' [1607]. 
That Hieron not only remained at Modbury but also very publicly prospered seems to have been due both to an inherent loyalty to the national church, whatever its shortcomings in his eyes, and to the formidable array of local and non-local notables who promoted his ministry. A 1615 sermon proclaimed that he rejoiced to be a son of 'our English church... wherein, it shall be my glorie and my crown in the day of Christ, to have been employed as a minister' (Wolffe, 96). The very many patrons, friends, and fellow workers for the gospel revealed in dedications to his publications included: William Herbert, earl of Pembroke and lord warden of the stannaries of Devon, to whom he sometimes acted as chaplain; Robert Rich, Lord Rich; the Champernownes of Modbury; local magistrates like Sir Ferdinando Gorges; Lady Strode and Lady Hele, both his spiritual daughters, the latter being a convert from Catholicism; Sir John Poyntz, 'one of his majesty's pensioners'; and Laurence Chaderton and Roger Goad, respectively masters of Emmanuel College and King's College, Cambridge. As Hieron explained in a funeral sermon for Henry Sommaster of Pensford, reproduced in 'Three Sermons' (1607), magistrates and ministers were joint leaders of the people in the fight for the maintenance of religion. On the other hand, as he asserted in a Gunpowder Plot commemoration address issued in 'Three Sermons' (1609), those who professed true religion yet were adversaries to its life and power were as much enemies as were the papists. 
Hieron published extensively, with the first of several major collections of his works appearing, apparently on his own initiative, in 1614. However, it was his 'A Helpe unto Devotion' (1608), which became a cornerstone of contemporary piety and made him a household name. Here the pastor who acknowledged 'that set formes of Prayer are very distastfull to many' who considered them 'a kind of confining and limiting of Gods Spirit', dismissed not just the 'fondnesse' of those 'who scarce count it praying, unlesse it bee by a booke', but also 'their carelesness, who labor not to attaine to an ability of commending their personall occasions... unto God'. Not prescriptively, but as a manual in orderly and effective intercession, to assist 'stammering and lisping tongues' to develop into 'tongues as fined silver... plainly and distinctly to speake the language of Canaan', he offered template prayers for everyday occasions and moods (foreword). His final prayer 'For the Whole State' gave thanks for prolonged peace, for the light of the Gospel and for freedom from the 'miserable bondage of Romish and Antichristian tyrannie' (p. 239), although continued watchfulness was necessary to counter the 'many Locusts' and 'continual spawn of new conspirators', that 'come dayly out of that Pit of Rome' (p. 258). It called on God not only to furnish 'everie place... with a Pastor after thine own heart' but, more provocatively, to 'restraine and reforme the greedinesse of those which muzzle their mouthes that should tread out the corne, and bring forth food of life to thy people' (p. 256). 
In 1615 Sir William Strode established a lecture at Modbury itself, the one place stubbornly resistant to Hieron's energetic and persuasive oratory, but by this time his health was being progressively undermined by the stone and by gout. In the aftermath of a crowded lecture at Plympton on a hot day in May 1617 he succumbed to a chill, but according to Quick it was heart disease which, after four weeks' illness, killed him at Modbury on 17 June; he was buried in the church there the same day. The funeral sermon, preached by Hieron's closest ministerial friend, John Barlow, lecturer at Plymouth, was published as 'Mr Hierons Last Farewell' (1618); the funeral charges were paid by Lady Hele, who also gave his widow an annuity and provided for some of his children. Several of his sons became clergymen, but it was his grandson and namesake Samuel Hieron (died 1686), ejected rector of Feniton, Devon, and licensed presbyterian preacher, who followed most closely in his footsteps and who helped ensure, through his friendship with Quick, that the reputation of the 'Star of the West', the proto-nonconformist of the Jacobean church, was kept alive not just locally but among the godly at large. 


@@@@@


doc= 13222


Hiffernan, Paul (1719?-1777), writer and playwright, is said to have been born in Dublin, although he intentionally obscured the details of his life. He attended a grammar school, a Dublin seminary to prepare him for Roman Catholic ordination, and finally a college in the south of France, where ultimately he took a degree in medicine from the University of Montpellier. Hiffernan returned to Dublin before 1748, and was known thereafter as 'the doctor' (and as Gallows Paul). The quintessential new author by profession, gregarious and entertaining, Hiffernan scrounged his dinners and hawked his works around his friends but never divulged where he lived; his letters were directed to coffee houses. Two works, both published in Dublin in 1739, 'The Enthusiasm. A Poem. With a Character of Dr. Jonathan Swift' and 'The Poet, a Poem', both by 'Mr. P. H.', have been attributed to Hiffernan. 
In Ireland Hiffernan attempted unsuccessfully to practise medicine, but being a notorious drunkard, he instead turned to literature. He was engaged by government to attack the popular opposition candidate Charles Lucas in a periodical, 'The Tickler', that first appeared on 18 February 1748 and lasted for seven influential numbers. In it Hiffernan exhibited a characteristic bent toward scurrility and abuse. A counterattack, 'The Marrow of the Tickler's Works', appeared in 1748, as did 'A Faithful Narrative of the Barbarous and Bloody Murder of P -- l H -- Ff -- n'. The pamphlet 'A Letter of Thanks to the Barber' by 'Mr. Francis Liberty: A Freeman and Citizen of Dublin', published in March 1748, was attributed in annotation to the Tickler. Hiffernan's ambitious 'Reflections on the Structure, and Passions of Man' (1748), in which he also considered the transitoriness of life, was published without enhancing the author's reputation. 
Hiffernan attempted to achieve success in the theatre and in 1750 his comedy 'The Self-Enamour'd, or, The Ladies Doctor' was acted at the City Theatre, Capel Street, and published in Dublin. In Dublin in 1752 he published his 'Remarks on an Ode on the Death of his Royal Highness Frederick, Prince of Wales': the ode the work of William Dunkin, the remarks scurrilous. 
But by the end of 1753, 'in some danger of his life' as he reported ('European Magazine', February 1794, 112), Hiffernan moved to England, and on 21 January commenced a new periodical, 'The Tuner', in which he savaged a number of new tragedies. He also began work as a translator. He published his 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse' (1755), but fame continued to be elusive. Now a pamphleteer and paragraph writer, Hiffernan's formal publications slowed but he continued to entertain and keep the friends on whom he sponged through dining, subscription collecting, hawking his books, and occasional blackmail. He wrote only when reduced by absolute necessity. 
On 24 April 1756 Hiffernan's two-act farce, 'The Maiden Whim, or, The Critical Moment', played once (the prompter's review: 'O Sad!') for his benefit, at Drury Lane. Fearing critical reprisals, he published in the 'Daily Advertiser' on the day of the performance the egregious lie that he had never hurt a playwright by savaging a play during its run. In 1761 Hiffernan published in honour of the new queen 'The Wishes of a Free People: a Dramatic Poem', and produced a farce, 'The New Hippocrates', acted just once at Drury Lane on 1 April (prompter: 'wretched, but went off quietly'); it went unpublished and unappreciated. The bookseller Tom Davies credits Hiffernan with the attack on Bute, 'Scotchman be Humble' (1763). In 1764 he published 'The Earl of Warwick', 'a very indifferent translation of Monsieur de la Harpe's play' (Genest, 4.457-8). The play was never produced, but when Thomas Francklin's translation of the same play had a triumphant run at Drury Lane in 1766, Hiffernan responded with violence, issuing a new edition (1767) of his play in which he criticized the taste of the managers. Hiffernan then went on to attack Garrick in his 'A Letter from the Rope-Dancing Monkey in the Hay-Market to the Acting Monkey of Drury Lane'. Garrick capitulated, produced 'The National Prejudice' for Hiffernan on 6 April 1768 (one performance), and helped him achieve a splendid subscription for his 'Dramatic Genius, in Five Books' (1770), which apotheosized Garrick. In 1770 Hiffernan engaged in a polemical war with Samuel Foote, who refused to employ him at the Haymarket Theatre as playwright and was so harassed for subscriptions by Hiffernan that Foote dubbed him a common thief. In retaliation Hiffernan published a critique, 'Foote's Prologue Detected' (1770), and prepared a letter inciting the public to tear down his theatre. Garrick successfully interceded. In 1772 during Garrick's polemical war with William Kenrick, Hiffernan provided on Garrick's behalf manifold newspaper paragraphs, verses, and pamphlets (most notably 'The Recantation and Confession of Doctor Kenrick, LLD'). Hiffernan also at various times coached candidates for the stage and attempted public lectures in anatomy. In 1774 'The Heroine of the Cave', a tragedy left at his death by Henry Jones and completed by Hiffernan, opened at Drury Lane on 19 March. 
Thereafter, suffering from the liver disease that killed him, Hiffernan survived on the charity of Foote, Garrick, and others. He died on 12 June 1777 at his lodgings, variously thought to be a small court off St Martin's Lane or near Westminster Bridge. 'His education was certainly liberal, and his knowledge of letters extensive', reported the 'Freeman's Journal' on 24 June, but his reviews were invariably contemptuous and it was 'a fact easily ascertained, that he never distinguished himself as a Writer; unless, indeed, a peculiar quaintness of phraseology, a remarkably vulgar train of thinking, and as remarkably vulgar a mode of expressing his thoughts, can be allowed to be the proper pretensions to distinction among Authors. ('Westminster Magazine')' 



@@@@@


doc= 13223


Hygeberht (d. in or after 803), archbishop of Lichfield, received his see in 779 ('AS chart.', S 114). His origins are unknown, though he was presumably a Mercian. Lichfield was the chief see of Mercia, close to the royal residence at Tamworth. It was made an archbishopric at the 'contentious' Synod of Chelsea in 787. The dominance in southern England of Offa, king of the Mercians, had been threatened by the resurgence of Kent under Ecgberht II ('fl'. 765-779), of whom Jaenberht, archbishop of Canterbury, had been an adherent. When Offa re-established control of Kent after Ecgberht's death, he persuaded Pope Hadrian I to divide the province of Canterbury, and the Mercian and East Anglian sees became the new province of Lichfield. Jaenberht retained control of the West Saxon, South Saxon, and Kentish bishoprics, and as the senior archbishop took precedence over Hygeberht in attesting charters. After Jaenberht's death in 792, Hygeberht took precedence over his successor, the Mercian Archbishop AEthelheard. 
Soon after his elevation at the Synod of Chelsea, Hygeberht consecrated Offa's son Ecgfrith as king of the Mercians. The dependence of Lichfield's enhanced status on Offa's line becomes evident after the deaths of Offa, on 29 July 796, and of Ecgfrith, on 16 December in the same year. In 797 AEthelheard was driven from his see in a Kentish rising, and by 798 the new king of the Mercians, Cenwulf, was negotiating with Pope Leo III for the restoration of an undivided southern province. Objections had always been to the advancement of Lichfield, not to Hygeberht personally, and in 797 Alcuin wrote to AEthelheard advising that 'the pious father' Hygeberht should not be deprived of his pallium, but that ordination of bishops should revert to Canterbury, which is what seems to have transpired. Hygeberht retained his archiepiscopal title until at least 799, but at the Synod of Chelsea in 801 he attests, albeit in first place, only as bishop. Cenwulf's attempt to transfer the archbishopric from Canterbury to London (then a Mercian city) failed, and in 803 a council at 'Clofesho' demoted Lichfield and restored the rights of Canterbury. Hygeberht attested the proceedings as abbot, but the location of his monastery and the date of his death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 13224


Higden, Henry (bap. 1645), author and lawyer, the son of John Higden ('b'. 'c'.1610) and his wife, Joane, 'nee' Durden ('b'. 'c'.1610), was baptized at St Mary Putney, Surrey, on 28 August 1645. After attending Westminster School he was admitted to the Middle Temple in April 1665; he was called to the bar in 1686. 'A Person known to all the conversable part of the Town, for his Pleasant and Facetious Company' (Gildon, 72), he published his lively translation of the thirteenth satire of Juvenal in 1686. His version of Juvenal's tenth satire appeared a year later, with commendatory verses by John Dryden, Aphra Behn, and Elkanah Settle. Higden defended free translation against Thomas Shadwell's attacks, writing that his aim was to give 'Life and Spirit to his Author, by making him English, in a Modish and Familiar way' (H. Higden, 'A Modern Essay on the Tenth Satyr of Juvenal', 1687). 
Higden's comedy 'The Wary Widdow' received a disastrous single performance in 1693, soon after the success of Congreve's 'The Old Batchelor'. According to 'The Poetical Register' (1719), 'the Author having contriv'd to make so much drinking of Punch in the Play, that the Actors got drunk, and were unable to go through with it, the Audience was dismiss'd at the Close of the Third Act' (Jacob, 138). In his indignant preface to the play text Higden did not mention drunkenness, but blamed the faction against him for turning the theatre into a bear-garden by 'hissing, mimicking, ridiculing, and Cat-calling', the management for spending no money on the production, and the actors for not learning their lines. His play had been cut by the master of the revels, when audiences were lapping up the obscenities of 'the Baudy Batchelour' and Dryden's 'The Kind Keeper'. In his 'Table-Talk', Tom Brown remarked that Harry Higden included a great deal of eating in his comedy because authors always wrote about what they liked best. Higden's poverty during the legal long vacation, when his rooms at the Temple contained only 'a Rug, two Blankets, a Joint-Stool and a Tin-Candlestick', are described in 'Letters from the Dead to the Living' ('Works', 2.177). His later career is obscure; in the late 1690s Gildon did not know whether Higden was living or not. 


@@@@@


doc= 13225


Higden, Ranulf (d. 1364), Benedictine monk and chronicler, appears to have been a Cheshire man, although little is known about his life. According to a colophon in one copy of his chronicle (Bodl. Oxf., MS Laud misc. 619) he entered the abbey of St Werburgh, Chester, in 1299. There is no evidence that he studied at a university, or travelled much outside Chester. The one reliable fact for the later years of his life is that in 1352 he was summoned by Edward III to appear at court with his chronicles. A note in the Laud manuscript suggests that he died in 1364 after living over sixty years in religion. 
Higden's major writing was his universal chronicle, in seven books, known as the 'Polychronicon'. Apart from the 'Polychronicon' he wrote a guide to sermon literature entitled the 'Ars componendi sermones', the 'Speculum curatorum', which was an aid to preaching, and a number of minor works including a collection of Latin sermons. Although his name has been associated with the Chester cycle of Whitsuntide plays there is no evidence that he was in any way connected with them. His reputation rests almost entirely upon the 'Polychronicon'. That work offered to the educated and learned audience of fourteenth-century England a clear and original picture of world history based upon medieval tradition, but with a new interest in antiquity, and with the early history of Britain related as part of the whole. Higden's historical narrative is particularly notable for its description of the Roman world. An interest in the ancient world had been developing for some time in fourteenth-century England. Higden was clearly aware of this, for he says that at the request of his fellow monks he changed his plan of writing a history of his own country and decided to enlarge the scope of his work. A further feature of his account is the description of the world contained in the first book of the 'Polychronicon'. Through the medium of John Trevisa's translation this section of Higden's work proved to be one of the most popular parts of his chronicle. To illustrate this description Higden included a world map in the later versions of his chronicle. The most elaborate copy, which may be the closest one to the original, is found in BL, Royal MS 14 C.ix. 
The 'Polychronicon' went through a number of editions in Higden's lifetime. The Latin text survives in a short, an intermediate, and a long version. Although it was once thought that the intermediate version was the original one, it is clear from Higden's autograph copy in the Huntington Library (Hunt. L., MS 132) that the short version of the text written soon after 1327 is the earliest, and that the narrative was then expanded into the later and longer accounts. A medieval text was rarely completed and Higden was still revising his chronicle at the time of his death. 
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries John Bale and Humfrey Wanley supposed that the short version of the text was the work of one Roger of Chester who called his compilation 'Polycratica' as opposed to 'Polychronicon'. The shorter work, they believed, was incorporated into the longer one. The name Roger of Chester does not, however, occur in any contemporary script, and there is no justification, as the editors of the 'Rolls Series' edition themselves stated, for supposing that the short version represents the work of anyone other than Higden himself. Wanley was further misled into thinking that a text found in BL, Harley MS 655, was also the work of the apocryphal Roger of Chester. This text is simply a form of the 'Polychronicon' taken from the short version which adds passages from the later books of the 'Historia aurea' of John Tynemouth. 
The Latin text of the 'Polychronicon' survives in over 100 manuscripts testifying to its immense appeal. Many cathedral churches and larger religious houses possessed copies. In the later middle ages copies were also owned by individual clerics as well as by parish churches, Oxford and Cambridge colleges, members of the nobility, and the wealthier merchants of London. The influence of the 'Polychronicon' is most clearly seen, however, in the continuations that were added to its text during the second half of the fourteenth century. As regards chronicle writing, that period may be termed the age of the 'Polychronicon' continuation. The first continuation from 1340 to 1377 was a standard account which went through a number of versions. Its importance lies in the fact that it covers a period when there are few first-rate contemporary chronicles, due to the fact that several writers, notably Adam Murimuth, Robert of Avesbury, and Geoffrey Baker, ended their work in the 1340s and 1350s. 
One important continuation covering the years 1348-81 was written by 
Malvern's continuation borrows from the final version (E) of the first 'Polychronicon' continuation (1340-77), and from Walsingham's text as printed in the 'Chronicon Angliae'. It contains none the less some original material, and achieved a certain popularity towards the end of the fourteenth century, when it was used to follow the main text of the 'Polychronicon' in a number of manuscripts. 
Several of the major chronicles of Richard II's reign were also written as 'Polychronicon' continuations. One of these is Walsingham's contemporary history for the years 1376-7, the so-called 'scandalous chronicle' which was once found continuing a 'Polychronicon' now divided between Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 316, and BL, Harley MS 3634. The Westminster chronicle (1381-94) was a continuation of three other works, including Malvern's chronicle, which were themselves continuations of the 'Polychronicon'. The chronicle of Adam Usk (1377-1421) also follows a text of Higden's work. The most popular continuation covering Richard's reign was the 'Vita Ricardi secundi' (1377-1402), the work of two monks of Evesham, which was sometimes used to form an eighth book of the 'Polychronicon'. In addition several religious houses added their own brief additions to Higden's text. 
The influence of the 'Polychronicon' extended beyond these continuations. The English translations of the Latin text increased knowledge of the work among a lay audience. The first translation of the 'Polychronicon' was made by John Trevisa during the 1380s. A second translation, made in the fifteenth century, is found in a single manuscript, BL, Harley MS 2261. Although fewer manuscripts of Trevisa's translation survive than copies of the Latin original, it would be wrong to underestimate its influence, for many copies of Trevisa's version in lay households may have failed to survive. The influence of Higden's chronicle is also to be seen in the work of chroniclers like the author of the 'Eulogium historiarum' who attempted to model their writings upon the 'Polychronicon'. Although the influence of the 'Polychronicon' was to decline at the close of the middle ages, the universal outlook that it reflected lived on among the writers and antiquaries of the Tudor age. 


@@@@@


doc= 13226


Higden, William (1662/3-1715), Church of England clergyman, was perhaps the son of Lawrence Higden of Corfe Castle, Dorset, clergyman. Though Higden had previously matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 23 February 1681, aged eighteen, on 5 April 1682 he matriculated sizar at King's College, Cambridge, and it was at Cambridge that he graduated BA in 1684 and proceeded MA in 1688. He became curate of Camberwell, Surrey, where in 1688 he preached the funeral sermon for the wife of the rector, Richard Parr. Higden contributed to a translation of Tacitus's life of Agricola which was published in 1698. 
At the revolution of 1688 Higden became a nonjuror, but later took the oaths of allegiance to Queen Anne about 1708, and in 1709 published a defence of his actions in 'A View of the English Constitution', which went through several editions. In it he offered a variety of precedents from common and statute law which he felt justified giving allegiance to the king 'de facto'. Like many jurors Higden tried to differentiate his arguments from those used to support the Rump Parliament, but particularly in the later parts of the 'View' he did lapse into discussing allegiance purely in terms of the relationship between protection and obedience, a very common argument in the engagement controversy of the 1650s. His work attracted a number of replies from leading nonjurors, including Charles Leslie, George Harbin, Theophilus Downes, and Henry Gandy, partly, it seems, in response to the contemporary opinion that Higden's work was unanswerable. 
Thomas Hearne claimed that Higden was created DD in 1710 in return for his efforts. Certainly publishing the 'View' seems to have done his career no harm. He preached at court on the anniversary of Charles I's death in 1711, and in the same year became rector of St Paul's, Shadwell. In May 1713 he was made a prebendary of Canterbury Cathedral. However, some time before taking the oaths Higden had been in lengthy correspondence in the summer of 1707 with Samuel Hawes (a future nonjuring bishop) about ending the nonjuring schism, so his decision cannot be seen as mere opportunism. The debate between them focused on two particular issues in the relationship between nonjurors and the established (and to them schismatic) church of the settlement of 1689. The first was the problem raised by the apparent inconsistency in the nonjuring position over accepting into occasional communion with them conformists (significantly, Higden had written on this theme in 'The Case of the Admission of Occasional Conformists to the Holy Communion' in 1705, republished in 1715 with a title adapted to make dissenters the explicit target of the work). The second was whether nonjurors should end their breach when the last bishop lawfully ordained before the revolution died or (as George Hooper had done in 1703) conformed. Did the demands of the Christian communion override formal questions raised by the revolution of 1688-9 about the relationship between church and state? Higden felt that it did, citing that 'our Blessed Saviour & his Apostles held communion with the High Priests who were advanced by the Civil Power' (MS Rawl. D844, fol. 47'r'). It seems best to take Higden at his word in his preface to the 'View', where he put his change of heart down to his worrying away at doubts which had arisen in his mind about his original decision. Parts of the book, he explained, were reworked from letters he had written in answer to objections raised by friends to his new position. 
Higden died in London on 28 August 1715 and was buried on 5 September in the Broadway Chapel, St Margaret's, Westminster. Although his 'View' was roundly attacked in his lifetime, it seems to have had a lasting legacy. John Wesley referred to the work as 'one of the best-wrote books I have ever seen in the English tongue' (Hynson, 69), and it has been suggested that Higden's writing was fundamental to shaping the Methodist leader's political outlook. 


@@@@@


doc= 13227


Higford, William (1580/81-1657), writer on conduct, was born in Dixton, Alderton parish, Gloucestershire, one of five children of John Hugford (died 1616), whose family owned the manor, and his wife, Dorothea, daughter of William Rogers. William (who adopted the spelling Higford) matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, on 14 January 1597 but later transferred to Corpus Christi College, which his father and grandfather had both attended. Here he studied under Sebastian Benefield and 'by the benefit of good discipline and natural parts, he became a well qualified gentleman' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 3.429), gaining his BA in February 1599. He returned to Dixton and married Mary (died 1657), daughter of Sir John Meulx of Kingston, Isle of Wight, with whom he had seven children. 
Through the patronage of Grey Brydges, fifth Baron Chandos, he was appointed a JP. Wood describes him as a zealous puritan but his anthologist, Clement Barksdale, rector of Sudeley, contends that Higford held fast to the Elizabethan church, 'warping neither to Rome nor Amsterdam' ('Harleian Miscellany', 9.582). This is not necessarily reliable either, since Barksdale was a firm Anglican, but Higford's writings show only conventional protestant piety and give fulsome praise to the Chandos and Tracy families, both of whom were royalist in the civil war. Higford died at Dixton on 6 April 1657, in his seventy-seventh year, and was buried in Alderton church. 
Barksdale collated some of Higford's writings and published them posthumously as 'Institutions, or, Advice to a Grandson' (1658). The recipient of this advice was John ('b'. 1627), son of Higford's son John ('b'. 1607), who married in 1626 Frances Scudamore (1608-1688) but predeceased his father. Higford clearly felt responsible for his grandson's upbringing. 'Institutions' was reprinted in 1660, republished in 1666 as 'The Institution of a Gentleman in III Parts', and reprinted by Thomas Park in 'The Harleian Miscellany' in 1812. The book draws on a wide-ranging classical knowledge to advise Higford's young grandson on such matters as preserving the estate, religion, education, how to act towards friends and servants, and drawing attention to the key virtues of justice, temperance, fortitude, and prudence. Knox suggests that Higford's work is largely derivative, but has the merit of offering a broad curriculum and praises the benefits of foreign travel and the acquisition of a foreign language. Wood records that Higford left behind other 'matters fit for the press... which being not understood by his children were lost' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 3.429). 


@@@@@


doc= 13228


Higgins, Bryan (c.1741-1818), medical practitioner and chemist, was born in Sligo, Ireland, the son of Bryan Higgins (died 1777), medical practitioner; little is known about his education. As his family, eminent in medicine, was Roman Catholic, he probably attended irregular 'hedge schools'. It was customary for Irish Catholic students to go abroad for higher education, and on 5 October 1765 he enrolled at the University of Leiden 'at the age of 24' (Wheeler and Partington, 51), passing the medical examination on 2 November and defending his thesis ten days later. Where he had studied medicine is thus not known. He practised medicine in London, but saw the entrepreneurial possibilities of chemistry. 
About 1770 Higgins married Jane, daughter and heir of J. Welland of London, and in 1774 opened a school of practical chemistry with a laboratory in Greek Street, Soho. The laboratory was 30 ft long, extensively equipped with furnaces and several thousand glass vessels; large chimneys were built to carry off the fumes of chemical reactions. Josiah Wedgwood's showroom was nearby, and so was Sir Joseph Banks's house in Soho Square: it was a fashionable area, and Higgins clearly possessed charm and social grace, which recommended him to the scientifically minded gentry of Hanoverian London. He became a friend of Samuel Johnson and of James Boswell, and Benjamin Franklin and Edward Gibbon were among his auditors. Joseph Priestley had attended Higgins's lectures, and bought chemicals from him, but became an enemy following a dispute over experiments on air, in which Higgins accused Priestley of stealing experiments from other chemists. Priestley retaliated by making an attack on Higgins's character, portraying him in a pamphlet as socially inferior and sycophantic. 
In 1775 Higgins published the first of several syllabuses of his lectures; copies of these were forwarded by Jean de Magellan (1722-1790) to Lavoisier in Paris. In 1776 he published experiments on the freezing of sea water, and on 8 January 1779 he patented a cement composed of sand, slaked lime, limewater, and bone ash -- a cement he claimed was cheap and durable. He promoted it in a book published in the following year, describing the experiments leading to its production. In 1786 Higgins published his best-known work, 'Experiments and observations relating to acetous acid, fixable air, dense inflammable air, oils and fuels'. The work, associated with his lectures, shows his concern both with the practicalities of heating and lighting systems, and also with the nature of matter and its relation to heat and light. These were Newtonian concerns typical of the day, but Higgins's reasoning was acute and original. He believed that the particles composing airs were hard and globular, surrounded by atmospheres of fire. They might acquire polarity, and definite repulsive and attractive forces were associated with them; these forces were 'saturated' in compounds. His nephew William Higgins developed these ideas further, and both Higginses have been seen as precursors of John Dalton, although his theory was much more testable and had a rather different basis. 
In 1788 Higgins had published analyses of mineral waters, an important business at that period. In November 1793 he issued proposals for a society, and on 25 January 1794 established the Society for Philosophical Experiments and Conversations. The first chairman was Field Marshal Conway; Charles, third earl of Stanhope, was a member; and Thomas Young acted as Higgins's assistant. The subscription was 5 guineas, and the society met weekly at 8 p.m., over a period of six months, at Higgins's house in Greek Street. The society's 'Minutes' were published in 1796. Although short-lived, the society demonstrated the demand, and the gentlemanly support, for scientific knowledge in London, which was later exploited by the Royal Institution. 
Presumably through the influence of his highly placed associates, in 1796 Higgins was appointed at $1000 per annum, later increased to $1400, to improve sugar and rum in Jamaica, and went to Spanish Town, from where he returned in 1801. His 'Observations and Advices' in this profitable technology was published between 1797 and 1803. Before leaving London, he had sold his apparatus and after his return does not seem to have been very active in chemistry, though in 1803 he did advise the Royal Institution about its laboratory, at the suggestion of Humphry Davy. 
Higgins died in 1818 at Walford in Staffordshire. He had made his career in an atmosphere of chemical and technical progress and optimism, where devising oil lamps which looked like candles, and heating systems based on warm air, went with and were as important as performing chemical analyses and syntheses. 


@@@@@


doc= 13229


Higgins, Charles Longuet (1806-1885), benefactor, was born at Turvey Abbey, Bedfordshire, on 30 November 1806. He was the eldest son of John Higgins (1768-1846) of Turvey Abbey and Theresa (died 1845), eldest daughter of Benjamin Longuet of Louth and Bath, a gentleman of Huguenot descent. The family had strong links with the evangelical movement, and the parish church at Turvey had evangelical links. He was taught at home and matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 14 November 1825. 
At Cambridge Higgins was impressed by the piety of the Revd Charles Simeon, the evangelical revivalist, and developed a taste for natural history and music, though he was an undistinguished scholar. He graduated BA in 1830 and proceeded to an MA in 1834. Although he had hoped to become a clergyman he relinquished the idea in deference to his father's wishes, and was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 16 November 1830. He was not called to the bar, and from 1836 to 1838 studied medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital. Having qualified as a doctor, he carried on a general medical practice at Turvey. 
When his father died in 1846, Higgins succeeded to the family property. The following year he built a village school, to which he added a museum in 1852. He also restored the church (1852-4) and erected more than sixty comfortable cottages. On 26 June 1853 he married Helen Eliza, daughter of Thomas Burgon of the British Museum. They had no children. Although Higgins never formally renounced his evangelical background, his increasing interest in high-church Anglicanism can be felt in the hymn-book which he compiled for general use in the Church of England and his paper on hymnology, afterwards published, which he read to the church congress at Nottingham in 1871. He was a JP and deputy lieutenant of Bedfordshire, and he delivered lectures on natural history and other subjects. Higgins died at Turvey Abbey on 23 January 1885, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 13230


Higgins, Francis (1669/70-1728), Church of Ireland clergyman and religious controversialist, was one of at least eleven children of Robert Higgins, a Limerick apothecary. Although, according to Higgins, the family's 'little fortune' was 'ruined' in the Williamite wars his brother John (also an apothecary) eventually became an alderman of the city. After education at Mr Ryland's school in Limerick Francis entered Trinity College, Dublin, aged sixteen, in May 1686, as a sizar. Ordained in 1689, while an undergraduate, the college being then under military occupation, Higgins was made curate of St Andrew's, Dublin, and was (or so he said) imprisoned by the Jacobite authorities. In February 1690 he became a reader at Christ Church Cathedral, only to be suspended shortly afterwards for dereliction of duty. He took his BA in 1691 and his MA two years later. 
In 1694 Higgins was presented to the rectory of Gowran, co. Kilkenny, by the Jacobite Lord Rosse. He later claimed to have been employed as an agent by the 'lower clergy' against a bill introduced during the Irish parliamentary session of 1695-7. Otherwise he first came to public notice in the Irish convocation summoned in 1704. A proctor for the diocese of Ossory, he was one of the prominent high-churchmen who, according to Archbishop King of Dublin, 'got the management of the clergy... into their hands' (King to Archbishop Wake, 12 Sept 1717, Wake MSS). With his clerical friend William Perceval he frequented the Swan Tripe Club, a tory dining club in Dublin which was the target of a satire depicting Higgins as fat, red-faced, and loquacious: 'a son of pudding and eternal beef' ('The Swan Tripe-Club', 1705). His former negligence forgotten, the high-flying canons of Christ Church elected Higgins to a prebend in 1705 and promptly dispatched him to England to pursue their jurisdictional dispute with Archbishop King. Higgins had already acquired a reputation as a fiery preacher, which he enhanced while in England, his partisan enthusiasm reaching a climax in a sermon preached in the Chapel Royal on Ash Wednesday (26 February) 1707, which was so strident in its denunciation of whigs as enemies of the monarchy and the established church that he was arrested for preaching sedition. Although the government entered a 'nolle prosequi', not only the offending sermon was published but also a 'postscript' (attributed to the nonjuror Charles Leslie), with an account of a prior interview with Archbishop Tenison of Canterbury, in which Tenison's advice to Higgins to moderate his tone had been insolently rejected. By order of the Irish House of Lords the postscript was publicly burnt. Higgins and Perceval also ran into controversy when they testified before the convocation of Canterbury to the powers of the lower house of convocation in Dublin. Although condemned in print for acting without authority the two men were vindicated by the Irish convocation. 
Higgins returned to Ireland in 1710 to spearhead the clerical reaction that accompanied the re-establishment of a tory ministry. He involved himself in a series of political disputes, in the most remarkable of which he supported fantastic allegations made by a converted Catholic priest, Dominic Langton, of an alleged republican conspiracy among provincial whigs. Unpleasant scenes followed at the Dublin quarter sessions, which Higgins attended as a JP (he had been removed in 1709 but was later restored). After he had insisted that the assembled company at the justices' dinner drink to the principle of passive obedience the grand jury presented him as 'a common disturber of her Majesty's peace'. The foreman, Lord Santry, brought this charge before the Irish privy council but was rebuffed by the tory majority there. Higgins was now the centre of attention on both sides of the Irish sea and became known as 'the Irish Sacheverell'. In 1712 he once again arrived in London: 'I believe', wrote Swift, 'he designs to make as much noise as he can in order to preferment' (Swift, 'Journal to Stella', 2.536). He was talked of for a deanery, in Ireland or England, but nothing came his way. 
After the Hanoverian succession, although still a thorn in Archbishop King's flesh, Higgins seems to have avoided political controversy. Belatedly he acquired the archdeaconry of Cashel, in 1725, in succession to Perceval, but he may have been an absentee for he retained the Christ Church prebend. He died in August 1728 and was buried in his prebendal church, St Michael and All Angels, Dublin. He is not known to have married. Besides several anonymous squibs, which may possibly be attributed to him, he published five sermons, all delivered between 1705 and 1707. 


@@@@@


doc= 13231


Higgins, Francis (1746-1802), newspaper proprietor and spy, was born in Dublin, the son of Patrick Higgins, an attorney's clerk, and his wife, Mary; his parents had moved there from Downpatrick, co. Down. Higgins passed his early years in menial employments, became an attorney's clerk, by report converted to protestantism, though his name is not found in the official list of converts (and his later reconversion to Roman Catholicism is alluded to), and, through deception, married an heiress, Mary Anne Archer (died 1767), of an eminent Dublin Catholic family, who in 1766 prosecuted him for fraud. Higgins was convicted, and was for a time imprisoned. This episode earned Higgins the sobriquet 'Sham Squire'. After his release he formed lucrative connections with lottery offices and gambling houses. In 1775 he appears as master of the Dublin guild of hosiers, which entitled him to be elected to the Dublin city commons. He was admitted an attorney at Dublin in 1780 (apparently through the influence of the attorney-general, John Scott), secured the posts of deputy coroner and under-sheriff for Dublin, and in 1788 was appointed a magistrate for co. Dublin. This accumulation of offices, along with his proprietorship of the 'Freeman's Journal' newspaper, meant that by the 1780s Higgins was one of the city's most influential citizens. 
Founded in Dublin in 1763, the 'Freeman's Journal' was an organ of radical opinion with Charles Lucas as its main contributor, and later it expressed the opinions of the 'patriots', notably Henry Grattan and Henry Flood, in their opposition to Lord Townshend. Higgins secured an editorial role from as early as 1779 and, without the knowledge of the then owners, was simultaneously in the pay of government. He skilfully maintained this equivocal role for a period by maintaining a pretence of patriotism for the sake of the newspaper's owners but at the same time ingratiated himself with government. However, from the date of his proprietorship of the 'Freeman' in 1783 (when it was purchased by government and placed under Higgins's management) until his death in 1802 it became openly subservient to Pitt's administration. Higgins continuously assailed the government's opponents in his paper, provoking Grattan's denunciation in parliament. Ironically the circulation and influence of the paper declined under Higgins's management, becoming ultimately a costly liability to its political sponsors. In 1789 Higgins's arch-rival, the Belfast radical John Magee, published polemical attacks in his own paper, the 'Dublin Evening Post'; there he exposed Higgins's antecedents and the Archer affair and denounced Higgins as a venal journalist, a corrupt magistrate, and a profiteer from gambling. Magee also attacked associates of Higgins, including the actor and theatre manager Richard Daly. In 1790 Higgins prosecuted Magee for libel and through his alleged influence with John Scott, now Lord Earlsfort, lord chief justice, he obtained, by authority of that court, writs styled 'fiats', an obsolescent legal process under which the defendant was liable to imprisonment until he found surety for damages of $7800, which he was unable to do. Under pressure the jury returned a guilty verdict against Magee. These proceedings formed the subject of discussion in the Irish House of Commons. The case brought into focus the abuse of fiats which subsequently ceased to be used. 
In 1791 Higgins was removed from the magistracy, and in 1795 he was struck off the roll of attorneys. In 1795 he warned the government of a projected attack on the new lord lieutenant, Lord Camden. Through the under-secretary of state, Edward Cooke, Higgins secretly communicated to the Irish government in 1798 information on the United Irishmen obtained through a system of spies and informers which he managed. The government account of secret service money (20 June 1798) has an entry for $1000 paid to 'F. H.' for the discovery of Lord Edward Fitzgerald. The initials are those of Higgins. Cooke recommended that Lord Castlereagh grant a yearly pension of $300 to Higgins for the same service. Although Higgins was amply rewarded by government for this and other services, he remained persistent in his demands and complaints. His role in this arrest was the subject of much historical inquiry subsequently, especially after the publication of the correspondence of Lord Cornwallis in 1859. Works by the historians R. R. Madden and W. J. Fitzpatrick appeared at a period of resurgent Irish nationalism in the 1860s, thus making Higgins's betrayal of Fitzgerald a key episode in national consciousness. It is not surprising that their assessment was coloured by that standpoint. Thus for Madden, writing in 1867: 'Higgins, in politics, in religion, in friendship, in all his pursuits, was everything by turns and nothing long. In hypocrisy and perfidy alone he was always consistent and persistent: he was always -- Higgins' (Madden, 'History', 2.451). Higgins died in affluence at Dublin on 19 January 1802: his will mentions legacies worth $12,380. His heir was Francis Higgins of Philadelphia, his nephew and namesake, who was originally from Downpatrick. Higgins was buried with his parents in Kilbarrack cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 13232


Higgins, Godfrey (1773-1833), historian of religion, only son of Godfrey Higgins of Skellow Grange, near Doncaster, and his wife, Christiana ('nee' Matterson), was born on (or shortly before) 1 May 1773. He entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1790, moving to Trinity Hall in 1791, but did not take a degree. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1818, but was not called to the bar. On his father's death in 1794 he succeeded to a considerable estate. In 1800 he married Jane, heir of Richard Thorpe. They had three children: a son, Godfrey, a daughter, Jane, who married Lieutenant-General Matthew Sharpe of Hoddom Castle, near Dumfries, and another daughter, Charlotte, who died, unmarried, before Higgins. His London house was 20 Keppel Street, Russell Square. In 1802, during the scare of an anticipated invasion by Napoleon, Higgins became a major in the 3rd West York militia, and while in this service he was seized with a bad fever at Harwich, from the effects of which he never recovered. 
After resigning his commission in 1813, Higgins devoted himself entirely to an unbiased investigation into the history of religious beliefs. He acquired a knowledge of Hebrew, and sometimes pursued his studies in foreign libraries. At the date of his death he had projected a journey to Egypt and the Near East in search of further clues to religious problems. Higgins's principal publications were in the field of comparative religion. His 'Horae sabbaticae' (1826), which received notice and criticism, contains an autobiography in the 1851 edition. In 1829 he published a work on Muhammad, and 'The Celtic Druids', which was the more critically successful of the two. His last work was 'Anacalypsis: an attempt to draw aside the veil of the Saitic Isis, or, An inquiry into the origin of languages, nations, and religions', which was printed in June 1833 but was not published until 1836. The second volume was edited by George Smallfield at the expense of Higgins's son after his father's death. Higgins claimed to be a Christian, regarding Jesus as a Nazarite, of the monastic order of Pythagorean Essenes, probably a Samaritan by birth, and leading the life of a hermit. 
Higgins acted with energy as a justice of the peace, and was keenly interested in practical questions of political economy. He took part in measures for the better treatment of the insane, and provided for the erection of a house for pauper lunatics near Wakefield. He favoured the abolition of the corn laws in conjunction with the 'fund law' and game laws. He supported calls for the reform of the House of Commons and advocated the abolition of the protestant church in Ireland. His interest in social and political issues was manifested in several publications including 'A Letter to Earl Fitzwilliam on the Abuses of the York Lunatic Asylum' (1814); 'The Evidence of Godfrey Higgins and C. Best Taken before a Committee of the House of Commons respecting the Asylum at York' (1816); and letters and observations on the passing of the 'Metallic Currency Bill' (1819), and on the corn laws and fund laws (1826). In 1831 several of the radical political unions of Yorkshire were anxious to elect him to parliament; he pledged himself to serve if elected, but declined to come forward as a candidate. Much of his correspondence with the political unions of Halifax, Huddersfield, Dewsbury, and Wakefield, along with some observations on the corn and fund laws and parliamentary reform, is contained in a volume published as 'An Address to the Electors and Others of the West-Riding of the County of York' (1833). 
Higgins attended the meeting of the British Association at Cambridge in June 1833, returned home out of health, and died at his Yorkshire residence at Skellow Grange on 9 August 1833. His wife had died eleven years earlier, on 11 May 1822 at Bath. Higgins was a freemason, and a fellow of the Society of Arts, the Royal Asiatic Society, and other learned bodies. 


@@@@@


doc= 13233


Higgins, John (b. c.1544, d. in or before 1620), poet and linguist, was a student at Christ Church, Oxford (according to Thomas Hearne), though his name does not appear in the university register. From about the age of twenty he began to 'learne the tongues' (Higgins, 130), specializing in French and Latin. He spent two years (probably 1569-70) teaching grammar, after which he began work on a new and thoroughly revised edition of Richard Howlet or Huloet's 'Abecedarium' (1552), published in 1572 as 'Huloets Dictionarie'. His next project in the field of languages was an expanded edition of Nicholas Udall's 'Flowers, or, Eloquent phrases of the Latine speach, gathered out of the sixe comoedies of Terence' (1575), which earned the praise of Thomas Newton in his 'Encomia' (1589). Higgins also claimed to have: 'translated Aldus phrases fraught / With eloquence' (Higgins, 131), but this work, if published, has not been identified. In 1585 he published another translation, 'The Nomenclator, or, Remembrancer of Adrianus Junius' (1585). By 1574, when he claimed to be not yet thirty, Higgins was vicar of Winsham, Somerset, where he was still dwelling in 1585 when he wrote the dedication to 'The Nomenclator'. His last published work was 'An Answer to Master William Perkins Concerning Christ's Descension into Hell' (1602). 
Although less accomplished as a poet than as a linguist, Higgins is today best remembered for his efforts in verse. A commendatory poem prefixed to 'Huloets Dictionarie' by Thomas Churchyard suggests that by 1572 Higgins was keeping company with poets. In the same year his first published verses appeared, prefixed to John Sadler's translation entitled 'The Foure Bookes of Flavius Vegetius Renatus'. His most important work, published in 1574, is 'The First Parte of the 'Mirour for Magistrates''. This was designed as a supplement to William Baldwin's 'Myrroure for Magistrates' (1559), a compilation of poetic complaints by characters drawn from late medieval English history. Higgins took up Baldwin's hint that the project should be expanded backwards to cover British antiquity from the earliest beginnings. Using as his source the fabulous history of Geoffrey of Monmouth (which he claimed to have once owned in manuscript), Higgins produced sixteen complaints (or 'tragedies') by unfortunate ancient Britons 'From the Comming of Brute to the Incarnation of our Saviour and Redemer Jesu Christe'. This work includes a few autobiographical stanzas following the tragedy of Mempricius which are the main source of information about Higgins's early career. A second edition followed in 1575, with additional passages and one new complaint. In 1587 Higgins's complaints were published in one volume with the original 'Mirror'. For this volume Higgins wrote twenty-three new complaints by ancient Britons and Romans, as well as contributing the complaint of Sir Nicholas Burdet to the latter section of the volume. 
Higgins has been sharply blamed by Lily Campbell and subsequent critics for violating the integrity of the 'Mirror' project. It is true that his literary skills were barely adequate to the task he set himself, and he seems not to have fully grasped the original 'Mirror''s political aims. Intentionally or otherwise, he transformed 'The Mirror' from a collection of cautionary tales into a dictionary of national (and fervently nationalist) biography. Thus, while he may have diluted the politics of the anthology, he helped ensure its enduring popularity among Elizabethan and later readers. His tragedy of Cordila is thought to have influenced both Shakespeare's 'King Lear' and the description of the cave of despair in Spenser's 'Faerie Queene' (book 1, canto 9). The parish records at Winsham show that his successor as vicar took up his position in 1620, indicating that Higgins died in or before that date. 


@@@@@


doc= 13234


Higgins, Matthew James (1810-1868), journalist, the youngest child and only son of Matthew Higgins and Janette, daughter of James Baillie, second son of Hugh Baillie of Dochfour, Inverness-shire, was born on 4 December 1810, at Benown Castle in co. Meath. His father died soon after his birth and he was reared by his mother. He was educated at a private school near Bath and at Eton College. On 22 May 1828 he matriculated from New College, Oxford, but never graduated. At college he preferred hunting to study. He afterwards travelled much in Spain and in Italy, where his three sisters lived in Naples, after their marriage to Italians. In 1838-9 he visited British Guiana, where he had inherited an estate, and repeated the visit in 1846-7. This experience enabled him to keep his estate in good order during the critical period which followed the abolition of slavery, and to write four effective pamphlets upon the difficulties of the sugar-producing colonies in 1847 and 1849. His first publication, however, was 'Jacob Omnium, the Merchant Prince', an amusing satire on mercantile dishonesty published in 'New Monthly Magazine' (August 1845). Jacob Omnium quickly became a popular public figure and Higgins's best-known 'nom de plume'. W. M. Thackeray contributed to the same number; the men met, when both enquired about the other's 'nom de plume', and became close friends. Thackeray's ballad 'Jacob Omnium's Hoss' ('Punch', 15, 251) celebrated an episode in which Higgins was involved which led to the end of the Star Chamber; the ballad effectively caught Higgins's formidable powers as a controversialist: '
His name is Jacob Homnium, Exquire; 

And if I'd committed crimes, 

Good Lord! I wouldn't ave that mann 

Attack me in the 'Times'. 
(G. N. Ray, 'Thackeray: the Age of Wisdom', 1958, 46)' In 1847 Higgins was in Ireland assisting the famine relief committee; Jacob Omnium's long letter to 'The Times' (22 April 1847; reprinted in Higgins's 'Essays on Social Subjects') excoriated idle landowners, both Irish and English. Higgins followed Peel into free trade and stood as a Peelite at Westbury in 1847, being defeated by James Wilson. He never again contested a seat, but he aided the Peelites by writing for their paper, the 'Morning Chronicle', until it folded in 1854, and he often attended the Commons; with J. R. Godley he was especially active in attacking whig colonial policy. 
Higgins also wrote frequently for 'The Times' under a variety of pseudonyms, including Jacob Omnium, Civilian, Paterfamilias, West Londoner, Belgravian Mother, Mother of Six, and John Barleycorn. Higgins was an amusing writer with a hard and quite radical edge. Comfortably off, he wrote because he liked to write. On 2 July 1850 his income increased when he married Emily Blanche, daughter of Sir Henry Joseph Tichborne of Tichborne and widow of the eldest son of Mr Bennett of Pythouse, Wiltshire (which house the family for a time also gained). The Higginses moved from 1 Lowndes Square to 71 Eaton Square, London. They had four children, one of whom died in infancy. Higgins was in every sense a prominent social figure (he was 6 feet 8 inches, too tall even to join the Life Guards), well known for his writing since his 'noms de plume' were mostly flags rather than disguises, and a member of many metropolitan clubs and societies, including the Philobiblon Society and the Cosmopolitan Club. He bought both pictures and horses as an expert. He wrote effectively on administrative reform and on reform of the army, especially with respect to military education and the purchase of commissions, being an early champion of the abolition of that practice (1857). He also wrote for the 'Edinburgh Review', and for the 'Cornhill Magazine' during Thackeray's editorship. 
In 1863 Higgins quarrelled with 'The Times' when the paper dropped the line of attack which, with Higgins, it had hitherto pursued against Lieutenant-Colonel Crawley during the latter's court martial for his treatment of Sergeant-Major Lilley and his wife in India; Higgins's correspondence about the rupture was published privately, as a pamphlet. Subsequently Higgins wrote for the 'Pall Mall Gazette', developing the genre of chatty titbits. His family interest also made him active in attacking the Tichborne claimant. A 'man of noble and amiable presence' (Leslie Stephen in 'DNB'), Higgins was an important figure in London literary society in the 1850s and 1860s, 'the author of not a few reconciliations' (Stirling Maxwell, lxix). His health suffered some decline and he took the waters at Homburg. He was taken ill after bathing at Kingston House, near Abingdon, Berkshire, and died there six days later on 14 August 1868. Survived by his wife and three children, he was buried near his younger son in the Roman Catholic cemetery in Fulham. His 'Essays on Social Subjects' was first published privately in 1856, and published in 1875 with a memoir by Sir William Stirling Maxwell. 


@@@@@


doc= 13235


Higgins, William (1763?-1825), chemist, was probably born in Collooney, co. Sligo, in 1763, the son of Thomas Higgins ('c'.1739- 'c'.1790), physician. By 1784 he had gone to London, where his uncle and patron, Bryan Higgins, was established as a doctor and chemist with a laboratory in Greek Street, Soho. Higgins matriculated on 6 February 1786 at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, and by 16 March the following year had migrated to Pembroke College. He remained there for more than a year but left without taking a degree. He was 'operator' to the professor of chemistry, William Austin; on 2 April 1787 he sent an (unpublished) analysis of a human kidney-stone to the Royal Society. 
Higgins experimented in the basement laboratory of the old Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, and then in London. In 1789 he published, at a cost exceeding $100, his 'Comparative View of the Phlogistic and Antiphlogistic Theories'. One of the earliest British converts to Lavoisier's view that combustion involved combination with oxygen rather than the emission of phlogiston, Higgins controverted the Irish chemist Richard Kirwan's 'Essay on Phlogiston' (1784). (Kirwan subsequently converted to Lavoisier's views as, by 1800, had almost all British chemists.) Higgins's book retained an interest because of its unstated assumptions on proportions which anticipated John Dalton's atomic theory. Indeed, in 1810 and subsequently, Humphry Davy suggested that Higgins had anticipated Dalton, and in 1814 Higgins himself published 'Experiments and Observations on the Atomic Theory', urging his priority. Higgins's subsequent editors, T. S. Wheeler and J. R. Partington (1960), place his work in the context of Newtonian elective affinities; it seems that only after Dalton had published his theory could anyone see approximations to it in Higgins's writings. 
In December 1791 Higgins was offered the position of chemist, on $200 per annum with coals and candles, at the newly established Apothecaries' Hall in Dublin; he returned to Ireland and was sworn in on 13 April 1792. The laboratory proved too expensive, and on 27 May 1795 Higgins lost his job. He transferred to the Royal Dublin Society at half the salary, and from 1795 to 1822 was also chemist to the Irish linen board. There he experimented and advised on bleaching with chlorine. At the Dublin Society a laboratory was equipped for Higgins, as professor, to experiment 'on Dying Materials and other Articles, wherein Chymistry may assist the Arts' (Wheeler and Partington, 17) -- probably the first applied chemistry laboratory in the British Isles. He also gave courses of lectures, and supervised the collection of minerals. 
In April 1817 Higgins obtained leave to visit the continent. On 1 May of the same year he was admitted as a fellow of the Royal Society, to which he had been elected in 1806. He died in Dublin in 1825, between 28 April (when he made his will) and the end of June of that year (when his death was reported to the Royal Society). His grave is unknown. He lived in rooms in Dublin, at 71 Grafton Street, but owned considerable property which he bequeathed to his nephew. He was regarded by many as a difficult person to work with, and the promise with which his career in chemistry had opened was not fulfilled. 


@@@@@


doc= 13236


Higginson, Edward (1807-1880), Unitarian minister, was born on 9 January 1807 in Heaton Norris, Lancashire, the third of six children and the eldest son of Edward Higginson (1781-1832), Unitarian minister at Stockport, and his wife, Sarah (1782?-1827), daughter of Joel Marshall, a Loughborough draper. In 1810 the elder Higginson became minister at Friar Gate Chapel, Derby, where he also kept a school, in which his children were educated; he encouraged his sons to learn woodworking, at which they became highly proficient. 
Lacking the nerve to be a surgeon, as his father wanted, Higginson entered Manchester College, York, in September 1823. In 1828 he became minister to the small congregation at Bowl Alley Lane Chapel, Hull. The next year, because the stipend did not reach the promised level, he began a successful school. In 1837, when two new proprietary schools swept away his pupils, he turned to teaching girls, with the assistance of an unmarried sister, but returned to teaching boys when his competitors failed. 
On 25 December 1839 Higginson married Lydia (1813/14-1856), the youngest daughter of Flower Humble, from a Newcastle mercantile family, and the adopted daughter of the banker Samuel Shore of Meersbrook (1737/8-1828), to whose wife she was collaterally related; they had a son and a daughter. In 1845, suffering from overwork and, possibly, depression, he resigned the Hull pulpit and the next year accepted an invitation from Westgate Chapel, Wakefield, where, despite a modest increase in income from his wife, he also kept a school, in time extended to girls. He delighted in the congregation and in the company of other West Riding ministers, a change from the isolation of Hull. 
Lydia Higginson died on 8 February 1856, aged forty-two, and on 5 July 1857 Edward married Emily Thomas (1826-1895); the daughter of George Thomas, a Carmarthen solicitor, she had been teaching at a girls' school in Wakefield. This marriage too produced a son and a daughter. The next year he accepted an invitation to High Street Chapel, Swansea. Besides conducting a school, he was visitor and examiner at the Presbyterian college, Carmarthen, where he also lectured on English grammar and literature and on political economy. In 1875 he reluctantly accepted the presidency of the college, but, suffering from ill health, resigned both presidency and pulpit in 1876. 
As a teacher Higginson was clearly ahead of his time, to judge from his call, in an essay published in 'The Educator: Prize Essays' in 1839, for openness and friendliness rather than reliance on authority in the classroom, from his reservations about corporal punishment, and from the transparent pleasure he took in opening a wider world to his Welsh-speaking students at Carmarthen. He regarded teaching as a distraction from his ministerial role, though, like most of his generation, he lacked the 'popular' style increasingly taken as the guarantee of ministerial success. While noting that he 'discoursed more than he sermonized, reasoned more than he exhorted', a Wakefield correspondent in 'Christian Life' (21 February 1880) also recalled his common sense, restrained eloquence, and deep religious feeling. 
Higginson's strongest instinct was scholarly, though he claimed no originality: one obituarist wrote that 'he could form no conception of the perfect Christian scholar that did not define itself into the image of Mr. Wellbeloved and Mr. Kenrick', the most distinguished of his teachers at York ('Christian Life', 21 Feb 1880). He was well-read, and his publications ranged from the usual Unitarian defences against Anglican and orthodox attacks to a distinctly Unitarian contribution ('Astro-Theology', 1854) to the debate on the plurality of worlds launched by the confrontation of William Whewell (1794-1866) and Sir David Brewster (1781-1868). He wrote frequently for the 'Christian Reformer' until its cessation in 1863, and from 1876 to his death contributed regularly to 'Christian Life'. His principal concern was to reassert historically and biblically based Unitarianism against the religious intuitionism of James Martineau (1805-1900) and John James Tayler (1797-1869); ironically, one of his sisters married Martineau, while another married Martineau's redoubtable opponent Samuel Bache (1804-1876). Of his many books, only the two volumes of 'The Spirit of the Bible' (1853-5) brought a modest return. 'Ecce Messias' (1874) was an extended effort to trace biblical testimony to the messianic hope, which John Locke had seen as the central feature of Christianity. Its failure with the public, after which Higginson gave up writing books, suggests the end of an era in the history of Unitarian intellect. Higginson died at 2 Glanmor Terrace, Swansea, on 12 February 1880 of heart disease, and was buried in the town's Dan-y-graig cemetery on 17 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 13237


Higginson, Francis (bap. 1586/7, d. 1630), minister in America, was baptized on 6 August 1586 (or possibly 1587) in Claybrooke, Leicestershire, the son of John Higginson, clergyman. He matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1602, and in 1609 moved to Jesus College, from which he graduated BA in 1610 and proceeded MA in 1613. In 1614 he was ordained deacon and then priest in the archdiocese of York. Tobie Mathew, archbishop of York, conferred on him the rectory of Barton in Fabis in 1615, but he was never inducted into the position. A strict conformist, Higginson resigned those posts in 1615 and obtained the living of Claybrooke. Later, he also preached at Belgrave, a neighbouring village. On 8 January 1616 at St Peter's, Nottingham, he married Anne Herbert (died in or before 1640); they had nine children. 
At some point between 1615 and 1627 Higginson fell under the influence of Arthur Hildersham, the suspended, and later imprisoned, nonconformist lecturer. However, he was tolerated by Bishop Williams of Lincoln until 1627, when he was deprived of his licence. Nevertheless, he was offered several other livings and was selected by the mayor of Leicester to be the city preacher, but he declined all offers. In 1628 proceedings in the court of high commission were apparently begun against Higginson, leading him in March to offer himself as minister to the Massachusetts Bay Company. In 1629 the governors of the company appointed him minister to one of their proposed settlements. With his family he sailed from Gravesend on 25 April 1629, and arrived in Salem harbour on 29 June. In early August their church was formed at Salem. Samuel Skelton was chosen minister and Higginson his assistant. Skelton and Higginson ignored the 'Book of Common Prayer' and instituted a fairly strict discipline, leading some members of the new congregation to issue complaints against them. They denied that they were separating from the Church of England, but clearly began to lay out the principles of congregationalism. 
Higginson kept a valuable journal of his voyage to New England. The journal was sent back to London in August 1629, although it was not published until the nineteenth century, when it appeared as 'A True Relation of the Last Voyage to New England'. Soon after his arrival he wrote a long letter to 'some friends' in England, which was refashioned into a pamphlet entitled 'New England's plantation, or, A short and true description of the commodities and discommodities of that countrey' (1630) and went through three editions by the year's end. 
Higginson contracted what contemporaneous sources refer to as 'a fever' in the summer of 1630, and died on 6 August. His widow, Anne, inherited the estate, which consisted mostly of undeveloped acreage in the Salem area. She died before 25 February 1640. 
Their eldest son, 
His younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 13238


Francis Higginson (1618-1673), Church of England clergyman, returned to England some time after 1630, was ordained, and became vicar of Kirkby Stephen, Westmorland. He was buried there on 20 May 1673. 


@@@@@


doc= 13239


John Higginson (1616-1708), was also a minister in America. He did not receive a formal university education (Harvard College not being founded until 1636) but nevertheless trained for the ministry under the supervision of John Cotton and others. He served as a schoolmaster and assistant pastor until, in 1659, he became the pastor of the Salem church which his father had settled. He took an active part in the discussion surrounding the 'halfway covenant' in New England in the 1660s and beyond. He died at Salem on 9 December 1708. 


@@@@@


doc= 13240


Higgons, Bevil (1670-1736), historian and poet, was, according to Venn, born at a place called Kezo, the third son of Sir Thomas Higgons (1623/4-1691), a politician, of Greywell, Hampshire, and his second wife, Bridget Leach, 'nee' Granville (died 1692), daughter of Sir Bevil Granville and widow of Sir Simon Leach, of Cadleigh, Devon. On 5 March 1686, at the age of sixteen, he matriculated as a commoner from St John's College, Oxford, but in Michaelmas he migrated to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a fellow commoner. His first production in print was a set of English verses addressed to the queen on the birth of the prince, James Francis Edward Stuart, which he wrote for inclusion in the university collection of congratulatory poems entitled 'Illustrissimi principis ducis Cornubiae... Genethliacon' (1688). He was admitted as a student of the Middle Temple on 12 November 1687, but was not called to the bar. 
Higgons and his two brothers, George and Thomas Higgons (1668/9-1733), were Jacobites and in 1689 they joined their uncle, Denis Granville, dean of Durham, who had become Anglican chaplain to James II in exile at St Germain-en-Laye, France. Bevil kept his wit and good humour unimpaired in exile. In 1692 he and his brothers travelled in secret to England to help raise Jacobite regiments to support the abortive rising planned to coincide with a landing of James II's army in France. They were heavily involved in the Fenwick plot in 1696, another failed attempt to engineer a Jacobite rising and a French-backed Jacobite restoration. The affair was complicated by an unplanned attempt to assassinate William III and warrants were issued for the arrest of Higgons and his brothers in February 1696, but they were later released. Little is known of Bevil's movements until 1704 when he and Thomas, by then gentleman usher to James III, accompanied Mary of Modena at Dean Granville's funeral in Paris. From 1715 onwards he lived off a share of the pension that his brother Thomas had obtained from James III after he had been replaced as James's secretary of state by Lord Bolingbroke. In July of that year Bevil was ordered by James II's illegitimate son, the duke of Berwick, to go to England to find out the plans for a Jacobite rising and to consider whether James should land in England or Scotland. He never left France as the situation became too dangerous in Britain. 
Higgons returned to England in 1718 and spent the rest of his life there writing in defence of the Stuarts and their cause. Of his historical works the most important was 'A short view of the English history; with reflections on the reigns of the kings, their characters and manners, their succession to the throne; and all other remarkable incidents, to the Revolution, 1688'. After letting his manuscripts for this work 'lie cover'd with dust these twenty-six years', Higgons published it in London in 1723; subsequent editions were published at The Hague in 1727, and at London in 1734 and 1748. A French translation was also published at The Hague in 1729. In 1725 he published 'Historical and Critical Remarks on Bishop Burnet's History of his Own Time' (2nd edn 1727). Both of these works were reissued in 1736 under the title 'The Historical Works of Bevill Higgons'. A work purporting to be by Higgons, 'A History of the Life and Reign of Mary, Queen of Scots and Dowager of France', was printed in Dublin in 1753. 
As a poet Higgons published several poems in Dryden's 'Examen poeticum' (1693), in the first of which he applauded Dryden on his translation of Persius. He is believed to have contributed to Elijah Fenton's 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1717) and published under his own name in 1713 his panegyric 'A Poem on the Peace', which was reprinted in 1731 as 'A Poem on the Glorious Peace'. He also wrote for the stage: in addition to a prologue and an epilogue for plays by his kinsman George Granville, Baron Lansdowne, his own play 'The Generous Conqueror, or, The Timely Discovery' was performed at the Theatre Royal in 1702. This was said to have 'illustrated the right divine and impeccability' of James II and though it met with a neutral reaction on its first night, the audience stayed away subsequently. One critic, possibly Charles Gildon, attributed the failure to the fact that the play 'was writ after an untoward manner, and above half the Town condemn'd it as Turbulent and Factious' ('A Comparison between the Two Stages, with an Examen of the Generous Conqueror', 1702, 79-139). 
Higgons died unmarried in Chiswick on 1 March 1736 and was buried in St Pancras churchyard on 6 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 13241


Higgons, Theophilus (1578-1659), Church of England clergyman, was born in 1578 in Chilton, near Brill, Buckinghamshire, the son of Robert Higgons and his wife, Alice (died 1608). He was educated partly at the free school at Thame, Oxfordshire, and in 1592, at the age of fourteen, went to Christ Church, Oxford. He graduated BA, proceeded MA in 1600, and was described as a tolerable Latin poet. 
It has been said of Higgons that he was 'at first inclined to Puritanism, became a convert to Catholicism... in search of preferment: but finding none, returned to Protestantism' (Brown, 132). Thomas Ravis, the dean of Christ Church, appointed Higgons his domestic chaplain when he became bishop of Gloucester. Higgons then became a lecturer at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, London, where he had a following 'for his sweet and eloquent way of preaching' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.482). It was later alleged that he had been both overtly anti-popish and disaffected to episcopacy. Having been there some time, he married, but apparently so clandestinely that relatives and admirers were unimpressed. He subsequently left his wife and children and went to the north of England. He was rector of Little Comberton, Worcestershire, in 1605 and of Garforth, Yorkshire, in 1607. In 1608 he published 'A Briefe Consideration of Man's Iniquitie and God's Justice', a pamphlet on venial and mortal sin. 
About this time Higgons was received into the Roman Catholic church by one John Fludde, probably the Jesuit John Floyd, an event which hostile commentators interpreted as motivated by ambition or through debt and want of preferment. This was a routine accusation, though it has none the less been asserted that 'Higgons had undoubtedly experienced considerable career and financial problems' (Questier, 'Crypto-Catholicism', 48). He appears to have spent two years at the English colleges at Douai and St Omer under the name Thomas Forster. His father, Robert, went over to St Omer in an unsuccessful attempt to persuade him to return to England. Instead Higgons published in 1609 'The First Motive of T.H.... to Suspect the Integrity of his Religion', 'a conversion tract almost exclusively devoted to justification for purgatory and prayer for the dead' (ibid., 60). He also attacked protestant views on the assurance of salvation and the counsels of perfection. Sir Edward Hoby's 'Letter to Mr. T.H. Late Minister, now Fugitive' was written at this time, including a letter from Robert Higgons dated Chilton, 28 May 1609, strongly criticizing his son. Higgons, then living in Rouen, wrote 'The Apology of Theophilus Higgons, Lately Minister, now Catholique' (1609). Copies of this book 'were among the recently imported Catholic books seized by the English government at the house of the Venetian ambassador in July 1609' (Allison and Rogers, 1.86). 
After living in Rouen for some time Higgons was reconverted to protestantism, reportedly by Thomas Morton, dean of Winchester. Again temporal motivations were alleged, Higgons being seen as not having found 'that which he expected, namely respect, preferment, and I know not what' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 484-5). He made a public recantation at Paul's Cross, as a result of which he published in 1611 'A Sermon Preached at St Paul's Crosse'. He was appointed rector of Hunton, near Maidstone, apparently secured for him by Hoby, in 1610. He would later publish 'Mystical Babylon, or papall Rome... in which the miserable and wicked condition of Rome... is fully discovered' (1624). In March 1642 he was summoned by the House of Commons as a delinquent for giving his support to the recent prayer book petition from Kent. He was sequestered from his living by April 1647 and went to reside at the house of one Daniel Collins in Maidstone. He died at Maidstone in 1659 and was probably buried at the church of All Saints, Maidstone, 'in the cemitery... near to the south east door of the chancel, but hath no stone or mon. over his grave' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.485). 


@@@@@


doc= 13242


Higgons, Sir Thomas (1623/4-1691), politician and author, was born in Shropshire, the son of Thomas Higgons ('b'. 1563/4, died in or before 1640), rector of Westbury, Shropshire, and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1656), daughter of Richard Barker of Haughmond Abbey. He matriculated from St Alban Hall, Oxford, on 27 April 1638, aged fourteen, and later resided at Merton College with his tutor, fellow Edward Corbet. On 4 February 1640 he was admitted to the Middle Temple. Subsequently he returned to Shropshire, though it is unknown whether he fought for either side during the civil war. Between about 1643 and 1646 he made a voyage to Italy; after his return to England, in 1647 or 1648 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Paulet, and widow of Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex (1591-1646), the parliamentarian general. They lived at Greywell, and during the marriage two daughters, Elizabeth and Frances, were born. After his wife's death in 1656, Higgons delivered and later published 'A Funerall Oration Spoken over the Grave' (1656) defending her against charges of adultery and other censures. In 1658 he published, as 'A Prospective of the Naval Triumph of the Venetians over the Turk', a translation of an Italian work by G. F. Busenello. 
In 1659 Higgons represented Malmesbury, Wiltshire, in parliament, where he spoke in favour of recognizing Richard Cromwell as lord protector, allowing the Scottish MPs to remain in the house, and maintaining the 'status quo' in general. Though he participated in this and other debates, his role was not prominent. At the Restoration he published 'A Panegyrick to the King' (1660), in which he exhorted Charles II to save England's 'sinking State' and to rule like Augustus and Trajan. This work won him the praise of Edmund Waller. In the Cavalier Parliament, as MP for New Windsor, Berkshire, Higgons soon distinguished himself as a firm supporter of the king by arguing in favour of his exclusive control of the militia. He argued that the power of the king was fully compatible with the liberty of the people, and he added that the civil wars would never have happened if the king's power over the military had not been contested. In total he served on 178 committees, chairing seven, acted as teller in fifteen divisions, and made twenty-two recorded speeches, one of which, on the militia, was published (1661). For his services the crown awarded him in 1663 an annual pension of $500 and a knighthood. In November 1661 he married Bridget Leach (died 1692), daughter of Sir Bevil Grenville, sister of the recently created earl of Bath, who had been instrumental in the Restoration, and widow of Simon Leach of Cadleigh, Devon. Over the years they had three sons, George, Thomas Higgons (1668/9-1733), and Bevil Higgons (1670-1736), and three daughters, Grace, Jane, and Bridget. Sir Thomas also maintained his literary interests, publishing 'Ode upon the Death of Mr Cowley' (1667) in celebration of the recently deceased poet, Abraham Cowley. 
In 1665 Sir Thomas was involved in a diplomatic mission to Paris and in 1668-9 he travelled to Dresden to deliver the Order of the Garter to the elector of Saxony. From 1674 to 1677 he served as the English envoy in Venice, where he probably wrote much of his most substantial literary work, finally published in 1684 as 'The History of Isuf Bassa, Captain General of the Ottoman Army at the Invasion of Candia', which concerned a Turkish tragic hero in the war against the Venetians in the 1640s. When he returned to England during the onset of the Popish Plot, he was identified in 'A Seasonable Argument', published at Amsterdam in 1677, as the recipient of $4000 in gifts from the crown and as one of those 'who have betrayed their country to the conspirators, and bargain'd with them to maintain a standing army in England, under the command of the bigotted popish D[uke] who... hopes to bring all back to Rome'. Though he defended the duke of York in the exclusion crisis, he also sat on parliamentary committees to protect the protestant religion. He chose not to participate in the Exclusion Parliaments but was elected MP for St Germans, Cornwall, in 1685 and served on three committees in James II's parliament. After the king's flight he maintained his loyalty, though unlike his sons Thomas and Bevil he did not become a Jacobite and follow the monarch into exile. 
On 24 November 1691 Sir Thomas died from apoplexy in the court of king's bench while acting as a witness for the earl of Bath's claim to the duke of Albemarle's estate. He was laid to rest in Winchester Cathedral on 3 December, near the remains of his first wife. According to his will he had outstanding debts of $4650 but also claims to $1640 in reimbursement for his expenses on his mission to Venice. 


@@@@@


doc= 13243


Higgs, Griffith (bap. 1589, d. 1659), dean of Lichfield and book collector, was born at Barre Place, Stoke Abbas, Oxfordshire, and baptized at St Andrew's Church, Stoke Abbas, on 28 October 1589. He was the third child and second son of Griffith Higgs (died 1608), yeoman farmer, and of Sarah (died 1602), daughter of Robert Paine of Caversham, near Reading. Higgs attended Reading School. William Laud, who had also been a pupil, was a fellow of St John's College, Oxford, when Higgs went there in 1606. While at St John's, Higgs gained a reputation as an orator and writer of Latin verses, including a manuscript verse biography of the college's founder, Thomas White (St John's College, Oxford, MS L11, fols. 1-25). He graduated in June 1610 and in 1611 was elected probationer fellow of Merton College, becoming MA in 1615. He was the college praelector in Greek and after his MA produced three theses ('variations') in philosophy, philology, and ancient history. In 1620 he was awarded the college's Bickley exhibition, worth $4 annually. During the period 1616 to 1625 he occupied in turn several college positions as tutor, bursar, dean, and senior proctor, 'tho' of little stature' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.481). In March 1625 the college offered him the living of Gamlingay in Cambridgeshire. Higgs spent some time there but had three sub-lessees; he resigned in 1630, officially because of his collation to the 'rich church' of Cliffe-at-Hoo in Kent (ibid.), but in fact he was then already in the Netherlands, as in 1627 the privy council had issued a passport to him. 
In 1627 Laud was bishop of Bath and Wells but in touch with Oxford affairs, and Merton College also had connections with the court, which probably accounts for Higgs's name being put forward as chaplain to Elizabeth of Bohemia. While at The Hague, Higgs obtained his DD from Leiden, his work for the degree being published as 'Problemata theologica' (1630), and he continued to study and teach, to maintain an academic correspondence, and to keep diaries, of which those for 1630, 1632, 1637, and 1638 survive. He also continued his undergraduate interest in amateur theatricals, an interest which he shared with Elizabeth of Bohemia. During this time he collected an extensive library. The court in The Hague had little to offer financially, but Elizabeth could use her influence to obtain preferment for her chaplain; probably by that means Laud (who had been bishop of St David's until 1626) gave Higgs the precentorship of that cathedral in 1631. In 1638 the queen wrote to Laud, following which Higgs secured the deanery of Lichfield and returned to England. His Netherlands diary ends on 20 September, when he was presumably already back in England, since he had a passport to return to the Netherlands in 1639 to collect his books. On Charles I's command Higgs became a chaplain-in-extraordinary in November 1638 and a chaplain-in-ordinary in July 1639. His precise ecclesiological position is uncertain. While Laud at his trial labelled Higgs a Calvinist, John Earle the essayist described a clergyman who was probably Higgs as a 'Protestant out of judgement not faction', and Higgs probably regarded himself as among 'conformable men of learning, and good life and moderation' (Morrish, 139). 
Almost all the Lichfield records were lost during the civil war and it is difficult to discover how much time Higgs spent there, but a visitation by Archbishop Laud suggests that he had been sent to put in order a very unhappy state of affairs. In 1643 there were two sieges of Lichfield, of which a Latin account by Higgs survives, implying that he was in the close at the time. With it is a tribute to Prince Rupert as liberator of the cathedral close, and a note, 'Authore D. Griff. Higgs etc. Decano'. 
In 1646 Higgs was in Oxford when it surrendered to Fairfax. Later, he returned to Stoke Abbas, and died there, at Barre Place, unmarried, on 16 December 1659. He was buried in the chancel of St Andrew's Church, Stoke Abbas, on 19 December, and a mural tablet surmounted by a portrait bust and Higgs's coat of arms was erected there. The large inscription was written mostly by himself. In spite of sequestration by parliament Higgs died a rich man and in his will he gave benefactions to the church and poor of South Stoke, and $600 for the maintenance of a schoolmaster there. In addition to bequests concerning gifts from the royal family at The Hague, he left money to buy books for the Bodleian Library and the libraries of Merton and St John's, and to fund both the librarianship and a divinity lecture at Merton. His own books, including the 'fair English 'Bible' presented to him by the 'Winter Queen'' (Morrish, 156), he left to Merton, where they became an important part of the college library. The books were to be collected from no fewer than eight different sources, and there proved to be more than 650 titles. His document outlining the duties of a librarian, accompanying his gift to Merton, was one of the first attempts to define the post in English, and important both for the college and for the development of the librarianship. 


@@@@@


doc= 13244


Higham, Thomas (1795-1844), landscape engraver and draughtsman, was baptized on 14 February 1795 at Bramfield, Suffolk, the son of Thomas Higham, who outlived him, and his wife, Charlotte. He was apprenticed to John Greig, an antiquary and topographical engraver. His earliest engravings, which include plates for James Storer's 'Antiquarian Itinerary' (1815), demonstrate the considerable skill and refinement characteristic of his mature work. He was an accomplished draughtsman; several engravings of Suffolk sites after his designs appeared in Storer's 'Ancient Reliques' (1812-13), and he drew and engraved plates for the 'Stationers' Almanack' from 'c'.1826 to 1839. In the late 1820s he began using steel plates, and his 'New London Bridge' and 'Suspension Bridge over the Thames at Hammersmith' of 1828 for James Elmes's 'Metropolitan Improvements' (1827-32) are some of his earliest engravings using the medium. 
For the remainder of his career Higham contributed to a large number of publications, typically only producing one or two engravings for each. His engravings after J. M. W. Turner are among his finest work; the engraver James Charles Armytage deemed his 'Rouen Cathedral' from the 'Rivers of France' 'one of the plates of the century' (Huish). Higham exhibited at the Society of British Artists in 1825, 1826, and 1830, and was an auditor of the Artists' Annuity Fund. It is possible that he was the Thomas Higham who married Hannah Briers at St Luke's, Old Street, on 10 July 1825 but he was widowed and lived with his younger sister Martha at 9 Upper Brunswick Terrace, Islington, where he died on 3 January 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 13245


Anthony Highmore (1718-1799), draughtsman, was born on 26 September 1718 in the parish of St Swithin, London. He was a pupil under his father, with whom he worked until about 1755. On 23 April 1740 he married at Old Brampton, Derby, Anna Maria, the daughter of the Revd Seth Ellis, with whom he had fifteen children, one of whom was the legal writer Anthony Highmore, who was born in London. Highmore occasionally painted portraits and topographical views. His five views of Hampton Court were engraved by J. Tinney. In 1755 he painted a copy of a portrait by Sir Godfrey Kneller of William III for the Mansion House, York. After his father retired to Canterbury in 1761, Highmore gave up painting and turned his attention to the study of theology. He died in Canterbury on 3 October 1799 in his eighty-second year. 


@@@@@


doc= 13246


Highmore, Anthony (1758/9-1829), legal writer, was born in London, the son of Anthony Highmore (1718-1799) ['see under 'Highmore, Joseph], draughtsman, and grandson of Joseph Highmore, the painter. From 1766 he was educated at a school in Greenwich, and he commenced practice as a solicitor in 1783. Although he worked for over forty years as a solicitor, Highmore, a devout Christian, devoted much of his spare time to the management of charitable concerns and served as secretary to the London Lying-In Hospital. In addition he also moved in radical parliamentary circles; in particular Highmore was an intimate friend of Granville Sharp, and was active in opposition to the slave trade. 
Besides contributing to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', Highmore also wrote a number of works on legal and social issues. His earliest was a digest of the law relating to the use of bail in civil and criminal cases (1783). 'A Succinct View of the History of Mortmain' appeared in 1787, and explored its charitable uses. This was judged to be a pioneering work: a contemporary referred to 'his little book, but great work' ('GM', 181). Early in the following decade Highmore published his 'Reflections' (1791) on the law of libel. In this he was an ally of Charles James Fox who, the following year, gave the issue greater prominence when he persuaded the Commons to pass a bill giving juries full powers in legal actions. In 1793 Highmore brought out 'Addenda to the Law of Charitable Uses', and also an account of the laws relating to the excise. 
During the alarm created by the threatened French invasion Highmore became a member of the Honourable Artillery Company, and in 1804 he wrote a history of the company, at the suggestion of its court of assistants. In 1808 a bill was brought before parliament to prevent the spreading of smallpox. This stipulated that no medical practitioner was to inoculate for the smallpox within 3 miles of any town, and provisions were made for isolating smallpox patients. Highmore, though a believer in vaccination, wrote a pamphlet opposing the terms of the bill, as amended by the Commons, in 1808. 
Among Highmore's legal treatises was one on the law of lunacy (1807), a pocket book for attorneys and solicitors (1814), and a guide to the executors of wills and codicils on how to keep accounts and administer the estates of the deceased (1815). He also wrote further works about charities. 'Pietas Londinensis' (1810) was a history of public charities in and near London; a second volume, 'Philanthropia Metropolitana' (1822), gave an account of the charitable institutions established in London between 1810 and 1822. Highmore died at Dulwich, Surrey, on 19 July 1829, in his seventy-first year. 


@@@@@


doc= 13247


Highmore, Joseph (1692-1780), painter, was born on 13 June 1692 in the parish of St James Garlickhythe in the City of London, the third son of Edward Highmore, a coal merchant, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Tull. From 1702 to 1704 he attended Merchant Taylors' School in London, and from 1707 trained as a lawyer, during which time, if his contemporary George Vertue is to be believed, he acquired a self-confident, perhaps even opinionated manner; 'the Natural practice of the law gives most men a good Voluable speech with a Stedfast assurance of which he has benefited in that particular. & turns it well to his advantage' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.29). His schooling and clerkship would have provided him with a good solid education. That he was proficient in Latin, for example, is evident from his prose translation of Isaac Hawkins Browne's poem 'De animi immortalitate' (1766). Highmore was, however, determined to pursue a career as an artist, no doubt in emulation of his uncle 
Highmore made two foreign excursions, first in 1732 to the Low Countries, and second in 1734 to Paris, where he made the acquaintance of artists associated with the Academie Royale. During both journeys he made a particular study of the work of Sir Peter Paul Rubens, an artist he greatly admired and whom, in technique at least, he attempted to emulate. Highmore's clientele came predominantly from the wealthy gentry or professional middle classes. Unusually among artists of the period, he did not use students or drapery painters; as he proudly wrote: 'I do every thing my self, which I believe is not true of one painter in England besides' (letter to James Harris, 23 March 1741, Hants. RO, 9M73/G482/10). This explains why full-length portraits by Highmore are rare (a notable exception being 'The Family of Sir Lancelot Lee', 1736; Wolverhampton Art Gallery) and why he was particularly known during his lifetime for small-scale group portraits or 'conversations'. Highmore's posthumous reputation suffered until the latter half of the twentieth century due to the misattribution of his work, particularly the twelve canvasses of 1743-4 illustrating scenes from Samuel Richardson's novel 'Pamela' (1740-41) (Tate collection, FM Cam., and the National Gallery of Victoria, Australia) and his group portrait 'Mr Oldham and his Guests' ('c'.1735-45; Tate collection). The latter was from at least 1828 until 1949 ascribed to William Hogarth. The 'Pamela' series was created to capitalize on the extraordinary popularity of Richardson's novel through the sale of engravings and by publicizing the display of the originals in Highmore's studio. Afterwards Highmore became an intimate of Richardson, whose portrait he painted several times and through whom he was recommended to Dr Edward Young, whose portrait he executed in 1754. 'Mr Oldham' is in style and composition unique among works by Highmore's contemporaries, and should therefore be viewed as one of the most innovative portraits of the early Georgian period. 
Highmore was a rather aloof figure among his professional peers, preferring instead the company of literary men such as Richardson, Hawkins Browne, James Harris, John Hawkesworth, and William Duncombe. In 1746 he presented the history painting 'Hagar and Ishmael' to the Foundling Hospital in London and was subsequently made a governor. In 1761 he retired to Canterbury with his daughter and son-in-law, the Revd John Duncombe. Portraits from this period are rare, but throughout his retirement Highmore published books and articles on a variety of subjects. These include 'Observations on a pamphlet entitled 'Christianity not founded on argument'' (1765), 'Essays, Moral, Religious, and Miscellaneous' (1766), and a discourse on colouring published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1778). This last highlights what Highmore perceives as the inadequate technical training offered at the newly established Royal Academy. In other published work he provocatively defends his idol Rubens against what he describes as 'the prejudice of connoisseurship' (Highmore, 'Remarks', 353). Certainly these late publications reveal that Highmore's confidence in stating his own opinions and inclination for lively debate, attributes that Vertue had observed early in his career, remained with him throughout his life. Highmore died in Canterbury on 3 March 1780 and was buried in the cathedral. 




@@@@@


doc= 13248


Highmore, Nathaniel (1613-1685), chemical physician and anatomist, was born on 6 February 1613 at Fordingbridge, Hampshire, the elder son of Nathaniel Highmore, rector of Purse Caundle, a village near Sherborne in Dorset. Educated at Sherborne School and Trinity College, Oxford, Highmore graduated BA (1635) and MA (1638) with the aid of a scholarship at Trinity, which he then relinquished in favour of his younger brother, Richard. On 30 December 1640 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Haydock, a prominent physician of Salisbury, with whom he probably worked as an assistant. Highmore returned to Oxford, where he was granted his BM in July 1641. Though he intended to proceed formally with medical studies for his doctorate, with the onset of civil war in 1642 Highmore became part of a scientific circle at Trinity College, Oxford, led by William Harvey, then physician to Charles I, and George Bathurst. In 1643 Highmore received his DM at Oxford under the so-called 'Caroline creations' of royal command for those who had favourably served the king at the battle of Edge Hill and its aftermath. While Highmore could indeed be described as a moderate royalist, he may have acquired the DM for attending to Prince Charles during a spell of measles in November 1642, though this remains uncertain. 
The Trinity experiments on the embryonic development of chicks drew in Highmore, whose friendship and collaboration with Harvey was underlined in the dedication to him, written in 1650, of his 'Corporis humani disquisitio anatomica' (1651), in which Highmore wrote: 'It is now eight years since we first had it in mind to expose our careful studies... to the judgement of the public' (A1'r'- 'v'). The broad purpose of the textbook was to redesign physiology and anatomy in the direction of Harvey's theory of the circulation of the blood. The frontispiece incorporating an allegorical drawing of the new theory emphasized this. Agreeing with Harvey that the heart's sustaining relationship to the body was analogous to the sun in the wider macrocosm, Highmore explicitly defined the origin and function of circulation beyond Harvey's more circumspect treatment. Whereas Harvey, in his 'Exercitationes de generatione animalium' (1651), focused on the unitary and vital nature of blood, Highmore advanced a particulate view of the blood that saw its carrying heat and nutrition and whose nature entailed constant motion. A similar shift is evident in Highmore's analysis of the pulmonary transit. Using Harvey's arguments to establish pulmonary circulation he considered the possible functions of the pulmonary vein to challenge the beliefs of those like Galen and Fernel who thought it sent air to the heart. Highmore believed that experiment showed that the pulmonary vessels contained blood and he used the techniques of Vesalius and Harvey to disprove the generation of vital spirits from the air. In describing blood as an oily substance Highmore was accepting that chemical distillation provided a surer analysis of its composition. Corpuscular philosophy also informed his understanding of respiratory functions. Believing that heat was innate in the heart and thus conveyed to the blood, respiration expelled excess heat particles residing in the blood. Moreover, the motion of the lungs helped the passage of blood from the right to the left ventricle, as experiment again proved. 
In Highmore's 'History of Generation' of 1651 corpuscularianism was extended to embrace atomism and it is noteworthy that the work contains the first published dedication to Robert Boyle, who was to become arguably the leading corpuscularian of his generation. Highmore had set up a practice in 1645 in Sherborne, just a short distance from Stalbridge where the young Boyle had recently returned from the continent to live on an estate purchased by his late father, the earl of Cork. A shared anatomical and medical outlook no doubt prompted Highmore to point to Boyle as 'both a pattern and wonder to our Nobility and Gentry' (N. Highmore, 'History of Generation', 1651, 3). Unlike Boyle, who was particularly reticent in using the term 'atomism' in this period because of its atheistic association with Epicurean thought, Highmore took it as 'an unquestionable law of Nature, (if, prejudice laid aside, right reason takes her place) that all actions and motions are performed by Atomes, or small bodies, moving after a different manner, proportionable to their several figures' (ibid., 115). Bearing a strong resemblance to the atomism of Gassendi, which in turn powerfully influenced Boyle, Highmore's general analysis of atoms is embedded within a broader discussion critical of supposed cure of wounds by sympathetic action at a distance, which instead points to atomic effluvia as sufficient explanation. Refuting the embryological theories of Harvey's friend Kenelm Digby, Highmore uses atoms and the circulation of the blood to explain the nature of nutrition and genetic continuity. 
In any rounded assessment of Highmore's work it should be remembered that there are clear limits to Highmore's modernism. A great deal of Highmore's physiology in his 'Disquisitio', for example, understandably reflects ancient and medieval theory and practice, as it did with many of his corpuscularian contemporaries. Attempting to account for the assemblage of the dissociated atoms of the conceptus and the orderly development of the embryo in his 'De generatione' led Highmore to argue for the pre-existence of embryonic parts, an idea as ancient as the atomistic concept of matter upon which his analysis was based. Highmore's 'seminal atoms' are transmuted into 'substantial formes', some of which are endowed by a directing force with an activating and vivifying principle. Also instructive is Highmore's criticism of Thomas Willis's views on hysteria and hypochondria, 'Exercitationes duae... de passione hysterica... de affectionae hypochondriaca' (1660), which explained hysteria as the consequence of a disturbed pulmonary circulation. On this occasion Willis's response in 'Pathologiae cerebri' (1677), that the nervous system was the arena of explanation, effectively refuted Highmore's attack. 
Highmore became a JP and county treasurer in Dorset. He had a practice in Sherborne for forty years, where he was actively involved in church affairs and served for a lengthy period as a governor of Sherborne School and the town's almshouse. He died there on 21 March 1685, and was buried on the south side of the chancel of Purse Caundle church. His wife survived him. In his will Highmore endowed an exhibition to Oxford from Sherborne School, and left his tables of the muscles to the physic school at Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 13249


Thomas Highmore (1660-1720), the serjeant-painter. Thomas Highmore was born in London on 22 June 1660, one of the two sons of Abraham Highmore and the cousin of Nathaniel Highmore, MD. He was apprenticed to Leonard Cotes for seven years in 1674, and became serjeant-painter in April 1703. In 1689 he took on as an apprentice his kinsman Sir James Thornhill, who succeeded him in the office of serjeant-painter. Thomas Highmore died in London on 8 March 1720. Curiously, Joseph was not apprenticed to his uncle Thomas (indeed he never trained directly under a master), but during his clerkship he attended the anatomical lectures of William Cheselden and Sir Godfrey Kneller's drawing academy. One of his earliest known portraits, of the ivory carver David le Marchand ('c'.1723; NPG), reveals Highmore's debt to Kneller at his most vivacious. In 1715, freed from the law, he established a portrait-painting practice, and on 28 May 1716 he married Susanna Hiller (1689/90-1750) ['see 'Highmore, Susanna], with whom he had two children, Anthony ['see below'] and Susanna. In 1724 the Highmores moved from the parish of St Swithin in the City of London to a house on the north side of the more affluent Lincoln's Inn Fields, an indication of Highmore's professional success and his social aspirations. From 1725 he is listed as a member of the masonic lodge of the Swan, Greenwich, whose master was the great English baroque artist Sir James Thornhill; this shows a certain professional canniness on Highmore's part. As he appears to have had little interest in societies or clubs, his association with the freemasons (he was junior grand warden of the grand lodge in 1727 and a regular attendee throughout the 1730s) cannot be underestimated. 


@@@@@


doc= 13250


Highton, Henry (1816-1874), schoolmaster and experimenter in telegraphy, was born at Leicester on 19 January 1816, the eldest son of Henry Highton of that town. He was educated at Rugby School under Thomas Arnold, with whom he remained friendly for a number of years afterwards. He matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 13 March 1834 and graduated BA, with a first class in classics, in 1837. He proceeded MA in 1840 and was Michel fellow of his college in 1840-41. In the same year he began tutoring the mathematician Henry Smith (1826-1883). 
On 16 June 1841 Highton married Elizabeth, the daughter of James Paxton (1786-1860). In the same year he was appointed assistant master at Rugby School. While at Rugby, in 1842, Highton had printed a letter addressed to Sir Moses Montefiore which offered some advice as to the recovery of the Israeli 'nationality lost for 1800 years'. In 1849 he published some sermons and, in 1851, a 'Catechism of the Second Advent'. In 1859 he moved to Cheltenham College as principal. He served in that office until 1862, in which year he published a revised translation of the 'New Testament'. In 1863 he published a letter to the lord bishop of London criticizing the Athanasian creed. His last theological work was 'Dean Stanley and Saint Socrates, the ethics of the philosopher and the philosophy of the divine' (1873), an attack on Arthur Stanley (1815-1881) for his 'consistent opposition to evangelical truth'. In the same year Highton published a translation of some of Victor Hugo's poems. 
In addition to his interests in education and theology Highton conducted a number of practical experiments in the application of electricity to telegraphy. In the mid-1840s he purchased the rights to exclusive use of a gold leaf instrument which he adapted for telegraphic purposes (it was used for a number of years in Baden). By the early 1870s he believed the sensitivity of the instrument would enable it to allow transatlantic communication along uninsulated underwater wires, a development which would greatly cut the cost of cable laying then being undertaken, allowing 'the poor emigrant to communicate with his family... and put an end to the necessarily almost prohibitory rates which at present prevail' ('Journal of the Society of Arts', 20, 1872, 509). His 1872 paper on the subject was well received, and the Society of Arts presented him with their silver medal for it. However, Highton's experiments had been largely conducted in fresh water and by 1873 he had to concede that such a system would not work in a saline medium. He instead began campaigning for the adoption of a cheap method of insulation he had developed using vegetable tar and lead oxides. 
In improving his gold leaf instrument for telegraphic purposes Highton had also done research into galvanism and the improvement of batteries. He produced several new types of battery, one of which (a type of zinc carbon battery) found much favour among electroplaters. His patents in the field were purchased about 1873 and the Highton Battery Company set up to work them. He also patented an artificial stone which for some years was popular for paving and building purposes. 
Highton spent his last years in Putney, London. He died at his home there, The Cedars, on 21 December 1874; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 13251


Higinbotham, George (1826-1892), politician and judge in Australia, was the sixth son of Henry T. Higinbotham, a merchant of Dublin, whose family had left Holland with William III, and Sarah, the daughter of Joseph Wilson, a United States citizen of Scottish descent, formerly American consul in Dublin. He was born in Dublin on 19 April 1826, and educated at the Royal School, Dungannon, whence he went to Trinity College, Dublin, in 1844; he graduated BA in 1848 and MA in 1853. Early in 1847 he went to London, and, while reading for the bar, became a reporter on the 'Morning Chronicle'; he entered Lincoln's Inn in 1848, was called to the bar in 1853, and within a few months sailed for Victoria, where the discovery of gold in 1851 had initiated rapid growth. 
In Victoria, Higinbotham again combined the law and journalism; he was admitted to the local bar in March 1854, and on 30 September that year married Margaret Foreman (1835/6-1910), who was born in Kent. In August 1856 he became editor of 'The Argus', at that time the most influential newspaper in Australia. As Victorians debated the forms of the limited self-government conferred in 1855, Higinbotham pressed for enlargement of the franchise. In a debate with the proprietor, conducted in the columns of his newspaper, he championed the rapid democratization of colonial politics. In 1859 he resigned the editorship and returned to the bar. 
In May 1861 Higinbotham entered political life as member for Brighton in the legislative assembly, describing himself as an independent liberal. In 1862 he lost his seat, but the following year was again elected for the same place. In June 1863 he became attorney-general in Sir James McCulloch's reform ministry, and a leading figure in its contest with the legislative council, the unrepresentative upper house of the Victorian legislature. The contest began when the ministry tacked tariff measures onto an appropriation bill and the legislative council refused to pass the legislation. Higinbotham's stratagem for obtaining supply embroiled Governor Darling, who was recalled by the Colonial Office in 1866. The assembly's vote of a pension to Darling's wife in the same year, and the council's rejection of the appropriation bill containing it, extended the parliamentary deadlock until 1868, when the ministry resigned in protest against the failure of the new governor to recommend the grant to parliament. 
Higinbotham's resentment of imperial interference hardened into a conviction that the colony possessed full rights of responsible government over its internal affairs, expressed in resolutions he introduced into the assembly in 1869. While critical of party organization and all other forms of collective politics that diminished the autonomy of the individual, his denunciation of what he called 'the wealthy lower orders' ('The Argus', 24 Oct 1864) who blocked popular aspirations elevated him to heroic status in the liberal pantheon. Meanwhile in 1865 he had consolidated the statutes of Victoria, as he was to do again in 1890, and received the thanks of both houses of parliament. 
Higinbotham's other principal concern at this time was educational reform. The colony had maintained a dual system of subsidies for denominational schools and limited provision of state schools. As chairman of a royal commission established in 1866, Higinbotham became convinced that the state must take full responsibility for education and withdraw aid to denominational schools, but Anglican and Roman Catholic opposition temporarily frustrated his efforts to establish a comprehensive system of state schools teaching 'common Christianity' but not sectarian doctrine. Believing that it had compromised the principles he had championed, Higinbotham resigned from the ministry in 1869 and lost his seat in parliament in 1871, though the following year it passed the act for secular education that he had advocated. He was re-elected in 1874, but in January 1876, finding himself unable to support Sir Graham Berry's ministry, which was engaged in a struggle with the legislative council on the questions of land tax and payment of members, he resigned his seat; he sympathized with the spirit which animated Berry, but disapproved his methods as subversive of parliamentary government. 
Higinbotham now remained aloof from active politics, and in July 1880 was appointed a puisne judge of the supreme court of Victoria. In September 1886, on the retirement of Sir William Stawell, he became chief justice of the colony. His independence and his peculiar view of the position of a colonial government are shown by his refusal to accept a knighthood and by his intimation to the imperial government that if he were appointed to administer the government during the absence of the governor he would cease to refer any matters of local concern to the secretary of state. His minority judgment in the case 'Toy v. Musgrove' in 1888, that the Victorian government had the right to restrict a Chinese immigrant from the British colony of Hong Kong, pressed claims for colonial sovereignty to new limits, and came to be regarded as a landmark of Australian constitutional history. 
Higinbotham refused to accept the notion that a person who entered 'the kingdom of judicial heaven is bound to become a political eunuch' ('Victorian parliamentary debates', 19 May 1869). His address on 'Science and Religion' (1883), at a time of keen religious controversy, struck an anti-clerical note while it insisted on the need to 'think with fearless freedom and yet believe'. He was an early advocate of women's franchise. During 1890 he created much indignation by subscribing to the funds of the strikers in that year's great strike. He died of heart failure at his residence in Murphy Street, South Yarra, Melbourne, on 31 December 1892, and was buried privately in the Brighton cemetery on 1 January 1893. 
The violence of Higinbotham's political utterances contrasted strangely with the charm and amiability of his private life; those who condemned his political views were strongly attached to him personally. His oratorical power was of a high order, and his intellectual attainments placed him in the forefront of his contemporaries in Victoria. He was independent and radical in his political views, a substantial charitable benefactor, broad-minded, and unconventional in private life. He was small in stature but strong and athletic. He left two sons and three daughters, including Edith, the wife of Professor Edward Ellis Morris, his first biographer. 


@@@@@


doc= 13252


Higson, John (1825-1871), topographer, was born on 25 July 1825 at Whitely Farm, Gorton, Lancashire, the son of Daniel and Letitia Higson. He lived from 'c'.1845 to 'c'.1865 at Droylsden, where he was employed for almost twenty years as cashier at the Victoria spinning mills and subsequently at the Springhead Cotton-spinning Company. He was an enthusiastic supporter of the Droylsden Mechanics' Institute, and an active church worker for many years. He married Elizabeth Caroline Green on 6 November 1848; they had six sons and two daughters. 
To a great extent self-taught, Higson was 'a tireless inquirer' into the history of Droylsden and surrounding areas, and he spent many years gathering material for his published works, which included 'The Gorton Historical Recorder' (1852) and 'Historical and Descriptive Notices of Droylsden' (1859). He and John Owen rescued and preserved from destruction the first parochial register of Newton Chapel (to 1666), and Higson himself was responsible for the safeguarding for posterity of much material relating to the history of the area. With some associates he also started an unsuccessful Droylsden paper on liberal conservative lines. He was a contributor to the 'Ashton Reporter' from its foundation in 1855, under the signature H. At the time of his death on 13 December 1871 at his home, Lees, Ashton under Lyne, he was working on a glossary of Lancashire idioms. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 13253


Hilary (fl. early 12th cent.), poet and Augustinian canon, was first suggested to have been a native of England by Jean Mabillon in the late seventeenth century. However, there is little evidence for his English nationality. His major link with England is his short (162 line) Latin poem of the life of an English recluse, Eve of Winchester. However Eve spent her latter years at the monastery of St Laurent in Angers, and as Hilary too spent part of his career in Angers and seems to have known Eve's spiritual director, Herveus, his knowledge of her life need not imply any links with England; all the more so as the lines describing (in vague and entirely conventional terms) Eve's life in England take up less than one third of the poem. 
Other poems by Hilary also have English subjects: two are addressed to an English boy or boys, another to an English nun, Rose, and a fourth to William de Anfonia, whom he describes as 'the honour of England'. Nevertheless these do not provide evidence of English nationality. The English boy was probably one of Hilary's students (another student, from Angers, is the subject of another poem); the nun Rose lived at the convent of Le Ronceray, near Angers, with which Hilary was connected; and nothing is known about the otherwise unrecorded William de Anfonia, other than the fact that Anfonia is almost certainly not an English place name. Hilary's 'ludi' or theatrical works on St Nicholas, Lazarus, and Daniel (all of which include refrains and other lines in correct and idiomatic Old French) contain no references at all to English subjects; his surviving correspondence is addressed exclusively to colleagues in Angers, Orleans, and Nantes. When Hilary talks of travelling to France to study under Abelard, he merely means the Ile-de-France (Abelard was teaching in Paris from the second decade of the twelfth century). There is, in fact, little doubt that he was a native of Angers or (more probably) Orleans. 


@@@@@


doc= 13254


Hilary (c.1110-1169), bishop of Chichester, was probably of low birth, since he is baldly described by the chronicle of Battle Abbey as 'a certain man called Hilary'. The date of his birth is unknown, but it is likely to have been about 1110. He may have come from the diocese of Salisbury, for he had a brother who was a canon of that cathedral, while his closest connections with any of his episcopal contemporaries were those with Jocelin de Bohun, bishop of Salisbury (died 1184). If this were so, it might provide the explanation for how he came by such a rare name for twelfth-century England: about 1100 the Salisbury Cathedral Library was acquiring (as Teresa Webber showed) an exceptional holding of the works of St Hilary of Poitiers. He could have received his early schooling from a Salisbury canon or priest. The Hilary recorded by the 'Cartae baronum' of 1166 as holding a virgate less than half a knight's fee of Bishop Jocelin, is likely to have been a relative of Bishop Hilary, given the rarity of the name and the practice of naming after an illustrious kinsman. 
Like Jocelin de Bohun, Hilary rose to prominence as a protege of Henry de Blois (died 1171), bishop of Winchester and brother of King Stephen. By about 1140 he held the deanery of the college of secular canons at Christchurch, Twynham, Hampshire, and before he became a bishop he had made a name for himself as an advocate at the papal curia, at just the time that St Bernard of Clairvaux was complaining to Pope Eugenius III about the rising tide of lawsuits being drawn into Rome under the burgeoning system of canon law. Certainly Hilary's character and mind were such as would be associated with a clever lawyer. David Knowles described him as 'an extremely quick-witted, efficient, self-confident, voluble, somewhat shallow man, fully acquainted with the new canon law but not prepared to abide by principles to the end. His talents were great but he used them as an opportunist' (Knowles, 27). In his early years as a bishop he was much employed by Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury (died 1161) as a legal assessor in cases which the archbishop heard as papal judge-delegate or as metropolitan. 
The evidence of Hilary's career as bishop suggests the need to question Knowles's view that he was not guided by principles and was a mere opportunist. In 1147 he was Stephen's candidate for the see of York, following the deposition of William Fitzherbert (died 1154), and though the pope chose to appoint the Cistercian Henry Murdac (died 1153), he shortly afterwards advanced Hilary to Chichester, vacant since 1145. But despite the circumstances of his promotion, Hilary appears consistently in politics as a king's man, often in circumstances when his actions cannot be construed as response to pressure. He is the perfect example of how canonical expertise did not at all seem to preclude political royalism or Erastianism, almost as a principle. He was an emissary of King Stephen to the Council of Rheims in 1148, where he excused the king's attempt to prevent Archbishop Theobald's attendance, which elicited from Eugenius the response, 'we thought to have turned you into a son of the Roman Church, but we have created in you a sword and an arrow' (Mayr-Harting, 'Hilary', 212). Stephen subsequently granted Hilary the chapelry of Pevensey, Sussex, and made him queen's chaplain, so that 'he might be invited to her feasts' ('Reg. RAN', 3.184). 
Hilary must early have insinuated himself into the good graces of Henry of Anjou, who in his first year as Henry II appointed him to be sheriff of Sussex, a rare case of a bishop in this position (he held it again in 1160-62). He was with the king at the siege of Bridgnorth in Shropshire in 1155, where Hugh (I) de Mortimer was in rebellion; and in 1156 he visited certain shires as a royal itinerant justice. Thus he was heavily involved in Henry II's early peace initiatives after the anarchy of Stephen's reign. To give his rule sacral mystique Henry II lent weight to the efforts of Westminster Abbey to secure the canonization of Edward the Confessor; Hilary wrote one of the letters sent to Pope Alexander III pleading for the canonization, and he was a party to its announcement in Westminster Abbey in 1161. Consequently Hilary's enmity towards Becket in the archbishop's conflict with Henry II may be seen less in the light of a canonist compromising, than of a royalist consistently pursuing, his principles. On the unimpeachable testimony of William fitz Stephen, Hilary remarked at the Council of Northampton (1164) that he wished the archbishop would become plain Thomas again, adding bluntly with reference to Becket's period as king's chancellor, 'those who disliked you then, side with the king against you now' (J. C. Robertson and J. B. Sheppard, 'Materials for the History of Thomas Becket', 7 vols., Rolls Series, 1875-85, 3.55). As often in these fraught times, issues of principles and personalities cannot easily be disentangled, and the personality clash between Hilary and Becket clearly went back some years. It probably dated from the Council of Colchester (1157) when Hilary argued -- and lost -- his suit before the king that Battle Abbey ought to be subject to the bishop of Chichester's jurisdiction. He was on losing ground, because Battle claimed exemption as a royal foundation; but royalism did not mean that a bishop would fail to champion his own rights as a diocesan. It was a basic instinct of every bishop of that time to seek to protect the privileges of his see. Thus it was not against his royalism that Hilary should have opposed the king at Colchester, and his opposition was quickly pardoned. But on that occasion Becket as chancellor had gratuitously embarrassed Hilary by implying publicly that he was a hypocrite. This action was apparently not forgiven. 
As with others of his episcopal contemporaries, Hilary is shown by his charters, albeit with rather sparse evidence, to have been a businesslike administrator and pastor. Early in his episcopate, in 1148, he obtained the restitution of lands belonging to the church of Chichester from a certain William Burdard, from William d'Aubigny, earl of Arundel, and from John, count of Eu. Some of these alienations may have reflected the disturbed conditions of Stephen's reign, but the problem with Bexhill and the counts of Eu went back some sixty years. As diocesan he also set an early example in trying to create vicarages, that is, to ensure that a portion of the revenues of parish churches should be set aside for the priests who would reside and do the pastoral work. There is a particularly remarkable document of Hilary's which appears to insist on this point in the case of all the parish churches belonging to Lewes Priory in Sussex. Another fragment of evidence gives a momentary glimpse of Hilary as a patron of learning, making a donation to his cathedral library of one of the earliest manuscripts in England of Peter Lombard's 'Sentences', a crucial work of Parisian theology. 
Although Hilary shows himself mainly in the roles of lawyer, politician, and administrator, he can be seen as in tune with an important religious movement of his time in transforming colleges of secular canons into houses of monks or Augustinian canons, the latter being communities of pastors with a quasi-monastic way of life. He assisted in such transformations at his old college of Twynham and at St Nicholas, Arundel; and he vigorously pursued the material interests of the Augustinian canons of Lanthony, Gloucestershire, far away from his own diocese, after the death in 1148 of their great patron, Bishop Robert de Bethune of Hereford. He wrote a pleasant letter to the canons, brisk but friendly, telling them not to get excited about such things. He and other friends of the deceased bishop would look after their affairs as if these were their own; but 'you should always be intent on carrying out the divine service as you are bound' ('Acta', 100). Hilary himself died on 13 July 1169. 


@@@@@


doc= 13255


Hild (614-680), abbess of Strensall-Whitby, was the daughter of Hereric, a Deiran prince, and his wife, Breguswith. Hereric was a nephew of Eadwine of Northumbria and the family fortunes seem to have been determined by that relationship. Hereric's exile and murder were probably a consequence of the fall of Eadwine, while the marriage of his daughter, Hild's sister Hereswith, with the East Anglian prince (later king) AEthelhere, built upon links first established by her great-uncle. 
Hild was baptized with Eadwine on Easter day (12 April) 627. According to Bede, she decided to enter the religious life while staying in East Anglia, influenced by the example of Hereswith, who had already withdrawn to the Frankish monastery of Chelles. Initially Hild herself also intended to enter Chelles, but was persuaded by Bishop Aedan to return to Northumbria, where she established herself in the monastery of Hartlepool, whose founder, Heiu, another disciple of Aedan, was apparently displaced to make way for her. Bede says, with somewhat suspicious and perhaps christologically determined symmetry, that Hild was thirty-three when she became a nun, and that she lived a further thirty-three years. Presumably, therefore, her entry into religion, perhaps as a widow, is to be dated to 647 and in any case it must have been before 651, when Aedan died. 
The difficulty with this narrative is that Chelles can scarcely have been founded before 648, the earliest possible date of the marriage of its founder, the Anglo-Saxon Balthild, to the Merovingian king, Clovis II; indeed it is more likely to have been established 'c'.660. Probably, then, Bede's informants at Whitby had made a mistake, confounding Chelles with its mother house of Jouarre (founded at some time between about 620 and 630) or with Faremoutiers (founded between about 615 and 620), the earliest double monastery in the Seine basin and also home to English princesses in the mid-seventh century. At all events, the story is evidence of Hild's early contacts with the Frankish kingdom of Neustria, contacts she almost certainly maintained. 
Once established in the first royal nunnery in Northumbria, Hild remained in close touch with the Northumbrian religious elite and was visited 'assiduously' by Aedan and others. In 655, in accordance with a vow made by King Oswiu before his victory over the Mercians at the battle of the Winwaed, she received custody of AElfflaed, his daughter and her kinswoman, whom she placed in the monastery at Hartlepool. Two years later she founded 'Streanaeshalch', on one of twelve estates of ten hides given by Oswiu to the church in further fulfilment of vows made before the Winwaed. The location of this monastery is problematic. There are good reasons to link it with both Strensall, near York, and Whitby, and it has been argued that it comprised communities in both places. 
Oswiu and his queen, Hild's relative Eanflaed, probably intended 'ab initio' to establish Strensall-Whitby as their family monastery and mausoleum, sending their daughter AElfflaed thither with Hild. In 664 the monastery was the scene of the famous synod, which determined that the Northumbrian church should henceforth follow the Roman Easter. Curiously, despite her links with the Roman mission, Hild appears to have taken the part of Bishop Aedan and the Lindisfarne community. Her attitude was perhaps determined not so much by the issues as by personal considerations, in particular her friendship with Aedan and a burgeoning hostility to the young Wilfrid, in 664 the spokesman for the supporters of the Roman observance. 
Strensall-Whitby's growing importance was buttressed by the school which Hild established there, five of whose pupils became bishops: Bosa (York), AEtla (Dorchester), Oftfor (Worcester), John of Beverley (Hexham and York), and Wilfrid (York). After 669 the monastery developed close links with the school established by Archbishop Theodore at Canterbury; both Oftfor and John of Beverley went on to study there. Hild's alliance with Theodore was probably strengthened by a common hostility to Wilfrid, by then bishop of York. Certainly, it was a pupil of Hild's who was intruded into York when Wilfrid was expelled from that see in 678, and she joined Theodore in sending envoys to Rome to oppose the despoiled bishop in his ensuing appeal to the Holy See. Most probably, too, hers were the English messengers responsible for inciting Ebroin, the Neustrian mayor of the palace, to such hostility towards Wilfrid that he was forced to take an indirect route to Rome through Frisia and Austrasia. 
Hild was praised by Bede for her skill as a counsellor of kings, princes, and the common people; for the rule which she established at Strensall-Whitby; and for her exemplary life. Although he stresses her qualities as a spiritual mother and as a servant of the Lord, he never describes her as a virgin, and it may be that she had been married before she entered religion. 
In 674 Hild was afflicted with the disease which was eventually to kill her. According to Bede, her death in 680 was accompanied by wonders, including visions (seen by nuns at Whitby itself and at the dependent community at Hackness) of her soul being taken to heaven by angels. Such visions, which also characterized the deaths of holy women at the Frankish monastery of Faremoutiers, are an indication that Hild's cult began early. Her feast day, 17 November, was observed by the early eighth century, when it was added to the calendar of St Willibrord, the Northumbrian bishop of Utrecht. She appears in the 'Old English Martyrology', and it has been suggested that the entry in this ninth-century compilation bears traces of a lost early life. She scarcely features, however, in pre-conquest liturgical material, and her cult was probably very local. 
Hild's relics were later translated from Whitby to Glastonbury, perhaps as early as the eighth century but more probably in the reign of Edmund I ('r'. 939-46). By the twelfth century they had been placed in a monument ('pyramid') to the left of the high altar at Glastonbury. There is some evidence, however, that Whitby, which continued to commemorate both deposition and translation (25 August), never relinquished its claim to her bones. Hild became patron saint of some fourteen medieval churches, eight of them in the North Riding of Yorkshire. St Hilda's College, Oxford, founded as St Hilda's Hall in 1893, is named after her. 


@@@@@


doc= 13256


Hildersham, Arthur (1563-1632), Church of England clergyman, was born on 6 October 1563 at Stetchworth, Cambridgeshire, near Newmarket, the son of Thomas Hildersam and his second wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Geoffrey Pole and niece of Cardinal Reginald Pole. His parents, who were both recusants, brought him up as a Roman Catholic and hoped that he would become a Catholic priest. His father sent Arthur to school at the grammar school at Saffron Walden, Essex, where the master, Desborough, 'a godly man, and a Religious Protestant', imbibed the young Hildersham with protestant principles. In 1576 he entered Christ's College, Cambridge, where like his fellow student William Perkins he almost certainly came under the influence of Laurence Chaderton, who was a proponent of the puritan wing of the church. After two years of study his father removed Hildersham to London, hoping that Catholic friends would help persuade him to go to Rome. When he declined to do so and remained unrepentant of a protestant conviction, it seems that he was disinherited. However, with the help of John Ireton, a fellow of Christ's and later rector of Kegworth, Leicestershire, Hildersham obtained assistance from his kinsman, Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon, and was able to return to Christ's and complete his studies; he graduated BA in 1581 and proceeded MA in 1584. He apparently preached in the college chapel as part of the college exercise in divinity. In 1583 he was elected a fellow at Christ's, but the master, Barwell, together with Andrew Perne and William Goad, preferred another godly candidate, Andrew Willet. Following his protest to the chancellor of the university, Lord Burleigh, Hildersham was appointed divinity reader at Trinity Hall. 
Hildersham's godly training and inclinations at Christ's placed him on the edge of conformity, and fitted him for a chequered ecclesiastical career. In trouble for preaching before his ordination and licensing, he had to recant on 10 January 1588, but he had been ordained by the time he took up a lectureship at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire. On 5 January 1590 he married Anne Barfoot of Lamborn Hall, Essex, a county where he had kin. On the death of Thomas Wyddowes, vicar of St Helen's, Ashby, Huntingdon presented Hildersham to the living and he was instituted on 4 October 1593. His assize sermon at Leicester on 20 July 1596 on the text of '1 Kings' 18:17-18 offended Judge Sir Edmund Anderson, who attempted to walk out and later threatened Hildersham with indictment by grand jury. In 1598 an attachment was sent out by the high court for his arrest, though nothing seems to have come of this. His standing as a leading godly divine is demonstrated by the fact that, with Stephen Egerton, Hildersham was one of the chief promoters of the 1603 millenary petition to James I, which requested further reforms in the liturgy, ceremonial, and structure of the church, although he was not a spokesperson at the Hampton Court conference. He distributed bequests to godly ministers, finding William Bradshaw and others employment, and supplying them with information. 
But high esteem with prominent puritan clergy brought with it suspicion and opposition from those who sought no further reform of the church and desired complete obedience and conformity to its existing canons and liturgy. In 1605 William Chaderton, bishop of Lincoln, deprived Hildersham for nonconformity. However, William Overton, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, allowed him to preach at the godly exercises which were held at Burton upon Trent and Repton, and his family enjoyed continued support from Huntingdon, who paid an annual allowance to Hildersham's son Samuel, at least between 1606 and 1611. William Barlow, who succeeded Chaderton as bishop of Lincoln, restored Hildersham's licence to Ashby in January 1609. However, when Richard Neile became bishop of Coventry and Lichfield he suppressed the exercises at Burton and Repton and James I wrote to reprimand Barlow. By 1613 Hildersham had been incorrectly accused of encouraging the heretic Edward Wightman (Whiteman), and was again suspended. In 1615 he was imprisoned in the Fleet prison, and then the king's bench prison, for refusing the 'ex officio' oath. Then he was accused of refusing to kneel for communion, and on 28 November 1616 was sentenced to imprisonment, to a fine of $2000, and to be degraded from the ministry. He eluded capture, and managed to find refuge with friends of his patron. During this time he declined an invitation to the English church at Leiden. However, following James I's death, on 20 June 1625 he was licensed by Sir Thomas Ridley, the vicar-general of Canterbury, to preach in the dioceses of London, Lincoln, and Coventry and Lichfield, and he began preaching again at Ashby on 3 August on 'Psalm 35:' 13. On 28 September 1625 he began a series of sermons preached over a number of years on 'Psalm 51'. He was suspended again on March 25 1630 for failure to wear surplice and hood for public worship, but was restored again on 2 August 1631. 
Hildersham was one of a number of high-profile godly ministers whose nonconformity was tolerated for periods of time, and then suddenly punished. He himself did not countenance separatism, though he encouraged meetings and gatherings for more intense and private spiritual exercises, and clearly disapproved of those clergy who were unable to preach. In his 'CVIII Lectures upon the Fourth of John' (1629) he remarked that: 'it were as intolerable bondage and tyranny to binde Gods people to rest upon the ministry of such as can not instruct them, as it were to compell infants to abide with such nurses as have neither sucke nor food to give them.' Like most of his godly churchmen, he advocated days of fasting and humiliation, arguing that the chief use of a religious fast is to humble, and afflict the soul with sorrow and grief, and a chief thing that makes prayer effectual with God is inward humiliation and sorrow of the soul. Many of Hildersham's sermons were preached at the communion service, and he also published 'A Briefe Forme of Examination' (1619) and 'The Doctine of Communicating Worthily in the Lord's Supper' (1619). His encouragement of regular communion was in contrast to the twice- or thrice-yearly practice common in most English parishes at this time. His understanding of sacraments was as 'mystical signs ordained by God, to represent and seal to the worthy receiver, salvation by Jesus Christ'. Like many of his fellow divines he emphasized their importance as ordinances of God, but also feared that they might be seen as conferring grace in themselves. Much of his homiletic material was concerned with worthy preparation and instruction, which included knowledge of the law, the gospel, and the sacrament. He stressed too the need of assurance in salvation. 
Hildersham preached his last sermon on 27 August 1631. He had had bouts of illness and fever in 1614 and 1615, and again in 1624. He contracted scorbutic fever, and died at Ashby on Sunday 4 March 1632. His will asked that there should be no funeral sermon, and he was buried in the chancel of Ashby church. An epitaph in the church gives recognition to one who was 'honourably descended from Sir Richard Poole', but more honoured for his sweet disposition, wisdom, charity, and 'judgment in the Holy Scriptures' and his 'zealous preaching'. He had several children; Samuel Hildersham (1594?-1674), by this time rector of West Felton, Shropshire, published his father's 'CLII Lectures upon Psalme LI' in 1635. 


@@@@@


doc= 13257


Hildersham, Samuel (1594?-1674), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire, the son of Arthur Hildersham (1563-1632), instituted vicar there in October 1593, and his wife, Anne (died 'c'.1640), a daughter of the Barfoot family of Lambourne Hall, Essex. Admitted as pensioner to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 6 May 1609, he graduated BA in 1613, proceeded MA in 1616, and became a fellow of his college in 1618. Thereafter Hildersham devoted his life to the promotion of godly living. He became a BD in 1623, and may then have been ordained by an Irish bishop without subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. Subsequently, on 13 June 1628, he was appointed by William Cokayne, merchant of Austin Friars in London, to the impropriated rectory of West Felton, Shropshire, a place which he was to serve faithfully for over thirty years. While there he published his late father's 'CLII Lectures upon Psalme LI' (1635), and also married his wife, Mary, daughter of Sir Henry Goodere (bap. 1571, d. 1627) of Polesworth, Warwickshire. 
During the civil wars Hildersham became committed to the parliamentarian cause. In 1642 and 1643 he was one of the Shropshire representatives to the Westminster assembly of divines, and in 1648 he signed a testimony of local ministers supporting the establishment of presbyterianism within the county. In the 1650s he was an assistant to the Shropshire commission, and established close friendships with two influential presbyterians, Richard Baxter and Henry Newcome; the latter remembered him as 'a very noble friend to me' ('Autobiography', 1.56). At the same time, however, he worked alongside Baxter, Newcome, and other ministers to establish links between presbyterians and Independents. After 1656 he was a member of the Shropshire Association, although this short-lived project was eventually abandoned at the Restoration. Following the 'Act of Uniformity', he was ejected from his living at West Felton. He retired to Erdington in the parish of Aston, near Birmingham, a town free from the provisions of the 'Five Mile Act'. Ultimately, though, he eschewed open nonconformity after 1662, and remained at Erdington, where he died in April 1674, 'aged eighty'. He was buried at Aston, without a funeral sermon, at his own request. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13258


Hildesley, Mark (1698-1772), bishop of Sodor and Man, was born on 9 December 1698 at Murston rectory, Kent, the oldest surviving son of the Revd Mark Hildesley (died 1726), rector of Murston and vicar of Sittingbourne from 1705, and his wife, Avis. In 1710 his father moved to the living of Houghton-cum-Whitton in Huntingdonshire and Mark was sent to Charterhouse School. He was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 29 March 1717; he graduated BA in 1720 and was elected fellow in 1723. In the latter year he was ordained, whereupon he was appointed chaplain to Richard Temple, first Viscount Cobham; he graduated MA in 1724. Impressed by Hildesley's abilities Edmund Gibson, bishop of London, made him one of the twelve preachers at Whitehall in February 1725. Hildesley's hopes of leading the life of a don were shattered, however, when in 1726 his father died, leaving Hildesley's mother and five sisters without support. 
Hildesley's search for preferment did not bear fruit until February 1731, when he accepted the college vicarage of Hitchin in Hertfordshire. In the same year he married Elizabeth Stoker (died 1763). In his first twelve months at Hitchin, Hildesley buried 158 parishioners who had died of an outbreak of the plague, the average number of deaths in the parish per annum being usually less than thirty. Hildesley and his wife had only two children, Mark and Elizabeth, both of whom died in infancy, a blow from which the couple never really recovered. Hildesley's living was not rich and he was compelled to spend a great sum on renovating the vicarage. In order to recoup the money he took as boarders six gentlemen's sons. The boys caused Hildesley great embarrassment when George Whitefield came to preach in the town square; having gone into the belfry of the church they rang the bells so loudly that Whitefield's sermon could not be heard. 
Hildesley, poor and childless, stayed in Hitchin for over thirty years. On 18 January 1734 he was made chaplain to Henry St John, first Viscount Bolingbroke, and on 10 May 1742 chaplain to Bolingbroke's brother John, second Viscount St John. He paid particular attention to the instruction of the young in his parish. In 1735 he was also given the neighbouring rectory of Holwell, in Bedfordshire; his kindness earned him the title Father Hildesley and he was much loved. In 1750 he was elected an honorary member of Spalding Gentlemen's Society, and on 20 February 1754 he was collated to the prebend of Marston St Lawrence, Northamptonshire. In 1755, at the age of fifty-six, he was recommended to James Murray, second duke of Atholl and sovereign lord of the Isle of Man, as successor to Thomas Wilson, bishop of Sodor and Man. Hildesley was created DD on 7 April by Thomas Herring, archbishop of Canterbury, and was consecrated bishop, by special licence, on 27 April 1755 in the Chapel Royal, Whitehall, by Matthew Hutton, archbishop of York, assisted by the bishops of Durham, Carlisle, and Chester. The following August he was installed in the island, in the cathedral of St German, Peel. 
Wilson, Hildesley's predecessor, had died at the age of ninety-two and, though he had been an excellent bishop, his vigour had waned somewhat in his later years. Hildesley immediately set about reforming his diocese. He built a court house for the transaction of church business, began Sunday schools, enlarged churches, and established parish libraries. He insisted that sermons be preached in Manx to the local people and that the catechism in Manx be used every Sunday in all churches in the island. He himself learnt a little Manx and in church always gave the final blessing in the language. His chief achievement however was to publish religious works in Manx -- in particular the entire 'Bible'. In this enterprise he was ably supported by a team of Manx-speaking clerics, most notably Philip Moore and John Kelly. The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) gave financial assistance. 
Under Hildesley's direction the four gospels and the 'Acts of the Apostles' were printed in London for the SPCK in 1763. The 'Book of Common Prayer' followed in 1765. The second part of the 'New Testament' appeared in 1767, having been printed in Ramsey, Isle of Man, by the Whitehaven printers Sheperd. The first part of the 'Old Testament' ('Genesis' to 'Esther') was printed by John Ware in Whitehaven in 1771 and again in 1772. 
Hildesley continued to hold the rectory of Holwell 'in commendam' until 1767, at which date he was presented to the mastership of Christ's Hospital at Sherburn, near Durham. The duties were slight and the income only $500 a year but the money enabled him in these, the last years of his life, not only at last to provide for the widows and orphans of the Manx clergy but also to travel more frequently to England and so alleviate the isolation that he often felt in the Isle of Man. 
On Saturday 28 November 1772 Hildesley had the pleasure of receiving the final proofs of the 'Old Testament'. This was the portion from 'Job' to 'Malachi', including for some reason the two apocryphal books of the 'Wisdom' and 'Ecclesiasticus'. The next day was Advent Sunday and the bishop preached in his own chapel 'On the uncertainty of human life'. He suffered a stroke the following day and died at Bishop's Court, Peel, on 6 December 1772; he was buried in Kirk Michael on 10 December. Hildesley left $300 of his meagre wealth to the SPCK to finance reprints of the Manx 'Bible'. The final portion of the 'Old Testament' appeared after Hildesley's death in 1773. The 'New Testament' was reprinted in 1775 and in the same year a one-volume edition of the whole 'Bible' appeared for the first time. 


@@@@@


doc= 13259


Hildeyard, Thomas (1690-1746), Jesuit and engineer, was born in London on 3 March 1690 into a family long established in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire. He was educated at the English College at St Omer (1702-7), entered the Society of Jesus on 7 September 1707, and was professed of the four vows on 2 February 1725. He was ordained priest about 1716. After teaching philosophy, theology, and mathematics at Liege, he was sent to the English mission, and by 1726 had become chaplain to the Bodenham family at Rotherwas, near Hereford. In September 1743 he was declared rector of the 'college' of St Francis Xavier, which included the counties of Hereford, Monmouth, Gloucester, and Somerset, and the whole of south Wales. 
Hildeyard was an accomplished engineer. In 1720 he was probably the first person in continental Europe successfully to build a steam engine after the designs of Thomas Newcomen. These had been smuggled to Liege by a consortium of Irishmen involved in industrial espionage. He was also noted for devising a number of innovative clocks. One of them was described in the 'Chronometrum mirabile Leodiense' (1727). This was an ingenious table clock giving time of day, information from the calendar, and all kinds of astronomical details. His 'Lectures on penance' were preserved in a manuscript at the presbytery, St George's, Worcester. Hildeyard died at Rotherwas on 10 April 1746, and was buried in the family chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 13260


Hildelith (fl. c.700), abbess of Barking, was a nun of unknown origin. Barking Abbey was founded in Essex, probably during the decade 665-75, by Earconwald, before he became bishop of London (675?-693); it was a double monastery, housing both monks and nuns, and its first abbess was Earconwald's sister, AEthelburh. Bede treats the early history of Barking in some detail ('Hist. eccl.', 4.6-11) because he had at his disposal a 'libellus' (a 'little book', now lost) on the miracles of St AEthelburh. Unfortunately, Bede does not supply a chronological framework for Barking's early history. According to John of Worcester, AEthelburh died in 675 and was succeeded by Hildelith; and Bede, drawing on the lost 'libellus', reports that she presided over the monastery for many years (ibid., 4.10). The date of her death is unknown. According to Bede, once again, Hildelith was energetic in the observance of monastic discipline, and undertook some reconstruction at Barking in order to accommodate within the church the relics of deceased members of the community. It was to Hildelith and her community of nuns that Aldhelm (died 709/10) dedicated his massive prose 'De virginitate'. From the structure of this work it is possible to deduce that many of these nuns were nobly born women who had divorced their husbands: one such was Cuthburh, sometime queen of Aldfrith, king of Northumbria (died 705); Hildelith may have been another. Aldhelm's remarks imply that these nobly born women were remarkably well educated in the scriptures and in patristic literature. Another English scholar of the time, Wynfrith (subsequently known as Boniface), described in a letter addressed to Abbess Eadburh the details of a vision of heaven and hell seen by a monk of Much Wenlock, which had been told to him by Abbess Hildelith. Therefore, although little is known of Hildelith's life, it is clear that she enjoyed intimate contact with the outstanding scholars of the time, and may herself be presumed to have achieved a respectable degree of education. 
A life of St Hildelith by John Tynemouth (which forms part of his massive 'Sanctilogium') is based principally on Bede, and adds nothing to knowledge of the saint's life. John says that she was venerated in the tenth century by Dunstan, AEthelwold, and AElfheah, but there is no record of such veneration in pre-conquest calendars or litanies of the saints. In some post-conquest liturgical sources (principally from Barking itself) Hildelith's deposition is commemorated on 24 March; the early fifteenth-century ordinal of Barking Abbey gives instructions for the performance of daily offices on this date (as well as on the octave). 


@@@@@


doc= 13261


Hilditch, Sir Edward (1805-1876), naval medical officer, was born on 13 May 1805, the son of John Frederick Hilditch, and his wife, Sarah. He studied medicine at St George's Hospital in London, took his MRCS diploma in 1826, and immediately entered the naval medical service. He was on the West Indian station from 1830 to 1855, and there gained extensive experience in dealing with outbreaks of yellow fever. For his work in several epidemics, Hilditch received successive promotions: surgeon in 1822; hospital surgeon in 1840; deputy inspector in 1844; and inspector-general in 1854. In 1855, after having met with a fearful epidemic of yellow fever in Bermuda, he was appointed to the charge of Plymouth Hospital, where he remained until he moved to Greenwich Hospital in 1861. He was placed on the retired list in 1865, receiving the honour of knighthood. In 1859 he was named honorary physician to the queen, when the distinction was first instituted. He was a warm, jovial, and unassuming man, well liked by both patients and colleagues. He died of heart disease at his home, 18 Arundel Gardens, Bayswater, London, on 24 August 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 13262


Hildrop, John (1682-1756), religious writer, born on 30 December 1682 in Petersfield, Hampshire, was the son of William Hildrop of Petersfield. He matriculated on 25 November 1698 from St John's College, Oxford, and graduated BA on 7 July 1702, MA on 8 June 1705, and BD and DD on 9 June 1743. On 14 April 1703 he was presented with the mastership of the Royal Free Grammar School at Marlborough, Wiltshire, by Thomas Bruce, third earl of Elgin and second earl of Ailesbury. He published several works on the apocalypse between 1711 and 1713, and in 1722 'Reflections upon Reason' appeared, a satire on freethinking, attributed at first to Bishop Francis Gastrell, and examined by Thomas Morgan in 'Enthusiasm in Distress' (1722). 
Hildrop was appointed rector of Maulden, Bedfordshire, in 1733. He resigned the school mastership on 4 December 1733 and, three months later, he resigned the rectory. On 13 April 1734 he was instituted to the rectory of Wath, near Ripon, Yorkshire, on the presentation of his patron's son Charles Bruce, Lord Bruce, later fourth earl of Elgin and third earl of Ailesbury, to whom he was chaplain. Hildrop published -- alongside several less noteworthy tracts -- various fugitive essays of a satirical and polemical character, chiefly directed against deists, either anonymously or under the pseudonyms of Phileleutherus Britannicus and Timothy Hooker. Though of slight intrinsic value, they are written in an unusually nervous, yet easy and entertaining style. These include 'An Essay for the Better Regulation and Improvement of Free-Thinking' (1739) and 'The Contempt of the Clergy Considered' (1739); the latter argued for the liberation of the church from state control. His 'Letter to a member of parliament containing a proposal... to revise, amend, or repeal... the ten commandments' is an amusing 'jeu d'esprit'. On its first appearance in 1738 it was attributed to Swift, but it appears in Hildrop's 'Miscellaneous Works' (1754), along with 'A Modest Apology for the Ancient and Honourable Family of the Wrongheads' and 'Some Memoirs of the Life of Simon Sallow'. In 1740 Hildrop became a regular contributor to the 'Weekly Miscellany'. In 1741 his 'An Essay on Honour' appeared and in 1742 he printed a work attempting to prove that animals' souls are degraded because of the fall of man, based on Guillaume Hyacinthe Bougeant's 'Philosophical Amusement'. He also published a collection of sermons as 'The Husbandman's Spiritual Companion' (1752). Hildrop died on 18 January 1756. 


@@@@@


doc= 13263


Hildyard, James (1809-1887), classical scholar, was born on 11 April 1809 at Winestead in Holderness, Yorkshire, the eighth of ten sons of the Revd William Hildyard, nine of whom became Cambridge graduates and six fellows of their colleges. He was educated under Dr Samuel Butler at Shrewsbury School from 1820 to 1829. From 1826 he was the head of the school, and in April 1829 was the chief person in a rebellion over the boys' diet known as the 'Beef Row'. In October of the same year he was entered as a pensioner of Christ's College, Cambridge, where, through the influence of the master, Dr John Kaye, he was at once elected to a Tancred divinity studentship, then worth the large sum of about $113 a year: he was ordained deacon in 1830. Hildyard won a Browne medal in 1830-33, and the members' prize in 1832. In 1833 he graduated BA as senior optime in mathematics, second in the first class of the classical tripos, and second chancellor's medallist, and was immediately elected fellow of his college. He was ordained priest in 1834. In 1840 he became Hebrew lecturer and tutor. He proceeded MA in 1836, and BD in 1846. In 1843 he was senior proctor. 
During fourteen years' residence Hildyard became prominent as a university politician who relished acrimonious disagreement. Nevertheless he fought hard to improve the method of college tuition, and wrote more than one pamphlet against the system of private coaching. He wrote and spoke in favour of voluntary theological examinations for ordination candidates. He spent some time on a laborious edition of some of the plays of Plautus, with Latin notes and glossary. For two years, 1843 and 1844, he was Cambridge preacher at the Chapel Royal, Whitehall, when large congregations were present, and a printed selection from his sermons had a rapid sale. About this period he successfully fought the battle of the black gown 'versus' the surplice, his opponent being the Revd Frederick Oakeley, a prominent ritualist who afterwards became a Roman Catholic priest. Hildyard's foreign travels included tours in Greece and Turkey. At Athens he caught a fever, and narrowly escaped being bled to death by King Otho's German physician. In 1846 he married Elizabeth Matilda, only daughter of George Kinderley of Lincoln's Inn, to whom he had been engaged for seven years, and in June of that year accepted the college living of Ingoldsby, Lincolnshire. He found the church and parsonage in a ruinous condition, but in the course of two or three years he restored the church, and built a new rectory at a personal cost of almost $3000. He was always a consistent advocate of the revision of the 'Book of Common Prayer', and his 'Ingoldsby Letters' (4th edn, 1879) was an important (if characteristically intemperate) contribution to contemporary debate on the subject. He also published numerous pamphlets and sermons. He died at Ingoldsby rectory on 27 August 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 13264


Hill, Aaron (1685-1750), writer and entrepreneur, was born on 10 February 1685 in Beaufort Buildings, the Strand, the eldest son of George Hill, an attorney of Whitchurch Manor, Malmesbury, Wiltshire. Declining family fortunes forced George Hill to sell his estate in 1707. Ann Gregory, Aaron's maternal grandmother, took charge of his education, sending him first to the free grammar school at Barnstaple (where he befriended the writer John Gay), then to Westminster School ('c'.1696-1699), and finally supporting him in an ambitious trip to the East ('c'.1700-1704) to visit his distant relative Lord Paget, English ambassador to Constantinople. Hill's early adventures abroad furnished material for the lavishly illustrated subscription volume 'A Full and Just Account of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire' (1709). Hill returned to Britain with Paget in April 1703, then tutored William Wentworth of Bretton Hall, Yorkshire, until Wentworth succeeded to the baronetcy in 1706. 
Between 1707 and 1710 Hill acted as secretary to the maverick earl of Peterborough after defending his actions in his heroic poem 'Camillus' (1707). Hill declined to follow Peterborough abroad, having, in 1710, married Margaret Morris (1694-1731), daughter of Edmund Morris, a successful grocer from Stratford, east London. The marriage proved happy: four of their nine children reached adulthood, and Hill was especially proud of the literary accomplishments of his three daughters, aptly named Urania, Astrea, and Minerva. Margaret Morris's dowry of $800 enabled Hill to relinquish his journalistic hack work for the 'British Apollo' (a question and answer paper modelled on Dunton's 'Athenian Mercury', on which Gay had assisted him) to embark on a career as a theatre impresario. His period as stage manager at the troubled Theatre Royal in Drury Lane between 23 November and June 1710 ended when an actors' revolt got the better of his youth and inexperience. Later in that year he became director of opera at the Queen's Theatre in the Haymarket, achieving lasting fame for commissioning and writing the libretto for Handel's first opera for the English stage, 'Rinaldo', staged on 24 June 1711. His early tragedy 'Elfrid' (premiered on 3 January 1710) met with an indifferent response not improved by its revision in 1731 as 'Athelwold'. However, Hill's farce which accompanied 'Elfrid', 'The Walking Statue', quickly entered eighteenth-century repertory. 
Hill's entrepreneurial energies found expression in a number of commercial ventures, the first of many he pursued during an exceptionally active life. In 1713 he took out a patent for the process of extracting oil from beechnuts and by 1716 had attracted over $12,000 from investors, but a succession of poor harvests between 1714 and 1716 ended the project. His subsequent project, the manufacture of chinaware in England, anticipated the industrial developments of Josiah Wedgwood. Another cherished plan which Hill failed to fulfil was the colonization of agricultural land in southern Carolina. Hill admired men of action as much as men of letters, as evident in his eulogistic poem to Peter the Great, 'The Northern Star' (1718). Meanwhile he continued to write for the stage, his second tragedy, 'The Fatal Vision, or, The Fall of Siam', opening at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 7 February 1716. His third and best tragedy, the one-act 'The Fatal Extravagance' (21 April 1721) dramatized a topical theme -- ruin caused by South Sea Bubble investments. Hill permitted the play to appear under the name of his impecunious friend the Scottish poet Joseph Mitchell, signal evidence of his emerging role as a patron and friend of other writers. This play's success, coupled with the relaxing of the theatre monopolies and the growth of the unlicensed stage, encouraged Hill to attempt a return to stage management. In 1721 he launched plans for a new resident English theatre company at the Little Theatre in the Haymarket but negotiations for this broke down late in the day. His adaptation of 'King Henry the Fifth' on 5 December 1723, with a cast that included Barton Booth, Robert Wilks, and Anne Oldfield, met with moderate success. 
Hill's most significant role during the 1720s was as patron and promoter of other writers. Between 1720 and 1728 he was perhaps the most important, certainly the most ubiquitous, man of letters in London literary life. His house at Petty France formed the backdrop for his friendship with many writers, members of the so-called 'Hillarian' circle (after the name Hillarius bestowed on Hill by his fervid admirer the writer Eliza Haywood). Other members of this circle were Edward Young, Richard Savage, John Dyer, Benjamin Victor, the Scottish poets Joseph Mitchell, David Mallet, James Thomson, and the poet Martha Fowke Sansom, whose autobiographical 'Clio' (posthumously published in 1752) proclaimed a passionate and intense attachment to Hill. Hill's magnetic good looks (he was tall, dark-haired, and with striking blue eyes) made him the object of much female adulation. Hill helped Richard Savage promote his attempts to claim aristocratic legitimacy, publishing on his behalf 'Miscellaneous Poems and Translations' (1726). Over a third of its ninety-two poems are by Hill, others by members of the Hillarian circle, documenting that group's intimate friendships. An ancillary venture was the 'Plain Dealer' (1724-5), a journal inspired by Joseph Addison's 'Tatler' which Hill co-edited with William Bond. This too promoted and encouraged the writings of Hill's acquaintances, with particular prominence given to religious sublime poetry. Essays by the critic John Dennis supported Hill's own enthusiasm for sublime biblical verse, first evidenced in his 'The Creation' (1720) and in his epic 'Gideon', parts of which were printed in the 'Plain Dealer' and 'Miscellaneous Poems'. 
By 1728 the Hillarian circle had begun to disperse and Hill turned once again to economic projects, his most ambitious yet, a plan funded by the York Buildings company to harvest Scottish pines on Speyside for use as mainmasts on British naval ships. Hill personally supervised the enterprise for several months during the spring of 1728, but it ultimately proved economically unsound, and by 1732 had accumulated a debit of nearly $7000. Scotland profited considerably from the company's extensive investment in the local infrastructures, but this was no consolation to shareholders. 
During his absence from London, Hill achieved the dubious fame of seeing his initials featured in both Pope's 'Peri Bathous' and 'The Dunciad' of 1728 as a 'flying fish' and a mud-diving writer, a sly dig at Hill's inability to sustain the sublime style. The relationship between Hill and Pope was uneven, fuelled in part by Hill's envy of Pope's success and grudging admiration of his talents. He took Pope to task in a lengthy correspondence in which he maintained his dignity while Pope resorted to subterfuges denying that Hill was the intended victim of 'The Dunciad'. Hill genuinely regretted Pope's incursion into 'low' satire: his 'The Progress of Wit: a Caveat, for the Use of an Eminent Writer' (1730) turned the allegorical topography of 'The Dunciad' against its own author, dramatizing Pope disappearing down the vortex of oblivion with his low subject matter. 
Hill cared deeply about many of the issues that had motivated 'The Dunciad' -- namely, the decline in national cultural standards -- but sought a different mode of redress. During the 1730s he lobbied Walpole's administration (notably in his 1731 'Advice to the Poets') and members of the royal family, especially Prince Frederick in his 1737 'Tears of the Muses', for public support for the arts, particularly the foundation of a national theatre and a dramatic academy. During the early 1730s he once again attempted to buy into the management of the Drury Lane theatre but proved unable to raise the capital. He took an active role from the sidelines, however, personally coaching actors, writing pamphlets addressing the state of the English stage (the anonymous 'See and Seem Blind', 1732) and launching 'The Prompter', which he co-edited with William Popple between 12 November 1734 and 2 July 1736, a journal which dedicated almost half its numbers to the state of the London stage. It was here that Hill formulated his theory of acting, espousing a more naturalistic mode than the rhetorical style favoured by traditional actors. His ideas were formalized in a poem called 'The Art of Acting' (1746), a prose version, the 'Essay on the Art of Acting', being published in his posthumous works of 1753. Meanwhile Hill achieved his greatest success on the stage with his adaptation of Voltaire's 'Zaire'. As 'Zara' this first appeared during an amateur production for the benefit of the ailing William Bond at York Buildings in 1735, before being finally presented to great acclaim at the Drury Lane theatre on 12 January 1736. Voltaire's approval prompted Hill to adapt another of his plays, 'Alzira', a work with a similarly exotic setting, first staged at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 18 June 1736. Hill fell out with Voltaire in disagreement over his interpretation of the character of Brutus. His own dramatic version of the story, 'Caesar', failed to get accepted for performance, but in 1738 he published an essay on the subject, 'An Enquiry into the Merit of Assassination'. 
By the spring of 1737 the financial difficulties which faced Hill had become insurmountable. After several months spent in 'solitary rambles' around Britain, by August 1738 he had 'sold the best part of a too little 'fortune'' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 4.111) and moved himself and his family from the house in Petty France to the rural London suburb of Plaistow. Although assailed by domestic problems (his errant son Julius Caesar, his feckless brother Gilbert, his daughter Urania's hasty marriage to the actor Warren Johnson, a nephew's suicide), he responded to his enforced 'retirement' with a flurry of activity. During his twelve years at Plaistow he planted over 100,000 French vines in hopes of creating an English wine industry and launched plans for the manufacture of potash, as well as publishing 'The Fanciad' (a work designed to promote a biography of the duke of Marlborough, 1743), 'The Impartial', his 'free thoughts on the situation of our public affairs anno 1744', 'Free Thoughts upon Faith' (1746), an adaptation of Voltaire's 'Merope' (finished 1745, first staged in 1749), and three books of 'Gideon, or, The Patriot' (1749). 
Throughout the time at Plaistow (a place his friend the printer and novelist Samuel Richardson described as 'that terrible marsh-pit') Hill and his family suffered persistent poor health, but attempts to leave were thwarted by a long-standing lawsuit that was unresolved in Hill's own lifetime. The activities of these years are documented in his correspondence with Richardson (V&A, Forster MSS, fol. 13.2). Richardson and Hill enjoyed a close, even affectionate friendship. Richardson had printed both the 'Plain Dealer' and 'The Prompter' and went on to print all of Hill's works of the 1740s. On 8 December 1740 he sent Hill two volumes of the anonymously published 'Pamela' to amuse his daughters. Hill soon guessed the author's identity and his eulogistic letters to Richardson supplemented the original preface and dedications when 'Pamela' went into a second edition on 14 February 1741. Hill and his daughters were also among those readers to whom Richardson sent drafts of 'Clarissa' for commentary. Richardson, anxious about the work's length, pleaded with Hill for suggestions for cuts. Hill responded with an abridged version (rejected by Richardson) which cut the novel's length by two thirds but introduced an obtrusive didacticism alien to Richardson's literary sensibility. Despite this difference of opinion, Richardson remained friends with Hill and maintained his correspondence with Urania for many years after Hill's death. 
Hill was seriously ill for much of 1749 and died at his home, Hyde House in Plaistow, on 8 February 1750, the day before a benefit performance of 'Merope' commanded by the prince of Wales. He was buried in Westminster Abbey alongside his wife. Many of Hill's poems and letters saw publication for the first time in a posthumous four-volume edition for the benefit of his family, 'The Works of the Late Aaron Hill' (1753, second edn, 1754). His plays and love letters appeared in the two-volume 'Dramatic Works' (1760). 
Nineteenth-century critics uniformly disparaged Hill's writings and personality. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' saw him as 'absurd and a bore of the first water', an assessment only partially rectified by Brewster's biography (1913). Recent cultural historians have accorded Hill a far more interesting and pivotal role as a pioneer of developments in stage scenery and drama, as a theorist of the Longinian sublime, and particularly for his unceasing activities on behalf of writers of very different political persuasions and literary gifts. He was, in one critic's words, 'the cultural glue that holds this literary period together' (Hammond, 287). 


@@@@@


doc= 13265


Hill, Abraham (bap. 1635, d. 1722), secretary of the Royal Society and cultural dilettante, baptized on 16 June 1635 at St Dionis Backchurch, London, was the eldest son of Richard Hill (died 1660), a prosperous London cordwainer and alderman, and of his wife, Agnes (died 1660). He seems to have had no higher education and was probably brought up as a merchant. By 1658 he had married Anne (died 1661), daughter of Sir Bulstrode Whitelocke, with whom he had a daughter, Frances (1658-1736), and a son, Richard (1660-1722). There were no children from Abraham's subsequent second marriage, to Elizabeth (1644-1672), daughter of Michael Pratt of Bromley by Bow, Middlesex. 
In 1660 Hill's life took a crucial turn. He inherited a moderate fortune at his parents' death, he bought Sutton Manor at Sutton-at-Hone, Kent, and he rented chambers at Gresham College, right in the heart of the social and intellectual world of the Royal Society of London ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. There he was part of the discussions which preceded the society's inception. Hill's role at the centre of this institution is demonstrated by his election to its council for the sessions 1663 to 1666 and 1672 to 1721. At the same time he was treasurer (1663-6, 1677-99), and for two years he was secretary (1673-5). He attended frequently at both council and society meetings throughout his sixty-year affiliation. 
Hill's role in the London intellectual scene was hardly noted by the great recorders of London life -- John Evelyn, Samuel Pepys, and John Aubrey -- but he played a large role in the life of Robert Hooke, whose diary provides a context for this otherwise unnoted Royal Society functionary. While in 1677 Hooke suspected that Hill backed Nehemiah Grew rather than himself for the post of secretary -- 'This evening Hill... plotted for Grew againste me' and 'Hill a dog for Grew. Hill and Louther slyly' ('Diary of Robert Hooke... 1672-1680', 333, 335) -- they were cronies who met at least once a week at coffee houses or taverns to discuss matters of scientific interest ('Excellent good discourse'; ibid., 245). Indeed, in 1676 they met almost every other day and sometimes up to three times in one day; and while such meetings later thinned the pattern of social life remained into the 1690s. They visited each other and for a time Hill was so central to Hooke's life that he noted the former's absences and returns to London. Apart from shared administrative tasks in the Royal Society such as the acquisition of the Arundel Library and the property and land around Chelsea College, Hooke showed Hill drafts of his papers and lectures and gave him copies of his books. They collected and shared books and occasionally collaborated on experiments. Hill was a member of the various philosophical clubs which Hooke spawned in the 1670s and 1680s and frequented all the fashionable haunts where philosophical matters were discussed. 
Hill's activities within the society represent many facets of the late seventeenth-century scientific endeavour. On the council he audited accounts, pursued errant fellows' arrears, and worked on committees concerned with the society's real estate and other possessions; he registered its letters and papers and helped to index the 'Philosophical Transactions'. In the society his contributions were eclectic but representative of a virtuoso's commitment to the widest definition of natural philosophy. His administrative skills came to the fore on committees such as those for the history of trades, surveying England, geological observations, and for handling correspondence and planning experiments for later meetings. He sent questionnaires to exotic places to be answered by travellers and collected curiosities brought back from such voyages; he helped to investigate water and air purity, the depth of the sea, breathing under water, hurricanes, distance travelled by shot at sea, Hooke's 'pepper mite' observations, the rate of fall of bodies, air pressure, and techniques of wine and paper making. But it is clear that Hill was not, himself, an experimenter. Many of his contributions came from his book learning -- both ancient and modern authorities -- and they usually displayed his eye for the exotic and strange such as Russian poisoning practices, their elk leather production, and the anatomy of whales. He used his reading for confirming or discounting what others produced at meetings. Later in life he was bequeathed money by Sir John Copley (died 1709) for what was to become the Copley medal of the Royal Society. 
From 1691 until the latter's death in 1694 Hill was comptroller to John Tillotson, archbishop of Canterbury. Indeed, after the accession of William and Mary his public career took off and he was a member of the Board of Trade between 1696 and 1702. In old age he retired to Sutton-at-Hone where he grew fruit for the making of perry and cider. Hill died on 5 February 1722 and was buried with his second wife in Sutton-at-Hone church. His career graphically demonstrates how multi-faceted the role of a 'man of business' and 'virtuoso' might be in the cultural life of the Royal Society and in government. 


@@@@@


doc= 13266


Hill, Adam (c.1548-1595), religious writer and Church of England clergyman, was a native of Salisbury, where he was one of the clever youths trained by Bishop John Jewel. He continued his education at Balliol College, Oxford, where he graduated on 5 April 1568 and was elected a fellow in the same year. He proceeded MA in 1572 but resigned his fellowship on 12 January 1573. He appears to have earned his living for some time as a schoolmaster, but also sought preferment in the church. In 1577 he became vicar of Westbury, and on 8 March 1578, aged about thirty, he was ordained priest by John Aylmer, bishop of London. In 1579 he was presented to the Wiltshire vicarage of Bishop's Lavington. The patron for this turn was Lord Burghley, which suggests that Hill was now regarded by the authorities as a man with a future. He resigned this second living in 1580 but in 1579 or 1580 obtained two further preferments in Dorset and Wiltshire. On 4 April 1582 he was instituted to the prebend of Gillingham Minor in Salisbury Cathedral, where on 16 January 1584 he became succentor. In the meantime he continued his studies, proceeding both BTh and DTh at Oxford on 2 July 1591. 
The fruits of his learning are apparent in Hill's published writings. 'The Crie of England', a sermon denouncing the vices of the age, delivered at Paul's Cross in September 1593 and printed in 1595 at the request of the lord mayor and aldermen of London, to whom it is dedicated, is lavishly illustrated with citations from sacred and secular sources. And his learning is still more apparent in 'The Defence of the Article' (1592), the article in question being the dogma of Christ's descent into hell, which Hill defended against Alexander Hume, an exiled Scottish presbyterian then employed as a schoolmaster at Bath. Here he deploys a massive array of authorities, classical, biblical, patristic, and contemporary, in a controversy which became increasingly acrimonious. When Hill complained of being traduced as 'a Bishopling and a time-server', Hume responded acidly 'Is truth a reveiling?' (Hume, 148). 
The charge was an easy one for Hume to make. The 'Defence' is dedicated to Archbishop Whitgift, and in it Hill stands forth as a defender of both religious orthodoxy and ecclesiastical authority. He attacks the attempt to allegorize the disputed article both because it undermines 'a most comfortable doctrine that Christ doth deliver us from hell' (Hill, 'Defence', 68'v'), and also because it leaves the way open to the free interpretation of all the fundamental doctrines of the church, creating a situation in which 'every man will be a head, no man a foote, every man a tung, no man a eare' (ibid., 30). Hume came back strongly, with a rejoinder (dedicated to Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex) whose title-page accuses his opponent of at least 600 'fallacies and deceits in reason', but Hill had no chance to retaliate in kind, for he died about 16 February 1595 and was buried in Salisbury Cathedral on 19 February. His exchanges with Hume reveal in passing that Hill had been an active preacher in Wiltshire, at various times taking the pulpit in Laycock, Trowbridge, and Chippenham, and engaging in a lively dispute in Salisbury with a fellow prebendary, Abraham Conham, that had to be settled by the bishop. Such activities, combined with his evident learning and his readiness to defend the church establishment, give some support to Wood's belief that had Hill 'not been untimely snatched away by death, he would have been advanced to an high degree in the church' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.623). 


@@@@@


doc= 13267


Hill, Alban (d. 1559), physician, was born in Wales, and studied at Oxford and at Bologna, where he took the degree of doctor of medicine. He lived in Cheapside in London for the rest of his life. 
According to Wood, Hill became famous 'not only for the theoretic, but for the practical part of physic', and he was greatly respected in the parish of St Alban, Wood Street, where he lived and practised. John Caius calls him a good and learned man. Hill is mentioned in laudatory terms by Bassianus Landus of Piacenza ('Anatomia', 1605, 2.225), with reference to a far from profound remark attributed to him about the uses of the mesentery. 
Hill is said to have published a book on Galen, but no such work is known to be extant. He became a fellow of the College of Physicians on 23 March 1552, was censor each year from 1555 to 1558, and elect in 1558. 
Hill died on 22 December 1559, and was buried in St Alban, Wood Street, London. His widow survived him until 31 May 1580. 


@@@@@


doc= 13268


Hill, Alexander (1785-1867), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born at St Andrews, Fife, on 19 July 1785, the son of George Hill (1750-1819), principal of St Mary's College, and his wife, Harriet Scott. He studied at the university of his native city, and graduated in September 1804. He was licensed as a preacher in 1806; for nine years afterwards he travelled in England and abroad, acting as tutor to a relative and pursuing his own studies, especially in the classics. In 1815 he was ordained as minister of Colmonell in Ayrshire; in June 1816 he was translated to the neighbouring parish of Dailly, where he remained for twenty-five years. He graduated DD at St Andrews in 1828. He married Margaret (died 1874), only daughter of Major Crawford of the East India Company, of Newfield; they had nine children. 
In 1840 Hill was appointed professor of divinity at the University of Glasgow; one of the competitors for the chair was Thomas Chalmers. Hill was an undistinguished rural clergyman, whose only significant theological publication was an edition of his father's 'Lectures in Divinity' (1825); it was clear that his only real credential for the post was his descent from the impeccably moderate family which had dominated the politics of early nineteenth-century St Andrews. His victory humiliated the much better qualified Chalmers and fuelled the rivalry between the moderate and evangelical wings of the Church of Scotland. 
Hill was one of several moderates whose good character helped rebuild respect for the church after the Disruption; his good judgement and kind heart made him popular with both his parishioners and his students. While his theological views remained essentially those of his father, he expressed them with greater evangelical enthusiasm. He was a hearty participant in services and a contemporary described his sermons as 'instinct with life' and breathing 'the spirit of Christianity'. His delivery was probably enhanced by his appearance: tall and thin, Hill had 'prominent and expressive' features (Smith, 368). 
After an unsuccessful candidature for the moderatorship of the general assembly in 1840, Hill was elected to the post in 1845, in the wake of the Disruption of 1843. He became an important figure in the general assembly, founding an association for increasing the livings of disadvantaged clergy and assisting with other charitable schemes. He was also the author of several pastoral and devotional works, including 'A Book of Family Prayers' (1837). He resigned his chair in November 1862, and died at his home, 24 Hillington Square, Ayr, on 27 January 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 13269


Hill, Arthur (1601-1663), politician, was the second son of Sir Moses (Moyses) Hill (died 1630). His mother was probably Sir Moses' second wife, Anne Stafford ('nee' Grogan), widow of Sir Francis Stafford, but may have been his father's first wife, Alice MacDonnell. Moses Hill, perhaps of London origins, had served as a soldier in Ireland from 1573 and secured property by grant, purchase, and lease in counties Antrim, Down, and Louth. 
By 1630 Arthur Hill had married his first wife, probably Anne Bolton (1603-1636/7), daughter of Sir Richard Bolton, future lord chancellor of Ireland; they had three sons. Hill appears to have practised law in the 1630s, secured a Dublin residence and, besides the portion of his father's lands which he inherited, set about building a landed base of his own, largely through offering mortgages to indebted Ulster landowners. Having become sheriff of co. Antrim in 1634, he was returned to the 1634 Irish parliament at a by-election, perhaps for Belfast, and was elected for Carysfort, co. Wicklow, in 1640. He was added to the commission of the peace for co. Antrim in 1640 and in that year received a command in the earl of Strafford's 'new army', raised to be used against the covenanters in Scotland. Hill's second marriage was to Mary (or Anne), daughter of Sir William Parsons, lord justice from 1641, and they had three sons and four daughters. 
With the outbreak of the Irish rising of 1641, Hill became one of the leaders of the protestant, pro-government forces in east Ulster and was given command of a cavalry regiment. In late 1642 he was one of a delegation of officers who travelled to England to plead with the two armed camps of king and parliament for aid in the Irish war lest they be forced to a truce with the confederate Catholic forces. In fact such a cessation came to pass in 1643 with royal approval, though Hill was soon persuaded of the merits of seeking supplies from the English parliament, which was committed to a policy of reopening the war. He was not, however, a supporter of parliament's solemn league and covenant and in April 1644 was one of the officers of English extraction willing to issue a proclamation, drafted by the king's government in Dublin, directed against the bond, despite its appeal in Ulster, particularly to the Scottish population there. By the early summer his commitment to renewed campaigning won out and he returned to England to seek logistical support for an Irish war to be explicitly conducted under parliament's aegis. 
Hill retained his command and managed to accommodate himself to the successive Commonwealth regimes of the 1650s. He secured a number of local offices including that of a revenue commissioner for the Belfast precinct and a surveyor of confiscated lands in Ulster. In 1654 he was elected to the united protectorate parliament for the combined counties Antrim, Down, and Armagh and in 1656 he served as an auditor-general for Irish accounts. His activities endeared him neither to the Scottish nor the presbyterian populations of Ulster. In 1653 he was involved in the scheme to transplant Scottish landowners from Ulster to Tipperary. He secured the odium of presbyterian clergy as a commissioner to enforce the engagement of loyalty to the republic in 1651 and for investigating those who had failed to offer thanks for the delivery of the lord protector in 1657. Yet his own religious position was out of keeping with that favoured by English regimes. He sheltered the deposed bishop of Down and Connor, Henry Leslie, who preached and possibly ordained under his protection, while the future bishop of that diocese, Jeremy Taylor, who lived nearby, noted that Hill's home was one where the outlawed 'Book of Common Prayer' was 'greatly valued and diligently used' (Bolton, 28). The death of Hill's elder brother, Peter, and of Peter's son Francis saw him gain the bulk of his father's pre-war properties, while the state rewarded him with further grants. In 1651 he invited Robert Child to his Ulster estate; Child remained there until his death in 1654, investigating local natural history and recording enthusiasm for agricultural improvement in the area. 
With the collapse of the Commonwealth, Hill was reckoned to have 'hastened to join once more the ascendant party' (Reid, 2.255). Perhaps as early as 1659 he was associating with those who supported the return of Charles II, and by early 1660 he was noted as one who could provide armed support for an unconditional restoration. He represented County Down in the 1660 Irish convention and in the parliament elected in 1661, and secured membership of the Irish privy council. He received a pardon at Charles's return and his property was again confirmed to him. Hillsborough, where he had erected a fort, rebuilt the church and established a settlement, was made a corporate town and parliamentary borough in 1662, and he was appointed constable of the strategically located castle. He died in April 1663, his son and heir, Moyses, further uniting the Hill family properties through a marriage to his cousin Anne Hill of Hillhall. 
Hill had steered close to the prevailing party in power, while retaining a commitment to the 'English interest' and to the Church of Ireland. His legacy was that of laying the 'real basis of the landed wealth of the family' (Gillespie, 140), his descendants, the marquesses of Downshire, going on to be among the most substantial and politically potent landowning families in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 13270


Hill, David Octavius (1802-1870), painter and photographer, was born on 20 May 1802 in Perth, Scotland, the eighth child (hence Octavius) of Thomas Hill, bookseller, and Emelia or Emily Murray. He was educated at Perth Academy. 
While still a teenager Hill applied the new technique of lithography to producing 'Thirty Sketches of Scenery in Perthshire, Drawn from Nature and on Stone', which was issued in six parts between 1821 and 1823 by his father Thomas Hill, a publisher and printseller in Perth. He went to study in Edinburgh at the Trustees' Academy School of Design under Andrew Wilson, a landscape painter and well-known art connoisseur. Although Hill inserted into his works depictions illustrating the manners of the Scottish peasantry, it was the subtle strength of his landscape paintings on which he rapidly built his reputation. These landscapes were admirably suited to engraving, the early nineteenth century's most influential development in the distribution of images, and many of his paintings are best-known through the engravings made from them; he had more works engraved than any other Scottish artist. Hill's great early achievement was his series of views in 1840 that were made into steel-engravings entitled 'The Land of Burns'. This project was the most ambitious and expensive Scottish publication up to that time and firmly established his reputation. His painting style was delicate rather than vigorous, but exploitation of light and shade gave many of his works unexpected force. He was particularly fond of the light at sunset. An extensive assessment of his career appeared in the 'Art Journal' for 1869, which asserted that: 'he is not to be classed with the school of the naturalists, applying the term to those artists who are satisfied to represent Nature as they see her, but with that of the poetists, treating his subjects in a manner that gives additional charms to whatever they may in themselves possess.' Hill was a man of tremendous good cheer and bonhomie, which served him well throughout his life. The 'Edinburgh Evening Courant' (18 May 1870) recalled that 'in personal appearance he was remarkable for his striking, classical, and manly features'. Andrew Wilson had introduced him to the artistic community, in which Hill became a jovial and central figure. He joined the Association for the Promotion of Fine Arts in 1826, but was one of several artists who withdrew in a controversy. In 1829 he was a founder member of the Society of Artists, and became its secretary in the following year; from 1836 this was a paid position. In 1838 the society became the Royal Scottish Academy of Fine Arts, of which he remained secretary for the rest of his life. He undoubtedly played a part in the academy's decision to commemorate the royal charter by opening its exhibition on 10 February 1840, the day the young Queen Victoria married. 
On 9 August 1837 Hill married Ann McDonald ('bap'. 1804, died 1841), the musically inclined daughter of a wine merchant in Perth. Their brief life together was one active in the society of the artistic community of Edinburgh. A daughter, Charlotte, was born in 1839, but a second daughter, born in 1840, lived only a few hours. Much weakened, Ann died on 5 October 1841 and Hill and his daughter went to live with his widowed sister, Mary Watson. 
The year 1839 had seen the public announcement of the invention of photography, an art that soon brought together D. O. Hill and 
Within days after Adamson opened his studio, on 19 May 1843, there took place in Edinburgh the Disruption of the Church of Scotland, perhaps the most significant event in nineteenth-century Scottish history. Acting on deeply held principles about control of their own parishes, a substantial proportion of the ministers of the Church of Scotland took the courageous act of signing the deed of demission, separating themselves from their livings and laying the foundations for the Free Church of Scotland. Dr Thomas Chalmers (1780-1847) presided as the first moderator of the Free Church assembly. Hill's brother-in-law, the Revd Robert MacDonald (1813-1893), one of the most fiery of the Free Church's early members, became largely responsible for their school building programme. Hill, moved by this momentous occasion, announced his intention of painting a monumental portrait of the nearly 500 ministers and lay people involved in the signing, to be engraved and published by his brother. Perhaps Hill had been inspired by the recent showing of George Hayter's 'The Great Reform Bill, 1832', a composite of 400 portraits of members of parliament painted from life. Hill's project presented immediate problems. By temperament and training a landscape painter, he had painted only one significant portrait before this. Knowing that the participants would soon scatter to all corners of Scotland, Sir David Brewster suggested Robert Adamson's new art as a means of recording their features. 
Within a very short period Hill's artistic direction and Adamson's manipulatory skills merged into a partnership unlike any in the early history of photography. Even with the help of specially devised cameras, lenses, and other devices made by the ingenious Thomas Davidson of Edinburgh, the exposure times of the calotype negative forced them to move furniture and trappings out into the garden in order to take advantage of the sunlight. Mirrors and reflectors helped to direct and concentrate the light. Hill's warm and commanding personality put the sitters at ease even while locking their bodies and expressions into a form that the camera could record. Robert Adamson had mastered the intricacies of the new art, refining it in a way that led to artistically pleasing prints. When their first efforts were exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy of Arts in 1844, they were titled as 'executed by R. Adamson under the artistic direction of D. O. Hill'. Their calotype portraits, at first seen as convenient studies for a grand painting, emerged with a power and truthfulness of their own. 
Their reputation grew as rapidly as the diversity of their subject matter. Hill's extensive social contacts came into play, and their subsequent portraits recorded the society of Edinburgh and many of its famous visitors. They took their cameras to the Free Church assembly in Glasgow and to the British Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in York. The architecture of Linlithgow, Durham, York, and Edinburgh expanded their subject matter, and their panoramas of Edinburgh provide a detailed record of the city at that time. Several of these landscape views provided direct inspiration for Hill's paintings. One of their most ambitious and penetrating projects was to document the fishermen and women, principally of the village of Newhaven. Within this picturesque and self-contained society Hill and Adamson extended the vision of photography to documenting a way of life -- including not only its people, but also the boats, nets, and other objects that defined their existence. For Hill this was a return in a more sophisticated fashion to his early interest in recording the manners of the Scottish peasantry. Just as in his paintings, it was poetry and not nature that inspired Hill, and the calotype negatives were often retouched to remove distracting elements or to emphasize important features. In the end, however, they spoke with truth to the spirit of the subject. 
Within the first four years of their partnership, Hill and Adamson took more than 3000 photographs, many of which remain of undeniable quality to this day. But Robert Adamson's health, the cause of his taking up photography in the first place, continued to fail. Adamson's work dropped off throughout 1847 and on 14 January 1848 his short life came to a tragic end at St Andrews. Hill was devastated, losing not only a close friend, but also the source of his success in the art of photography. He continued to live in Rock House and to distribute their photographs, but could never again achieve the artistic harmony of the works that he had produced with Adamson. He joined the Photographic Society of Scotland in 1858, even though more than a decade had passed since he had been involved in taking a photograph. A brief collaboration with the Glasgow photographer A. M'Glashon in the years 1860-62 was unproductive. The original inspiration for taking up photography, his painting of the signing of the deed of demission, was not completed until 1865, and this grand painting, now in the offices of the Free Church, is little more than a collage of the calotype photographs on which it was founded. 
Hill's activities as the secretary of the Royal Scottish Academy continued throughout his life and served to maintain his prominence in the artistic community. In 1830 Hill was one of the major forces in the formation of the Art Union of Edinburgh, the first institution of the kind in the nation, and one that was soon copied. In 1850 he was appointed one of the commissioners of the board of manufactures in Scotland, a body then responsible for the Government School of Art and the new National Gallery of Scotland. 
Hill's only child, Charlotte (Chatty), the wife of W. Scott Dalgleish, died early in 1862. Shortly afterwards, on 18 November 1862, Hill married the sculptor Amelia Robertson Paton ['see 'Hill, Amelia Robertson (1820-1904)], who was the sister of the Pre-Raphaelite artist Sir Noel Paton and the landscape painter Waller Hugh Paton. 
In addition to his public services, Hill continued to paint and to exhibit. Some of his paintings, particularly 'Old and New Edinburgh, from the Castle' and 'The Braes of Ballochmyle', were clearly inspired by the photographs he had been involved in taking. In all, Hill exhibited about 300 of his works in his lifetime. About 270 of these were shown in the annual exhibitions of the Royal Scottish Academy. Nearly all were paintings, but he exhibited seven calotypes in 1844 and ten more the following year. His reputation was grounded largely in Edinburgh -- he showed only four times at the Royal Academy in London -- but this was not as limiting as it might seem. The 'Athens of the north' was a powerful intellectual centre in the dual wake of the Scottish Enlightenment and the exhortations of Sir Walter Scott. It was a place where a man such as Hill could influence greatly the course of artistic development. And that he did. 
Hill's marriage to Amelia was not only happy but productive. It was under her influence that Hill finally completed his Disruption painting. Although she was clearly a Scottish artist, Amelia exhibited eighteen of her sculptures at the Royal Academy in London, helping to extend her husband's reputation as well. Tragically, Hill developed rheumatic fever in 1868. They moved from the cramped but central quarters of Rock House to a more tranquil spot in Edinburgh. There -- Newington Lodge, Mayfield Terrace -- Hill died on 17 May 1870. Amelia Hill executed a bronze bust for his grave in the Dean cemetery. 
It is curious that Hill's obituaries nearly universally failed to mention his pioneering photographic work with Robert Adamson. But it is this body of work, much more than his paintings and engravings, that has lived on, inspiring successive generations of photographers and historians. The landscapes and architectural work that they accomplished are valuable records of a Scotland now changed. More significantly, however, they brought to the photograph the expressive power to record the personality of the sitters. In 1843, when Adamson started his studio, those in the know maintained a careful distinction between the daguerreotype and the photograph. Daguerreotypes, those magic little mirrors that were unique images on sheets of polished silver, had immediately taken over the province of the portrait. Photographs, which at the time meant images on paper, had lagged in this application. Perhaps part of this can be ascribed to the temperament of their inventor, William Henry Fox Talbot, for social contact was difficult for him and this shows almost inescapably in his photographs of people. Hill had no such problem and Robert Adamson ensured that the human contact he had made was expressed clearly and forcefully on a sheet of paper. The power and visual nature of Hill's and Adamson's images were likened to those of Rembrandt, and appropriately so, with their moody range of masses of light and shade. Nothing in the early history of the photograph can be compared to their body of work. 
Although Hill's and Adamson's photographs fell briefly from sight within Hill's lifetime, it was not long before they regained an enduring and well-deserved reputation as beautifully symbolizing the expressive power of a radical new art. The photographer Francis Caird Inglis (1876-1940), who took over Rock House about 1900, found many negatives and prints remaining there. The Glasgow photogravure master Thomas Annan (1828-1887) had made permanent carbon prints of Hill's Disruption painting. His son, J. Craig Annan (1864-1946), had been familiar with Hill's and Adamson's photographs since he was a child, and worked with Inglis to make new prints from the negatives (a practice natural at the time but roundly discouraged today) and permanent prints in carbon. It was through Annan that Alfred Stieglitz (1864-1946) became interested in this pioneering work, introducing it not only to the American public, but also to serious photographers worldwide. A nephew of Hill's, the bookseller Andrew Elliott, had taken over the shop and stock of Hill's brother Alexander. In addition to writing one of the early books on Hill's photographs, he commissioned Jessie Bartram to make sensitive carbon prints from the originals between 1913 and 1925. It was natural that Elliott's book should emphasize the contributions of his uncle and by the time Heinrich Schwarz had published his serious assessment in 1931 Robert Adamson was almost totally forgotten. Later historians have begun to appreciate the essentially symbiotic nature of this unique partnership, however, and it is not unusual to find their work today labelled (perhaps as it always should have been) as being by Adamson and Hill. Certainly there can be no meaningful separation of their individual contributions to their photographic masterpieces. 
Robert Adamson's command of the process of making prints in silver was as unusual as it was complete, and the original prints have proven to be among the most durable of all early photographs. More than 3000 are in the collection of the Scottish National Portrait Gallery in Edinburgh and many hundreds of other originals grace the collections of museums worldwide. Nearly 1000 of their original paper calotype negatives survive, the largest group at the University of Glasgow and most of the others at the Scottish National Portrait Gallery (with smaller deposits at the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, University of Texas, and at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York). By their very nature, Hill's lithographs and engravings are scattered but survive in numerous locations. His paintings fared less well, though the Perth Museum and Art Gallery, the National Gallery of Scotland, and the Hunterian Gallery in Glasgow each hold several, and numerous others are in collections worldwide. Many were purchased by patrons, and these are still coming to market. In addition to his photographic legacy shared with Robert Adamson, Hill's greatest influence was on the development of the arts in his native Scotland. The obituary in the 'Art Journal' (new ser., 9, 1870) observed that even though 'Mr. Hill's works may not rank with the highest productions of British artists, even with the best of those of Scotland, he did much to maintain the honour of the school to which he belongs... in the Art-circles of Edinburgh... his loss will undoubtedly be much deplored, and his absence from them deeply regretted. (p. 203)' The 'Edinburgh Evening Courant' (18 May 1870) stressed the character that had made it all possible, saying that Hill was 'very loveable and much beloved'. 


@@@@@


doc= 13271


Hill, Sir Dudley St Leger (1790-1851), army officer, the eldest son of Dudley Hill, of Welsh descent, and his wife, the daughter of Colonel John Clarges, was born in co. Carlow, Ireland. He was appointed ensign in the 82nd regiment on 6 September 1804, and exchanged the year after into the 95th rifles. As lieutenant he accompanied his battalion to South America in 1806, volunteered for the forlorn hope at Montevideo, and commanded the scaling party that captured the north gate of the city in February 1807. He was wounded and taken prisoner in the subsequent attack on Buenos Aires in June. He accompanied his battalion to Portugal in 1808, was present at Rolica and Vimeiro, was wounded at Benevente, and was present at Corunna. Returning to Portugal in 1809, he was present at the battle of Talavera and the operations on the Coa. 
In July 1810 Hill was promoted to a company in the Royal West India rangers, but remained attached to the 95th until appointed to the Portuguese army. He commanded a wing of the Lusitanian legion at Busaco in September 1810, and a half-battalion with some British light companies at Fuentes d'Onoro in May 1811. He commanded the 8th Portuguese 'cacadores' at the storming of Badajoz in April 1812, at the battle of Salamanca in July, and in the Burgos retreat, where his battalion lost heavily at the passage of the Carrion, and where he was himself wounded and taken prisoner. After exchange he again commanded his battalion at Vitoria; at the storming of San Sebastian in September 1813 he headed the attack of the 5th division, receiving two wounds, and was present at the repulse of the sortie at Bayonne in 1814. In these campaigns he was seven times wounded. 
At the peace Hill returned with the Portuguese army to Portugal, and served there; in 1820 he held a divisional command in the Portuguese service. He was made major in the newly raised 95th (Derbyshire) regiment in December 1823, from which he exchanged to half pay in January 1826. In 1834 he was appointed lieutenant-governor of the island of St Lucia, and took out with him the act of emancipation. He returned home on the occasion of his second marriage in 1838. He became major-general in 1841, and, after serving on the staff in Ireland, was appointed to a divisional command in Bengal in 1848, which post he held at the time of his death. 
Hill married, first, the third daughter of Robert Hunter of Kew, Surrey, with whom he had six children, and second, on 23 June 1838, Mary, widow of Mark Davies, of Turnwood, Dorset. Hill was made CB in 1814, knighted in 1816, and made KCB in 1848. He had the Portuguese orders of the Tower and Sword, and of St Bento d'Avis, the latter conferred in 1839. He was presented with a sword and two valuable pieces of plate by his native county. He was appointed to the colonelcy of the 50th regiment in 1849. He died at Ambala, Bengal, on 21 February 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 13272


Hill, Edwin (1793-1876), civil servant and inventor of postal machinery, was born on 25 November 1793 at Birmingham, the second of the eight children of Thomas Wright Hill (1763-1851), schoolmaster, and his wife, Sarah Lea (1765-1842), daughter of William Lea. His elder brother was Matthew Davenport Hill, and his younger brothers included Rowland Hill and Frederic Hill. Like his brothers, he was educated at his father's school and then set to teach there while still a boy. Later he took a post at the assay office in Birmingham and subsequently at a brass-rolling mill, also in Birmingham, where he rose to be manager. He was one of the signatories of the notice convening the Birmingham meeting of 22 January 1817 to petition for parliamentary reform. In 1819 he and his brother Matthew married sisters, respectively Anne (1793-1873) and Margaret Bucknall. Edwin and Anne had ten children, seven of whom survived him. 
In 1827, when the family school extended to Bruce Castle, Tottenham, in addition to the existing establishment at Hazelwood, Birmingham, Edwin Hill joined the enterprise and moved to Tottenham where Rowland took charge of the teaching. Edwin was mostly concerned with the commercial management, being too much interested in his mechanical experiments to give up much of his time to teaching. In 1840, with penny postage about to commence, it was necessary to expand the stamp office. Stamps had long existed as a tax-collecting device, but now the Inland Revenue was to supply the Post Office with the new postage stamps. Rowland was appointed to the Treasury to oversee the introduction of the system, and Edwin applied for the stamp-producing appointment, asking Charles Babbage for a reference in support. Here he remained, joined later by his son Ormond, until his retirement in 1872. 
Edwin's best-known invention was a machine for folding envelopes, which was shown at the Great Exhibition of 1851, though the patent had by then been bought by Warren De la Rue to whom it was there attributed. He invented many mechanical contrivances for the stamp department. At his retirement, a Treasury minute paid tribute to 'his resourcefulness and considerable mechanical ability which had contributed so much to the success of the new postage scheme'. He published pamphlets on currency (1848 and 1856) in which he was concerned with maintaining stability of monetary value while overcoming the swings of the business cycle between expansion and depression. He also published two pamphlets entitled 'Criminal Capitalists' (1870 and 1872) arguing that all enterprises needed both labour and capital, while the attack on crime was directed almost entirely at the labourers; he believed that a drive against landlords who housed criminals and receivers of stolen goods would be more productive. In particular, he wished to redefine the law to make it an offence to receive goods 'believing' them to be stolen. He died on 6 November 1876 at his home, 1 St Mark's Square, close to the entrance to the London Zoo, and was buried at Highgate cemetery. 


