@@@@@


doc= 13273


Hill, George (c.1716-1808), lawyer and eccentric, was born at Waddington, Lincolnshire, the eldest son of Nathaniel Hill MA (died 1732), rector of Waddington and lord of the manor of Rothwell, Northamptonshire. As well as his father, his brother and two uncles were clergymen. Hill's father died in 1732, and George broke with family tradition by pursuing a career in the law. 
Hill matriculated at Clare College, Cambridge, in 1733 and was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1734 and called to the bar in 1741. His practice seems to have been mainly 'chamber practice' of conveyancing and advice. On 6 November 1772, after thirty years of obscurity, Hill was created serjeant and king's serjeant. The explanation is possibly that Henry Bathurst, as the first tory chancellor since 1714, had difficulty in finding tory lawyers sufficiently senior for preferment. Hill held a reactionary view of recent legal development: he is quoted as saying that 'the greatest service that could be rendered the country would be to repeal all the statutes, and burn all the reports which were of later date than the Revolution' (Romilly, 72). On creation as serjeant he immediately gained an extensive practice in common pleas, as can be seen from the law reports of the period. In king's bench, however, he repeatedly clashed with the chief justice, Lord Mansfield. 
Mansfield used Hill's deafness and rather ponderous advocacy to make him the butt of jokes in court, and satirized his fondness for extensive reliance on old cases in preference to general principles, so that Hill acquired the nickname of Serjeant Labyrinth. However, after Mansfield's death, as the pendulum of legal patronage and culture swung towards the tories, Hill was transmuted from an 'old fool' -- his own account, to the young Eldon, of most young lawyers' view of him (Twiss, 93) -- to a respected, if eccentric, elder statesman of the bar. Nineteenth-century legal memoirs preserve numerous anecdotes about Hill's eccentricity -- reflecting both views; an unfriendly story tells of his accidentally producing a candlestick in court when he meant to produce a law report; a friendlier one of his ordering his servants to kill a fox which had been chased into his garden, and responding to the outraged hunt by producing a medieval case report which justified his action. 
Hill married, some time before 1761, Anna Barbara, daughter and heir of Thomas Medlycote of Cottingham, Northamptonshire, and they had two daughters. One anecdote tells of his becoming so absorbed in business that he had to be called to church to attend his wedding. Any expectations which Hill might have had of the marriage were disappointed on Thomas Medlycote's death, when he was found to have left all his property on trusts which gave his daughter only a separate property for life, and that provided that she returned to using her maiden name. On his wife's death (some time between 1793 and 1799) Hill said to Eldon (then attorney-general), 'I have lost poor dear Mrs Hill', and then, after a pause, 'I don't know, though, that the loss 'was' so great; for she had all her property, Mr. Attorney, to her separate use' (Twiss, 301). Hill died at his house in Bedford Square, London, on 21 February 1808, and was buried in the family vault at Rothwell, where there is an epitaph upon him by Bennett, bishop of Cloyne. An important collection of legal manuscripts was purchased from his executors by the Society of Lincoln's Inn, and is in the library there. 
Mansfield's attempt to make Hill a laughing stock was transmitted by Campbell's 'Lives of the Chief Justices' and has been followed by some modern authors. Hill, however, had the last laugh: for most of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries orthodox views of what made a 'sound lawyer' were closer to Hill's than to Mansfield's. 


@@@@@


doc= 13274


Hill, George (1750-1819), theologian and college head, was born in St Andrews on 22 May 1750, the eldest of the eight children of the Revd John Hill (died 1765) and his second wife, Jean McCormick (died 1796), daughter of his colleague John McCormick and a great-niece of William Carstares, the former principal of Edinburgh University. He was educated at the grammar school and university of St Andrews, graduating MA in 1765. During his second session of divinity studies at St Mary's College, Hill's scholastic ability attracted the patronage of the eighth earl of Kinnoul, then university chancellor and a key supporter of the moderate party in the Church of Scotland. Kinnoul encouraged Hill's uncle Joseph McCormick, the principal of the United College, to introduce Hill to the historian William Robertson, who subsequently recommended him as tutor to the eldest son of Pryse Campbell MP, one of the lords of the Treasury. In this capacity he travelled to London in 1767 and to Edinburgh in 1768, where he concluded his studies in divinity. During that time Hill became Robertson's protege, and was introduced to various ecclesiastical and literary figures, including David Hume. Hill became a member of the Edinburgh Speculative Society and a frequent visitor in the home of Henry Dundas. 
In 1772 Kinnoul made it possible for Hill to purchase the Greek professorship at St Andrews, a post which he held for the next sixteen years. Licensed to preach in 1775, he served as assistant at St Leonard's until he was appointed minister of the second charge of St Andrews by the town council in May 1780. On 7 June 1782 he married Harriet Scott (died 1825); they had twelve children, including Alexander Hill (1785-1867), later divinity professor at Glasgow. 
Highly esteemed as a preacher and as a lecturer, Hill zealously discharged his pastoral and academic duties for the balance of his career. In 1787 he was made DD by the University of St Andrews and was appointed dean of the Order of the Thistle. He became professor of divinity at St Mary's College in 1788 and principal in 1791. Hill was elected moderator of the general assembly in 1789, and was appointed one of the king's chaplains for Scotland in 1791 and a dean of the Chapel Royal in 1799. He became minister of the first charge of St Andrews in 1808. 
Hill's initial rise to national prominence was based on his management of Scottish ecclesiastical affairs on behalf of the Dundas interest. Upon Robertson's unexpected retirement from church politics in 1780 Hill quickly assumed the leadership of the moderate party in the general assembly, a role which he earned through his ability as a speaker, his business capacity, understanding of church law, and his conciliatory spirit. These powers of oratory and persuasion, coupled with the support of Dundas, enabled the moderate party to dominate the assembly for another generation. In spite of his spirited defence of patronage, Hill was also widely respected by evangelical leaders, and disputes over the practice subsided until after his death. 
While other moderate clergymen turned their abilities to 'improvements' in literature and science Hill devoted himself to the advancement of theology and theological education. 'Lectures in Divinity' (1821), which he prepared for publication prior to his death, became the standard textbook in Presbyterian seminaries in Scotland and America until after the mid-nineteenth century. In addition Hill also published 'The Advantages of Searching the Scriptures' (1787), 'Theological Institutes' (1803), 'Lectures upon Portions of the Old Testament' (1812), and a number of sermons. 
Hill's theology continued in the moderate common sense tradition by emphasizing the need for a rigorous defence of traditional Christianity in the face of Enlightenment scepticism, represented by Socinianism and deism. At the same time the 'Lectures' presented a concise, orderly exposition of Calvinism and endeavoured to limit the moderate tendency to rely upon natural theology by stressing the reliability and primacy of biblical revelation. In grappling with the claims of traditional orthodoxy and the priorities of the Enlightenment, Hill formulated a theology which increased the common ground between the moderate and evangelical factions and strengthened the church as a whole. This rapprochement was further enhanced by Hill's commitment to excellence in theological training and his encouragement of preaching that emphasized both doctrine and practical morality. 
While in many respects Hill was responsible for the dominance of the moderates during his lifetime, other aspects of his legacy furthered the demise of his party. His rigid social conservatism, his ecclesiology, which in many ways subordinated the church to the state, and his uniting of the fortunes of his party with the Dundas interest allowed the moderates to dominate the Church of Scotland during the reactionary Napoleonic era, but did little to prepare them for the evolution in social thinking which would follow. Theologically, his resistance to the notion that only naturalistic explanations of the origins and contents of the 'Bible' were acceptable may also help to explain why such liberal thought found little foothold in Scotland until well after 1850. It was the popularity of his 'Lectures' which may in part have helped to stem criticism during the nineteenth century. 
Hill died from a series of strokes on 19 December 1819 and was buried in the cemetery at St Andrews Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 13275


Hill, Sir Hugh (1802-1871), judge, was born at Graig, near Doneraile, co. Cork, the second son of James Hill and his wife, Mary, daughter of Hugh Norcott of Cork. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he took a BA in 1821, and kept two years' terms at the King's Inns before joining the Middle Temple in London. He practised with great success as a special pleader under the bar between 1827 and 1841, when he was called to the bar and joined the northern circuit. In 1831 he married Anoriah (died 1858), daughter of Richard Holden Webb, controller of customs; they had two sons, including James Eardley Hill, who also became a barrister. It is possible that Hill may have married twice, since one source, the 'Solicitors' Journal and Reporter', gives his wife's name as Georgiana Anne Audley. 
Hill became a QC in 1851 and on 29 May 1858 was appointed a judge of the court of queen's bench. He was made a serjeant-at-law and knighted at about the same time. Prolonged illness forced him to retire from the bench in December 1861. He died at the Royal Crescent Hotel, Brighton, on 12 October 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 13276


Hill, James (1697-1727), antiquary, was born on 7 February 1697 in the parish of St Nicholas, Hereford, the third son of John and Mary Hill. He was educated at Trinity College, Oxford, and called to the bar as a member of the Middle Temple in 1721. In 1717 he issued proposals for publishing by subscription a history of the city of Hereford in two parts, one on its ecclesiastical and the other on its secular development, with 'transcripts from original records', 'geometrical plans of the city, churches, monasteries, and chapels', and engravings of monuments, arms, ancient seals, and portraits of eminent persons. He proposed to follow this, if successful, by another volume on the county, but the work was still unfinished at his death. In 1718 he was elected FSA, and on 30 April 1719 was admitted FRS. He showed to the Society of Antiquaries in the year of his election a 'vast collection of drawings, views, inscriptions, plans, and observations in MS, the fruits of his travels in the west of England that summer' (Gough, 1.410). One of his drawings, a west view and ichnography of Tintern Abbey, Monmouthshire, was engraved by J. Harris for John Stevens's 'History of Antient Abbeys' (vol. 2, 1723, 57). When at a meeting of the Society of Antiquaries on 3 January 1722 it was resolved to attempt a complete history of British coins, Hill undertook to describe the Saxon coins in Lord Oxford's possession, while his own collection was to be catalogued by George Holmes, the deputy keeper of the records in the Tower of London. During the same year he exhibited to the society an accurate survey of Ariconium (near Weston under Penyard) and of Hereford. He also composed poetry, 'a beautiful soliloquy... on hearing a parent correct his child with curses' (Gough, 1.418). A long narrative poem on Roman Britain was apparently not completed. 
Hill was a friend of William Stukeley and Roger Gale, and, under the Celtic name Caradoc, a member of their Society of Roman Knights, which met to study Roman remains. By December 1725 he had acquired a house in Herefordshire, and although he told Stukeley he did not mean to leave London completely, lack of money apparently prevented him from returning. Early in 1727 he sent Stukeley his picture, in profile. He died in August that year, probably in Hereford, and was buried in Hereford Cathedral on 25 August. Verses on his death were published in John Husband's 'Miscellany of Poems' (1731), from which it appears that Hill wrote some lines on 'Eternity' about ten hours before his death. 
At Hill's dying request his father in March 1728 sent his Herefordshire collections to Samuel Gale, who found that, although Hill had done more than was supposed, his work was 'a mere embryo of what he had promised' ('Family Memoirs', 1.204-5), and therefore unfit for publication. In 1752 Isaac Taylor of Ross bought the papers from Hill's brother, a schoolmaster in Herefordshire, for John Roberts MB, also of Ross, who indexed them and added a further ten volumes. After Roberts's death in 1776 the whole collection again passed to Taylor, who sold it in 1778 to Thomas Clarke FSA, principal registrar of the diocese of Hereford. On Clarke's death in March 1780 it came to the Revd James Clarke, who still owned it in 1821. Clarke offered to sell it to John Allen the younger of Hereford, who had repaired some of the volumes in 1818, but they could not agree about the price. By 1833 the collection belonged to Thomas Bird of Hereford (died 1836). It passed to Robert Biddulph Phillipps (died 1864), who bequeathed it to Belmont Priory, near Hereford. It was later acquired by Hereford City Library. A collection of thirty-five ancient Herefordshire deeds, most of them marked with Hill's name, was given by Joshua Blew, librarian of the Inner Temple and a native of Herefordshire, to Andrew Coltee Ducarel. 


@@@@@


doc= 13277


Hill, James (d. 1817), actor and singer, was believed to be a native of Kidderminster, Worcestershire. He lost his father when he was four and was adopted and educated by his maternal uncle, John Hale (died 1782), rector of Albrighton, Shropshire. On the death of that uncle, Hill was taken to another uncle in Wolverhampton, who apprenticed him to a painter when he was sixteen. 
After a short visit to London, Hill went to Bristol, where he met William Dimond, the manager of the theatres there and at Bath. Although Dimond had no need for extra performers, Hill persuaded him to allow him to perform for a single night. This first performance was as Belville in the comic opera 'Rosina', by Frances Brooke, but the date and place are unclear; according to John Roach's 'Authentic Memoirs' and Thomas Gilliland's 'Dramatic Mirror', it occurred at Bristol in June 1796, but John Genest's 'Some Account of the English Stage' says 1 October 1796 at Bath. Hill so impressed Dimond on his debut that he was awarded a five-year contract. Under the recommendation of Ann Selina Storace, Hill studied under Mr Richards, the leader of the band at the Bath theatre, and also under Xamenes, and finally with Venanzio Rauzzini. 
After two years Hill was given permission to go to London and perform at Covent Garden in the 1798-9 season for $5 per week. His first performance in London was as Edwin in Leonard MacNally's comic opera 'Robin Hood', and he went on to play more than twenty-five roles at Covent Garden over the next eight years, eventually securing a salary of $12 per week. Perhaps his most successful role was as the original Sir Edward in Thomas Knight's comic opera 'The Turnpike Gate', which had twenty-seven performances in the 1799-1800 season. Hill's career in London ended at the end of the 1805-6 season, when he left Covent Garden as a result of some 'fancied' injury to his pride and is said to have gone to perform 'in the country' (Gilliland, 2.784). 
Although Hill never received huge accolades as a performer, he was described in the 'Authentic Memoirs' as attractive, 'with a pleasing figure' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'), and Gilliland made the following observation: 'as a performer little can be said in his favour, but as a singer he is entitled to our praise; and with a due attention to his vocal studies, he might stand very high in the profession' (Gilliland, 2.784). He was apparently popular with the ladies, though his enjoyment of pleasurable pursuits was probably detrimental to his career. 
It is not known when or to whom Hill was married, but a Mr and Mrs Hill performed at Edinburgh in 1810-11 and, according to the 'Biographical Dictionary of Actors', James Hill was the same man who, with his wife, joined a company headed by W. Adamson in Jamaica in 1816. According to the same source, Hill was involved with concerts there until his death at Mount Bay, Jamaica, on 27 June 1817, though his death was not registered in the 'Royal Gazette' in Jamaica for 1817. Administration of his estate was granted to his brother Charles Hill, a bachelor and doctor. 


@@@@@


doc= 13278


Hill, James John (1811-1882), painter, was born in Birmingham, the son of Daniel Hill of Broad Street, Birmingham. He was educated at Hazlewood School and studied at John Vincent Barber's academy in Birmingham, where Thomas Creswick was a fellow student. He worked for some years in Birmingham, chiefly as a portrait painter; among his sitters were the philanthropist the Revd Dr Samuel Wilson Warneford and Mrs Glover, founder of Spring Hill College. 
Hill moved to London in 1839, and in 1842 he was elected a member of the Society of British Artists. He was a frequent and popular contributor to its exhibitions until 1881, principally showing portraits, rustic scenes, and figures. He also exhibited at the British Institution (1848-55) and the Royal Academy (1845-68). He painted many portraits and several pictures of horses and dogs for Lady Burdett-Coutts, one of his most regular patrons. After some years in London, he began to concentrate on the fantasy subjects for which he is best-known. These were usually half-length figures, either singly or in small groups, studied from life, and with landscape backgrounds painted from nature. Many of the most effective were Irish studies, made on his frequent visits to Ireland from 1854. Several of his works were purchased by Herbert Ingram, founder of the 'Illustrated London News', and were published as lithographs in the weekly. He also painted figures in the works of the landscape painter Henry Bright. Later in his career Hill again changed direction and concentrated on landscapes, but these did not achieve the success of his rustic figures. He died of bronchitis at Sutton House, West Hill, Highgate, Middlesex, on 27 January 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 13279


Hill, Sir John (c.1625-1701), army officer, declared in 1695 that he was about seventy. A native of Kent, he evidently fought for parliament in the civil wars. In 1651 he was a captain in Fitch's infantry regiment when it occupied Inverness. A strong republican, by late 1653 he was in command at Ruthven Castle in Badenoch, and three years later was made major and justice of the peace. In May 1657 he was appointed governor of the fort at Inverlochy, where he enforced justice with previously unknown impartiality. He assisted in planting presbyterian ministers and established a schoolmaster at the Inverlochy settlement, enhancing its role in spreading English culture in Lochaber. In 1660, newly promoted to lieutenant-colonel, he was as General Monck certified 'singularly active and instrumentall in his Majestie's happy restauration' (Firth and Davies, 2.519). 
Monck decided that Inverlochy should be evacuated and dismantled, and Hill settled in Ireland, perhaps as a location more congenial for nonconformists. He may have married at this time: by 1690 he was a widower with daughters living near London. Sir Arthur Forbes, a royalist opponent in 1653, and later earl of Granard, was his principal Irish patron, and he was made comptroller of the household by the lord lieutenant, the earl of Essex. About 1679 he became steward at Belfast to the earl of Donegal and constable of Belfast's unfortified castle. In 1689 he persuaded Irish forces not to burn Belfast, using the support of the distant King James and a sympathetic Scottish Jacobite general, and his $300-$400 savings. The Williamite duke of Schomberg appointed him one of three temporary commissioners to manage the Ulster revenue. 
In March 1690 George Mackenzie, Viscount Tarbat, another former royalist opponent, brought him to Scotland to persuade the west highland chiefs to submit to the government of King William in return for money to buy out the Argyll family's destabilizing feudal rights over them. His negotiations were sabotaged by those conducted by John Campbell, earl of Breadalbane, intended to delay the government offensive for Jacobite ends. In July 1690 Major-General Hugh Mackay built Fort William on the Cromwellian foundations at Inverlochy, and left Hill as governor of what remained a precarious outpost. At his request William granted the adjoining settlement of Maryburgh a charter on 13 November 1690, as part of renewed plans to promote a civilian settlement in Lochaber. 
The garrison and Hill's prudent policies prevented the west highland clans from reassembling as a Jacobite army. He supported the presbyterian faction within the Scottish ministry, but in June 1691 the leader of the opposing faction, secretary Sir John Dalrymple (later earl of Stair), sent Breadalbane to the highlands to achieve a pacification. A cessation of arms was agreed and William proclaimed that the chiefs must take the oath of allegiance by 31 December 1691 before the privy council or sheriffs. Factional hostility and rational distrust of Breadalbane, combined with news that Breadalbane intended the destruction of Fort William (with the loss of Hill's employment and arrears), led Hill to join in unscrupulously undermining his cessation, which collapsed that autumn. 
Dalrymple just survived this set-back, but Hill and the Scottish commander-in-chief, Sir Thomas Livingstone, supposed, wrongly, that their involvement in the sabotage would lead Dalrymple to seize upon any further disobedience to justify their dismissal. Hill's feelings of insecurity were increased by distrust of his deputy governor, James Hamilton, in correspondence with Dalrymple and Livingstone. Late in December 1691 the major chiefs hurried to submit ahead of the government campaign. A minor chief, Alexander Macdonald of Glencoe, arrived at Fort William on 31 December, mistakenly supposing that Hill could administer the oath. He sent him with a letter to Inveraray, where he took the oath six days late. Many Glencoe Macdonalds had submitted earlier, and Hill's obligation to the clan was increased by the formal preliminary agreement he made for Glengarry's surrender on 31 December, intended to protect Glencoe also. He ignored an order from Livingstone to attack them if they held out. 
On 16 January 1692 Hill unexpectedly received William's instructions, including a conditional order to extirpate the Glencoe men as a warning, and Dalrymple's violent covering letter. Livingstone sent a still more violent letter to Hamilton emphasizing that destroying Glencoe was the way to win Dalrymple's favour. Hill considered the orders 'a nasty durty thing and was resolved rather to lay down his Comission then to have putt them in Execution' (deposition 2 July 1695, NA Scot., GD 406, bundle 633) but temporized, fearing dismissal and destitution, and hoping for a countermand. Giving the clause about Glencoe priority over William's main instructions, he let Glengarry submit on easy terms. By 12 February he had no pretext left for delay and, needing to reassert his authority over his officers, issued a brief authorization to Hamilton to march to Glencoe and execute Livingstone's orders. The massacre ensued the next morning. 
Hill recovered his courage, ignored orders to hunt down survivors and solicited permission to resettle them in Glencoe. His regiment kept order in the highlands despite being undermanned, and he again worked to moderate the council's more disruptive orders. He attended the inquiries into Glencoe of 1693 and 1695; in the latter he was exonerated, the beneficiary of a bargain whereby he suppressed material incriminating Livingstone, a member of the dominant faction, in return for weight being given to his real excuses. He was knighted about 1696. Late in 1697 he blundered in accepting the insincere protestations of Simon Fraser (later Lord Lovat) just before he seized and forcibly married the marquess of Atholl's daughter. On 1 February 1698 William ordered that Brigadier-General Maitland and his regiment should replace Hill at Fort William, sparking a plot to burn the fort, which Hill quelled. Hill retired on half-pay, having made only $1000 sterling during his time as governor, and died in April 1701 at Clockmilne, a suburb of Edinburgh near Holyrood, owed $202 10's'. by the government. Almost all his highland record was of disinterested and able service in a difficult borderland, but it is for his conduct during his one brief major lapse from these standards, driven by partisanship and moral cowardice, that he is chiefly remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 13280


Hill, John (d. 1735), army officer, was the youngest son of a London Turkey merchant, Francis Hill, and his wife, Elizabeth, the second daughter and coheir of Sir John Jenyns, of St Albans. His sister Abigail, Lady Masham, was a favourite of Queen Anne. The collapse of Francis Hill's business ventures reduced his children to a condition of dependence upon the patronage of their cousin Sarah Churchill, later duchess of Marlborough. The duchess clothed Jack (the name by which John was commonly known) and sent him to St Albans grammar school (1690-91), and thereafter used her influence at court as confidante to the future queen, Princess Anne, to find him a place -- first in 1692 as a page to Prince George and then in 1698 as one of the grooms to the bedchamber in the duke of Gloucester's household. After the duke's death Sarah had him transferred back to Prince George's household for a brief period in 1700. Hill's elder sister Abigail was also found a position within the royal household. 
Under the Marlborough influence Hill was commissioned a captain in the Grenadier Guards in November 1702 and in 1703 was appointed adjutant-general to the forces sent to Portugal. In May 1705 he was given the colonelcy of the 11th foot (the late Lord Stanhope's regiment) upon their return from Spain, having formed part of the garrison at Portalegre which capitulated in 1704. Hill's colonelcy owed as much to his sister's rising position at Queen Anne's court as to the Marlborough influence. The regiment was returned to full strength and in 1706 formed part of the expedition against the French coast under Earl Rivers, which was abandoned and sent to Lisbon. In 1707 Hill re-embarked with his regiment for Valencia and the onset of the campaign which culminated in the battle of Almanza. During the battle the 9th and 36th regiments were brigaded with the 11th under Hill's command and, although not immediately engaged, were led forward by Hill to stem the French advance and allow the remnants of the British force to make an orderly retreat. Hill, along with his regiment, was captured and taken prisoner. 
Having secured his parole and returned to England, Hill re-formed the regiment, which was sent to the Netherlands in the summer of 1708 to reinforce Marlborough's command. During 1709 it took part in the siege of Mons. On 26 September Hill was ordered to take his troops and break new ground close to the enemies' palisades, and he had to beat off a determined sally from the besieged fortress, with the loss of 150 killed or maimed -- including Hill himself, who was injured in the attack. 
By 1710 Hill's sister, now Lady Masham, had supplanted the duchess of Marlborough in the affections of the queen, and she used her position at court, together with her alliance with Robert Harley, reputed to be a cousin, to undermine the position of Marlborough and at the same time secure her brother's continued advancement. At the behest of Harley, Queen Anne proposed Hill for the vacant colonelcy of the late earl of Essex's regiment of dragoons. Marlborough, who, according to his duchess, had never rated Hill as a soldier, refused the commission on the grounds that the imposition of a younger officer with influence, over the claims of more experienced and deserving men, would weaken his authority and undermine morale. Relations with the queen rapidly deteriorated, and the duke was unable to resist the queen's subsequent demand in April that Hill be promoted brigadier-general. In May, Hill was further recompensed with a pension of $1000 per annum, to be held during the queen's lifetime. In parliament Marlborough overreached himself. An attempt by the whigs to have Lady Masham removed from court only strengthened the queen's search for a new ministry. Marlborough's political demise can be traced to this episode. 
Hill was elected a tory MP for the Cornish pocket borough of Lostwithiel in 1710, which seat he held until 1713. In the Commons he was fairly inactive, although, as the duchess of Marlborough mentioned in one of her more acerbic comments: 'when Mr Harley thought it useful to attack the Duke of Marlborough in Parliament... this honest Jack Hill, this once ragged Boy, whom I clothed, happening to be sick in bed, was nevertheless persuaded by his sister to get up, wrapped himself in warmer cloathes... to go to the House to vote against the Duke. (Green, 120-21)' Such now was the political enmity which existed between cousins.Hill's close connections with the Harley administration brought him further promotion. In 1711 Henry St John revived the plan for an expedition to take Quebec and, to gain the queen and Abigail Masham's support, proposed Hill as the commander-in-chief. Marlborough's powers of promotion had been placed in the hands of a board under the duke of Ormond and advancement was given to those who opposed the duke. Hill was duly dispatched in April 1711 with a force of 6000 men. However, on account of poor navigation in bad weather the expedition came to grief, without a shot being fired, in the St Lawrence River with the loss of 800 men, and it returned to England. Jonathan Swift, a close social and political confidant of Hill, reported that he was 'privately blamed by his own friends for want of conduct. He called a Council of War, and therein it was determined to come back' (Swift, 9 Oct 1711). This apparent lack of leadership was doubtless a sad confirmation to Marlborough, yet the expedition's miscarriage did not prevent Hill's continued rise, socially and professionally, during the tory administration. 
In June 1712 Hill was made lieutenant-general of the ordnance (having failed to win the governorship of the Tower) and was given command of the force sent to garrison Dunkirk upon the treaty of Utrecht. The governorship of Dunkirk was a further favour from St John, who sought to strengthen his position through the appointment of friends. In July 1712 Hill was promoted major-general and in November he returned to London to be sworn a member of the privy council. He did not stand for election in 1713, perhaps due to talk of a peerage, never realized. 
In London, Hill's conviviality, a source of some strain to his personal health, was recognized by his election to the board of brothers, or 'society', as Swift termed a small congenial club of men of wit, learning, or influence formed by himself and St John. From Dunkirk, Hill maintained his connections with Swift through the gift of a snuff-box, of which the recipient declared, ''tis allowed at court, that none in England comes near to it' (Swift, 7 Aug 1712 and 12 Aug 1712). A gathering of the club hosted by Hill at his London house in January 1713 was described by Swift as 'the greatest dinner I have ever seen' (ibid., 25 Jan 1713). In February 1714 Hill was instructed to return to Dunkirk in his capacity of commissioner to inspect the fortifications, but he was present in Whitehall in August for the accession of George I. 
Upon the Hanoverian succession Hill lost all his offices, although his commission as major-general was renewed. He sold the colonelcy of his regiment in July 1715 and went into retirement. Both he and his sister retained their tory political sympathies and support for Bolingbroke, who was rumoured to be at Hill's London house for meetings with friends in 1717 ('Stuart Papers', 56, 5.236). Hill remained unmarried, living at his seat at Egham, on the borders of Berkshire and Surrey, and his London house in Jermyn Street, where he died on 19 or 22 June 1735, some months after his sister. He left his estate to his nephew Samuel, second Baron Masham. 
Hill's military career, which owed little to personal merit, offers an insight into the politics of Queen Anne's court, where first the influence of his cousin, the duchess of Marlborough, and later that of his sister propelled forward his career and social advancement. His career, moreover, played a prominent role in the downfall of the duke of Marlborough. 


@@@@@


doc= 13281


Hill, Sir John (bap. 1714, d. 1775), physician and actor, second surviving and fourth-born son of Theophilus Hill (1680-1746) and his wife, Ann Susannah ('nee' Yorke), was baptized on 17 November 1714, probably in the region of Peterborough. Hill's father, who had a Cambridge medical degree, climbed the clerical ladder at Peterborough Cathedral from prebend in 1710, to minor clerk in 1719, and canon in 1720, before resigning seven years later in favour of his first-born son, Theophilus ('b'. 1706); he later became curate of Denham parish in Buckinghamshire. 
Little is known of John Hill's early years before he was apprenticed to the London apothecary Edward Angier in 1730-31. One source current until the late nineteenth century held that he was a strolling player from 1730 to 1735, but this is unsubstantiated. However, Hill's fascination with the theatre is definite, vying with his interest in botany as chief among his lifelong preoccupations. In 1738 he started collecting specimens for Lord Petre, and at some point between then and 1742 he married Susannah Travers, daughter of the steward of Richard Boyle, third earl of Burlington, though no record of the marriage survives. Hill worked as an apothecary in a shop close to the Strand, London, and during the years 1739-40 the second duke of Richmond, Lennox, and Aubigny commissioned Hill (probably as a result of an introduction from Petre) to collect specimens for him from England and Wales. This relationship continued into 1741, with Hill taking up residence at Goodwood House, the Sussex seat of the Richmonds. At Goodwood, a fashionable seat of learning, literature, and theatre (the castle boasted its own theatre), Hill met a number of the theatrical community including Owen MacSwinney, David Garrick (then at the beginning of his career), and Peg Woffington. Hill acted on the Goodwood stage, continued to collect botanical specimens, and wrote his 'Orpheus, an Opera'. On 2 July 1742 Petre died, making Richmond Hill's sole employer. During his flirtation with theatricals at Goodwood, Hill became infatuated with Peg Woffington, who did not return his feelings. By 1743 Hill had finally broken away from Goodwood and settled in Westminster, retaining his interest in his original apothecary shop. Perhaps inspired by the new wave of 'natural' acting given vogue by Garrick in the 1740s, Hill went on to act in several plays, putatively at Drury Lane and Covent Garden. He studied acting with Charles Macklin and in 1744 played Lodovico in his 'Othello' at the 'little theatre' in the Haymarket. Hill 'seems to have been the only person who regarded the experiment as a success' (Duerr, 241). 
During this time in London, Hill began seriously to promote and expand his interest in natural science, becoming acquainted with significant naturalists and fellows of the Royal Society such as Martin Folkes, Sir Hans Sloane, Henry Baker, William Watson, and James Parsons. Hill's scientific publications consequently began to grow and multiply. In 1746 he published Theophrastus's 'History of Stones' in addition to two papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. Despite his publications and circle of friends, Hill's attempts to join the Royal Society in 1747 failed. Notwithstanding, in 1748 he published a 'History of Fossils' and translated Pomet's 'Complete History of Drugs'. In 1749 he assumed two editorships: of the 'Monthly Review' (anonymously), and of the 'British Magazine', in which his column 'The original spectator' was carried over from the 'Monthly Review'. As an editor he was responsible for reducing the use of capitals and thereby reforming the prevailing eighteenth-century style and taste in such matters. 
Hill's 'The Actor' appeared in 1750. It was the first English acting treatise to discuss the personal and emotional attributes of the actor rather than the rhetorical conventions of performance that had characterized earlier acting manuals. 'The Actor' was a thinly disguised adaptation of a French original, 'Le comedien' by Pierre Remond de Sainte-Albine. (The second edition of 'The Actor' in 1755 expanded on the first, making more extensive reference to the English stage; this version was translated back into French by Antonio Sticotti as 'Garrick, ou, Les acteurs anglais' and influenced Denis Diderot's 'Paradoxe sur le comedien'.) Also in 1750 Hill published two satires on the Royal Society ('Lucine sine concubitu' and 'A Dissertation on Royal Societies'), sinking his hopes of ever being elected. Despite this deeply resented set-back (and perhaps because of it), Hill continued to publish prolifically in the sciences. In 1751 'A Review of the Works of the Royal Society', 'A History of the Materia medica', and 'A History of Plants' appeared. These were joined by non-scientific titles such as 'The Adventures of Mr George Edwards' and 'The History of a Woman of Quality'. Moreover, on 5 March of this year, his column in 'The London Daily Advertiser and Literary Gazette' announced him to the world as 'the Inspector', a journalistic cognomen by which he became universally recognized, especially among the 'habitues' of the Bedford Coffee House. Hill also acquired an MD degree from the University of St Andrews. In 1752 his 'Essays in Natural History and Philosophy' completed the third volume of his system of the natural world, 'A History of Animals'. Some time during that year Hill moved to 12 Hart Street, Bloomsbury, London. 
The next year marked a departure on Hill's part away from scientific publications, perhaps because he had stopped collecting specimens. A miscellany of works materialized, including: 'The Conduct of a Married Life', 'Observations on the Greek and Roman Classics', and 'The Story of Elizabeth Canning', the last being based upon a contemporary incident concerning a servant girl (Canning) who went missing for twenty-eight days citing abduction for the purposes of prostitution. Hill opposed strongly the view of Henry Fielding, who considered the girl's story to be truthful. Hill then engaged with Fielding in a pamphlet war. Like all men of principle, Hill had a penchant for making powerful enemies, especially among the 'literati' (Smollett and Richardson, for example). Hill was also satirized as an 'archdunce' in 'The Hilliad: an Epick Poem', having made an enemy of its author, Christopher Smart. 
During 1753 Hill wrote his last 'Inspector' column, and married for the second time. In September 1753 Henrietta Wilhelmina Jones (died 1789), the sister of Charles Jones, fourth Viscount Ranelagh, became Hill's wife at St George's Chapel, Hyde Park, London. 
Despite being pursued by publishers, Hill had an unaccountably unproductive year in 1754. Garrick (at Drury Lane) and John Rich (at Covent Garden) refused Hill's 'The Critical Minute: a Farce'. However, Hill managed to publish 'Urania', a dictionary of astronomy, and 'The Useful Family Herbal'. His output in 1755 was more prolific, with the publication of 'Thoughts Concerning God and Nature', 'The British Herbal', and second editions of 'The Actor' and 'The Useful Family Herbal'. His 'Naval History of Britain' (1756) made a timely appearance just before the commencement of the Seven Years' War. Hill's writing continued apace: 1757 saw his attentions turn once more to the sciences, with 'Eden, or, A Compleat Body of Gardening' and 'The Sleep of Plants, and Cause of Motion in the Sensitive Plant'. Hill finally secured the patronage of Lord Bute and published a long list of titles, including: 'The Construction of the Nerves', 'The Virtues of Wild Valerian', 'An Idea of a Botanical Garden in England', 'The Management of the Gout', 'The History of Insects', 'A Method of Producing Double Flowers', and 'The Gardener's New Calendar'. All were published in 1758. He also made another sally at entering the theatre world with his farce 'The Rout', which proved to be prophetically titled, with Garrick breaking off for ever with Hill in 1759. In that year too, at the instigation of his patron Bute, Hill began his 'magnum opus', 'The Vegetable System' (1759-75), a work which eventually ran to twenty-six volumes. The work cost Hill a considerable amount of money, some of which he recouped through the sale of herbal medicines such as 'the essence of water-dock', 'tincture of valerian', and 'pectoral balsalm of honey'. Other botanical titles of 1759 included 'Virtues of Honey', 'Usefulness of Knowledge of Plants', 'Proliferous Flowers', and 'A Practice of Gardening'. In this year too he published his 'Cautions Against the Immoderate Use of Snuff', a curiously prescient tract which associates tobacco with cancerous growths. Hill also bought a property in Bayswater, London, and began to help Bute to lay out Kew Gardens. His 'Flora Britanica', published in the same year, was the first Linnaean flora of Britain. Although volumes one and two of 'The Vegetable System' were published in 1761, Bute was becoming less and less involved in the project as his star rose (to prime minister in 1762) and fell (in 1763, when he was out of office). As a result of the impact of 'The Vegetable System' on the continent, Hill found himself corresponding with European scientists such as Haller and Gesner. He became ill in 1764, perhaps from the effects of gout and dropsy; his 'Centaury, the Great Stomachic', a book of herbal remedies, followed in 1765, and in 1766 he published 'Hypochondriasis, a Practical Treatise on the Nature and Cure of that Disorder'. 
Ever-straitening financial circumstances in 1767 spurred Hill to export his herbal remedies to the American colonies. Among his publications the following year were: 'A Method of Curing Jaundice', 'Polypody', 'Hortus Kewensis', and 'A New Astronomical Dictionary'. However, Hill's scientific reputation was not enhanced by suspicions at home and abroad by those who found it difficult to cope with his 'distorted mind and personality' (Rousseau, xxxii). Failing health brought Hill close to death, and he made a will on 1 January 1769. Fully recovered in the spring he researched his 'Construction of Timber'; volume fourteen of 'The Vegetable System' was published and he commenced work on the next volume. The 'Family Practice of Physic' and 'Herbarium Britannicum' followed at the end of the summer. In 1770 Hill lived almost exclusively at his house in Bayswater surrounded by his plants and herbs, quitting but not disposing of his property in St James's (Arlington Street). The 'Vegetable System' grew to volumes fifteen and sixteen, and Hill continued to correspond with Carl Linnaeus and Albrecht von Haller, exciting the German's praise in particular for 'The Construction of Timber'. 'Cautions Against the Use of Violent Medicines in Fevers', and 'Fossils Arranged According to their Obvious Characters' also appeared in 1771. In the following year, Hill sent Linnaeus a copy of 'The Vegetable System' and found himself being presented at the Swedish court (not for the first time), where he was in good standing. 'Sparogenesia, or, The Origin and Nature of Spar' appeared the same year. 
In 1773, despite being handicapped by a return of ill health, Hill nevertheless managed to publish volumes twenty-one to twenty-two of 'The Vegetable System', in addition to 'Twenty-Five New Plants', 'A Decade of Curious and Elegant Trees', and 'Plain and Useful Directions for those who are Afflicted with Cancers'. In 1774 he was awarded the order of Vasa by Gustavus III of Sweden, which honour was conferred at the English court some time between 1 and 10 June. The last year of Hill's life, 1775, saw the publication of the final volumes of 'The Vegetable System', in addition to 'Inquiries into the Nature of a New Mineral Acid Discover'd in Sweden' and 'Circumstances which Preceded the Letters of the Earl of Mexborough'. Following further travels to the Netherlands, Hill returned to England because of continuing sickness. He died at his home in Golden Square, London, on Wednesday 22 November 1775, and was buried at Denham in Buckinghamshire; no monument remains. A will and testament of 8 November names his wife and Martha Constance Hardy as his executors. The year after Hill's death, his wife undertook to extract from Lord Bute the thousands of pounds which were allegedly promised to Hill. In 1788, after unsuccessfully pursuing litigation against Bute, she published 'An address to the public, by the Honble Lady Hill; setting forth the consequences of the late Sir John Hill's acquaintance with the earl of Bute', trying him in the court of public opinion and ascribing to him the loss of her husband's health and fortune. In 1779 'A Short Account of the Life, Writings and Character of the Late Sir John Hill, MD' was published. After the death of Hill's widow in 1789, their daughter and sole executor, Juliana, acquired Hill's medical papers and secret herbal preparations. She sold the latter to the druggist Benjamin Shaw in 1802. 
Given that his knighthood was a foreign award, Hill was something of a prophet without honour in his own land. He enjoyed the company of influential people but infrequently won their favour and loyalty. Indeed he was generally reviled in his day. Hogarth included Hill in his basket of hated works in his 'Beer Street' satire. Garrick famously remarked of him: 'For Physick and Farces, his Equal there scarce is, His Farces are Physick, and his Physick a Farce is' (Little and Kahrl, 1.299). In 'The Rosciad', Charles Churchill satirized Hill as a 'Proteus' '
For who, like him, his various pow'rs could call 

Into so many shapes, and shine in all? 

Who could so nobly grace the motley list, 

Actor, Inspector, Doctor, Botanist? 
('Rosciad', 69)' However, behind these disparagements lie unintended compliments. In Garrick's epigram there is the admission that Hill was without equal; and in Churchill's lines there is the recognition that Hill truly had a wide-ranging, protean curiosity. According to Samuel Johnson, 'Dr Hill was... a very curious observer; and if he had been contented to tell the world no more than he knew, he might have been a very considerable man' (Boswell, 383). But Hill did not know when to temporize, nor did he suffer fools gladly. Slender, and close to 6 feet in height, Hill was a tall poppy ripe for cutting down, and the age in which he lived obliged. His reputation has been somewhat reclaimed since. At the end of the millennium, Hill was recognized as less of a quack and dilettante, and, to use George Rousseau's phrase, more 'a type of Renaissance man in the eighteenth century' (Hill, ix). 


@@@@@


doc= 13282


Hill, John Harwood (1809-1886), Church of England clergyman and topographer, son of Robert Hill of Lincoln and Leamington, and his wife, Mary, was born at Louth, Lincolnshire, and baptized there on 3 October 1809. Robert Gardiner Hill (1811-1878) was a younger brother. On 30 June 1830 he was admitted a pensioner of Peterhouse, Cambridge. His marriage on 8 December 1833 to Maria Ann Jiggins (1815-1874) brought them a large family, including John Daniel Hill, staff surgeon to the Royal Free Hospital, London. 
In 1834 Hill graduated BA, was ordained deacon at Carlisle, and became curate of Glaston, Rutland. The following year he was ordained priest at Peterborough and moved to become curate of Corby, Northamptonshire, and librarian to Lord Cardigan at Deene. He compiled a black-letter catalogue of the Deene library, with etchings of his own. In 1837 he was appointed by Lord Cardigan rector of Cranoe, and by the lord chancellor in 1841 vicar of Welham, both near Market Harborough, Leicestershire. In August 1846 the church at Cranoe was badly damaged in a storm and through Hill's efforts a new church was built in 1849 by subscription. The church at Welham was also restored during his incumbency and in 1838 the rectory at Cranoe was rebuilt, largely at his expense. Hill was appointed surrogate for the diocese of Peterborough in 1852. 
Hill was author of several works, of which the earliest was 'The chronicle of the Christian ages, or, Record of events ecclesiastical, civil, and military to the end of 1858' (1859). His 'History of the Hundred of Gartree' was published in two parts: 'The History of the Parish of Langton' (1867), which was originally designed to raise funds for the rebuilding of the church at Tur Langton, and 'The History of Market Harborough' (1875); both volumes included several other parishes and were illustrated with Hill's own etchings. Hill was the local secretary of the Leicestershire Architectural and Archaeological Society and contributed some seventeen articles to its 'Transactions' on a wide variety of local history and genealogical subjects. He was also a corresponding member of the Royal Archaeological Institute. On 12 January 1871 he was elected FSA. He died at Cranoe rectory on 3 December 1886 and was survived by Sarah ('b'. 'c'.1848), his second wife. He was buried in Cranoe churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 13283


Hill, Joseph (1625-1707), nonconformist minister, was born at Bramley, near Leeds, Yorkshire, in October 1625. His father, Joshua Hill, was minister successively at Walmsley Chapel, Lancashire, and Bramley Chapel, and died in 1632, a few hours before the arrival at his house of a citation for not wearing a surplice. Joseph Hill attended school at Pocklington, Yorkshire, and was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, on 20 August 1646, graduating BA in 1649. He became a fellow of Magdalene College, proceeding MA there in 1651. Hill knew the young Samuel Pepys, admonishing him on 21 October 1653 for having been 'scandalously overseene in drink the night before' (Pepys, 'Diary', 1.67). Hill was a popular tutor at Magdalene and served as senior proctor in 1658. In 1660 he kept the act for the degree of BD, and when he declined to conform in 1662 the authorities 'cut his name out of their books in kindness to him' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.81), preventing his formal ejection. He was a lecturer between 1660 and 1662 at All Hallows Barking. When he met Pepys again in July 1661 Hill was less censorious than he had been eight years earlier. Over glasses of wine in a tavern in Pope's Head Alley he was confident that 'the King now would be forced to favour Presbytery, or the City would leave him' (Pepys, 'Diary', 2.141). Despite the loss of his fellowship, and with the act against conventicles soon to pass the Commons, Pepys found Hill continuingly optimistic for the future of the church. 
This could not be sustained for long, and Hill, 'considering the dissensions in England about Church government, etc, resolved to settle beyond sea, that I might be quiet' ('Letters of Eminent Men', 1.254). At Leiden he stayed for two years with Matthew Newcomen, pastor of the English church there, entering Leiden University as a student on 29 March 1664. He returned in 1666, during the Second Anglo-Dutch War, landing on the Suffolk coast in a Dutch vessel, together with many other English persons. Papers in his possession were confiscated and he was pronounced 'as dangerous a person as could have been sent... to do the Dutch intelligence from England' ('CSP dom.', '1665-6', 520). The documents found on him seem to have been quite innocuous. They included a request to procure the release of a Dutch minister held prisoner in Chelsea College, and a letter dated 3 July 1666 from Richard Mayden, minister of the English Reformed church at Amsterdam, to Peter Herringhooke, a merchant of London. This revealed that Hill wished to marry the writer's daughter Elizabeth, and had come over to settle his estate in England. He was imprisoned, but was shortly released, having undertaken not to return to the Netherlands. After the war hysteria died down, however, he did return, married Elizabeth Mayden, and following his election on 19 June 1667 was invested on 7 August as minister of the Scottish church at Middelburg, Zeeland. 
There Hill remained until 1673. In that year, following the French invasion of the Dutch republic and the revolution which had brought William of Orange to power, he committed to the press of Amsterdam anonymously, under the guise of a patriotic Dutchman, 'a well-wisher to the Reformed Religion, and the welfare of these countries', 'The Interest of these United Provinces, being a Defence of the Zeelanders Choice'. On the title-page he laid out his position: '
I. That we ought unanimously to defend ourselves. 

II. That if we cannot, it is better to be under England than France, in regard of Religion, Liberty, Estates and Trade. 

III. That we are not yet come to that extremity, but we may remaine a Republick, and that our Compliance with England is the onely meanes for this. 

' The ostensible audience for the book was Dutch; it was an exhortation to maintain the war effort against the French. Hill's book, a quite substantial work, interesting for the knowledge it displays of the diplomatic history of the century, contended that English policy had for too long been distorted by a fixation upon the danger from Spain. This had been cleverly encouraged by the dangerous and aggressive French: 'how far they have overgrown Spain in power... so great they overshadow us all' (sig. P2). Translated into English, the book can be read in the light of a second audience as part of the propaganda war being waged by William III and his agents to win over public opinion in England and so pressure Charles II into breaking his alliance with the French. Yet with its argument that it was better to be subjected to the English enemy than the French and talk of compliance rather than alliance, it was perhaps a rather more ambiguous work. Where it was unambiguous was in its warning against the French threat, and following complaints from the French ambassador the Dutch authorities found it politic to order, on 19 August 1673, that the author be expelled until the end of the war. As he later recorded it Hill was 'banichsed, 'duranto bello', by a Frenchified party in the States' ('Letters of Eminent Men', 1.254). 
The ambiguity of Hill's position is further highlighted and perhaps explained by his reception on his return to England: Charles II rewarded him with the sinecure rectory of Llandinam, Montgomeryshire, worth $90 a year. Hill arranged that his nephew, John Spademan, later a fellow minister at Rotterdam, should be presented to the living (as he was on 18 December 1674), but should pass its profits to him. This arrangement was challenged in 1689 by the dean and chapter of Bangor on the grounds that Spademan had not taken the requisite oaths and was in the Netherlands anyway, so that the living was vacant in fact and in law. On 8 August 1696, after much dispute, the diocese agreed that Hill should be paid $70 a year. The original grant and its continuation were almost certainly a payment for Hill's activities as a government agent. In or before 1702 Hill wrote to the earl of Nottingham: complaining that 'my sine-cure was wrested from me by a punctilio by law' he offered to continue to perform the work he had done for previous secretaries of state. Obscure references in Aphra Behn's correspondence hint that he may already have been an agent by the late 1660s, though the firmest evidence comes from the 1690s. 
Among Hill's most lasting achievements was his expanded version of Schrevelius's Greek-Latin lexicon, published in 1663. Another achievement was reported, though not perhaps purely out of altruism, on 25 June 1677, by William Millington, a London auctioneer, who wrote to Hill of his 'great Service done to Learning and Learned men in your first advising and effectually setting on foot that admirable and Universally approved way of selling Librarys by Auction amongst us' ('Calamy rev.', 265). Hill left England soon afterwards. On 13 January 1678 he was instituted as a minister of the English Presbyterian church at Rotterdam. On 1 September 1681 Hill wrote to his old acquaintance Pepys explaining his emigration: 'being tired with the buss of both parties in London, I retired hither, where I live to my owne content in great peace and quietness, above the frownes of fortune and below the envy of my enemies' (ibid.). On 17 June 1687 Hill was in touch with Richard Baxter about the distribution of his 'Methodus theologiae', reporting the relief occasioned in the Netherlands by the news of the latter's release from prison. Further letters to Pepys from Rotterdam of 16 November and 7 December 1697 provided unofficial briefings on the negotiations leading to the treaty of Ryswick, and offered assistance to Pepys in the preparation of 'your great work of your Naval history' (Pepys, 'Private Correspondence', 145). In 1707 Hill found it necessary to complain to Robert Harley that he had not been paid for his services as a government agent since the late 1690s, at the same time offering to sell him his coin collection. Hill was an indefatigable student and book collector, retaining to the last his habit of reading, though his memory had nearly gone. He died at Rotterdam on 5 November 1707. 
Hill is sometimes confused with his namesake Joseph Hill, not least because the latter also served, between 1699 and 1718, as a minister in the English Presbyterian church at Rotterdam. 


@@@@@


doc= 13284


Hill, Joseph (1667-1729), Presbyterian minister, was born at Salisbury on 11 October 1667, of godly parents. After receiving his early education from Thomas Taylor ('c'.1614-1677), an ejected minister, he entered the free school at Salisbury before he was seven, where he remained for nine years. He was then sent to Charles Morton's celebrated academy at Newington Green, until it was broken up two years later, in 1685, as a result of persecution. After studying for a year under Samuel Sprint at Andover, Hampshire, where he became proficient in Hebrew, he returned to London to complete his studies 'with such who had been Mr Moreton's pupils, who attended at this time weekly lectures, read to them by Mr Glascock' (Wood, 30). As a result he was noticed by Richard Stretton, who recommended him as chaplain and tutor to Lady Irby (died 1695), with whom he lived for nearly seven years. He was ordained on 23 June 1694 with Edmund Calamy and others. 
Hill was minister of the Presbyterian meeting at Swallow Street, Westminster, until 1699, when he accepted an invitation to be minister of the English Presbyterian Church at Rotterdam. He was called to the meeting at Haberdasher's Hall, Cheapside, on 16 February 1718 and remained there until his death. He was an orthodox subscriber at the Salters' Hall controversy in 1719. Shortly before his death he was chosen to preach the expository lecture on Wednesday evenings at Little St Helen's meeting-house. His only publication was a sermon preached to the society. Hill was not a popular preacher, and the congregation was left in a very declining state. It revived briefly under Stephen Ford, but the church was dissolved in 1734. Hill and his wife, Martha, had no children, and he died in London on 21 January 1729. Hill has been confused with his more celebrated namesake and fellow Presbyterian minister Joseph Hill (1625-1707). 


@@@@@


doc= 13285


Hill, Joseph Sidney (1851-1894), missionary and bishop in Africa, was born at Barnack, near Stamford, Northamptonshire, on 1 December 1851, son of Henry Hill, builder, who died at the age of twenty-five; his mother, a domestic servant, accepted help to send him to the Orphan Working School, Haverstock Hill, London, when he was nine. He was deeply affected by the death of a friend (whose surname, Sidney, he added to his own as a Christian name) and he determined to become a missionary. He applied to the Church Missionary Society (CMS), entered its preparatory institution at Reading in 1872, and proceeded to its college at Islington, London, in 1874. Hill was made a deacon by the bishop of London in 1876, and shortly afterwards, on 31 July 1876, he married Lucilla (died 1894), daughter of Thomas Leachman, and proceeded to Lagos in west Africa. Within a few months he and his wife became seriously ill and they were forced to return to England. 
Hill next served as a curate in Richmond, Surrey, for a year before being sent by the CMS to New Zealand. He was appointed to Wairoa, Hawke's Bay, and was ordained priest in 1879. He was to work among the Maori but had little support from his fellow missionaries and found the Maori language very difficult to master. He therefore applied to work in Auckland and resigned from the CMS in 1882. In Auckland he served mainly as a missionary and as a prison chaplain. He returned to England in 1890, again as a missionary, with the Revd W. Hay Aitken; the following year he offered to go to west Africa once again with the CMS. 
The CMS's west African mission was in a state of crisis, brought on first by the actions of intolerant young European missionaries who condemned the leadership of Bishop Samuel Crowther and his fellow African clergy in the Niger delta. The missionaries had also attacked the CMS for its failure to back them in the way they thought appropriate, and the society pusillanimously conceded to many of their demands. However, Crowther then died, at the end of 1891. In this context it was inevitable that the west African church had a very strong commitment to Crowther's successor being an African, while the missionaries and their supporters in England had an equally strong conviction that he must be a European. The latter won the day, and in 1892 Hill was their choice. 
Hill was widely acceptable, having many of the personal qualities required to deal with the intensity of feeling in England and in west Africa, where there was now a danger that a church independent of Anglican structures might be created. Archbishop Benson, who was far more sympathetic to the African perspective than the CMS, insisted that Hill went to west Africa, as his commissary, prior to his consecration, to investigate the situation and to find two African assistant bishops. Hill did so in 1892, and he produced a fair-minded report which steered a middle course between the CMS (by then in effect anti-African) and the west Africans. His consecration, together with that of the two African assistant bishops he had chosen, followed on 29 June 1893. He left for west Africa in November 1893, but on 6 January 1894 he died of blackwater fever, in Lagos, where he was buried. His wife died the next day and four other missionaries died within a fortnight. 
Hill's successor was another Englishman, Herbert Tugwell (1855-1936), whose nomination and consecration were pushed through with great and unusual haste in order to reduce the build-up of new pressure for the appointment of an African. This appointment was much resented in west Africa and the CMS became even more distrustful of non-European leadership. Tugwell, however, was often at variance with the CMS. Instead he came to see the need for, and the propriety of, African oversight at every level in the church. 


@@@@@


doc= 13286


Hill, Matthew Davenport (1792-1872), penal reformer, was born on 6 August 1792 at Suffolk Street, Birmingham, the eldest of the eight children of Thomas Wright Hill (1763-1851), schoolmaster, and his wife, Sarah Lea (1765-1842). Two of his five brothers attained professional eminence: Rowland Hill (1795-1879), postal reformer, and Frederic Hill (1803-1896), inspector of prisons. Two other brothers had successful, if more obscure, careers: Edwin Hill (1793-1876), civil servant, and Arthur Hill (1798-1885), schoolmaster. Hill's mother was the daughter of a factory worker. His father, a convert to Unitarianism, bought a school of his own in 1803 which, in 1819, after one earlier move, was transferred to Hazelwood in Hagley Road, on the outskirts of Birmingham. 
Hill was educated at Wolverhampton and in his father's schools. As the eldest son of an impecunious schoolmaster, he was expected to shoulder responsibility at an early age. By 1804 he was teaching others; at the age of sixteen he was principal teacher. From about 1816 he and his brother Rowland, having become disenchanted with their father's educational ideas and methods, launched a series of reforms with the aim of making Hill Top (as it was known from 1804 to 1819) 'a thoroughly good school'. These reforms included changes in the curriculum, for which Matthew was chiefly responsible, and the creation of an entirely new disciplinary structure, the effect of which was to place real responsibility for running the school in the hands of the pupils. These reforms were described in 'Plans for the Government and Liberal Instruction of Boys in Large Numbers' (1822), which was re-issued in 1825 with 'Public Education' prefixed to the title. Though published anonymously, this was probably written by Hill. The book, which was widely and favourably reviewed, won Hazelwood the admiration of Jeremy Bentham, with whom Hill became friendly; Hill also acquired an international reputation, and a large influx of new pupils. 
On 11 July 1814 Hill entered Lincoln's Inn, thereby becoming the first person from Birmingham to go to the bar. For several years he continued to live at Hill Top, owing to his inability to support himself in London. In 1816 he began to keep terms, but it was not until 1818 that he finally left the family home. While studying the law Hill supported himself by teaching and journalism, reporting parliamentary proceedings for the 'Morning Herald' and the 'Sunday Review'; the latter was a weekly journal which Hill ran with two friends, John and Samuel Steer. In his teens Hill had been a regular contributor to the 'Midland Chronicle'. The comparative poverty and inactivity of Hill's early years as a barrister encouraged him to continue his literary activities, and he contributed to Charles Knight's 'Quarterly Magazine' under the pseudonyms of William Payne and Martin Danvers Heaviside. 
On 3 November 1819 Hill married Margaret Bucknall, the elder daughter of a Kidderminster brewer. They had six children. These included Florence Davenport Hill (1828/9-1919) ['see under 'Hill, Rosamond Davenport], a poor-law reformer; Alfred Hill (1821-1907), registrar in the Birmingham court of bankruptcy; Rosamond Davenport Hill (1825-1902), a member of the London school board and a juvenile reformatory activist; Matthew Hill (1834-1892), professor of clinical surgery at University College, London; and Joanna Margaret Hill (1836/7-1901) ['see under 'Hill, Rosamond Davenport], who was also actively involved in social issues. Until 1851, when they moved to Bristol, the Hills lived in or near London, including in Chancery Lane, Chelsea, Hampstead Heath, and Haverstock Hill. 
Hill was called to the bar on 18 November 1819. He took chambers at 44 Chancery Lane and joined the midland circuit. As a young lawyer he was associated with several notable cases, including 'R. v. Borron', an action arising out of the Peterloo massacre. In 1820 he represented John Cartwright, founder of the London Corresponding Society, and Jane Carlile, when she was prosecuted for selling seditious literature. Hill won the reputation of a champion of radical political causes, representing the rioters at Nottingham during the 'Reform Bill' crisis (1831), and the Rebecca rioters in south Wales (1843). However, while Hill emphasized his radicalism when it suited him to do so, and was one of the early supporters of women's enfranchisement, he was no revolutionary. Later, as an MP, he described himself as being 'of Whig principles inclined to radicalism' ('Dod's Parliamentary Companion'). In line with the whigs, he advocated parliamentary reform as a means of averting revolution. He favoured universal suffrage only in the distant future, accepted without question the guilt of the Tolpuddle martyrs, and criticized trades unionism as 'the parent of unnumbered evils'. In 1848 he enrolled as a special constable to combat the Chartist threat. 
After severing links with his family's school, Hill's educational interests centred upon Henry Brougham's Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (SDUK). He was present at the society's inaugural meeting and remained an active member until its demise in 1846. Hill conceived the idea for the 'Penny Magazine', the SDUK's most successful publication, which at its height attained a circulation of approximately 200,000 copies per issue. 
Hill was elected MP for Hull in December 1832, his candidacy having been sponsored by various leading whigs and radicals, including Lord Althorp and Thomas Attwood. Although he spoke on a range of subjects, including religious toleration, the colonization of South Australia, the abolition of 'taxes on knowledge', and electoral and criminal law reform, his political career was blighted by his injudicious allegation, subsequently retracted, that the Irish MP Richard Lalor Sheil was publicly opposing a coercion bill while privately supporting it. In the general election of January 1835, Hill finished bottom of the poll -- a victim, he insisted, of tory bribery. He never stood for parliament again. 
In 1834 Brougham, the lord chancellor, appointed Hill a king's counsel with a patent of precedence. Hill thereupon gave up work at the criminal bar; for several years his most lucrative field of practice was the presentation and defence of election petitions before committees of the House of Commons. He also appeared in the 'habeas corpus' case of the Canadian prisoners (1838-9), and for many years he represented Baron De Bode in his fruitless efforts to secure compensation for family property confiscated during the French Revolution. In May 1839, at an annual salary of $300 (increased to $400 a few years before his retirement in 1866), Hill was appointed recorder of Birmingham. He soon became embroiled in a bitter dispute with the town council over the court's conduct and management; this dispute was to continue for some sixteen years. More importantly, for more than a quarter of a century the recordership provided Hill with a public platform from which, through his addresses or charges to grand juries, he could air his views, particularly on matters of penal and criminal law reform. Many of these charges were collected and published as 'Suggestions for the Repression of Crime' (1857). They, more than anything else, established Hill's reputation as a 'criminologist' and penal reformer. 
Hill was not an original thinker. Rather, he was a significant adapter, synthesizer, and publicist of others' ideas. Hill's penological views were much influenced by Alexander Maconochie, whose 'mark system' was based on the notion of prisoners earning their release not by serving a pre-determined period of confinement but by gaining, through labour, a prescribed number of 'marks'. Hill was instrumental in Maconochie's appointment to the governorship of Birmingham gaol (1849-51). After Maconochie's dismissal, Hill became chief spokesman for the 'mark system'. Under the influence of Walter Crofton, chairman of the directors of the Irish convict prisons, and others, Hill modified Maconochie's ideas, which themselves were not wholly original, into a scheme for indefinite confinement, release from which, if it came at all, would be earned through reformation alone. Most prisoners would pass through various stages before release, commencing with a period of severe treatment, which might include chaining, solitary confinement, and corporal punishment, and concluding, several stages later, with release on licence and post-release assistance. Recidivists, serious offenders, and those who showed no signs of reform would be imprisoned for life in high-security gaols with no prospect of release, their morale sustained simply through the prospect of improving their conditions through good conduct. 
Hill's penal and criminological ideas have been termed harsh but they were more a combination of severity and enlightenment. Although he favoured the incarceration of suspected thieves who were unable to prove legitimate means of support -- a proposal which, when it was made in 1850 and again in 1851, excited a great deal of largely hostile press attention -- he felt that minor offences, such as garden robbery by juveniles, should attract no punishment. He also believed some first offenders could be placed on probation, that juveniles should be neither flogged nor transported, that some prisoners should gain early release on licence, and that former prisoners should receive aftercare. As recorder he was able to put some of these ideas into practice. His practical reforms included participation in the formation of two discharged prisoners' aid societies: in Birmingham in 1856 and in Bristol in 1864. 
Whether advocating leniency or severity, Hill was guided by three principles: first, that the object of criminal jurisprudence should be the reduction of crime to the lowest possible amount, the treatment of the criminal being a means to an end, not an end in itself; second, that retribution should not be a consideration in the punishment of the offender; and third, that since the deterrence of offenders was uncertain the object of punishment should be the prevention of re-offending, either through reformation or by incapacitation, including capital punishment and permanent incarceration. It followed that he sought to assist those who genuinely wished to reform, but to punish ruthlessly recidivists, those who broke faith with the trust placed in them, and those who showed no inclination to reform. 
Hill played a prominent part in the controversy over the early release of convicts on so-called 'tickets-of-leave' or licences. In place of transportation to the colonies the 'Penal Servitude Act' of 1853 provided for the initial subjection of prisoners to a harsh discipline, the severity of which would be progressively relaxed, subject to good behaviour, as the sentence proceeded. The final stage, ostensibly reserved for those who gave evidence of reformation, was early release on licence. In 1855 Hill, though a strong supporter of the ticket-of-leave principle, criticized the indiscriminate and lax way in which the licensing was administered by Joshua Jebb, chairman of the directors of convict prisons. It was revealed that Hill himself had passed excessively long sentences of penal servitude on offenders who had no chance of early release. Two years later, he criticized the 'Penal Servitude Act' of 1857, which established definitively that those sentenced to penal servitude were entitled to early release, and which also allowed for the release on licence of some convicts after only thirty months in confinement. He accused Jebb and the home secretary, Sir George Grey, of thereby 'sapping the vitals of reformatory treatment'. The garrotting panic of the early 1860s produced a public outcry against tickets-of-leave, a backlash against reformatory treatment, and an era of harshness in penal policy. By 1862 Hill was complaining to Brougham that 'it is next to impossible to obtain a hearing on the subject of reformatory treatment' (Brougham MSS). 
On the basis that 'evil courses are less painful to break through in youth than in age', Hill particularly concerned himself with the problems of juvenile crime and punishment. As recorder he witnessed a cycle of juvenile crime, conviction, confinement, release, and re-offence. He favoured two strategies as a means of breaking the cycle: probation and institutional reformatory care. As counsel at the Warwick sessions Hill had seen an embryonic probation scheme in action. It had involved the return of those who were not hardened criminals into the care of respectable and responsible parents and employers. In 1841 he introduced a refined version of the scheme in Birmingham, recruiting the assistance of the borough police to monitor its operation. Although the legality of probation was 'questioned in high quarters', Birmingham's police believed that probation was associated with encouraging rates of reformation. 'The Spectator' (3 Jan 1844) described it as 'a sound principle of correctional discipline'. Encouraged, Hill urged adoption of the practice elsewhere, but when it was tried in Middlesex it failed owing to a shortage of surviving parents, co-operative employers, or responsible friends. In the 1850s, having used probation in over four hundred cases, Hill discarded it himself, preferring to send errant juveniles to reformatories. 
Impressed by the results achieved by juvenile reformatories, especially at Mettray in France and Stretton-on-Dunsmoor in Warwickshire, Hill pressed for child offenders to be sent to institutions financed by a combination of public, parental, and charitable funds. To this end he campaigned on several fronts: in the press, in evidence to select committees, in correspondence with MPs, in charges to grand juries, and at conferences he had arranged with others of like mind. Above all, Hill made use of an extensive network of personal contacts to disseminate his views. One of those with whom he worked closely, especially after he moved to Bristol, was Mary Carpenter. Together they organized the influential reformatory school conferences which were held in Birmingham in 1851 and 1853. In the wake of the Birmingham gaol scandal, parliament passed the 'Youthful Offenders Act' of 1854. This provided for Treasury and parental support for voluntary reformatory schools, to which juvenile offenders sentenced to at least fourteen days' imprisonment could be sent for periods of between two and six years. The measure did not meet all of Hill's objectives. He was particularly opposed to the preliminary punishment of offenders before transfer to a reformatory. But, as he informed Lord Brougham, he was willing to 'snatch at the present good within our reach and not indulge sickly taste for the Utopian' (Brougham MSS). Thereafter he did much to spread the reformatory ideal and press for swifter implementation of the 1854 act. 
Hill was commissioner of the Bristol and district court of bankruptcy from 24 March 1851 to 31 December 1869, when the office was abolished. On accepting this post Hill withdrew from private legal practice; on relinquishing it he was granted a gratuity of $1800. An active temperance campaigner and supporter of co-operation, Hill was a co-founder of the Law Amendment Society (founded in 1844) and prominent in the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science (founded in 1857). Aside from the works already cited, Hill published numerous periodical articles and pamphlets, chiefly on legal and social questions. He edited 'Remains of Thomas Wright Hill' (1859) and, with two of his daughters, 'Our Exemplars Poor and Rich' (1861). 
From his early twenties Hill was also a regular European traveller. On several occasions he toured Great Britain, Ireland, and the continent, including for the purpose of inspecting prisons and reformatories. In personality he appears to have been earnest, ambitious, pompous, and arrogant. In a sympathetic 'Memoir' his daughters acknowledge his short temper, as did his brother Frederic. In appearance Hill was somewhat corpulent and, in later life, heavy-jowled. From early childhood he suffered poor health. He was subject to depression, which, unless he kept himself busy, brought on physical illness. In the 1860s ill health twice prevented him from giving oral evidence to select committees. His retirement in January 1866 from being recorder of Birmingham was occasioned by an attack of acute bronchitis. Hill's wife, Margaret, who had grown increasingly deaf with age, died on 31 October 1867. Hill himself died after a 'painful illness' ('The Times'), 'induced by failing strength, the result of old age' ('Law Journal'), at his home, Heath House, Stapleton, near Bristol, on 7 June 1872. He was buried next to his wife in Arnos Vale cemetery, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 13287


Hill, Nicholas (1570-c.1610), philosopher, was born in Fleet Street, London, and was educated first at Merchant Taylors' School, then as a scholar at St John's College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 21 July 1587 as 'plebei filius'. His parents are unknown. On 30 June 1590 he was admitted as a fellow of the college, but within a year he had been deprived ('amotus'), probably on account of his conversion to Roman Catholicism. Thereafter college records state that he 'went away, applied himself to the Lullian doctrine, and published certain questions in philosophy', and that he was dead by 1621 at the latest. The philosophical questions here mentioned are set out in his only published work, 'Philosophia epicurea democritiana theophrastica' (Paris, 1601). 
So much may be stated confidently. For the rest of his personal life there is only hearsay evidence collected sixty years after his death. This consists of two independent and incompatible accounts uncritically combined by Anthony Wood in his 'Athenae Oxonienses' (1691-2). One of these, supplied to him mainly through John Aubrey, by Thomas Henshaw (who afterwards disclaimed it), rests ultimately on London gossip and statements ascribed to Edmund Sheffield, first earl of Mulgrave (1564-1646), whose qualifications as a source are unclear. It contains some demonstrable absurdities. The other account came through intermediaries at Oxford -- Joseph Maynard and Obadiah Walker -- from the scientist Robert Hues. Since Hues moved in the same circles as Hill and had spent his last sixteen years at Oxford, his testimony has much greater weight and, though indirectly reported, deserves respect. 
From this it appears that, after leaving Oxford, Hill was for some time associated with Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, the patron of Thomas Harriot and afterwards of Hues himself, and so was to some extent involved in the 'atheist' or 'deist' circle of Northumberland and Sir Walter Ralegh, with whom Aubrey independently describes him as 'intimate'. Although a professed Catholic, Hill shared the unorthodox views of this circle. According to Hues 'he professed himself a disciple of Jordanus Brunus'. This is clearly true: the 'Lullian doctrine' to which he had applied himself was what Bruno had taught in Paris, and in his own writings Hill supports the main cosmological ideas of Bruno -- a heliocentric system, atomism, the eternity of matter, the infinity of the universe, and the plurality of worlds. Hill had probably discovered Bruno's ideas in Oxford where Bruno's visit to the university in June 1583 was well remembered, especially in St John's College. Such ideas were acceptable in the Northumberland-Ralegh circle: Northumberland himself was interested in Bruno and acquired his works. 
However, by the late 1590s Hill had apparently found a new patron. According to Hues, he then 'joined himself to Mr Basset, who, after Queen Elizabeth's death pretended some right for the crown; but King James being admitted, and possessed, he fled and lived in Rotterdam...'. This statement has been dismissed by C. J. Robinson in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' as 'a gossiping story', but it is very specific and the episode itself is authentic. Sir Robert Basset, a restless Devon partisan of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, was reported in 1598-1600 to be turning to popery under the influence of 'one Hill', 'a lewd fellow Hill', and in 1600 he conceived a wild plan to seize Lundy island and declare himself heir to the throne. In 1603, on the queen's death, he actually attempted to carry out this plan, but the result was a fiasco and he fled abroad. It may be that Hill, on learning of this project in 1600, took fright and himself fled abroad -- perhaps to Paris, where he published his book in 1601. The book contains some curious passages compatible with such a scenario, and Hill's eccentric dedication of it to his own infant son Laurence provided him with a pretext to denounce previous patrons who, he implied, had betrayed him. This obscure episode, never publicized at the time but confirmed by the state papers, would have been known to Hues through his then patron Ralegh, a Devon man familiar with the Basset family. 
Hill's 'Philosophia epicurea', a sequence of 509 propositions in natural philosophy, is topical in another respect too. In 1600 Giordano Bruno had been burnt at the stake in Rome, and it has been suggested, by Jean Jacquot, that Hill's book was a tribute to his memory. But if so, Hill was careful to cover himself: he cites Bruno (as 'Nolanus') explicitly in a marginal note only; he states, in the title and in the dedicatory epistle, that he is offering hypotheses only ('proposita simpliciter, non edocta'); and he declares that if any of them is contrary to the Catholic faith, 'igni illud et inferis mando' ('I commit it to the flames and hell'). And if he published the book in Catholic Paris, the centre of Lullian studies, he sought safety for himself in protestant Rotterdam. 
According to Hues, Hill died in Rotterdam, from taking poison because of distress at the death of his own son. Henshaw told Wood that Hill died 'in or about 1610', a detail which he may have derived, indirectly, from Hill's widow, who was living in London 'behind Bow church' about 1637. Like her husband, she was a Roman Catholic, but her identity is unknown. 
Hill's book made no impact in contemporary England except as a butt for the Jacobean wits. Ben Jonson tilted at his 'atomi ridiculous' ('Epigrams', no. 133). Reprinted in Geneva in 1619, it was violently attacked by Mersenne in his general onslaught on Bruno and the deists in 1623-5. But later, when heliocentric and atomist ideas had been made acceptable by Galileo and Gassendi, Hill was occasionally remembered as an erratic precursor, and in the 1660s he was described by Aubrey as 'one of the most learned men of his time, a great mathematician and philosopher and traveller and poet', whose unprinted works had by then unhappily been lost. 
These unprinted works are said to have included a treatise -- clearly Brunian -- 'De infinitate et aeternitate mundi' and another, 'mighty paradoxical', 'on the essence of God, etc., light, proving that there is a God, in 10 or 12 articles'. In the Bodleian Library, MS Wood F 42 fol. 174 seems to be a translation of part of the former, and MS Tanner 306 fols. 110-12 -- a Latin poem of eighteen lines -- probably formed part of the latter. Another short Latin poem, inscribed and signed by Hill himself, is in the 'album amicorum' of Sir Francis Segar in the Huntington Library (MS HM 743, fol. 82). A manuscript commonplace book now in the Brotherton Library of Leeds University (MS Lt 52), which contains a note, 'written by my cosen Mr Nicolas Hill', may be by him. If so, it is presumably an early compilation: it shows an interest in a hermit life and Catholic mysticism but no Lullian or Brunian ideas. 
From his writings Hill seems to have been a crotchety, difficult, and reclusive man, with few friends, his affections being concentrated on his little son, whose 'thousand pretty tricks' enabled him to forget his personal resentments and whose death 'of a pestilential disease' in Holland precipitated his own. 


@@@@@


doc= 13288


Hill, Pascoe Grenfell (1804-1882), Church of England clergyman and author, son of Major Thomas Hill, was born at Marazion, Cornwall, on 15 May 1804. He was educated at Mill Hill School, London, and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1836. In the same year he was ordained priest, and became a chaplain in the Royal Navy. During his service at sea he saw much of the slave trade on the African coast and published two accounts of his experiences. The first, 'Fifty Days on Board a Slave-Vessel in the Mozambique Channel' (1844), went to several editions in Britain and the United States and was reissued as late as 1993, being of value for its firsthand account of the shipping of slaves. In 1845 he was placed on the retired list. 
On 26 January 1846 Hill married Ellen Annetta (surname unknown). They had at least two sons before her death on 18 April 1878. From 1852 to 1857 he was chaplain of the Westminster Hospital, and for some time morning reader at Westminster Abbey. On 26 January 1863 he was appointed rector of St Edmund the King with St Nicholas Acons, Lombard Street, City of London, where he continued until his death. A high-churchman, he provided a succession of preachers for his church, improved its choir, and held short services in the middle of the day. He was the first to introduce a surpliced choir into a City church. 
As well as his works on slavery Hill wrote: 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1845), a volume, mainly of love poems, whose publication he later regretted; 'A Journey through Palestine' (1852) and 'A Visit to Cairo' (1853); and also historical works and a 'Life of Napoleon' (3 vols., 1869). He died at home at the rectory house, 32 Finsbury Square, London, on 28 August 1882, and was buried in the City of London cemetery at Ilford. 


@@@@@


doc= 13289


Hill, Richard (1655/6-1727), diplomat and public servant, was born at Hawkstone, Shropshire, and baptized at Hodnet on 23 March 1656, the second son of Rowland Hill ('bap'. 1623?) of Hawkstone and his wife, Margaret Whitehall of Doddington, Shropshire. From Shrewsbury School, Hill was admitted on 18 June 1675, aged nineteen, to St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1679, proceeded MA in 1682, was ordained deacon, and was a fellow between 1679 and 1692. He served as a tutor to the Burlington family and then to that of Laurence Hyde, first earl of Rochester and lord president of the council, who advanced his career. A meeting with Richard Jones, earl of Ranelagh, paymaster-general to the army, led to his appointment as Ranelagh's deputy in Flanders. His financial skill both saved him from the disgrace that was Ranelagh's lot and helped him amass a large fortune. His father is reported to have said: 'My son Dick makes money very fast: God send that he gets it honestly' (Blakeway, 181). A moderate tory, he was distrusted by his whig employers, as the Marlboroughs' and Godolphin's correspondence displays. Speaker Richard Onslow held that his wealth 'was all acquired by himself... without any reproach as to the means of it that I ever heard of' (Burnet, 4.318). 
Hill held office in England as a lord of the Treasury from 1699 to 1702 and a lord of the Admiralty from 1702 to 1708, but his most notable service was on the continent. In 1696 he was sent to Brussels as envoy, and William III, whom he admired greatly, sent him to Turin in 1699 to congratulate Victor Amadeus II, duke of Savoy, and his duchess, respectively second and first cousins of both William and Mary, on the birth of an heir. He had little taste for the envoy's life abroad, complaining that 'there is neither beef, nor veal, nor mutton which an Englishman can eat' (M. Lane, 'The Nineteenth Century', 1927, 562), but his 'clear parts,... his easy access and affable way', as well as his being 'a favourite with both parties' ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 145) fitted him for diplomatic life. According to a 1720 dedication to William Robinson, bishop of London, who had been lord privy seal, William III 'did often declare that he had never employed two ministers of greater vigilance, capacity and virtue than yourself, my Lord, and the Reverend Mr Hill' (Wheatly). In 1703 Queen Anne sent him again to Turin, via The Hague, where he laid his plans with the Dutch to bring the duke of Savoy into the War of the Spanish Succession against Louis XIV. 
Victor Amadeus's duchy, caught between France and the empire, would be put at risk in a war, but war also presented the prospect of repossessing territory lost earlier to the French. The duke had previously proved an unreliable ally, deserting the allies in 1696, and Hill and his Dutch colleague worked hard and at last successfully to gain the full commitment of a ruler who was 'a very absolute Prince and will have everything his own way' ('Diplomatic Correspondence', 1.315). England's subsidy to the duchy was agreed at last, and 'wee were a little out of humour, the Envoy of Holland and myself, to come so far and make so ill a bargain for so much money' ('Diplomatic Correspondence', 1.316), but Victor Amadeus then made a further demand, forcing Hill's reluctant agreement -- at a price. Nottingham, Hill's chief, and Marlborough favoured taking advantage of the diversion provided by the Camisard revolt in the Cevennes to mount an invasion of France from Piedmont, with Huguenot refugees and former Vaudois insurgents to be recruited, and with Sir Cloudesley Shovell's fleet in support. Hill constantly argued against the scheme, as is evident from his very full correspondence, more than 600 letters copied and put in order in his retirement. Hill was his own man and risked offending even Marlborough. He said of De Miremont, the Huguenot general sent from England, that 'he knows no more of what is doing in the Cevennes than the post-man does' ('Diplomatic Correspondence', 1.351). His scepticism was vindicated by the failure of his planned diversion on the French coast to help the Catalans, in which the four frigates at his disposal ('my little fleet') took part, the Camisard element having lost heart at rumours of their leader Cavalier's peacemaking ('Diplomatic Correspondence', 1.343-87). When he asked later for the ambassadorship to The Hague another was appointed who, wrote Godolphin, 'will have no whimseys of his own but will be sure to follow your [Marlborough's] instructions' (Snyder, 2.146). 
Hill placed the greatest importance on the lowest rated of his instructions. He was 'to give your best attention to the Vaudois... to let them know your willingness to intercede for them' and 'very earnestly to press the Duke to revoke all such edicts as have lately been made against them' ('Diplomatic Correspondence', 1.4). The Vaudois, a medieval heretic sect, later protestants, who had suffered centuries of persecution by the dukes of Savoy, were guaranteed toleration by a secret clause of the 1690 treaty, and in 1696 by an edict which had become a dead letter by the duke's abrogation of the treaty. Hill made it his business to gain reaffirmation of this clause in the new treaty, thus making the allies guarantors for the Vaudois. After many disappointments he made the granting of the extra subsidy demanded by the duke conditional on 'the liberty of conscience of the Vaudois, which I do demand' ('Diplomatic Correspondence', 1.389). In recognition of this and of the funds he collected in England and the benefits he gained for them the Vaudois pastors placed him 'at the head of our Nehemiahs' ('Diplomatic Correspondence', 2.973). In retirement he continued to serve the Vaudois, conveying funds to them until the 1720s. The Vaudois link survived his death for a century or more: in 1825 by order of the House of Commons the 1690 and 1704 treaties were printed in order to hold the allies of the time to their duty to protect the Vaudois, who were again under threat. 
Hill's bid for The Hague ambassadorship having failed he was given a final appointment to Brussels but withdrew. His health was bad and, as he had inscribed on his marble monument in Hodnet church, he was 'militiae fessus et viarum' ('tired with war and travel'). In his three-quarter-length portrait he looks haggard, especially compared with an earlier oval study. He lived quietly as tenant at Cleveland House, St James's, and in his own house at the Old Palace, Richmond, where 'he was much resorted to by the most eminent persons of the time [and] the Royal family shewed him very particular regards' (Burnet, 4.318). He refused a bishopric in hope of that of Ely, which was not realized, and became a fellow of the Royal Society, DCL of Oxford (1708), and fellow of Eton College (1714), where he enjoyed his own chambers. Arthur Onslow, who knew Hill, found that his letters 'proved him to have been a very considerable person, and made for higher stations than he arrived to' (Burnet, 4.318). For want of such stations he devoted his great wealth to consolidating the family's Shropshire estates and to providing from them for three nephews, especially Rowland Hill (1705-1783), later father of Richard Hill (1732-1808) and Rowland Hill (1744-1833). He rebuilt Hawkstone to his own design but Attingham Park later became the Hills' grandest seat. Hill died on 11 June 1727 at Richmond and was buried in the family vault at St Luke's Church, Hodnet. The Vaudois, who have survived and prospered, remember and honour him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13290


Hill, Sir Richard, second baronet (1733-1808), religious controversialist, was born on 6 June 1733 at the family seat -- Hawkstone Park, near Shrewsbury -- the eldest son in the family of ten children of Sir Rowland Hill (1705-1783), landowner, who had been created first baronet in 1727, and his first wife, Jane, the daughter of Sir Brian Broughton. The evangelical preacher Rowland Hill (1744-1833) was his younger brother, and his great-uncle was the diplomatist Richard Hill (died 1727). He was educated at Shrewsbury grammar school (1743) and at Westminster School (1744-8) before matriculating from Magdalen College, Oxford, on 8 December 1750. He was created MA on 2 July 1754. He went on the grand tour to Italy with Charles Bruce, fifth earl of Elgin, during 1756 and 1757, and from February to July recorded their travels in a notebook. Hill made a second trip to Italy in 1790-91, this time in the company of his half-brother, the Revd Brian Hill; they travelled south to Naples and spent almost two months in Sicily. 
Greatly troubled by an overwhelming conviction of his own sin, Hill returned to Oxford, where he experienced an evangelical conversion on Saturday 18 February 1758; he recorded that he felt a new sense of peace and assurance and took communion 'as never before' the following day. His newly found faith strengthened by hearing the sermons of Thomas Haweis at St Mary Magdalene, he joined a small Methodist society that met regularly in Oxford. The expulsion of six students from St Edmund Hall in 1768, for having attended Methodist prayer meetings, sparked off a pamphlet war. Hill leaped to their defence with an anonymous pamphlet, 'Pietas Oxoniensis' (1768), in which he scathingly denounced the college and the vice-chancellor for punishing the students for holding Calvinist beliefs that, he argued, were 'the ancient, undoubted, received tenets of the Church of 'England'' (p. 57). Having acquired a taste for religious controversy, Hill vigorously participated in the often bitter debates in the Methodist movement between those who adhered to Arminian doctrines, led by John Wesley, and those who held Calvinist convictions, whose principal champion following George Whitefield's death was Augustus M. Toplady. Hill mainly sparred with Thomas Olivers and John William Fletcher but his 'Review of All the Doctrines Taught by the Rev. Mr. John Wesley' (1772) drew a response from Wesley himself. He accused Wesley of teaching that a 'second justification' by works was necessary for salvation, and ruthlessly listed the contradictory doctrinal statements made by Wesley. By the end of 1773 Hill sought a reconciliation with Wesley, and the two men met for the first time and shook hands after a service conducted by Thomas Pentycross. 
In May 1780 Hill was elected to parliament as MP for Shropshire; he represented his constituency, without facing a contest, for twenty-six years. He adopted an independent and moral position on political issues; characteristically his maiden speech, on 19 May 1781, was delivered on a 'bill for better regulation of the Sabbath'. Convinced that peace in America should be the primary concern of Lord North's ministry, he voted against the government in 1781-2 and in favour of the peace preliminaries presented by Lord Shelburne in February 1783. He proved a steadfast supporter of William Pitt after he had come to power, late in 1783. His speeches were lengthy, pious, and full of misguided attempts to use humour to convey his moral and political arguments; his comparison of the coalition of North and Charles James Fox to an alliance of Herod and Pontius Pilate had the house in stitches -- at his expense. Despite his best efforts to bring religion into political debates his method of larding his speeches with scriptural quotations alienated rather than convinced his fellow MPs, in stark contrast to William Wilberforce, who successfully championed the evangelical cause in parliament. 
Following his father's death, on 7 August 1783, Hill succeeded to the baronetcy and Shropshire estates, which brought him an income of over $15,000. He became embroiled in controversy with the high-church Anglican apologist Charles Daubeny from 1798 to 1800, after Daubeny had attacked evangelical preaching for damaging the established church. Hill replied with three pamphlets: 'An Apology for Brotherly Love and for the Doctrines of the Church of England' (1798), 'Reformation Truth Restored' (1800), and 'Daubenism Confronted and Martin Luther Vindicated' (1800). In 1803 the controversy continued, when George Pretyman Tomline, bishop of Lincoln, severely censured evangelical preaching in his charge; Hill warmly defended the evangelical clergy from Tomline's accusations. 
Hill was a keen supporter of the British and Foreign Bible Society but failing health prevented him taking a more active role in its work. Soon after the dissolution of parliament in autumn 1806 ill health forced him to give up his seat, and he retired to Hawkstone. He died there on 28 November 1808, and was buried in a vault known as the Sepulchre of the Hills in the nearby parish church of Hodnet, Shropshire, where a monument was erected to his memory. He never married, and was succeeded as third baronet by his younger brother John, the father of Rowland Hill, first Viscount Hill, and of Sir Thomas Noel Hill. 


@@@@@


doc= 13291


Hill, Robert (d. 1423x5), justice, was one of a west-country family that included several lawyers in the later fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. His father was perhaps also called Robert. The relationship of the Hills to each other is not always clear, and particular care is needed to distinguish the judge from his contemporary namesake, Robert Hill of Spaxton, Somerset, who was son of Sir John Hill, justice of the king's bench from 1389 to 'c'.1408, and who died in 1423 after a career in estate management in Somerset and Devon. 
Robert Hill the future judge doubtless began his legal career by acting for west-country clients, and in 1384-5 was one of the lawyers retained for their counsel by Edward Courtenay, earl of Devon. He was described in a list of these lawyers as 'Robert Hull the son' (BL, Additional Roll 64320), to distinguish him from 'Robert Hull the father' (ibid.) who was similarly retained; Sir John Hill the future judge was a member of the earl's household at this date. 
Hill was MP for various Devon towns: both Dartmouth and Tavistock in 1372; Plympton in 1373, 1377 (twice), and 1380; and Exeter in 1379. In all of the election returns save two for Plympton he is described as Robert Hill junior. He made his career as a lawyer based partly in the Westminster courts, and he joined the Inner Inn; he gained the entree to the court of common pleas by being made a serjeant-at-law in Michaelmas term 1388. 
On 14 May 1408 Hill was appointed a justice of the court of common pleas, and was reappointed on the accessions of Henry V and Henry VI. In 1421 and 1422, following the death of Richard Norton, he acted as chief justice of common pleas, though he was never formally appointed to that office. His salary was last paid at Easter 1423, although he may have lived until 1424 or 1425. 
Since Hill settled at Shilston, in Modbury, Devon, he is probably to be identified as the Robert Hill who married Isabel, daughter of Sir John Wadham (justice of the common pleas, 1388-97) and Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of William Shilston of Shilston. They had several children, his heir being Robert, who according to one account was born in 1392. Isabel must have predeceased her husband, who by 1419 was married to Joan, daughter and heir of Sir Otho Bodrugan; she survived Hill, and married Sir John Trevarthyan, or Trevaygnoun, before dying in 1427 or 1428. 


@@@@@


doc= 13292


Hill, Robert (d. 1623), Church of England clergyman, was born in Ashbourne, Derbyshire, 'that poore and untaught towne', where he described himself as 'descended of meane but honest parentage' (R. Hill, 'The Contents of Scripture', 1596, sig A5'v'; TNA: PRO, PROB 11/142, fol. 87). He always remained conscious of his Derbyshire roots, and in later life dubbed a portion of his London rectory his 'Derbyshire room' (E. Freshfield, ed., 'The Vestry Minute Book of St Bartholomew Exchange', 1890, 79). He matriculated pensioner from Christ's College, Cambridge, in July 1581, graduated BA in 1585 and proceeded MA in 1588. In 1589 he was admitted a fellow of St John's College, Cambridge. Hill's subsequent activities in Cambridge reveal puritan sympathies probably acquired under the early influence of William Perkins. At St John's, Hill was among a cohort of godly young men granted fellowships in the early 1590s who later became notable puritan figures, such as William Crashawe and Abdias Ashton. While at St John's he signed petitions (organized by Henry Alvey) in favour of the imprisoned separatist Francis Johnson, and another in 1595 against the Arminian William Barrett. A disputed election for the mastership of the college in 1595 found Hill among those writing to Lord Burghley in support of candidates who included Alvey and complaining that they had been maligned as 'puritani' (Baker, 2.607). It is noteworthy that Hill's will mentions a 'Mr Henry Alvey of Cambridge' as his father-in-law, although no record has been found of this marriage. Hill was again involved in controversy about 1595-6, when he was the chief complainant to Bishop Richard Bancroft of London against a sermon given by the regius professor John Overall in his capacity as vicar of Epping, especially concerning the question of whether Christ had died for all men. 
Hill's career progressed uncertainly during these years, although the feoffees of St Andrew, Norwich, appointed him as curate, a position he held from about 1591 to 1602. Nevertheless, he seems to have been based in Cambridge for much of this time and in 1596 was apparently living at Park Hall, Essex, at the house of Sir William FitzWilliam. In the dedication to his 'Life-everlasting' (1601) Hill signed himself as 'your Lordships most bounden and dutifull Chaplaine', although the 'Preface to the reader' is dated from St John's College where Hill continued as a fellow until 1608-9. Hill had proceeded BD in 1595 and it was during the 1590s that he first established himself as a dedicated religious popularizer and pedagogue and a translator of continental protestant divines. In 1591 he translated William Perkins's classic, 'A Golden Chaine', into English, at the author's specific request. Hill later produced a version of the same text set out in a catechetical form, published in 1612. In 1596 he published 'The Contents of Scripture' -- effectively an abridgement and explication of the 'Bible' -- 'wherby the yong beginner might get entrance into reading, & the old reader be readied in remembring' (sig. A7), which also contained passages from Isaac Tremelius, Francis Junius, Theodore Beza, Johannes Piscator, and John Calvin. A more scholarly work was 'Life-everlasting, or, The true knowledge of one Jehovah, three Elohim, and Jesus Immanuel: collected out of the best modern divines' (1601), in which Hill espoused a hard-line position on predestination and insisted emphatically on the need for the doctrine to be fully taught to a lay audience, an insistence also reflected in his clash with Overall. 
In 1602 Hill moved to the capital when he obtained a lectureship at the fashionable parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, a position he retained until 1613. It was for this parish that he composed his most popular work, a catechism which went through eight editions and was posthumously translated into Dutch. Originally published in 1606 as 'Christs Prayer Expounded, a Christian Directed, and a Communicant Prepared', it was greatly expanded in 1609 as 'The Pathway to Prayer and Pietie'. These later editions included new material such as 'A direction to Christian life' and 'An instruction to die well'. This catechism displays Hill's pastoral abilities to best advantage, and it is distinguished by its clarity of exposition, use of homely similes, and willingness to tackle difficult pastoral issues. 
Although Hill obtained a living at St Margaret Moses in 1607, he continued to live in St Martin's parish, sometimes in the houses of its vestrymen, apparently lacking the means to provide himself with accommodation. During this period Hill proceeded DD, in 1609. Finally, in 1613, the support of Lord Chancellor Ellesmere gained him preferment to the prosperous City living of St Bartholomew by the Exchange, where he remained until his death in 1623. On 1 June 1614, at Canterbury Cathedral, Hill married Marguerite or Margaret, widow of the prebendary Adrian Saravia. She was the well-born daughter of John de Wijts, a religious refugee from Antwerp. Margaret Hill died in childbirth on 29 June 1615, aged thirty-nine, and her death was lamented in print by Hill and Joshua Sylvester in the sixth edition of 'The Pathway to Prayer' (1615-16), in which it was noted that she had served in the households of the Hastings and Palavicinio families. 
Hill seems always to have been a conforming puritan, and he lamented the 1607 death of Bishop Richard Vaughan of London, whom he characterized as 'an ornament to our Church in which he was a preaching Bishop' and 'a most watchfull and temperate Governour' (Hill, 1609 edn, foreword). Nevertheless, Hill's sympathy for more radical religious figures remained with him to the end. In 1620, for example, he edited the works of the nonconformist Samuel Hieron, prefacing the volume with a laudatory account which is a principal source for Hieron's life. Throughout his life Hill clearly felt dogged by the insecurity of his financial position. His will orders the sale of his library and he entreats his St Bartholomew's parishioners 'that since I was a principall meanes to builde the parsonage house they would mediate that my loving wife may not uppon a soddaine be put out of yt but have convenient tyme to provide for her selfe'. Hill also left bequests to Dr Richard Clarke 'of Canterbury', Thomas Westfield (future bishop of Bristol, whose sister, Susan, had married Hill some time after 1615) and the Vintners' Company, of which he was a member. He died in August 1623 and was buried in the chancel of St Bartholomew by the Exchange, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 13293


Hill, Robert (1699-1777), tailor and religious writer, was born on 11 January 1699 at Miswell, Hertfordshire, the son of poor parents, Robert Hill and Phoebe, 'nee' Clark. His father died within a year of his birth and about five years later his mother married Thomas Robinson, a tailor in Buckingham. Robert was left to the care of his maternal grandmother, at Miswell, and on her removal in 1710 to Tring Grove he became a farmer's boy. Having proved too delicate for this occupation he was apprenticed in 1714 to his stepfather in Buckingham, where the chance acquisition of a grammar at the age of seventeen inspired him with zeal for learning. His first studies were Latin and French, and later he studied Greek and Hebrew. 
Hill married in 1721 and became a schoolmaster in 1724, on finding his increasing family hard to support. He ran his school, which had more than fifty scholars, for six or seven years. In 1728 his wife died; in 1730 he married a rich widow but she was such a spendthrift that he left her in 1732 and travelled as a tailor and stay-maker. Having heard of his second wife's death, about 1741, he returned to Buckingham in 1744 and married for the third time in 1747. 
About this date Hill came to the notice of a neighbouring clergyman, who encouraged him to write. Hill was also introduced by him to Joseph Spence, who wrote an account of Hill's life in 'Parallel in the manner of Plutarch, between a most celebrated man of Florence, and one, scarce ever heard of, in England' (1757). This tract compares Hill with the Florentine writer Antonio Magliabechi and was included in Robert Dodsley's 'Fugitive Pieces on Various Subjects, by Several Authors' (1761). A long list of benefactors at the end of Spence's tract shows that Hill received substantial assistance, but in 1775 he was again in difficulties. In a preface to Hill's 'Christianity the True Religion: an Essay in Answer to the Blasphemy of a Deist' (1775) Hill is still described as a poor but worthy man. He died at Buckingham in July 1777 after a long illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 13294


Hill, Robert Gardiner (1811-1878), surgeon specializing in the treatment of the insane, was born at Louth, Lincolnshire, on 26 February 1811, the son of Robert Hill, a tradesman, of Leamington Spa, and his wife, Mary. John Harwood Hill was an elder brother. After being apprenticed to a local surgeon about 1825, Hill trained in London at Grainger's anatomy school and at Guy's and St Thomas's Hospitals. While a student in London, Hill became interested in the treatment of the insane, and there survives an extensive manuscript note made by him describing Philippe Pinel's liberation of the insane from their chains. 
In 1834 Hill became a member of the College of Surgeons and was appointed house surgeon to the Lincoln General Dispensary. The next year he was appointed as house surgeon, or resident medical officer, to the Lincoln Asylum, where, from about 1827, Edward Parker Charlesworth, one of three physicians to the asylum, had begun to reduce the level of mechanical restraint, such as strait-jackets and handcuffs, used on patients. With indefatigable energy and tremendous determination Hill took these measures further until by 1838 restraint had been abandoned altogether at Lincoln. This was the first example of what came to be known as the non-restraint system in the treatment of lunatics. Hill publicized the achievement through a lecture in Lincoln in 1838 and by a pamphlet, 'Total Abolition of Personal Restraint in the Treatment of the Insane' (1839). Although Hill succeeded in abolishing mechanical restraints it was necessary for him to impose rigorous discipline on his subordinates to ensure that they did not revert to using them. As a result there was a high level of tension among the attendants and officers of the asylum. This, coupled with the animosity of the governors and physicians, led to fierce infighting at the asylum from 1839, which led to Hill's resignation in 1840. With the departure of Hill, the momentum for non-restraint was lost at Lincoln. The debate over the merits of non-restraint was transferred to the columns of 'The Lancet' in 1839 to 1841 and the most prominent site for developing non-restraint methods became the Middlesex County Asylum at Hanwell, where its governors, especially John Adams, and its medical superintendent John Conolly, did most to make non-restraint an orthodox doctrine of British psychiatry. 
After retiring from the Lincoln Asylum, Hill's professional career was rather unremarkable. In 1840 he applied unsuccessfully for two asylum jobs (one of them being that of medical officer at Hanwell under Conolly). After ten years of general practice partnership in Lincoln, he opened, in 1851, Eastgate House, a small private asylum for female patients. The same year Hill was presented with a testimonial by the mayor of Lincoln, and in 1852 Hill himself was elected mayor. Eastgate House closed in 1856 and Hill went to London to become a co-owner (with Dr E. Willett) of Wyke House, another small asylum. In 1860 he dissolved the partnership, returned to Lincoln, and became an owner of Shillingthorpe House at Greatford, a decaying institution with a handful of patients, which was abandoned in less than three years. In 1863 Hill again moved to London, this time to take up the position of medical superintendent and co-owner of Earl's Court House, a private asylum for about twenty-five female patients, where he spent the rest of his life. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1853. 
Hill's claim to be the originator of the non-restraint system led him into conflict with his colleagues. In 1850, he responded through the correspondence columns of 'The Lancet' to comments made by Conolly and Charlesworth, and reiterated his claim. The debate opened again in 1857 when Hill repeated his claim in his 'Concise History of the Entire Abolition of Medical Restraint', a work prompted by Conolly's own piece on non-restraint published the year before. The argument resurfaced again in 1870 in Hill's 'Lunacy: its Past and Present'; this time he had been provoked by Sir James Clark's 'Memoir of John Conolly' (1869). 
Hill died on 30 May 1878 of apoplexy and chronic kidney disease at Earl's Court House, Earl's Court Road, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery; he left a widow, Charlotte. One of his sons inherited the house, and another son also took up psychiatry. 


@@@@@


doc= 13295


Hill, Roger (1605-1667), lawyer, was born on 1 December 1605 at Colyton, Devon, the second of nine children and eldest son of William Hill (died 1642) of Poundisford, Somerset, and Jane ('b'. 1584), daughter of John Yonge of Colyton. The family had prospered as merchants in Taunton and tenants on the bishop of Winchester's estate, showing an interest in parliament exceptional for minor gentry and contracting useful matches with several Dorset families of similar status. Hill was admitted to the Inner Temple, London, in 1624 and called to the bar in 1632. On 10 December 1635 he married Katherine, daughter of Giles Greene of Corfe Castle, Dorset. After bearing a son and a daughter, she died, and was buried on 30 November 1638. 
It was probably this connection that brought Hill the recordership of Bridport, which he represented throughout the Long Parliament. He served on more than sixty committees, showing particular interest in religious and legal issues. A zealous presbyterian, he was outspoken in his attacks on the hierarchy, especially Archbishop William Laud. On 3 August 1641 he married Abigail, daughter of Brampton Gurdon of Assington, Suffolk. Said to be of no considerable estate, he nevertheless promised $100 for the defence of parliament. He attended the second marriage of Denzil Holles, having earned 20 guineas for drafting the settlement. But he soon moved to the left in politics, though not in religion, probably under the influence of two other Dorset borough members, John Pyne, leader of the Somerset radicals, and Edmond Prideaux, in whose coach he usually commuted to Westminster. An uxorious husband, he sat up past midnight, sometimes 'after a dozen houres attending at the House' (BL, Add. 46500, fol. 24), to write letters to his wife in the country, combining assurances of affection with spiritual counsel. He was added to the Somerset committee in 1644, and at the sale of episcopal lands he bought the great manor of Taunton Dean, which he improved by enclosure. He was horrified to discover that one of his cousins was growing into strange opinions smacking of Independency and antinomianism, and urged Pyne to promote a petition for the establishment of presbyterianism, and for strong measures against cavaliers and malignants. But when Holles's supporters in the City invaded parliament on 22 July 1647 Hill and Prideaux were among the MPs who fled to the army for protection. 
Hill was named to the high court of justice to try Charles I, but did not act, and delayed taking his seat in the Rump until 23 February 1649. On 18 May he acted as teller for the bill to establish a court for probate and marriage cases, and although he co-operated with the promoter of the conveyancing bill, he seldom attended later sessions. Hill assisted Prideaux in preparing the case against John Lilburne and the Levellers, and became a bencher in the following month. He was less of a doctrinaire republican than Pyne, with whom his relations began to deteriorate in 1650. 
After the establishment of the protectorate Hill again assisted Prideaux in the trial of John Penruddock and the royalists, steering a cautiously legal course. He was rewarded with the dignity of the coif, and became baron of the exchequer in 1657, performing the usual duties of holding assizes on circuit and carrying messages to the Commons from the upper house. Hill's second wife died on 31 December 1658, and was buried with three of their four children in the Temple Church. On the fall of the protectorate he resumed his seat in the Rump, keeping a cursory diary of its proceedings. He must have welcomed the overthrow of the military junto that supplanted it, being promoted to the upper bench in January 1660. Hill lost office at the Restoration, though he insisted on retaining the style of serjeant-at-law. He had to give up Taunton Dean; but unlike Pyne he was not excluded from the 'Act of Indemnity'. 
On 1 May 1662 Hill married another Abigail, the daughter of Thomas Barnes of Alborough Hatch, Essex, coheir to her brother James and widow of John Lockey of Holmes Hill, Hertfordshire, and of the quondam radical Joshua Berners of Clerkenwell, Middlesex, over whom she is said to have exercised a moderating influence. Hill's lengthy will, which he signed on 9 March 1665, begins with an old-fashioned assurance of sharing in the resurrection of the just. He enjoyed substantial liquid assets, including $4000 advanced on mortgage to Lord Arundell of Wardour and $1424 to a Herefordshire squire. In addition he had $3000 for which he had failed to find a high-yielding investment. The sum of $200 was set aside for distribution to twenty of the industrious poor who 'truly love and feare the Lord' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/323, fol. 347'v'). Hill died in London on 21 April 1667, leaving instructions for the avoidance of 'any vaine Pompe or Ceremony att all' at his funeral (ibid., 11/323, fol. 344). He was buried two days later with his second wife in the Temple Church. His widow, with whom he had no children, survived until 24 November 1713. 
Hill was clearly a workaholic. To judge from the prolixity of his letters and his will, his legal opinions may have been expensive, but satisfying to those clients who wanted even the unlikeliest contingencies covered. He had laid the foundations for the social promotion of his younger son, Roger, who swiftly acquired a knighthood, a freehold estate in Buckinghamshire, and a county seat in parliament. 


@@@@@


doc= 13296


Hill, Sir Rowland (c.1495-1561), merchant and local politician, was born at Hodnet, Shropshire, the eldest son of Thomas Hill and his wife, Margaret, the daughter of Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey, Cheshire. He was apprenticed to the London mercer Thomas Kitson, and obtained his freedom in 1519. He then became a leading merchant adventurer, exporting broadcloths to Flanders and importing linens and fustians, his growing wealth indicated by his subsidy assessments, which rose from $150 in goods in the mid-1520s to 5000 marks in goods in 1541 (only two other men in London were assessed so high). For the bulk of his civic career the centre of his business operations was the parish of St Stephen Walbrook, in which he acted as churchwarden in 1525-6 and where he owned a property fronting onto Walbrook. But he also retained an interest in the Welsh marches, and acquired extensive estates in Shropshire, Cheshire, Flintshire, and Staffordshire; between 1539 and 1547 he purchased large quantities of former monastic property. His power in his native county was reflected in his appearance on the Shropshire commission of the peace between 1543 and 1554. 
The bulk of Hill's administrative energies were directed to the capital. He was prominent in the affairs of the Mercers' Company, serving as warden in 1535-6, and as master in 1543-4, in 1550-51, in 1555-6, and again in 1560-61. As sheriff in 1541-2 he endured a brief period (28-30 March 1542) of imprisonment in the Tower of London on the orders of the House of Commons for his abuse of the serjeant of parliament sent to secure the release of George Ferrers, a member of parliament imprisoned for debt in the Bread Street Counter. Although the king backed the Commons in this case of member's privilege, he showed favour to Hill shortly after the affair by knighting him, on 18 May 1542, during the prorogation of the parliament. Hill was elected to the court of aldermen on 9 November 1542, and served successively for the wards of Castle Baynard (1542-6) and Walbrook (1546-61). He took over as lord mayor for the year beginning in November 1549 in the wake of the 'coup d'etat' against Protector Somerset and in the midst of a period of religious uncertainty, but he oversaw some of the critical changes in the direction of godly protestantism, including the removal of altars. His mayoralty was also noted for the repurchasing by the livery companies of chantry properties seized by the crown in 1548, an initiative that was organized by the court of aldermen, and for the City's purchase in May 1550 of the former manors of Bermondsey Priory (now known as the King's Manor) and the archbishop of Canterbury (now known as the Great Liberty manor) in Southwark, together with a charter giving the aldermen extended powers over the troublesome southern suburbs. He remained an assiduous member of the court of aldermen, and attended nearly two-thirds of the meetings in the reigns of both Edward VI and Mary. He may have endured a spell of disfavour under Mary, but, although dropped from the commissions of the peace for Middlesex and Shropshire in 1554, he had recovered the regime's confidence by 1557, when he was nominated as a commissioner for the investigation of heretics. 
Hill enjoyed an enviable reputation for charitable virtue. 'Grett mon was mad for ys deth, and he gayff myche to the pore' ('Diary of Henry Machyn', 272). Although he had accumulated extensive estates, he was remembered as a paternalistic landlord who had neither raised rents nor levied entry fines. As tenant from the Mercers' Company of the precinct of the hospital of St Thomas Acre from 1542, he undertook to maintain its school, and he seems to have moved it at his own expense from the cloister into new quarters in a room on the north side of the choir or chancel. In 1555 he established a school at Market Drayton in his native Shropshire. He was also closely involved with the establishment of the London hospitals. He was the president of Bridewell and Bethlem hospitals from 1557 to 1558 and again between 1559 and 1561, and he held the post of surveyor-general of the London hospitals from 1559 until his death. But his charity had a stern edge, for he also enjoyed a reputation as 'a foe to vice and a vehement corrector' (notes on his monument at St Stephen Walbrook, London, Mercers' Hall). His mayoralty witnessed a determined campaign against moral offences, the wardmote inquests being required in April 1550 to make fresh presentments of ill rule, 'upon which indictments the lord mayor sat many times' (Hume, 167-9). The crusade was controversial because of Hill's readiness to punish wealthy offenders. Perhaps because of this determined moralism, which seems to have owed something to pressure from the protestant pulpits, and perhaps because of the coincidence of his mayoralty with a decisive turn in the English Reformation, Hill is often described as the first protestant lord mayor of London, but this tradition seems to date from no earlier than 1795, when a descendant, Sir Rowland Hill, bt, erected an obelisk to his memory in Hawkstone Park, Shropshire. Although he was one of the City's representatives in the first parliament of Mary's reign (October-December 1553), Hill is not named as one of those 'which stood for the trewe religion' (Bodl. Oxf., MS e Museo 17). His will gives little indication of fervent protestantism, and there was no celebration of godly values in either the memorial tablet in St Stephen Walbrook or in the inscription on the portrait at Mercers' Hall. His arrangement for the distribution of a dole of 12died a house through the wards of the City as he lay dying was characteristic of his charity, but also redolent of an older type of piety. His interest in innovative charitable projects and in education may have owed more to the humanist values fashionable in London circles at this time than to protestantism. 
Hill was married by 1542, but the identity of his wife, who died during his mayoralty, is unknown. There were no surviving children. He died at midnight on 28 October 1561, according to Machyn, 'of the strangwyllyon' (strangury, a disease of the urinary organs), and was buried on 5 November in the parish church of St Stephen Walbrook. The bulk of his property passed to his nieces, one of whom married the judge Sir Reginald Corbet and another Hill's fellow alderman and 'most suer and faithfull friende' Sir Thomas Leigh. 


@@@@@


doc= 13297


Hill, Rowland (1744-1833), evangelical preacher, was born at Hawkstone Park, near Wem, Shropshire, on 23 August 1744, the sixth son of the ten children of Sir Rowland Hill (1705-1783), landowner, and Mary Pole (died 1789). He was educated at Shrewsbury School and Eton College and converted to an evangelical faith by his elder brother Richard Hill. While at Eton, Rowland formed a short-lived religious society through which some of his friends were converted. He entered St John's College, Cambridge, as a pensioner and in 1764 formed a religious society of ten to twelve friends that included Charles de Coetlogon, Thomas Pentycross, and David Simpson. They studied the Greek 'New Testament', prayed, and read evangelical literature. They also visited the sick and those in prison, and Hill preached in Cambridge and in neighbouring villages. This group was disapproved of by the university authorities, but they were not expelled, like the six students at Oxford in 1768. 
After graduating BA in 1769 (he proceeded MA in 1772) Hill spent four years preaching throughout England and Wales. This angered his parents, but delighted his brother Richard and sister Jane, after whom he was most influenced by George Whitefield and John Berridge. They helped shape his Calvinistic convictions and his determination to exercise an itinerant preaching ministry. His theology meant that he was out of favour with the Methodists; his activities were regarded with suspicion by the Church of England authorities; and his temper led him to quarrel even with the countess of Huntingdon. Without this disagreement Hill might have gained her patronage and become Whitefield's successor. Another possibility was that he could have become a Presbyterian and a chaplain to Lady Glenorchy. He applied for Anglican orders but was refused by six bishops because of his irregularities. However, in June 1773 he was ordained deacon by the bishop of Bath and Wells to the curacy of Kingston, near Taunton. Though he was diligent in his parish duties, he would not be confined by the parochial system and continued to itinerate. A. M. Toplady urged him to give up his irregularities. The bishop of Carlisle promised to ordain him priest (on letters dimissory of the bishop of Bath and Wells) but the archbishop of York forbade the ordination and Hill remained in deacon's orders. In his own words, he passed through life 'wearing only one ecclesiastical boot' ('Congregational Magazine'). Hill was a unique figure in the evangelical revival and adopted a significant independent position. He was concerned with order and freedom, valued the scriptural content of the Church of England liturgy, but would not be inhibited by episcopal censure or restricted by parochial boundaries. He claimed that he was not a dissenter -- 'The church turned me off, and not I her' (Sidney, 138). But he could also say, 'See what a churchman I am; I must have it all correct' (ibid., 237). He accepted the authority of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', but amended them to express his Calvinistic theology. He was deeply committed to the promotion of evangelical unity, and spoke of lowering the walls between denominations so 'that we may shake hands a little easier over them' (ibid., 475). For this reason he did not approve of any doctrinal restrictions being placed upon the work of the British and Foreign Bible Society. 
On 23 May 1773 Hill married Mary Tudway (1747-1830), with whom he settled at Wotton under Edge, Gloucestershire. Though they had no family of their own, he deeply loved children. He preached to them, and wrote hymns, prayers, and books for them. At Wotton he built an almshouse and a modest house for himself where he tended the garden. In the adjoining chapel (rebuilt in 1851 and closed in 1973) he used the Anglican liturgy and permitted evangelicals of any denomination to preach. This practice he repeated at Surrey Chapel, Blackfriars, London (opened 1783), Cheltenham Chapel (opened 1809), and Mill Street Chapel, Leamington (opened 1828 and bought by Hill in 1831). His custom was to spend the summer months in Gloucestershire, when he made an 'episcopal visitation' to Cheltenham, and the rest of the year at Surrey Chapel. During his absence he employed Anglican clergy and nonconformist ministers. When an evangelical incumbent was appointed to Wotton, or when his biographer Edwin Sidney preached, Hill closed his chapel and encouraged his congregation to worship at the parish church. During the year Hill went on extended preaching tours throughout the United Kingdom, describing himself as the 'Rector of Surrey chapel, Vicar of Wotton-under-Edge, and curate of all the fields, commons etc. throughout England and Wales' (Burder, 127). He was deeply loved and highly regarded by evangelicals within the established church and by dissenters. 
Surrey Chapel was the largest of its kind in London and could accommodate 3000 people. It was the centre of Hill's ministry and the congregation included leading evangelicals and the poor. The chapel was the focus for Hill's missionary and philanthropic work. Attached to it were thirteen Sunday schools for over 3000 children (Hill was one of the earliest supporters of the movement in London). In addition there was a Dorcas Society for the relief of poor married women, an almshouse for poor women, and a school of industry for poor girls. On the River Thames, Hill was one of the promoters of a floating chapel. He supported the London Missionary Society and raised large sums of money on his preaching tours ['see 'Founders of the London Missionary Society]. He was also involved in the formation of the Religious Tract Society, supported the British and Foreign Bible Society, and was a trustee of the 'Evangelical Magazine'. While living in Gloucestershire he met Dr Edward Jenner, and Hill became a keen advocate of vaccination. He wrote a tract on the subject, in 1806 opened a clinic attached to Surrey Chapel, and personally vaccinated thousands of children. 
Surrey Chapel was known for its music and Hill's powerful preaching. His presence in the pulpit was arresting, his style a combination of humour, pathos, and vivid illustration. He was pre-eminent among the London preachers. Well into his eighties he still preached six or seven times a week. Though his extemporary preaching was described by Isaac Milner as 'slap-dash preaching' (Sidney, 141), Richard Sheridan said that 'his ideas come red-hot from the heart' (ibid., 140). Like Whitefield, Hill could attract immense crowds -- on one of his Scottish tours he preached to between 15,000 and 20,000 people. He wrote, or contributed to, a number of publications on subjects which included the debate between Calvinism and Arminianism. Hill's most popular work of fiction was his 'Village Dialogues' (30 editions). He compiled a number of hymnbooks and he composed a few hymns, some of which were revised by William Cowper. 
Hill was a larger-than-life character, and an aristocratic eccentric with a ready wit. He remained active almost to the end of his life. He died in Surrey Chapel House on 11 April 1833 and was buried on 19 April beneath the pulpit of Surrey Chapel. His remains were reinterred in 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 13298


Hill, Rowland, first Viscount Hill (1772-1842), army officer, was born on 11 August 1772 at Prees Hall, near Hawkstone and Shrewsbury in Shropshire, the second son and fourth of the sixteen children of John Hill, later third baronet (1740-1824), of Hawkstone, and his wife, Mary (died 1806), the daughter of Robert Chambre of Petton, Shropshire. The rising influence of the Hill family had accelerated during the career of Richard Hill (1655-1727), called 'the great Hill', lord of the Treasury and lord of the Admiralty under Queen Anne. A baronetcy was created for his nephew Rowland in 1727, and it passed to John Hill in November 1809. Five of Rowland Hill's brothers took part in the Napoleonic wars, including his elder brother, John, of the 25th light dragoons; Clement, who long served as his aide-de-camp; Thomas Noel Hill (1784-1832), in the Portuguese service; Francis, also in the Portuguese service; and Robert, commander of the Royal Horse Guards. George IV later told Sir John, their father: 'I am glad, indeed, to see the father of so many brave sons' (Sidney, 9). As a young child Rowland was large and somewhat awkward and reserved, but he possessed a bright mind and formed his own opinions independently, although in his younger years he much imitated John. At the age of seven or eight he went to Ightfield School for one year and then to a school in Chester, where he remained until he was seventeen, when his father wanted him to prepare to enter the legal profession. However, John had already joined the army, and Rowland told his parents that, because he did not like the study of law, he would never excel at it. Instead, he preferred a career in the army. This choice surprised his teachers -- on occasion he had fainted at the sight of blood -- but he stood by his choice, and his parents agreed to it. 
In 1790 Sir John Hill arranged for Rowland's commission as an ensign in the 38th foot, followed by leave to study at a military academy in Strasbourg. He was promoted lieutenant early in 1791, returned briefly to England, and then received another leave of absence to resume his studies. He joined the 53rd foot in January 1792 and resumed active service that was virtually unbroken during the wars of the next twenty-three years. In 1793 he raised an independent company that carried a promotion to captain. He briefly served with Francis Drake as assistant secretary at the republic of Genoa, but when Admiral Hood landed at Toulon (28 August 1793) Hill hurried there to join his regiment. Hill energetically carried orders for Lord Mulgrave, General Charles O'Hara, and Sir David Dundas, as well as spending time in the front lines, where he received a superficial wound. When Dundas evacuated Toulon in December, Hill carried the dispatches to London. In 1794 Thomas Graham raised a regiment, the 90th foot, and Hill contributed so much in recruiting that he was promoted major and shortly afterwards lieutenant-colonel. The 90th moved about the Mediterranean and other minor venues during the next four years. The next French movement involving Bonaparte -- Hill had faced his artillery at Toulon -- occurred with the French landing in Egypt in July 1798, and Hill, fuming over his lack of action at Gibraltar, once more joined Drake on a mission to the continent. When he learned that the force under Sir Ralph Abercromby was preparing to sail to Egypt he raced back to take part. By then he had been promoted brevet colonel. 
In March 1801 the British force anchored in Abu Qir Bay and the troops landed. On 13 March, in hard fighting, Hill, commanding the 90th, was severely wounded by a musket ball to the head; a week later Abercromby, mortally wounded, was brought into Hill's cabin and soon died. Hill rejoined the 90th after three weeks of convalescence and advanced against Cairo as French resistance weakened. By September the enemy had left Egypt. Hill was made a knight of the Crescent of Turkey. He sailed to Malta for garrison duty, an assignment that lasted for only a short time while British and French diplomats negotiated the peace of Amiens, which seemed destined to cause a reduction of the British army and the disbanding of the 90th. Instead, after Hill had taken a short period of leave at Hawkstone, relations with France soured, and he rejoined the army at Belfast amid rumours, which seemed genuine, that the French were planning to invade Ireland. Hill meticulously reconnoitred all possible landing sites and planned for counter-measures against an invasion. Having been promoted major-general (30 October 1805), he joined a force -- intended to liberate Hanover from the French -- bound for the Hanoverian coast, where he was in charge of embarkation. He carried out his duties well and during this period met Sir Arthur Wellesley for the first time. After the expedition failed (1806) Hill was stationed briefly at Canterbury and served on the staff of Sir John Moore, generally recognized as the premier organizer in the army. Hill's own skills at troop management were being formed, and his reputation for being a firm disciplinarian while demonstrating humanitarian concern and equitable techniques in training and handling troops began to set him apart. Early in his career some of his men began calling him Daddy Hill, a term of appreciation for his benevolent concern for the common soldier, but it also began to create a stereotype of Hill that rather masked his ruthless combat qualities. Despite his battlefield heroism, this stereotype dogged him throughout his illustrious career. 
Hill spent over a year in Ireland (1807-8). In 1807 the French invaded Portugal: they seized Lisbon (1 December), and Dom Joao, the prince regent, and his court barely escaped and sailed with British protection to Brazil. When Bonaparte seized the Spanish throne in May 1808, and the Spanish appealed for British help, the British government decided to send an expedition to Portugal. Temporarily Wellesley was in command, and Hill was assigned to organize the embarkation. The force of about 10,000 men sailed from Cork on 12 July and arrived off Portugal on 1 August. Hill supervised the landing at Mondego Bay, about 100 miles north of Lisbon. Wellesley quickly formed his forces and engaged Delaborde at Rolica (17 August); Hill commanded the 1st brigade, which was stationed in the centre of Wellesley's position. Rifleman Harris gave a poignant account of Hill's great courage when he rallied the 29th foot after the death of its colonel. When Delaborde withdrew, Junot offered battle at Vimeiro (21 August). Hill's force occupied Wellesley's right, but the French were forced back and virtually routed. Soon afterwards the combatants signed the disgraceful convention of Cintra (22 August), following which Hill's brigade came under the command of Sir John Hope, under Sir John Moore. 
Moore decided to take the offensive against the French in Spain, an unlucky decision based on poor intelligence, and Hill's men marched northwards towards the border. Bonaparte, however, poured forces into Spain, and Moore, Hill, and the other generals were forced to retreat to the coast, closely pursued by Marshal Andoche Soult's corps. They defeated Soult at Corunna on 16 January 1809, when Moore was killed, then escaped on British transports. Hill and Beresford formed the rearguard, and their men rowed to the ships as the evacuation was completed. After leave in Ireland, Hill sailed from Cork in March with about 4000 troops to reinforce Sir John Francis Cradock at Lisbon. Wellesley replaced the cautious Cradock in April, and the British force marched towards Porto. Hill commanded the 1st division, and two other infantry divisions and a cavalry division, with Portuguese troops interspersed, brought Wellesley's meagre force to about 17,000 men. At Porto, Soult's forces lined the northern bank of the 300-yard-wide River Douro, and on 12 May Wellesley ordered a surprise daylight crossing. Hill's troops were among the first across, and Soult was soon forced out of the city. The stunning success of the operation led to the invasion of Spain in early summer and the battle of Talavera (28 July). Hill was wounded by a musket ball during the desperate battle, and Wellesley's forces retreated towards Portugal. 
Wellesley confirmed his confidence in Hill later in 1809 by appointing him to a semi-independent command in the Portuguese Alentejo based on two factors: he meticulously followed orders, and he knew how to adapt troops to unusual circumstances. With British resources so meagre, Hill was an ideal choice for such an assignment. By 1810 Soult's army of the south held Andalusia, and Marshal Andre Massena had assembled a large force yet again to invade Portugal. Wellesley, now Viscount Wellington, drew Hill's force closer to his main position at Busaco, and his men dug in on the right as the fierce battle took place on 26-7 September. After the allied troops began their retreat towards Lisbon, Hill marched to Coimbra and then southwards to the environs of Torres Vedras, where the British and Portuguese constructed strong defensive fortifications. He took a virtually impregnable position on the right of Wellington's main force, and Massena found himself stalemated before the lines of Torres Vedras. On 14 November the French began taking positions a little to the north, and Hill's force began edging forward again. Hill contracted an infectious fever at this time, and because many men died from it he was sent to Lisbon to recuperate. When the effects of the disease persisted Hill returned home, and for six months his force came under the command of other officers. William Stewart, the ranking brigade officer, took a turn at command, but because he was prone to lead into risky engagements Wellington ordered William Carr Beresford to take command of the detached force in the south. In March 1811, when Massena began a full retreat, Beresford began moving his corps towards Campo Mayor. 
Perhaps the Albuera campaign provides a study of the clear contrasts between the executive skills of field command shown by Hill and Beresford. Beresford's clumsiness was apparent at Campo Mayor in April, but he was cleared to oppose Soult's force as it marched northwards into the vicinity of his force at Albuera (16 May 1811). In the desperate fighting Beresford's disposition was faulty, his orders were indecisive, and his losses of British troops were staggering. On 1 June, Hill resumed command of his shattered force, although Wellington told Beresford to 'write him a victory' (Vichness, 431), and Hill soon reconstructed the southern wing into a potent fighting force. He moved into the region of Portalegre, and by 1 September his corps had grown to about 16,000. Meanwhile, a worthy opponent, General Jean-Baptiste Girard, began playing cat-and-mouse games in Estremadura, near Merida. Girard's actions were designed to draw attention away from the French operations near Ciudad Rodrigo, but nevertheless Hill intermittently entertained his officers and other guests and reconnoitred the area to prepare for an opportunity against Girard. Of the former activities, Wellington once told a staff member: 'As you are a stranger, I will give you some useful information. Cole gives the best dinners in the army; Hill the next best; mine are no great things; Beresford's and Picton's are very bad indeed' (Brett-James, 69). Hill was something of an epicure and transported a handsome silver service in the Peninsula with which to serve his elegant dinners. He began extensive secret preparations to force a showdown with Girard. 
Since Girard had only 6000 men around Caceres, Hill put together a larger expeditionary force to pursue Girard and attempt to bring him to action. As the October rains pounded Estremadura, Hill put his force into motion, and his own troops did not learn of his objective of relieving Caceres until the march turned eastwards. As Hill approached Caceres, Girard withdrew generally towards Merida along a curving route that resembled a flexed elbow. By forced marches Hill moved rapidly towards the French, and by 27 October he was able to get within striking distance of Girard at Arroyo Molinos. Girard was a shrewd opponent, but, possibly on account of the torrential rain, neglected to patrol the area, affording Hill the opportunity of moving his entire force within a few hundred yards of the village occupied by the French. On the morning of 28 October he unleashed his men on the position and completely surprised Girard's units. Hill's men drove the main force into the mountains, killed 800, captured 1300, and seized all the horses, the baggage, three field pieces, and the magazine. Hill lost seven killed and sixty-four wounded. In all, the operation was a great contribution to allied morale in the dreary year of 1811 and began the steady elevation of Hill to the forefront of Wellington's generals. The earl of Aberdeen wrote to his brother in November 1811: 'I have formed a notion that he is the second best man in Portugal'; the brother replied: 'You are perfectly right' (BL, Add. MS 43224). 
On 22 February 1812 Hill, on Wellington's recommendation, was made a KB. That year, as the scales began to tip towards the British in Spain, Wellington decided to move against Ciudad Rodrigo, and Hill received permission for an operation against the bridge and fortifications at Almaraz on the Tagus River. As the expedition began on 24 April, Hill selected three infantry brigades, an artillery brigade under Alexander Dickson, and two regiments of cavalry for the march, a total of 7000 men. He used elaborate ruses to conceal his intentions, because, if his movement were to be detected, strong enemy forces could intercept his retreat. He refused to let his men stage a banquet at Truxillo to celebrate the anniversary of the battle of Albuera. Instead, he ordered a march throughout the night that brought his force within 6 miles of the location of the bridge. The difficulties included strong fortifications on both sides of the river as well as a menacing castle, Mirabete, guarding the road on which Hill's men approached. A sentry detected a British soldier on the road and alerted the garrison, which began firing on the main force. Hill had no siege equipment, but his scouts located a goat trail leading down the mountain to Fort Napoleon, a stone fort with 450 men. Hill decided to surprise and storm the fort, 'a resolution', wrote William Napier: 'more hardy than it would appear... [If he failed,] every slanderous tongue would have been let loose on the rashness of attacking invulnerable forts: a military career hitherto so glorious might have been terminated in shame, but totally void of interested ambition Hill was unshaken. (Napier, 4.163)' Hill's men crept to within 800 yards of the fort during the night of 18 May. As General Christopher Tilson-Chowne feinted against Mirabete high on the mountain, Hill's troops scaled Fort Napoleon, routed the garrison, and turned the guns there against Fort Ragusa on the opposite side of the river. The commander, Aubert, ignominiously evacuated the fort, and Hill soon controlled the two forts and the bridge. His men destroyed the installations and large stores of food, supplies, and equipment. He retreated southwards the following day, since an attempt to besiege Mirabete would probably have brought French forces racing towards the region. But the brilliant operation permanently destroyed French communication in that area, for materials were not available for repairs. Once more, General Hill, the surpriser, had turned a difficult assignment into a great gain: 'It was', said Benjamin D'Urban, 'the most advantageous Coup of the Second Class during the war' (D'Urban, 256). George Bell called him 'the Duke's favourite and most successful General' (Bell, 63). 
During the remainder of 1812 Wellington defeated Marmont at Salamanca (22 July) and advanced against Burgos, while Hill kept a force south of Madrid. When Wellington was forced to retreat westwards, Hill joined the march and went into winter quarters. Neither side could fight a winter campaign, so Hill's future assignment was that of commander of an attached wing rather than as commander of a semi-independent corps, at which he had excelled. As the advance of 1813 began, Hill commanded not only the 2nd division, the Surprisers, but the light division, the Portuguese division, and other forces, a total of 30,000 men. They moved steadily forwards towards the plains of Vitoria, where the French army formed a strong line, with Hill's corps on the right facing Gazan's army of the south. On 21 June the battle broke out near Hill's position, and he directed the movements under heavy fire. Eventually the French force broke and retreated, leaving heavy casualties on both sides, but the French lost all their artillery, stores, and baggage, together with huge sums of money and treasure. Four of the Hill brothers were reunited during the march beyond Vitoria, and the forces moved steadily towards the frontiers of France; on 9 July the brothers had their first extensive view into France. 
While cantoned in the heights near Maya, Hill constantly studied the French positions. He began advancing on 8 November 1813. On 13 December his force of 14,000 was stationed at St Pierre d'Irube when Soult attacked it with a powerful force of 35,000. Because of heavy rains and swollen streams no reinforcements could reach Hill's position, but he did take advantage of a narrow front. The carnage was terrible, but at the crucial moment Hill moved the 57th foot from his right to the centre, and the French attack was repulsed. Wellington later rode up and said: 'Hill, the day's your own!' (Longford, 338). Yet Hill received only modest publicity from this great feat. In the lore of the Peninsular War, it may be better known that Hill swore at St Pierre -- one of only two times, it was said, the other being at Talavera -- that he won an impressive victory at worse than two-to-one odds. The allied force continued to move eastwards in 1814, and in late March Wellington's forces reached Toulouse, the taking of which appeared to be a bloody operation. Hill attacked the St Cyprien suburb, the other units began their assault, and, by 11 April, Soult's forces withdrew towards the south. At this time couriers arrived to bring official notice that Bonaparte had abdicated and peace had been declared. Wellington left Hill in command of the allied army while he travelled to Paris. Hill's accomplishments were exceeded only by those of the commander-in-chief. 
At the age of forty-two Hill emerged from the Peninsular War as a proven general, but he planned to return to his estate in Shropshire. The government was preparing to expand the war in North America, and his name was mentioned as the possible commander of it, but in fact the war was giving way to negotiation. Hill had been elected an MP for Shrewsbury in 1812, on the family interest, but had never had an opportunity to be seated; he supported the government. As the Peninsular War ended, Hill and four other generals were made barons; Hill was created Baron Hill of Almaraz and of Hawkstone on 17 May 1814 and granted a pension of $2000 per annum. As he never married he wanted his title and pension to pass to his nephew, so on 16 January 1816 he was granted a special remainder to the male heirs of his brother John. On his return to Shropshire he was feted as a hero and honoured by a memorial column in Shrewsbury costing $6000, 133 feet high and inscribed with the victories which he had gained. 
Following Bonaparte's escape from Elba in February 1815, the cabinet ordered Wellington to Belgium and sent Hill to join him. Hill arrived at Brussels on 2 April, and Wellington directed him to restrain the prince of Orange, commanding the Dutch-Belgian forces, from rash actions. Thousands of British troops crossed the channel, including three of Hill's brothers -- Clement, Robert, and Thomas. 
As Wellington formed his army, Hill received command of a corps of 25,000 to 30,000 men, which Wellington placed to the far right of his main position at Mont St Jean, south of Waterloo. Bonaparte's movements were carried out in secrecy, but Wellington could not give up his view that Bonaparte might direct his advance over good roads to Hill's position, so he kept his right wing strong, perhaps too strong. Hill's force played no appreciable part in the battle of Quatre-Bras (16 June) and was engaged only peripherally at Waterloo (18 June). As the battle progressed, when Hill saw that no threat was offered on the far right, he began leading some of his units to support the allied troops around the key position at Hougoumont. His horse was shot under him but, though bruised, he survived the desperate fighting. He accompanied the army to Paris and then went on furlough to London to consult Lord Bathurst about the succession of his peerage. He then returned to France, established headquarters at Cambrai, and served as second in command of Wellington's army of occupation. He was made GCB on 2 January 1815 and GCH in 1816, and received Portuguese, Austrian, Russian, and Dutch orders. 
In 1818 Hill returned to Shropshire and undertook the renovation of his modest estate, Hardwicke Grange, which he inherited from his uncle Sir Richard Hill, second baronet (died 1809). Sir John and his sons were not very secure financially, and Hill had to manage carefully his income from his pension, his colonelcies of various regiments, including the 53rd (1817-30), and from governorships at various times, among them that of Plymouth, the best available when he obtained it in 1830. He occasionally went to London, where he sat in the Lords, but in the early 1820s he paid only nominal attention to politics, voting tory. On 14 June 1820 he was awarded a DCL degree from Oxford University. George IV selected him to carry the royal standard at the 1821 coronation, and Hill later wrote to the College of Arms requesting it. In 1823 he declined the lieutenancy of the ordnance and in 1827 the master-generalship, offered by Wellington. However, in 1828 he replaced Wellington, then prime minister, as commander-in-chief of the army. At the request of William IV he abstained from voting on the 'Reform Bill'. 
As commander-in-chief, Hill surrounded himself with good men, such as Sir Henry Hardinge and Lord Fitzroy Somerset. He continued to be influenced by Wellington, and attempted no fundamental reforms, although he did introduce reforms to reduce drunkenness in the ranks, to provide educational and recreational outlets for troops, and to curb some of the more cruel forms of punishment, such as flogging. He approved, if reluctantly, the formation of regimental libraries. His performance at the Horse Guards became more complex when Lord Grey and the whigs came to office in 1830. Hill probably survived the political pressures because he had firm control of the army and showed skill in his policies supporting the civil power and limited military expeditions. In the late 1830s his health declined, and he resigned on 9 August 1842. On 22 September he was created Viscount Hill with remainder to his nephew Sir Rowland Hill, bt. He died at Hardwicke Grange on 10 December 1842 and was buried on 16 December in the village church of Hadnall, Shropshire. He divided his fortune of $30,000 among his family and left a fund to maintain the Shrewsbury column. He was succeeded by his nephew Sir Rowland Hill, fourth baronet (1800-1875), tory MP for Shropshire (1821-32) and for North Shropshire (1832-42). 
To evaluate Hill's contributions, one should focus on his role as an army officer rather than as an administrator. He was a commander with genuine humanitarian concerns for his men. He was a loyal subordinate who never deviated from the concept that he must meticulously obey orders. He possessed sound judgement and displayed the impressive ability to be inventive when he carried out surprise operations. He showed a broad grasp of tactics and, to a degree, of strategy, although the towering Wellington dictated the course of the struggle in the Peninsula that helped to lead to the defeat of the empire. Yet Hill's battlefield performance and victories demonstrate that he had mastered the element of surprise and was one of the great commanders of the age. 


@@@@@


doc= 13299


Hill, Sir Rowland (1795-1879), postal reformer and civil servant, was born on 3 December 1795 at 96 Blackwell Street, Kidderminster, third of the eight children of Thomas Wright Hill (1763-1851), schoolmaster, and his wife, Sarah Lea (1765-1842). 
The Hill family, buffeted at times by economic adversity, was exceptionally close and indeed operated as a well-ordered regiment in pursuit of the group's self-advancement and in support of its belief in liberal causes, reform, and earnest improvement. For the Hills, progressive education was one great means through which these goals might be achieved. About 1803 Rowland entered Hill Top, his father's school in a Birmingham suburb, where despite the effects of scarlet fever which permanently weakened his health he developed his skills as a budding mathematician and mechanical engineer. At the age of twelve he became an assistant to his father, and in 1819 he helped his family to establish Hazelwood, a new school in Edgbaston. There the Hills assiduously implemented an innovative educational policy based on the ideals of representative democracy and competitive capitalism, not unlike the approach of Jeremy Bentham's 'Chrestomathia'. On 27 September 1827 Hill married Caroline (died 1881), daughter of Joseph Pearson, a Wolverhampton manufacturer and county magistrate; they had one son and three daughters. In the same year as his marriage, with the aid of three of his brothers he extended the family's experiments in education by opening the Bruce Castle School in Tottenham, Middlesex. 
However, Hill grew increasingly frustrated in his role as a schoolmaster. He was not, after all, the great intellectual of the family. That role was played by Matthew Davenport Hill, the eldest brother. Furthermore, having abandoned any religious belief Hill was troubled by the fact that he had to take his pupils to church services and lead them in prayers. It is not surprising, then, that he began to look for other avenues to social progress and personal advancement. He considered an offer from the social reformer Robert Owen to manage one of his experiments in communal living, but rejected it. For a time part of his considerable energy was expended on work on a series of inventions and ideas, such as a rotary printing press, a scheme for pneumatic dispatch of messages, and road-building machinery. He also became involved in campaigns for colonizing South Australia, having produced in 1832 a paper on the subject with the characteristic title 'Home colonies: a plan for the gradual extinction (by education) of pauperism and the diminution of crime'. By 1835 this activity bore fruit in Hill's appointment as secretary to the South Australian colonization commission, a government post which paid $500 a year and which allowed Hill to turn over the management of the Bruce Castle School to his younger brother Arthur. 
It was another issue which was to be the great cause of Hill's life, however. In January 1837 Hill published the first edition of 'Post Office Reform: its Importance and Practicability', after submitting the gist of his proposals privately to Lord Melbourne's government. In this pamphlet Hill undertook two tasks simultaneously. The first was to attack the current postal system as overly complicated, usually requiring the recipient of a letter to pay for postage based on the number of sheets the letter contained and the distance it had been conveyed. Under this system a letter of a single sheet sent from London to Birmingham cost as much as 9died Matters were made worse by the fact that London was served by three separate delivery systems. Thus a Londoner might receive mail from three different letter-carriers. Elsewhere it was usually the case that mail had to be collected from local post offices and posted not, as later, in roadside boxes, but at the same local post offices or in 'receiving' houses. Hill insisted that this unwieldy arrangement unfairly taxed the public and inhibited the expansion of trade and ideas. Hill's second goal in writing this pamphlet was to propose an alternative system of a standard prepayment for letters conveyed between principal towns and cities, regardless of the specific distance involved. Hill would later modify and improve details of this scheme, most importantly suggesting the use of stamps as one method of prepayment. However, his fundamental approach first presented in 'Post Office Reform' remained unchanged for the rest of his life. 
When Hill put forth these proposals in 1837 he was a relatively obscure individual approaching middle age. By 10 January 1840 -- the inauguration of penny post through which a letter of 1/2 oz might be sent anywhere in the country for 1died -- he had become a nationally known figure whose ideas had become government policy and who was poised for a significant career in the Victorian civil service. How had the transformation come about? Due credit should be given to Hill, who was tireless in promoting his scheme and in organizing support among the public in general and the commercial and banking community in particular. However, it should be remembered that Hill was not the lonely crusader, single-handedly opposing myopic supporters of outmoded assumptions and practices, which some accounts of his life, and indeed at times his own rhetoric, might suggest. The Post Office had already been the object of criticism from men such as Robert Wallace, MP for Greenock, who in 1833 launched an effective reform campaign. Hill's campaign also benefited from the support of like-minded individuals such as Henry Cole and Edwin Chadwick. Hence the success of Hill's attack on the Post Office is partly explained by the fact that it was only one aspect of a wider utilitarian assault on existing institutions, which characterized the post- 'Reform Bill' generation and which called for a sweeping review of current procedures and advocated changes based on principles of rationality and political economy. 
Hill was convinced that his proposals for Post Office improvement required his direct supervision and involvement if their implementation was to be successful, and from 1839 to 1842 he was attached to the Treasury at an annual salary of $1500 to carry out this assignment. Dismissed by the Peel government in September 1842 he was employed from 1843 to 1846 as first a director and then chairman of the London and Brighton Railway Company; however, he remained dedicated to the engine of reform and to driving that engine, and Peel's fall from office in 1846 was a welcome event which facilitated Hill's entry into the Post Office as secretary to the postmaster-general. In this position Hill was somewhat awkwardly inserted into the Post Office to serve as an arm of the department's political chief and a representative of the Treasury. The senior permanent official and the linchpin of the administrative structure remained the secretary to the Post Office. Nevertheless, problems and frustrations persisted. Although the penny post had stimulated a significant increase in the number of letters mailed -- 19 per capita in 1860 versus 3 per capita in 1839 -- Hill's projections of the impact of penny post on departmental finances proved inaccurate. He had predicted that gross departmental revenue would return to its pre-penny post level within five years. This prediction was not fulfilled until 1851. More seriously, during the first year the penny post net revenue fell by 69 per cent, and it was not until 1873 that the department was able to maintain consistently the $1.6 million figure earned the year before the implementation of Hill's reforms. 
Hill offered several explanations for this unexpected outcome. At times he attributed the blame to what he regarded as excessively costly railway contracts made after 1840 in the era of the decline of coaching companies. (One Post Office estimate held that railway conveyance of mail was almost four times as costly as conveyance by coach. Such estimates, of course, failed to take into consideration the improved speed of conveyance or the greater capacity of the railways to handle the weight of mails, which was three times larger after penny post.) Incensed by the situation Hill recommended that government loans to railway companies be contingent on their lowering their charges for the carriage of mail. In 1867 he carried the attack one step further by advocating nationalization of the railway industry as a way to escape from the imbroglio and to destroy the independence of the railway interest. He also attempted to account for the shortcomings of his reforms by claiming that both the efficiency of the Post Office and the effectiveness of his plans were severely diminished by the fact that a politician, the postmaster-general, headed the department. To Hill, such men -- relics of the old corruption -- simply lacked the necessary commitment and expertise for the task at hand. In a statement which reveals much about his view of the Post Office hierarchy and the crucial centrality of his place in that same hierarchy, he once lamented in his journal that 'The P.M.G. has... interfered with my department' (Perry, 8). Instead Hill favoured an arrangement whereby the Post Office would be managed by a board with himself as chairman. 
Hill's real wrath was reserved for a group of permanent civil servants inside the bureaucracy, who had entered the Post Office before his arrival, and who, Hill claimed, intentionally frustrated improvements. The leader of this group was Colonel William Maberly, who had been secretary to the Post Office since 1836 and who remained sceptical as to the practicality of penny post. After a bitter power struggle Hill seemingly emerged triumphant in 1854 when his old enemy Maberly resigned, and Hill succeeded him in that important position at an annual salary of $2000. Unfortunately for Hill a number of other opponents, including Anthony Trollope, John Tilley, and Frank Ives Scudamore, remained in their departmental positions. To counterbalance their influence, Hill relied on several relatives, including his brothers Edwin Hill and Frederic Hill and his only son, Pearson, who had been installed in Post Office jobs. 
What Hill never realized was that the reasons for the failure of postal reform to achieve all the results he so ardently desired lay elsewhere. As Daunton has convincingly demonstrated, Hill's analysis of the economics of mail conveyance was fundamentally flawed. Hill had overestimated the elasticity of demand for mail services and underestimated the staff size required to operate the system. The irony is that some of his opponents, such as Maberly, had a much more accurate view of the complexities of postal finance than Hill did. Moreover, Hill and his family failed to recognize the reality that despite his effectiveness as an outside critic of departmental weaknesses and adherence to the 'status quo', Hill was not temperamentally suited to manage a complex bureaucracy from the inside. Autocratic and prone to be suspicious, he never achieved any critical detachment from his obsessive belief that postal reform constituted the great cause of modern life and that everyone should adopt that same belief. (When Hill met Garibaldi at a banquet in 1864, the only topic he wished to pursue was the state of the Italian post office.) 
Hill's dogmatic approach to issues, viewing all questions according to a rigid standard of his own making, was not well suited to a department which came into more frequent contact with the public than any other government agency and which faced issues that were often less than clear-cut. For example, as a committed advocate of free trade, Hill questioned the virtue of the Post Office's monopoly of mail conveyance. Yet one result of the monopoly was that it provided a certain level of service for the entire country. Similarly, Hill was adamantly opposed to 'cross-subsidies', the practice of using profits earned in one area of the Post Office's operations to cover losses incurred elsewhere. To Hill such a practice constituted an inequitable tax on the nation at large to the benefit of smaller interest groups or particular communities. Instead every aspect of the department's operations should be self-supporting. Yet this assumption ignored the fact that there were some areas of the Post Office's responsibilities, the overseas carriage of mails being an obvious case, where simply relying on market forces to ensure low contract costs, equally low postage rates, and a healthy profit would, if adopted, not work. 
These outlooks also shaped Hill's ambivalent attitude toward questions of Post Office expansion into areas beyond simply the conveyance of letters. Although in principle he supported both a parcel post and the establishment of Post Office Savings Banks, he was not an enthusiastic advocate of either idea. With regard to the former he believed that the public would regard a parcel post as unjustifiably interfering with private enterprise. The parcel post was not established until 1883, long after Hill's departure from the department. With regard to the latter Hill envisaged that Post Office Savings Banks should operate on charges based on those of the money-order system in order that a suitable surplus might be attained. If this approach had been followed by those who actively campaigned for the establishment of departmental savings banks, namely Scudamore and George Chetwynd, the system's ultimate usefulness would have been severely limited, and it is worth noting that aside from the penny post very few of the changes associated with the remarkable expansion of the nineteenth-century Post Office were advanced by Hill. 
These shortcomings did not prevent Hill from becoming quite literally a Victorian icon (statues of him were erected at Kidderminster, Birmingham, and at the Royal Exchange in London). His dedication and hard work at the Post Office and an effective public relations campaign had established his reputation as a major public figure. According to W. E. Gladstone, Sir Rowland Hill's great reform 'had run like wildfire through the civilised world; never perhaps was a local invention (for such it was) and improvement applied in the lifetime of its author to the advantages of such vast multitudes of his fellow-creatures' ('DNB'). To John Stuart Mill, for example, Hill's reforms symbolized the benefits which were made possible through what Mill termed 'popular government'. Hill reaped the rewards of this fame, including fellowship of the Royal Society in 1857, a knighthood in 1860, an honorary degree of DCL from Oxford University in 1864, and the first Albert gold medal given by the Society of Arts. 
In 1864 Hill was forced to retire as a consequence of ill health, exacerbated by stress resulting from bitter policy disagreements over salary and promotion issues with Lord Stanley of Alderley, the postmaster-general, and an unsuccessful attempt to appeal over Stanley's head to Lord Palmerston the prime minister, who perceptively described Hill as the 'spoilt child of the Post Office' (H. Parris, 'Constitutional Bureaucracy', 1969, 129). None the less, honours continued to be heaped on Hill, including a $20,000 parliamentary grant and the freedom of the City of London in 1879. After serving on the royal commission on railways in 1865-7 Hill spent much of his retirement working on a history of the penny post and his memoirs, the latter published posthumously in 1880 with the aid of G. Birkbeck Hill. Sir Rowland Hill died on 27 August 1879 at Bertram House, his home in Hampstead in north London. Venerated in death as in life, he was buried in Westminster Abbey on 4 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 13300


Hill, Rowley (1836-1887), bishop of Sodor and Man, was born at Londonderry on 22 February 1836, the third son of Sir George Hill, baronet (1804-1845), of St Columb's, co. Londonderry, and his wife, Elizabeth Sophia (died 1900), eldest daughter of John and Louisa Rea of St Columb's. He was educated at Christ's Hospital, London, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1855 and graduated BA in 1859, taking his MA in 1863, and being made DD 'honoris causa' in 1877. He was ordained a deacon in 1860, and served the curacy of Christ Church, Dover. In the following year he was admitted to priest's orders by the archbishop of Canterbury, and he moved to the curacy of St Marylebone, London. On 30 April 1863 he married Caroline Maud (died 1882), second daughter of Captain Alfred Chapman RN. In 1863 he became perpetual curate of St Luke's, Edgware Road, London, and after five years' service in that parish he was presented to the rectory of Frant, in the diocese of Chichester. In 1871 he exchanged his rectory for the vicarage of St Michael's, Chester Square, London. 
Hill was presented in 1873 to the vicarage of Sheffield. That large and important parish he held, with the rural deanery of Sheffield and a prebend in York Cathedral, until August 1877, when he was presented on the recommendation of the earl of Beaconsfield to the bishopric of Sodor and Man. A moderate evangelical, Hill discharged his duties with great zeal and success. But his plan of uniting the proposed bishopric of Liverpool to that of Sodor and Man was not generally approved, and was declined by the government. He published sermons, collections of Sunday school lessons, and instructions on the catechism. After the death of his first wife Hill married again, on 11 June 1884; his second wife was Alicia Eliza, daughter of Captain George Probyn. After a brief illness, Hill died at his London residence, 10 Hereford Square, Old Brompton, South Kensington, on 27 May 1887. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 13301


Hill, Samuel (1648/9-1716), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was the son of William Hill of South Petherton, Somerset. He matriculated from Lincoln College, Oxford, on 10 April 1663, aged fourteen, but transferred to St Mary's Hall from where he graduated BA in 1666. Nothing is known of his activities until 18 February 1673 when he was installed in the parish of Meare, Somerset. On 21 December 1679 he married Grace Pinfold at St Augustine with St Faith, London. On 10 May 1687 he was presented to the parish of Kilmington in Somerset by Sir Stephen Fox. He was made prebendary of Buckland Dinham in Wells Cathedral on 5 September 1688, appointed master of Bruton Free School, Somerset, in 1700, installed archdeacon of Wells on 12 October 1705 (at which time he appears in the records as MA), and elected a canon residentiary of the cathedral on 25 November 1708. Anthony Wood characterized Hill as a man 'much esteemed for his learning and zeal for the Church of England' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', new edn, 1813-20, 4.564). 
In his first published work, 'The Catholic Balance' (London, 1687), the high-church Hill sets out the themes to which he would return throughout his career. He is concerned to defend 'true doctrine', which he defines as that which is 'caught in the Scriptures, preached by the Fathers, and universally received in the Primitive Church' (p. 134), and he argues for an ecclesiastical hierarchy that is of divine and apostolic origin, and therefore independent within its own bounds. Hill followed this up in 1688 with 'The Necessity of Heresies Asserted and Explained' (London, 1688), in which he argues that heresy is morally necessary in order to demonstrate 'right doctrine' (p. 13). 'De presbyteratu dissertatio quadripartita' (London, 1691) was Hill's attack on the structure and doctrines of Presbyterianism. 
Hill subsequently became engaged in the controversy surrounding the oath of allegiance to William and Mary imposed by parliament in 1689 upon all beneficed clergy. Six bishops and about 400 lower clergy refused to swear the oaths and were deprived of their livings in early 1690. In 1692 Hill, who was distressed at the change of bishops but had nevertheless taken the oath, published a justification of conformity entitled 'Solomon and Abiathar, or, The Case of the Deprived Bishops and Clergy Discussed' (London, 1692). He insists that the secular deprivations are lawful because they were done for just reasons, and the church has concurred in them. Hill revisited the issue four years later in 'A Debate on the Justice and Piety of the Present Constitution under King William' (London, 1696). 
In 1694 Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, published his 'Four Discourses' (London, 1694). The second of these, 'Concerning the divinity and death of Christ', was challenged by Hill in his 'A Vindication of the Primitive Fathers' (London, 1695). Burnet's exposition of the Trinity and incarnation, argues Hill, is so ambiguous that it leaves 'a latitude for various heresies in this 'mystery'' (p. 7). Such latitude 'leadeth to destruction, in the service of heretical Comprehensions' (p. 53). Burnet complained to the bishop of London that his chaplain, Roger Altham, professor of Hebrew at Oxford, had licensed such a book 'full of scurrility', and Altham was obliged to make a public apology to Burnet for letting the book slip through. Although there were rumours that Hill would be suspended by the bishops for his assault on Burnet, he escaped punishment. Burnet later published an anonymous reply. Apparently Hill wrote a defence of his 'Vindication', and also revised his 'Vindication' in preparation for a second edition, but neither ever appeared in print. 
As early as 1693 some high-church clergy, including Hill, had been calling for a convocation of the clergy of the ecclesiastical province of Canterbury to settle the Anglican definition of the Trinity. The campaign came to a head with the publication of Francis Atterbury's 'Letter to a Convocation Man' (London, 1696). The official response came from William Wake in his 'The Authority of Christian Princes over their Ecclesiastical Synods Asserted' (London, 1697). Hill waded into the controversy with his 'Municipium ecclesiasticum, or, The Rights, Liberties, and Authorities of the Christian Church' (London, 1697), the first reply to Wake. Hill declares that the church has a 'divine right' to hold synods to govern its own affairs. There are examples of synods in scripture and instances in early church history of synods running church affairs without interference from secular authorities. He later defended 'Municipium ecclesiasticum' from an attack by Wake in 'The Rites of the Christian Church Further Defended' (London, 1698). The subject of church power was one to which Hill returned in 'A Discourse on Government' (London, 1698), 'A Brief Discourse into the Grounds, Authority... of Ecclesiastical Synods' (London, 1698), and 'The Rights, Liberties and Authorities of the Christian Church' (London, 1701). 
After this flurry of activity nothing further appeared in print until 'A thorough examination of the false principles and fallacious arguments advanced against the Christian church' (London, 1708), Hill's response to Matthew Tindal's 'pernicious' book 'The Rights of the Christian Church Asserted' (London, 1708). Hill's final three works, published in 1713, were concerned with remission of sins, baptism, and the 'Apocrypha'. He died on 7 March 1716 and is buried in Wells Cathedral. 
Hill was survived by his wife, Grace, by at least two sons, William and Samuel, and by daughters. The preamble to his will, written four days before he died, conveys Hill's sense of mission as a defender of the church, thanking God for his mercies: 'transcendingly above all with the divinest of all Imployments in the Services of the Priesthood whereby I have been admitted into the knowledge of God and of his holy Oracles and enabled with a zeale to defend the faith and Church of Christ against all the Adversaries thereof these Ages.' He put himself into the hands of God, 'now the Time of my Warfare seeming to be at an end' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/553, fol. 93'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 13302


Hill, Sir Stephen John (1809-1891), colonial governor, born on 10 June 1809, was the son of Major William Hill and his wife, Sarah. He entered the army in 1823, became lieutenant in 1825, and was promoted captain in 1842. On 30 November 1829 he married Sarah Ann, the daughter of William Vesey Munnings, chief justice of the Bahamas. In 1849 he commanded an expedition which proceeded 80 miles up the River Gambia. On 6 May he stormed and destroyed the fortified town of Bambacoo, and on the following day attacked and partially destroyed the fortified town of Keenung; he also fought a successful action on the plains of Quenella. He commanded a detachment of the 2nd and 3rd West India regiments in a successful attack by the British and French naval and land forces under Commodore Fanshawe on the pirates of the island of Basis, on the Jeba River, west Africa. For this service he received the thanks of the lords of the Admiralty and the brevet rank of major. 
On 1 April 1851 Hill was appointed governor and commander-in-chief of the Gold Coast. The following year the protected chiefs consented to a poll tax on their people to defray the cost of administration, and a local force was raised for the defence of the colony under the name of the Gold Coast corps. On 6 November 1854 Hill was nominated lieutenant-governor of Sierra Leone, and on 21 November he was appointed colonel of the 2nd West India regiment. He remained there until 1859, undertaking two successful expeditions up the Great Scarcies River in January 1858 and February 1859. In July 1860, having been made CB, he returned as governor-in-chief. Ill health compelled him to return to England on 21 July 1862, when he left his son, Lieutenant-Colonel William Hill, as acting governor. His second term of administration was marked by the annexation of British Quiah in April 1861 and British Sherbro in November 1861. 
On 9 February 1863 Hill assumed the office of captain-general and governor-in-chief of the Leeward and Caribbee Islands, where he remained until 1869. He was then moved to Newfoundland. The province's vote against confederation in that November was a source of annoyance to him, but he accepted the result. Acting always on the advice of his executive council, he was a trusted and popular governor. He married for the second time on 3 August 1871. His wife, who was to survive him, was Louisa Gordon, the daughter of John Sheil (died 1847), chief justice of Antigua. In 1874 Hill was made KCMG, and he retired from active service in 1876. He died in London, at his home, 72 Sutherland Avenue, Maida Vale, on 20 October 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 13303


Hill, Thomas (c.1528-c.1574), writer and translator, described himself as a 'Londoner', and claimed to have been 'alwayes rudely taughte, amonge the Smythes of Vulcanus forge' ('Proffitable Arte of Gardening', 1568, sig. dd3'r'). However, Hill knew Latin and Italian and he became known as a translator of popular books on science and the supernatural. His first publication, in 1556, was a translation of a Latin compilation on physiognomy. This was dedicated to a physician, George Keble, as was its successor in 1559, a compilation on the interpretation of dreams, which ran to five editions. In 1560, the year of his first extant almanac, he was described as a leading almanac-maker, 'both lerned and honest' (Fulke, sig. B1'r'). Hill produced at least eight more almanacs, becoming one of the first English makers of such a series, and one of the first to produce an almanac (in 1571) with blank pages, for use as a pocket diary. About 1560 he also published 'A Briefe Treatyse of Gardening', the first book on that subject in English; this ran to nine editions. 
In 1567 Hill produced three more books: another work on dreams; one on phenomena such as comets, marvellous bodies of water, fiery portents, rainbows, and earthquakes; and a collection of receipts for conjuring tricks, practical jokes, household matters, and divination, perhaps translated from Latin, and meant 'for the recreation of wittes at vacant tymes', which was reprinted as late as 1684. Hill enlarged his physiognomical translation in 1571 with a new dedication to the duke of Norfolk, an acknowledgement of help from John Dee, and liminary verses in Latin and Greek. In the same year he advertised exclusive manuscript copies of unpublished works, such as his 'Guide of the Matrone', which offered to expound 'practises purchased of manye iolly Dames, and Countesses of Italy' ('Contemplation of Mankinde', 1571). These were attempts to raise Hill's status as an author, as may have been the elegant pseudonym Didymus Mountaine, under which a new, handsomely illustrated compilation, 'The Gardners Labyrinth', was published in 1577. Hill had died, however, before this was printed; the Latin poet Henry Dethick saw it through the press. 
Hill's translations of works on chemical medicine by Conrad Gesner and Leonardo Fioravanti ('The Newe Iewell of Health', 1576, and 'A Ioyfull Iewell', 1579) were completed by two friends of his, George Baker and John Hester. These books were instrumental in making Paracelsianism widely known in England. A mathematical and astronomical textbook, 'The Schoole of Skil', which rejects Copernicanism, was printed by William Jaggard in 1599; many of Hill's unpublished works must have been lost. Dethick, Hester, and Jaggard all commented on Hill's unornamented style and agreed that his work was nevertheless admirable. Jaggard wrote that 'It is not vnlike, but he would (if God had spared him longer life) haue held on as he began, to set forth for the common good of his and our Country diuers necessary works' ('Schoole of Skil', sig. A4'r'). 


@@@@@


doc= 13304


Hill, Edmund (1564-1644), Benedictine monk, was born in Somerset on 24 June 1564, the son of Thomas and Joan Hill. He is sometimes said to have been a Church of England clergyman but this is unlikely in the light of his own avowal that 'I was born, baptized and confirmed a Catholic' (Hill, 'Quartron of Reasons', 1600, preface). He was a servant of John Gerard, the Jesuit, who sent him to the English College of Douai, then temporarily removed to Rheims, on 21 August 1590. He left for Rome on 16 February 1593, continued his studies in the English College there, and was ordained priest on 12 March 1594 by Owen Lewis, bishop of Cassano. He was the chief troublemaker in the student uprising against the administration of the English College at Rome by the Jesuits, with their pro-Spanish sympathies. He earned sufficient notoriety in this role to receive a personal rebuke from Pope Clement VIII at the audience granted to him on his departure for the English mission. 
Hill's youthful contentiousness now found a new outlet in religious controversy. On 18 January 1599 William Pole, a Devonshire justice of the peace, denounced him to Pole's grandfather, Sir John Popham, the lord chief justice, for having 'corrupted and seduced' Sir Robert Basset. Pole claimed to have written to the same effect in 1597. This accusation shows that Hill's first missionary field was his native west country. His 'A Quartron of Reasons of Catholic Religion with as many Brief Reasons of Refusal' was published secretly in England in 1600, bearing the imprint 'Antwerp'. This challenge elicited two responses, the first in 1603 from Francis Dillingham, one of the translators of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible'. A weightier response of 438 pages from George Abbot, dean of Winchester and future archbishop of Canterbury, appeared in 1604. Abbot spent a year and a half on its composition even though he dismissed Hill's work as no more than an abridgement of a similar book by Richard Bristow, usually referred to as 'Bristow's motives'. Hill wrote two other works of a devotional nature. 
When Hill published his 'Quartron' he was, according to his own account, 'living at Phalempyne, beyond the sea', being then a doctor of divinity. Two years later he was again labouring on the mission, and being apprehended at 'Dubscombte's house in London' was committed to Newgate prison. A Jesuit recounting his capture described him as an 'appellant priest'. On 30 April 1604 he was condemned to death for being a priest, but was reprieved at the intercession of the Spanish ambassador and banished in the following year. While in prison again in 1612 he received the Benedictine habit by commission from Leander of St Martin (John Jones). After his release he was professed a monk of St Gregory's Priory, Douai, on 8 October 1613, though he continued to work as a missioner in England where he laboured for nearly fifty years in all. In 1633 he was given the honorific title of prior of Gloucester by the English Benedictine congregation. On leaving the English mission he retired to St Gregory's at Douai, where he died on 7 August 1644. 


@@@@@


doc= 13305


Hill, Thomas (d. 1653), college head, was born at Knighton-on-Teme, Worcestershire, the son of William and Mary Hill. He has been claimed as a pupil of the King's School, Worcester, but from an association based on the false identification of his birthplace as Kington in the same county. He was admitted pensioner of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 19 October 1618 and matriculated the same year. He advanced to a scholarship, and graduated BA in 1623. After becoming a fellow of Emmanuel he proceeded MA in 1626. He was ordained deacon in the diocese of Peterborough on 23 January 1629, and made priest the following day. While at Emmanuel he was a regular preacher at the nearby parish church of St Andrew the Great, and continued to minister to the townspeople during an outbreak of plague. He spent a period with the puritan divine John Cotton at Boston, Lincolnshire, during which time his religious convictions were sharpened. In 1633 he took his BD and four days later was instituted to the rectory of Titchmarsh, Northamptonshire, on the presentation of the earl of Manchester. He sought relief from the composition fee payable to the university by beneficed graduands, since he had paid more than his first year's income to pension the previous incumbent, and because he was not formally possessed of the living when he took his degree. The university rejected his suit, but despite this awkward beginning Hill became an energetic rural pastor. At this time he visited Lord Brooke at Warwick, through which connection he met and married Mary Willford, governess to the earl of Warwick's daughter Lady Frances Rich. 
Hill was appointed to advise the Lords committee on religious reform established in March 1641. He became a member of the Westminster assembly and was a regular weekday morning preacher in Westminster Abbey; on Sundays he was heard in St Martin-in-the-Fields. Several of his sermons before parliament between 1642 and 1644 were printed, as was a fast sermon before the lord mayor and aldermen of Easter week 1644. In 1645 he was first designated master of his old college and then, because this was 'not... a sphere large enough' (Tuckney, 52), he was made master of Trinity College, Cambridge, in which post he was confirmed by parliamentary order of 17 January 1648. In 1645/6 he was vice-chancellor and in 1646 he received his DD. He obtained for the university library the reversionary interest in books bequeathed by Archbishop Richard Bancroft, and solicited from Sir John Wollaston the establishment of a mathematical lecture. Hill himself lectured every Sunday in St Michael's Church, attached to Trinity, and also preached in the parish church of All Saints opposite the Great Gate. In the pulpit he was 'plain, powerful, frequent and laborious' (Tuckney, 58). A further 'Six Sermons' were published in 1649. Hill edited William Fenner's 'Wilfull Impenitency' (1648) and with Edmund Calamy edited Fenner's works, published from 1651. He also assisted Samuel Clarke with his 'Lives' of puritan divines. 
Hill died of a quartan ague on 18 December 1653. His friend for thirty-four years Anthony Tuckney, master of St John's, preached at the funeral in Great St Mary's on 22 December. By his will of 15 July 1650 and codicil of 7 July 1652 Hill left to his wife his house at Over Aston (Aston Court) in Knighton-on-Teme, together with other property there and at Burford, Shropshire (all which he had bought from his father) together with lands at Over, Cambridgeshire. Mary Hill subsequently became Tuckney's second wife, and died some time before 30 September 1668. When Hill made his will his parents were still alive; he also mentions sisters Jane Doughty, Margery Floyd, Anne Clarke, Mary Carbourne, and (as yet unmarried) Penelope. He made bequests to the poor of Titchmarsh, to his colleges, and to the university library. His personal effects were valued at $485 16's'. 4died, including $45 in plate and $120 in books. 


@@@@@


doc= 13306


Hill, Thomas (c.1628-1677), nonconformist minister, was born at Derby and attended Repton School. Before attending Cambridge University, according to Calamy, Hill was 'sometime a domestic to the earl' of Chesterfield (Calamy, 'Continuation', 855). He was admitted at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, on 10 September 1645 and matriculated at Easter 1646, before graduating BA in 1650. On leaving the university he became chaplain to the countess of Chesterfield at Tamworth Castle, Warwickshire, and was then preacher at Elvaston, Derbyshire, before moving to Leicestershire. Nothing is known of Hill's marriage, except that it produced a son, Thomas Hill, who founded and led an academy for training ministers at Findern in Derbyshire and who died in March 1720. 
Refusing the engagement, the oath of loyalty to the Commonwealth in 1649, Thomas Hill acted as minister at Orton on the Hill from June 1651; the parish lay near where four counties met -- Leicestershire (in which it was), Derbyshire, Staffordshire, and Warwickshire. On 16 November 1652, at the meeting of the classis of Wirksworth, Derbyshire, he 'produced two certificates, one from his neighbouring ministers concerning his ministerial abilities and godly conversation; the other from the parishioners of Orton on the Hill concerning his title there, they certifying their choice of him to be their minister'; these certificates, his 'testimony of the grace of God in him, of his inward call' and of 'his competent skill in the original tongues' were all approved by the classis (Cox, 164-5). But only after attending a second meeting on 21 December 1652, at which he preached a sermon and defended a thesis to the satisfaction of the assembled divines, was Hill accepted as fit for the ministry. He was formally ordained by the Wirksworth classis on 15 March 1653. All this, and his refusal to preach before Cromwell, may suggest that Hill was strongly of a presbyterian persuasion. 
In 1660 Hill was not ejected from Orton, but the sequestered vicar was restored in that year and it seems that Hill had moved a few miles to a house at Lea Grange. He was presented by the second earl of Chesterfield to the curacy of the nearby parish of Shuttington, Warwickshire. Here he was allowed rectorial tithes belonging to the earl, and although the 'Five Mile Act' made it impossible for him to take services he was able to engage a sympathetic Worcestershire minister for the work. Thus, 'using prudence, he had an opportunity of exercising his ministry where some others were molested' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.746). It may also be that Hill's security was improved by his geographical situation. His old vicarage at Orton on the Hill was in the diocese of Lincoln, his living at Shuttington was under the jurisdiction of the bishop of Worcester, and his own residence at Lea Grange was in Staffordshire in the diocese of Lichfield. 
Calamy records of Hill that 'his stature was something low, his hair black, his countenance graceful, and acceptable'; he valued the works of Richard Baxter especially, because of the 'catholic spirit' of universalism to be found in them; on admission to the university Hill was acknowledged to be already better versed in Hebrew 'than many or most of the Tutors'; an 'expert linguist' in Latin and Greek, he entertained also a lively interest in philosophy, mathematics, and history (Calamy, 'Continuation', 856, 860). It is clear that Hill shared with many of his persuasion a deeply serious and conscientious approach to his calling, preaching three times on Sunday in all weathers. His inflexibility in this seems to have brought upon him the cold which led to his death at the age of about forty-nine. He was buried at Orton on the Hill on 7 March 1677. 


@@@@@


doc= 13307


Hill, Thomas (d. 1720), Presbyterian minister and tutor, was the son of Thomas Hill (c.1628-1677), curate of Shuttington, Warwickshire, who refused to conform in 1662. He probably received his early education from Samuel Shaw, master of Ashby grammar school, who had been at school with his father. He was educated for the nonconformist ministry at John Woodhouse's academy at Sheriffhales, Shropshire, but 'through want of subsistence has beene forced... to quitt' (Presbyterian Fund board minutes, fol. 79'r'). With a grant of $8 a year from the Presbyterian Fund (1692-3) he resumed his studies with Woodhouse. He received a gift of books under Richard Baxter's will in 1693, at which time he was living at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, probably with Shaw, whose will Hill witnessed. 
Hill was ordained at Nottingham on 7 April 1703 by ten Presbyterian ministers. At the time he was minister of Findern, 4 miles south-west of Derby. He later also supplied Alvaston ('c'.1711-20). From about 1710 he conducted an academy in Derby preparing students for the nonconformist ministry, which some time after 1714 was removed to Hartshorne (between Ashby and Derby) and finally to Findern. In common with most other nonconformist tutors in this period he was harassed, and in August 1712 presented at the assizes for keeping a school in Derby 'for the boarding of youth' without a licence. The prosecution was initiated by the master of the free school. In his defence, Hill stated that 'I board young men; I advise them what books to read; and when they apply to me for information on anything they do not understand, I inform them' (McLachlan, 'Ebenezer Latham', 150). The case was dismissed. 
From the textbooks Hill recommended, in particular the Newtonian Le Clerc's work on logic and the Cartesian Rohault on physics, he was clearly open to the latest scholarship. Nevertheless, they were the texts that John Woodhouse had employed. The use of Richard Baxter's 'An End of Doctrinal Controversies' (1691) suggests Hill favoured Baxter's 'middle way'. Whether modern languages were taught is unclear, but in 1715 Hill published a collection of psalms in Latin and Greek verse which his students were expected to sing, which also indicates an unusual interest in music. The names of twenty-two students are known (there were 'many more'), of whom the most distinguished was John Taylor, the Hebraist and future principal of Warrington Academy, who migrated from Thomas Dixon's academy at Whitehaven. Hill died on 2 March 1720 at Findern, where he was buried on 5 March. After his death the academy was continued by Ebenezer Latham, who may previously have served as his assistant. Under Latham, the academy became one of the leading academies educating students on liberal theological principles. 


@@@@@


doc= 13308


Hill, Thomas (1661?-1734?), portrait painter, is believed to have been born in 1661; but so far no clues to his birthplace or parentage have emerged. He was trained to draw by the elder William Faithorne, foremost portrait engraver of his day, whose sensitive touch was to influence Hill's own manner. Hill studied painting under the Dutch history painter Dirk Freres, whom Sir Peter Lely had encouraged to come to England. That Hill also received a liberal general education is evinced by his letters to Humfrey Wanley and the memoranda occasionally sent to George Vertue for his 'Note Books'. 
Hill emerged as an independent portrait painter about 1694. He had lodgings in London (in 1720, in York Buildings, off the Strand), but relished country visits to paint congenial sitters. Hill's portrait manner is graceful and unpompous. He liked to depict children out of doors, with swags of flowers or beside garden ornaments with curious antique reliefs, often with tall cypresses in the background. Waterhouse singled out 'Susannah Strangways' (a young girl with a dove, 'c'.1705; priv. coll.) as having a 'gentleness and refinement hardly to be found in any other portrait painter of the time' (Waterhouse, 'Painting in Britain', 95). 
A beguiling portrait of the young actress Letitia Cross (known as 'The girl') was engraved by John Smith 'c'.1700. Most of Hill's adult commissions were engraved; they include 'Sir Henry Goodricke', master of the ordnance (in cuirass), and 'Lady Goodricke', and several portraits of bishops, including 'Philip Bisse, Bishop of Hereford' (New College, Oxford; engraved by Vertue, 1719); 'George Hooper, Bishop of Bath and Wells' (1723; Wells Cathedral; engraved by G. White); and 'William Wake, Archbishop of Canterbury' (NPG). 
Hill's most congenial commissions came from the Strangways family (later Fox-Strangways, and from 1741 earls of Ilchester), of Melbury House, Dorset. Hill's most inventive work there was a large family group (on canvas) for the grand staircase wall. Perhaps begun towards the end of the 1690s, after the old Tudor house had been enlarged and its garden redesigned, it depicts ten members of the intermarried Hornor and Strangways families in the garden at Melbury, Erato with her lyre presiding in stone, and a complete view of the house in the background. On the right, new lovers plight their troth (his hand delicately clasping hers) and, unusually for the times, Hill introduced an additional figure of a manservant, discreetly separated by drapery, bringing them a letter of congratulation. 
From Melbury, on a later visit, Hill reported to Wanley: 'I was received perfectly friendly, like a Relation, as one of the family... How shall I doe to leave a fine seat, a Coach and six to take the air in, a great deal of good Company, a table with ten or fourteen dishes of meat... to come home to my poor station in Yorke buildings, considering a cloudy, heavy, stifled air must be my Lott? Why I shall now and then meet my friend Mr. Wanley and others such, and desire no more. (letter of 10 Sept 1720, Goulding and Adams, 449)' Hill was a long-standing friend of the eminent scholar Humfrey Wanley. In 1708 Wanley became librarian to Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford, and began to build up one of the finest collections of manuscripts ever assembled. Wanley was chiefly based at Wimpole Hall, where Hill was a welcome visitor, executing numerous commissions for the earl of Oxford; as well as copies of family portraits, these included portraits of members of Lord Oxford's circle of antiquarians, including 'James Anderson' ('Mr Anderson the famous Scots antiquarian'), 'Solomon Negri', Hebrew scholar (a head, painted in 1717), and 'John Daniel Schumacher', 1722, curator of the tsar's books and antiquities, then on a visit to Wimpole. Lord Oxford also commissioned a half-length self-portrait of Hill. All these were dispersed in the late Lord Oxford's sale in 1742 (and are now untraced). 
Hill painted three different portraits of Humfrey Wanley. The original of the first portrait (dated 1711, with the sitter displaying a large Greek text) is in the collection of the Society of Antiquaries of London (with a version in the Bodleian Library, Oxford). A second portrait, dated 1717, was presented to Oxford University by the second earl of Oxford in 1740 (Bodl. Oxf.); a replica is in the National Portrait Gallery. Hill's last, unique three-quarter-length portrait of his friend, painted in 1722 (and now in the British Museum), is the finest and most fully characterized of all his works. Wanley himself recognized this, writing to Schumacher that the portrait 'will be his Master-piece' (letter of 26 May 1722, P. L. Heyworth, ed., 'The Letters of Humfrey Wanley', 1966, 444-5). It depicts Wanley virtually full-face and nearly full-length, sitting at ease in a many-buttoned velvet coat, one arm held over a larger than life-size brass head of the emperor Hadrian, the latest antiquity to enter the collections which he had the honour to curate. In its reflection of a life well spent, Hill's portrait of Humfrey Wanley anticipated Hogarth's 'Captain Coram' by twenty years. 
Wanley died in 1726. Hill may by then have retired from painting; one of Vertue's notes in 1725 refers briefly to 'Mr Tho Hills (painter) sale of pictures drawings plaster moulds and prints' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.8). Seemingly not recorded elsewhere, this may have been a private studio sale open only to Hill's associates. Vertue stated that Hill died at Mitcham in 1734; but his death cannot be traced there in or about that date; nor is it known whether he was married. If documentation of his life remains elusive and his self-portrait is lost, his work stands, in Ellis Waterhouse's words, as 'original and refreshing in a stereotyped age' (Waterhouse, 'Painting in Britain', 95). 


@@@@@


doc= 13309


Hill, Thomas (1760-1840), book-collector, was born in Lancaster in May 1760 and went at an early age to London, where for many years he carried on an extensive business as a drysalter at Queenhithe. He patronized Robert Bloomfield (1766-1823), whose 'Farmer's Boy' he read in manuscript and recommended to a publisher. Hill was part proprietor of the 'Monthly Mirror', and befriended Henry Kirke White when a contributor to that periodical. Robert Southey felt that Hill's was probably 'the best existing collection of English poetry' (Knight, 2.27). 
Hill occupied a house in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, and a cottage at Sydenham, Kent. There, in his celebrated 'Sydenham Sundays', he used to entertain 'literati, artists, wits and actors' ('New Monthly Magazine', 43), including John and Charles Kemble, Theodore Hook, Campbell, Edward Dubois, the Hunts, James and Horace Smith, and the comedian Charles Mathews. These hospitable parties are vividly recalled in a number of memoirs, including those of Mrs Mathews, who celebrates 'days of unmixed pleasure' (Mathews, 626). 
A lifelike picture of Hill is rendered in Hook's novel 'Gilbert Gurney', where he figures as Hull. The scenes in which he appears were read over to him before publication. He was always thought to be the original of John Poole's comedy 'Paul Pry', immortalized at the Haymarket in 1825 by Liston, although Poole himself insisted that the character was never intended 'as the representative of any one individual' ('New Monthly Magazine', 31/1, 1831, 280). His familiar peculiarities are also represented in the person of Jack Hobbleday of Poole's 'Little Pedlington'. Lockhart called him 'the most innocent and ignorant of all the bibliomaniacs'. 'He had no literary tastes and acquirements; his manners were those of his business' (C. Redding, 'Fifty Years' Recollections', 1858, 2.212). But the 'jovial bachelor, plump and rosy as an abbot' (Hunt, 181), 'a fat florid, round little man like a retired elderly Cupid' ('New Monthly Magazine', 80/1, 45), with his famous 'Pooh! pooh! I happen to know', his ceaseless questionings in a harsh, guttural voice, his boastings, his insatiable curiosity, his extensive and distorted knowledge of all the gossip of the day, was spoken of by everyone as a very kind-hearted and hospitable man. Even at an advanced age he was unusually young-looking; hence the joke of Samuel Rogers, that he was one of the little Hills spoken of as skipping in the 'Psalms', and the assertion of James Smith that the record of his birth had been destroyed in the fire of London. 
About 1810, after losing heavily through an unsuccessful speculation in indigo, Hill retired to second-floor chambers at 2 James Street, Adelphi, London, where he lived until his death, varying his strict economy with occasional binges. Longmans gave between $3000 and $4000 for his books, which formed the basis for their 'Bibliotheca Anglo-poetica' (1815). He caught a severe cold at Rouen in the autumn of 1840 and died in the Adelphi on 20 December in his eighty-first year, leaving to Edward Dubois most of his remaining fortune. His furniture and plate were sold by auction on 23 April 1841. 


@@@@@


doc= 13310


Hill, Thomas (1808-1865), topographer, elder son of the Revd Isaac Hill (1773-1856), headmaster of Mercers' School, London, 1804-1840, was born in London. He matriculated in 1825 and entered Clare College, Cambridge, in 1828; he graduated BA in 1830 and proceeded MA in 1832. Hill was admitted at the Inner Temple on 26 May 1831. On 22 December 1833, however, he was ordained deacon in London, and the next year, on 21 December, was ordained priest. He was assistant classical master at Mercers' School from 1832 to 1850, and was presented to the living of Holy Trinity Minories, Queenhithe, London, in 1850. He was author of 'The Harmony of the Greek and Latin Languages' (1841) and 'The History of the Nunnery of St Clare and the Parish of Holy Trinity' (1851). Hill died at his home, 30 Little Trinity Lane, Queenhithe, on 13 February 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 13311


Hill, Thomas Ford (1753-1795), antiquary, was born on 21 September 1753, the son of George Hill, glove manufacturer of Worcester, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was a Quaker, and intended for a commercial life in the linen trade. After serving an apprenticeship at Pontefract, he was taken into the house of Messrs Dawson and Walker in Cornhill, London, probably securing the position because Walker, also a Quaker, was his brother-in-law. During this period Hill seems to have lived with his mother at Ely Place in London, where she had moved from Worcester after her husband's death. 
Hill soon abandoned business for literature and antiquities, and in 1780 he made an antiquarian tour through Scotland. On this tour he collected Erse songs, which he published together with a description of his journeys in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of 1782 and 1783. These were held to be a valuable contribution to the 'Ossian' debate, on which Hill maintained a largely neutral stance. The songs he collected were privately printed as 'Antient Erse poems, collected among the Scottish highlands, in order to illustrate the Ossian of Macpherson' in 1784. In 1784 he visited the continent, residing at Geneva to learn French, and afterwards exploring the mountainous district of Savoy. In 1787 he went on to Italy to pursue antiquarian studies and was in Rome by February that year. His portrait was painted in Rome by Gavin Hamilton. During his five years abroad he became acquainted with eminent scholars and with Cardinal Borgia and Prince Kaunitz; he travelled to Ravenna, Venice, Prague, the Netherlands, and various places in Germany. In 1790 he was back in London, where he rented a house in Charlotte Street, Portland Place. He made two other journeys to the continent in 1791 and 1792, when he travelled through a greater part of Germany, and also visited Paris. He published in 1792 a work on current events in France, which a reviewer in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' found too favourable to the Revolution. In the same year he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He returned to Italy in 1794, and died on 16 July 1795 at Ariano in Apulia, worn out by the difficulties he had encountered on his journey to Calabria earlier that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 13312


Hill, Sir Thomas Noel (1784-1832), army officer, seventh son of Sir John Hill, third baronet (1740-1824), of Hawkstone, Shropshire, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Chambre (died 8 March 1806), and younger brother of Rowland Hill, Viscount Hill, was born on 14 February 1784. He entered the army on 25 September 1801 as cornet in the 10th light dragoons, becoming lieutenant in 1803 and captain in 1805. He exchanged to the 53rd regiment the year after, and on 16 February 1809 was appointed major in the Portuguese army under Marshal Beresford. He commanded the 1st Portuguese regiment with distinction at the battle of Busaco, the capture of Ciudad Rodrigo, the battles of Salamanca and Vitoria, and the capture of San Sebastian. He was appointed captain and lieutenant-colonel 1st foot guards (Grenadier Guards) on 25 July, and was knighted on 28 July 1814. He served as assistant adjutant-general in the Waterloo campaign. He retired from the guards on half pay on 27 May 1824. He was deputy adjutant-general in Canada in 1827-30, and was afterwards appointed commandant of the cavalry depot, Maidstone. 
Hill married, on 27 July 1821, Anna Maria Shore (died 25 Feb 1886), second daughter of John Shore, the first Lord Teignmouth; they had six surviving children. 
Hill was a KCB (January 1815), and had the orders of the Tower and Sword of Portugal and of Maximilian Joseph of Bavaria. He died at Maidstone, Kent, on 8 January 1832, and was buried in Maidstone churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 13313


Hill, Thomas Wright (1763-1851), schoolmaster, was born in Kidderminster on 24 April 1763. He was the son of James Hill, a baker and dealer in horse-corn, and his second wife, Sarah, who was the daughter of a Kidderminster apothecary named John Symonds. His forefathers for three generations had been freeholders and tradesmen of Kidderminster, descended from Walter Hill, a landowner of Abberley, Worcestershire (died 1693). They claimed relationship with Samuel Butler, author of 'Hudibras'. Both of his parents were strict dissenters and Hill received part of his education at a school kept by Stephen Addington, a dissenting minister, at Market Harborough, Leicestershire. He was afterwards moved to Kidderminster grammar school. In early childhood he developed a taste for literature, and interested himself in mathematics, astronomy, and natural philosophy. When nine years old he attended several of the philosophical lectures of James Ferguson, of which he gives an interesting account in his autobiography. 
When fourteen years of age Hill was apprenticed to a brass-founder in Birmingham, but he found the business uncongenial, and his voluntary efforts as a Sunday school teacher at the chapel of Joseph Priestley led him ultimately to devote his special attention to teaching. He joined Priestley's congregation, and was much influenced by his pastor, whose scientific interests he shared. 
On 29 July 1791 Hill married Sarah Lea (1765-1842), the daughter of a Birmingham working man. They had six surviving children: Matthew Davenport Hill; Edwin Hill; Sir Rowland Hill, the postal reformer; Arthur Hill, headmaster of Bruce Castle School; Frederic Hill, inspector of prisons; and Caroline Hill, who became the wife of Francis Clark of Birmingham. Honest, guileless, and unconventional, Hill was said to have been endowed with every sense but common sense. That deficiency his wife, a woman of strong character, tried to supply. 
A manufacture of woollen stuffs in which Hill had engaged was ruined in 1795 by the French war. The family moved to Wolverhampton, where Hill became a works superintendent. Reduced to great straits, at the suggestion of his wife he opened a school in order that his children might be properly educated. The school was first opened in 1803 at Hill Top, then on the outskirts of Birmingham. His simple love of truth and courtesy made him a fair teacher, but he lacked mental perspective, and treated all kinds of knowledge as of equal importance. His private pupils in mathematics in the town included Edwin Guest, afterwards master of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and Benjamin Hall Kennedy, afterwards professor of Greek at Cambridge. Hill never freed himself from debt, but his buoyant optimism never allowed his poverty to trouble him, although his wife felt it keenly. Their son Rowland soon took charge of their money affairs, with admirable effect. 
The school remained at Hill Top until 1819. Rowland had then become its chief director, and it was moved to Hazelwood. Although Hill did not retire from teaching until 1835 it is thought that his sons Rowland and Matthew were largely responsible for the modernization of Hazelwood School in accordance with the principles of utilitarian and radical educational thought. The school attracted a great deal of attention from Jeremy Bentham and other members of the Chrestomathic group and in 1827 a new branch was opened at Bruce Castle in Tottenham. This eventually superseded Hazelwood School, which closed in 1833. Hill died at his home in Bruce Terrace, Tottenham, on 13 June 1851, aged eighty-eight. 
Hill's 'Remains', containing an autobiographical fragment and some notices of his life, were privately printed in London in 1859. A volume of selections from his papers appeared in London in 1860. It includes a brief account of his system of shorthand. He originally devised this ingenious system about 1802, and by various changes at length reduced it to a complete philosophical alphabet, on a strictly phonetic basis, without depriving it of its stenographic character. His hope that it might come into general use was not realized. The volume also includes 'A system of numerical nomenclature and notation, grounded on the principles of abstract utility' (1845); in this new system the names of the numbers are made, by virtue of arithmetical significance given to the vowels and diphthongs, to indicate their precise meaning by their structure. 
Among his other activities Hill made a close study of letter sounds. Dr Guest, his former pupil, attributed to him the discovery of 'the distinction between vocal and whisper letters' ('A History of English Rhythms', 1838, 1.9). Perhaps the most significant product of his inventiveness was his scheme for proportional representation, to ensure the representation of minorities in elections. The idea, apparently the result of Hill's mathematical interests, was adopted for committee elections in a scientific society founded by his son, Rowland, and was recommended by Rowland Hill in 1839 for adoption in municipal elections in South Australia. Hill has been accounted the first Englishman to propound the idea of a single transferable vote as the basis for proportional representation (Hart, 7-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 13314


William Hill (fl. 1647-1662), who likewise was a student of Merton College. The latter Hill was the son of a nonconformist of Herefordshire and followed his father's tendencies in this regard. He attended Merton from 1647 onwards. While it is unclear whether it was he or the former William who submitted to the parliamentary visitation on 12 May 1648, it seems more likely that it was the younger Hill. Wood's description of him as 'a tale-bearer to the parliamentarian visitors' and 'a factious person' substantiates this view (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', vol. 3, col. 801). On his departure from the university he became a parson, but because of his parliamentary sympathies lost his benefice on the Restoration. However, two years later, in 1662, he received 'a considerable benefice' in Gloucestershire (ibid., col. 802). The reason for this lies in the murky Tong plot. Hill seemingly heard of a plot among his former associates against the king. Whether Hill turned state's evidence or was a double agent is unclear, but his own relation of his role in his 'Narrative of the Said Plot', attached to the 1662 publication 'A brief narrative of that stupendious tragedy, late intended to be acted by the satanical saints of these reforming times, humbly presented to the king's majesty', depicts his involvement in a favourable light. He did not live to enjoy his benefice, dying a few years later. 


@@@@@


doc= 13315


Hill, William (1618-1667), classical scholar, was the son of Blackleech Hill, an attorney of Hemlingford hundred in Warwickshire. He was born at Cudworth, Warwickshire, and matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, on 21 November 1634. By December 1638 he had received his BA degree, and he became a fellow of the college in 1639 owing to his proficiency in Greek, Latin, and physics. Shortly after his election as fellow he moved to Sutton Coldfield, to take the post of master of the free school there, where he proved to be as successful a schoolmaster as he had been a scholar. His marriage to a rich wife (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', vol. 3, col. 800) proved short-lived, his wife dying by 1641, the year when Hill received his MA degree from Oxford. Perhaps the death of his wife, to whom he was very much attached, was the reason why he decided to leave Warwickshire and travel to London to start a career as a physician. 
Having made his name there Hill married again, this time to the daughter of another physician who had links to Sutton Coldfield. This latter marriage did not prove as happy as his first one, as a result of the scandal caused by the birth of a son seven months after the marriage. Hill tried in vain to convince his medical colleagues that the boy was conceived within the marriage, even going so far as to write a manuscript treatise on the subject. In the later 1640s he may have been at Oxford, where his name is included in the lists of those who submitted to the parliamentary visitation. Certainly he had leave to graduate BM and DM from Oxford on 8 June 1649. His dedication of his popular ''Dionysion oikoumenes periegesis': Dionysii orbis descriptio commentario critico et geographico... ac tabulis illustrata a Guilielmo Hill' (1658) to Henry Cromwell may account for his subsequent move to Ireland, where he became chief master of the cathedral school of St Patrick's, Dublin. However, on the Restoration he was forced out of this position and moved to Finglas, where he tutored privately. His only other work was an (unpublished) epitome of the physician Lazarus Riverius. Before his death he is reputed to have been given an honorary doctorate by Trinity College, Dublin. Hill died at Finglas as a result of a fever and was buried on 29 November 1667 in Finglas church. Little is known of his family save that the fever which killed him also killed 'most of his family' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', vol. 3, col. 801). 
This William Hill is often confused with another 


@@@@@


doc= 13316


Hill, William Noel-, third Baron Berwick (1773-1842), diplomatist, was the second son of Noel Hill, first Baron Berwick, great-nephew of Richard Hill (1655/6-1727), and his wife, Anne, daughter of Henry Vernon of Hilton, Staffordshire. Born on 21 October 1773, he was educated at Rugby School and Jesus College, Cambridge (1791-3), and was MP for Shrewsbury (1796-1812) and Marlborough (1814-18), sitting as a silent Pittite. He courted Lady Hester Stanhope, ultimately unsuccessfully, though he was briefly engaged to her. He was appointed envoy to Regensburg in 1805 -- 'a little bit of a job', Lady Bessborough thought (HoP, 'Commons') -- but war prevented him from going there. He was envoy to Sardinia from 1807 to 1824. In 1822, he rejected Canning's offer of the under-secretaryship of foreign affairs. In 1824 he assumed the additional name of Noel; in the same year he was created a privy councillor, and went as envoy to Naples, where he served until 1833. There he was, Harold Acton thought, 'a middle-aged sybarite who loved good cheer though some thought him heartless. His reputation for wit was not justified by his despatches' (Acton, 6). In 1832 he succeeded his elder brother, Thomas Noel Hill, as third Baron Berwick. He was an FSA. He died unmarried at Redrice, near Andover, on 4 August 1842. His large library was dispersed by sale. 


@@@@@


doc= 13317


Hill, Wills, first marquess of Downshire (1718-1793), politician, was born on 30 May 1718 at Fairford, Gloucestershire, the third but only surviving son of Trevor Hill, first Viscount Hillsborough (1693-1742), landowner, and Mary (1684-1742), daughter of Anthony Rowe of North Aston, Oxford, and widow of Sir Edmund Denton, first baronet, of Hillesden, Buckinghamshire. His first name was received from General Sir Charles Wills, one of the sponsors at his baptism. 
The family's fortunes had been linked with Ulster since 1573, when Moyses Hill joined Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex, on his expedition to colonize Antrim. The connection with co. Down was established in 1607. A series of judicious marriages saw estates and titles grow, so that in 1742 Wills Hill inherited, at twenty-four, an Irish viscountcy, control of five seats in the Irish parliament, and estates that enabled him to succeed his father as lord lieutenant of co. Down, a dignity he held for the rest of his life. Moreover, in the previous year he had been elected member of parliament for Warwick. Entry into the Irish House of Lords in November 1743 completed formal proof of his Anglo-Irish political standing. 
Thereafter, Hillsborough demonstrated an unwavering ambition to advance himself. His first success was to be created, on 3 October 1751, Viscount Kilwarlin and earl of Hillsborough in the Irish peerage. Five years later, on 17 November 1756, he acquired the British title of Baron Harwich of Harwich and so left the House of Commons. Continuing to be known as Hillsborough, he became, on 28 August 1772, Viscount Fairford and earl of Hillsborough in the British peerage. A final promotion occurred on 26 August 1789 when he was styled marquess of Downshire, though this he was obliged to accept as an Irish title. He never succeeded in becoming lord lieutenant of Ireland nor secured an Irish dukedom. This unremitting pursuit of advancement did not escape notice. It has been pointed out (GEC, 'Peerage', 4.458n.) that he secured a barony, two viscountcies, two earldoms, and a marquessate, making him, by this reckoning, the equal of Wellington and twice as honoured as Nelson. 
Despite being involved in politics for almost half a century, Hillsborough attracted only fitful attention. He has no biographer and is barely mentioned in many scholarly studies. Only between 1763 and 1774 was his role in English politics of sufficient prominence to gain much notice. 
Hillsborough was returned as MP for Warwick in May 1741; an absence of private correspondence and an equal lack of commentary -- nothing is known of his education or upbringing -- obscure his connection with the Greville family through whom he secured an unopposed election. He quickly became a regular, if hardly significant, contributor to the proceedings of the house. He first made his mark as an opposition whig, connected with Bubb Dodington and Viscount Barrington, and his speeches won the approval, not to be immutably sustained, of Horace Walpole, who noted in March 1751, when Hillsborough moved the address of condolence on the death of the prince of Wales, that: 'Lord Hillsborough was a young man of great honour and merit, remarkably nice in weighing whatever cause he was to vote in, and excellent at setting off his reasons, if the affair was at all tragic, by a solemnity in his voice and manner that made much impression on his hearers. (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George II', 1.56)' Contemporaries noted his love of opera.By now, Hillsborough had abandoned opposition and become a supporter of government, a shift matched by that of William Greville, seventh Lord Brooke, the proprietor of his seat at Warwick. A reward was his becoming, in October 1751, earl of Hillsborough in the Irish peerage. Winning the approval of the duke of Newcastle he was appointed, in May 1754, comptroller of the household and an English privy councillor. This began his identification with the monarchy: he has been judged 'of all George III's ministers, the most convinced 'King's Friend'' (Pares, 171n.). 
A further advance was not long delayed: in December 1755 Hillsborough became, at Newcastle's instance and with Henry Fox's support, treasurer of the chamber, a position he gave up in November 1756 when the Pitt-Devonshire ministry was formed. His consolation was to receive the English title of Lord Harwich and thus a place in the House of Lords. This was too high a price to be acceptable to George II but Devonshire insisted that it had to be met. Hillsborough could claim Fox, George Grenville, and Halifax as friends and he also had not incurred the hostility of William Pitt. Even so, it was a promotion that recognized the needs of ministerial reconstruction, not his political merit. 
Marriage on 1 March 1748 to Lady Margaret Fitzgerald (1729-1766), daughter of the nineteenth earl of Kildare and Mary O'Brien and sister of James, first duke of Leinster, rendered Hillsborough's connections with Fox as much family as political: the wives of Leinster and Fox were sisters, daughters of the second duke of Richmond. Their eldest daughter, Mary Amelia Cecil, became a renowned political hostess. Assisted initially by a $20,000 dowry, Hillsborough acquired further estates. In 1749 he bought lands at Bainbridge and developed a centre for the linen trade. He also undertook the rebuilding of Hillsborough. Additional estates were inherited in 1751 on the death of a distant relative, Marcus Trevor, second Viscount Dungannon. Absence from office and the House of Commons after 1756 made possible an increased attention to Ireland. On a visit to Ulster in September 1758 Mrs Delany was invited to Hillsborough, which she found set in 'a very fine cultivated country, little inferior to some parts of Gloucestershire'. An intention to build a new house and bestow the present residence on the bishop of Down was announced. Despite this activity, Hillsborough still came no more than 'once a year for a month or two, to set forward his works' ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 3.512-14). Great landlord of co. Down he might be, but that did not make him its leading resident. 
Hillsborough returned to government in September 1763, one of the ministerial changes occasioned by the departure of Bute, the death of Egremont, and the elevation of his friend George Grenville. He replaced Shelburne as president of the Board of Trade, an office he would hold until dismissed by Rockingham in July 1765. Exceptionally conscientious as an administrator, he was absent from only three of the 262 meetings of the board convened during his presidency. Against this, no influence on ministerial policy can be discerned. Even if his statement in parliament, after the event, is accepted, that 'he thought the 'Stamp Act' was inexpedient, had advised against it when first proposed' (Basye, 142-3), the act had been passed and Hillsborough never threatened to resign. Accounts of this major political crisis hardly mention him. 
During Hillsborough's presidency the Board of Trade's principal task was to acquire and assess details and views relating to imperial policy and possessions. The aftermath of the Seven Years' War and the territorial gains secured at the treaty of Paris in 1763 provided an abundance of referred topics, ranging from American Indian relations and colonial land grants to the administrative incorporation of new American and Caribbean possessions and the collection of reports on tensions in the colonies. But the board, while it could formulate, did not initiate policy. That was the function of members of the cabinet. 
The significance of American events was all too evident to an Irish peer long hostile to any growth of parliamentary powers in Dublin. In 1751 a pamphlet was published entitled 'A Proposal for Uniting the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland'; it was believed by contemporaries and is accepted by historians to have been Hillsborough's work. The author argued that a union would bring new members to Westminster willing to support the interests of prince and people, not those of 'an unnecessary malignant opposition to his measures' (Sedgwick, 2.141). A meeting of the Irish parliament in 1759 showed that Hillsborough was still thought to hold these views. Fears that a French invasion might occur during a Commons recess had brought proposals that emergency meetings should then be called. Opponents declared that not only would this give undue control to the administration but that Hillsborough, who was present, was leading a plot to bring about union and abolish parliament. On 5 December several thousand demonstrators engaged in an anti-union riot without and within the Dublin parliament. Although Hillsborough always gave precedence to his English ambitions, Irish mistrust remained constant. 
In July 1765 Rockingham replaced Grenville and Hillsborough was forced from office. A year later in August 1766, on the return of Chatham, he was restored to his post. Rather curiously, he accepted on conditions of exclusion from the cabinet and the power of the board being reduced to the provision of reports. His connections with Fox and an unwillingness to encounter Chatham at close quarters may have curbed an inveterate pursuit of position. He wished, he explained to Grenville, 'that I might do the business in an easy manner to myself' (Thomas, 'British Politics', 288-9). If this was his hope, it would not be fulfilled: the business of the board continued much as before. A further reduction of his labours was achieved at the end of 1766 when he was appointed joint postmaster-general -- 'laid up in lavender... till he shall be wanted elsewhere', as Barrington put it (ibid., 289). It was a position that ranked two steps below cabinet level but which, in exchange for occasional light duties, provided an annual income of about $2900. Thus rewarded, Hillsborough could remain, in a truly 'easy manner', present on the political scene. 
It was a well-timed break from ministerial responsibilities. Had he remained at the Board of Trade, Hillsborough would inevitably have been involved in Charles Townshend's attempt, by raising an American revenue, to resolve the financial problems of an administration from which its leader, Chatham, had dissociated himself. A faltering ministry, faced with collapse after Townshend's sudden death in September 1767, required reconstruction by the duke of Grafton. Major concern with American problems warranted the creation of a new, third secretaryship of state. But who should fill it? A process of elimination by age, experience, and factional commitments left Grafton with Hillsborough. Availability, rather than merit, earned him this promotion in January 1768. 
As the new secretary Hillsborough faced three major issues: the fate of the Townshend duties, the extent and form of western settlement, and the provision of government for Quebec. All held particular significance for an Anglo-Irish landlord, involving as they did the raising of revenues from reluctant local bodies, economic and social development in areas which resisted control, and the consequences of admitting an overwhelmingly Catholic population into a governmental system hitherto confined to protestants. Their consideration confirmed Hillsborough's conservative fears. 
Learning of Hillsborough's appointment, American colonial agents in London offered a guarded welcome. William Samuel Johnson reported home to Connecticut that the new secretary 'is esteemed a nobleman of good nature, abilities, and integrity; is a man of business, alert, lively, ready, but too fond of his own opinions and systems, and too apt to be inflexibly attached to them' ('Trumbull Papers', 252). On the other hand, it might prove the case that, as a native of Ireland possessing 'vast property' there, he would have 'formed reasonable notions of the rights and liberties of the distant branches of this empire' (ibid.). Of this hope, Johnson would soon be disabused. 
Since Hillsborough had declared that he was urging North, the new chancellor of the exchequer, to repeal the Townshend duties, Benjamin Franklin's first impressions were not unfavourable. Whatever view Hillsborough may have held, his belief in colonial subordination took priority and was challenged by American responses. In February 1768 the Massachusetts house of representatives dispatched a circular letter to the other continental colonies, urging agreement that only their assemblies should impose taxes. Informed of this by Governor Francis Bernard, the secretary issued his own circular letter, in which he announced that all American governors must combat this 'open opposition to and denial of the authority of Parliament', if necessary by the prorogation or dissolution of assemblies (Thomas, 'Townshend Duties Crisis', 81). 
It was of no avail. Eight colonies had responded positively to Massachusetts before Hillsborough's letter reached their governors, and the other four did so by the end of the year. In Massachusetts his demand for the rescinding of the circular letter was rejected on 30 June by ninety-two votes to seventeen, numbers that in the struggle became synonymous with patriots and tories. Colonial resistance, expressed through non-importation agreements, intensified after Hillsborough in June 1768 instructed General Gage to send troops to Boston. During the next four years, though the repeal of the 'Townshend Acts' in March 1770, whereby only the duty on tea was retained to assert parliamentary authority, reduced popular disorder, Hillsborough devised no solutions. The long-standing difficulties created by the needs of Quebec, disputes with the colonial assemblies, the absence of effective support for governors and officials, remained unresolved. Bostonian opposition was marked by the daubing of properties of suspected tories with 'Hillsborough paint' -- compounded of faeces and urine. 
The problems of western expansion and Indian relations persisted. Decisions were needed on the territorial extent and direction of settlement and on the maintaining of frontier peace, issues that brought Hillsborough's resignation as secretary of state in August 1772. The immediate cause was a proposal to create a colony on the Ohio. To be called Vandalia, as a compliment to the queen, it would have been the first established in North America beyond the Atlantic seaboard. Hillsborough's opposition was unwavering but had led to his encouraging the project's supporters to apply for an even larger grant. Intended to ensure its rejection, this did not work. Much to the dismay of North, who resisted to the end the loss of 'one of the best and firmest friends I have in the Cabinet' (Marshall, 731), Hillsborough's enemies, led by Rochford and supported by Gower and Suffolk, refused to accept his indefinite avoidance of a decision. The king deplored the conflict, but admitted that it was due in part to 'suspicion in Lord Hillsborough' (ibid.). The secretary of state's resignation did not weaken North's position, since Dartmouth, an old friend and member of his family, agreed to accept the office. But by mid-August 1772 the case for the new colony appeared to be won, its opponent having been defeated and driven from office. 
As consolation, Hillsborough received a constantly coveted prize -- advancement in the peerage. On 28 August 1772 his Irish became a British earldom. He did not join the opposition, though he had lost authority: his attempt in May 1774 to block Dartmouth's proposal for the westward extension of the boundary of Quebec was flatly rejected. The rapidly growing resistance of the American colonies reinforced Hillsborough's opinions. When the new parliament met on 30 November 1774, he moved the Lords' address 'in a very long and severe speech on the colonies' ('Last Journals of Horace Walpole', 1.410). At no time during the years of the American war did he express any sympathy for the rebels or support moves towards peace. 
Having resigned, Hillsborough turned his attention to co. Down. Although he admitted, a month later when back at Hillsborough, to his undersecretary, William Knox, that 'I did not, you know, wish to resign', he claimed that he was 'not now at all sorry'. He continued: 'I have totally forgotten that I was ever concerned in public business, and am so employed in church-building, road-making, farming and every rural occupation that belongs to an estate and a country gentleman that I go to bed every night very much tired, and find little time for anything else. ('Various Collections', 6.108)' By then he had remarried, following the death of his first wife on 25 January 1766. Mary Stawell, Baroness Stawell of Somerton (1726-1780), whom he married on 11 November 1768, the only daughter and heir of Edward, fourth Baron Stawell, and the widow of Henry Bilson-Legge, brought Hillsborough another substantial dowry. 
Hillsborough's resignation certainly did not serve to extinguish an ambition to become lord lieutenant of Ireland, even though this met continual rejection. When in October 1776 an appointment was giving much trouble to North, the king declared that only Hillsborough must be excluded. With landed estate solely in Ireland an unacceptable precedent would be established. Further, as the entire cabinet was aware, 'I am sorry to say, I do not know a man of less judgment than Lord Hillsborough, and consequently less qualified to fill that office with dignity or propriety' (George III to John Robinson, 15 Oct 1776, 'Abergavenny MSS'). Departure from government did not lead to longer stays in Ulster. Although he watched zealously over the economic and political interests of his estates and dependants, visits took place in the summer months. Any political prospect, including the hope of becoming lord lieutenant, derived from London. If that hope persisted, so did his reputation for duplicity. 
In November 1779 Hillsborough returned to office, replacing Weymouth as secretary of state for the southern department. Typically, this represented a last political resort of an increasingly beleaguered North, not a strengthening of the ministry. It may have revived Hillsborough's Irish ambitions since the southern secretary acted as the ministerial link with the lord lieutenant and, theoretically, could thus exercise a crucial influence. There is no indication, however, that Hillsborough did so. On entering office he had declared to the lord lieutenant that he was 'very little acquainted with the Politics & Intrigues of Dublin' (Johnston, 86). Certainly, officials dominated, even directed, the ensuing correspondence between Whitehall and Dublin. Hillsborough's presence in government attracted little attention in respect of either Irish or foreign affairs. That is not to say that Irish issues, especially demands for trade equality and the formation of the volunteers, could be overlooked. Hillsborough's opening remarks, as was his custom, sought to please. He declared that he had accepted office on the understanding that Ireland and England would be put on an equal commercial footing. He thus yielded as a matter of expediency to a popular demand whose consequences he feared more than welcomed. 
In London during June 1780 Hillsborough's apprehensions of mob activities were renewed as the Gordon riots threatened property and his security. The continued growth in Ulster of a movement whose Dungannon convention of February 1782 gave prominence to what Hillsborough had initially applauded but now called 'Your cursed Volunteers and Patriots' (Bardon, 215) left him in a state of alarm. He experienced this even in Hillsborough when the visit of the lord lieutenant was greeted at a corporation dinner by a toast to the Volunteers. 'Ld H cried 'Fy, fy, fy,' and each time knocked his hand on the table -- Do you know, Sir, there is not a toast could be more disagreeable to G'ment' (Young, 170). 
Hillsborough's vehement reactions to challenges to authority never changed: as late in the American war as November 1781, he declared in the Lords that 'he hoped that the independence of America would never be admitted in that House, nor that a majority of their lordships would consent to a measure which, if it should be adopted, must prove the ruin of this country' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 22, 1781, 661). But with the failure of the war and the downfall of North's ministry, loss of office was inevitable. If he did not, others knew the price he would pay. As the duke of Rutland, lord lieutenant in 1786, remarked: 'Lord Hillsborough's uniform principle is 'perseverance' in anything once adopted -- in spite of the changes which time and events may have produced' (duke of Rutland to Lord Sydney, 29 Jan 1786, 'Rutland MSS', 3.279). His last speech in the Lords, on 24 January 1786, had provided confirmation as he once again 'recommended a union with Ireland as the best method of connecting and consolidating the interests of both kingdoms' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 25, 1786, 996). 
This did not mark Hillsborough's final involvement in politics. That followed closely upon his securing in 1789 the Irish marquessate of Downshire. His son and heir, Lord Kilwarlin, now became earl of Hillsborough but continued, as he had since 1776, to represent County Down in the Irish House of Commons. His last election in 1783 had cost about $3000, but this bore no comparison to that of 1790 which saw the family's claim to both county seats challenged by the young Robert Stewart, the later Lord Castlereagh. His family mounted an 'independent' campaign to break the Downshire hold on both seats. A bitter, extended, and costly election ensued: polling the 6000 electors occupied sixty-nine days until Stewart won a seat. 
The contest was sufficiently expensive to prevent Stewart from completing his Mount Stewart mansion house and to generate additional Downshire debts. If the family fortunes had benefited from advantageous marriages, settlement charges had subsequently diminished them: at Downshire's death in 1793 the estate was $69,600 in debt. His end was not unexpected. There were frequent references to 'old age' during his later years. After suffering a stroke in the autumn of 1790, he died at Hillsborough Castle on 7 October 1793, having 'wholly retired for some years' from public and political affairs ('GM', 1st ser., 63/1, 1793, 962). He was buried at Hillsborough. 
Both contemporaries and historians have judged Hillsborough adversely: by the time of the Falklands crisis in 1770 he had become to Horace Walpole 'a pompous composition of ignorance and want of judgment' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George III', 3.133), while Wraxall, noting his attention to public business, thought 'his natural endowments, however solid, did not rise above mediocrity' ('Historical and Posthumous Memoirs', 1.381). George III did not withhold criticism of however faithful a servant: 'Lord Hillsborough', he complained, 'always puts things off to the last minute, and though an amiable man, the least a man of business I ever knew' ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 5.418). A modern historian has commented that 'No historian has had a good word to say for Hillsborough' (Shy, 292), although his commitment, as distinct from his achievements, while secretary of state for America has won some recognition. Even so, the failure of British policy in the American colonies between 1768 and 1772 must be related to its direction by Hillsborough. 
Found charming on occasion, particularly by women, to whom he was known affectionately as the Black Earl, Hillsborough sustained a political presence through persistence, not talent. He possessed no parliamentary following at Westminster and was insufficiently skilful as either minister or politician to prevail in his own right. That he should have been one of the leading Irish magnates to participate in English politics in the second half of the eighteenth century provides some indication of the comparative political talent of the peers of the two kingdoms. 


@@@@@


doc= 13318


Hillary, William (1697-1763), physician, was born at Birkrigg, an isolated farmhouse near Hawes in Upper Wensleydale, Yorkshire, on 17 March 1697. He was the second son of John Hillary and his wife, Mary Robinson, Quakers who belonged to an influential group of Friends in Wensleydale that included the Robinson, Fothergill, and Hillary families. The Hillarys moved in 1699 to a substantial farmhouse in the nearby village of Burtersett which to this day is known as Hillary Hall. Nothing is known of Hillary's schooling but in 1715 he was apprenticed to a Quaker apothecary in Bradford, Benjamin Bartlett. After seven years he went to the University of Leiden, where he was a student of Hermann Boerhaave, and where he graduated MD in 1722 with a thesis entitled 'Dissertatio medicas inauguralis practica de febribus intermittentibus'. Hillary then settled as a physician in Ripon where he stayed until 1734. During this time he recorded the changes in the weather and the epidemics he encountered in an attempt to correlate weather and disease. His observations were published in the second edition of his 'A Practical Essay on the Smallpox' (1740). He had by then moved to Bath where he practised from 1734 until 1746. 
At Bath, Hillary's attention was drawn in 1737 to a spring in Lyncombe, to the south of Bath, which he was to dignify with the name of a spa. His 'An Enquiry into the Contents and Medicinal Virtues of Lincomb Spa Water Near Bath' (1742) extolled the manifold virtues of the spa water, which had been taken by, among many others, the fourth earl of Chesterfield, to whom Hillary dedicated his book. By 1746, however, his position in Bath had become, for obscure reasons, unsatisfactory. Then, through the good offices of John Fothergill, a family friend, also formerly apprenticed to Benjamin Bartlett, Hillary moved to the island of Barbados, arriving there in early 1747. He sought to continue the work on weather and disease that he had begun in Ripon but an unfortunate accident to his barometer prevented him from starting his observations until 1752. In 1751 he had an important consultation. Lawrence Washington, in the company of his brother George, and in search of relief from the mortal tuberculosis from which he suffered, sought Hillary's opinion on his disorder. The event was recorded by George Washington in his diary. 
On All Saints' day 1755 Hillary witnessed the remarkable ebbing and flowing of the tide in Barbados which suggested to him that there must have been a cataclysmic earthquake far out at sea. Only two months later did he hear of the Lisbon earthquake which had occurred that same day. From a knowledge of the time difference Hillary was able to calculate that the shock wave had travelled across the Atlantic at over 400 miles an hour, a remarkable speed, he commented, for anything to be transmitted through water. His work in Barbados was recorded after he returned to England in his 'Observations on the changes of the air, and the concomitant epidemical diseases in the island of Barbados, to which is added a treatise on the putrid bilious fever, commonly called the yellow fever; and such other diseases as are indigenous or endemial, in the West India islands or in the torrid zone' (1759). This was one of the first books in English to deal specifically with tropical disease. It contains an early description of the disorder known as tropical sprue, a form of intestinal malabsorption causing nutritional deficiency that occurs particularly in islands such as Puerto Rico and in countries of the Far East. Hillary did not confine his comments to medical matters. He was forthright in condemning local sartorial fashions. For the hot climate of the West Indies he advised a 'loose gown or Banjan', the dress of the mandarins, immensely more comfortable than 'a thick rich Coat and Waistcoat, daubed and loaded with Gold', under which he had seen men melting, 'preferring the Character of a Fop' to that of a 'Man of Sense and Honour'. 
Hillary returned to London in 1759 after seeming to have had a financially successful stay in Barbados. A contemporary stated that Hillary had made $6000 during his twelve years in the island. He lived at first in East Street, off Red Lion Square in Bloomsbury. After seeing his 'Observations' through the press he was occupied with other literary ventures, first 'The Nature, Properties, and Laws of Motion of Fire' (1760). He then embarked on one of his most ambitious and idealistic ventures, 'An inquiry into the means of improving medical knowledge, by examining all those methods which have hindered, or increased its improvement in all past ages' (1761). It was in fact an eighteenth-century history of medicine. 
Hillary died, a lifelong bachelor, on 25 April 1763. He was described in the records of the Friends as of 'St Dunstan in the West' and had been a member of Peel Meeting, which met at St John Street, Clerkenwell. He was buried on 1 May in the Quaker burial-ground at Bunhill Fields. The cause of his death was said to be 'fever'. He left no will but an administration was granted to his younger brother, Richard, merchant of Liverpool. Richard Hillary's second son, named for his doctor uncle, was Sir William Hillary, founder in 1824 of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution. 


@@@@@


doc= 13319


Hillary, Sir William, first baronet (1770-1847), founder of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, was born in Liverpool on 4 January 1770, the second son of Richard Hillary ('b'. 1703), who belonged to a Quaker family from Wensleydale and who set up a partnership in Liverpool trading with the West Indies, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Wynne. His elder brother, Richard, was a member of the house of assembly in Jamaica, where he died unmarried in 1803. Mary Rolls, a poet, was his sister; the physician William Hillary was his uncle. 
Hillary was appointed equerry to the duke of Sussex, with whom he spent two years in Italy, returning home in 1800. On his return to England he married Elizabeth Disney Fytche, on 21 February 1800. They had twins, a son and a daughter. He came into property both by marriage and inheritance during that year. He used part of his fortune ($20,000) to raise the first Essex legion of infantry and cavalry. He commanded the legion of 1400 men against the French upon the renewal of the war with France in 1803. The legion constituted the largest force then offered by any private individual for the defence of his country. In recognition of his services he was created a baronet on 8 November 1805. Three years later, owing to a heavy loss of property in the West Indies, Sir William left his estate in Danbury Place in Essex and settled at Fort Anne, near Douglas, in the Isle of Man, where on 30 August 1813 he married Emma Tobin, his first wife having died. 
Hillary witnessed a large number of shipwrecks off the coast of the Isle of Man and, after the destruction of 'Vigilance' (the government cutter) and 'Racehorse' (the naval brig) in 1822, he became involved in the question of safety and life-saving at sea. In February 1823 he issued 'An appeal to the British nation on the humanity and policy of forming a national institution for the preservation of lives and property from shipwreck', which he dedicated to George IV. The proposal was supported by George Hibbert and by Thomas Wilson, an influential city member, and on 4 March 1824 a public meeting was held at the London tavern under the chairmanship of the archbishop of Canterbury (Manners-Sutton). The Royal National Institution for the Preservation of Life from Shipwreck (from 1854 the Royal National Lifeboat Institution) was then founded and established upon a permanent basis, with the earl of Liverpool as first president. The movement attracted the approval of the king, the royal dukes, and William Wilberforce, the archbishop of York. 
On his return to the Isle of Man, Hillary established in 1826 a district association, of which he became president. He provided the four chief harbours of the island with lifeboats and Manby and Trengrouse safety apparatuses. Hillary frequently went out in the boats himself, and was instrumental in saving many lives. In December 1827, assisted by his son, he helped to save seventeen men from the Swedish barque 'Fortroindet', and in the same year he helped to rescue the crew of the 'St George'. He suffered six fractured ribs as a result. In November 1830 he set out with a crew of fourteen volunteers and helped to save sixty-two people. Again he put his own life at risk and was washed overboard. However, he survived to be awarded the Shipwreck Institution's gold medal, as he was on two other occasions. In 1832 he planned the tower of refuge on St Mary's, or Conister Rock, in Douglas Bay. He established a sailors' home at Douglas, and was strongly behind a proposal that the government should build a breakwater and make a harbour of refuge in Douglas Bay. His last public act was to preside at a meeting held at Douglas to lobby the government on this subject in March 1845, when he had to be carried from his residence at Fort Anne to the court house in a chair. He died at Woodville, near Douglas, on 5 January 1847, and was buried in Douglas churchyard; many people attended the funeral. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his son, Augustus William (1800-1854). His daughter, Elizabeth Mary, was married in 1818 to Christopher Richard of Blackmore Priory, Essex. 
At the time of Hillary's death the institution which he had been instrumental in founding owned some twenty lifeboats and had an annual income of $350. It was reorganized in 1849. In addition to his central work, Hillary also promoted other public schemes, publishing pamphlets entitled 'Suggestions for the Improvement and Embellishment of the Metropolis' (1824), 'A Sketch of Ireland in 1824: the Sources of her Evils and their Remedies Suggested' (1825), and 'Suggestions for the Occupation of the Holy Land by the Knights of St John of Jerusalem' (1841), as well as 'The National Importance of a Great Central Harbour of Refuge for the Irish Sea at Douglas' (1842; based on a tract of 1826) and a lifeboat 'Appeal', which went through several editions. 


@@@@@


doc= 13320


Hilliard, Nicholas (1547?-1619), miniature painter, was the eldest of the four sons and four daughters of Richard Hilliard (died 1594), leading citizen and goldsmith of Exeter in Devon, and his wife, Laurence, daughter of Richard's former master, John Wall. Nicholas was probably born in 1547, the year of the death of Henry VIII and the accession of his son, Edward VI. 
Richard Hilliard and the 'princely merchant' John Bodley were zealous supporters of the Reformed religion and in 1549 became involved in the siege of Exeter by west-country Roman Catholics -- then in the majority -- who were violently opposed to the young king's protestant prayer book. At Edward's death in 1553, and the accession of his Roman Catholic half-sister, Mary I, many English protestants fled to the continent to escape persecution. Among them was John Bodley, who went first to Wesel and Frankfurt in Germany and then to Switzerland. At some point Bodley summoned his entire household to join him, and on 7 June 1557 they were admitted to the English congregation in the Calvinist stronghold of Geneva, of which John Knox was a minister. In the party was Nicholas Hilliard, then aged about ten, a little younger than Bodley's son Thomas (later founder of the great Bodleian Library at Oxford). Richard Hilliard no doubt allowed his eldest son to go abroad for his own safety, perhaps paying for the privilege. This gave the boy an unexpectedly early chance to learn French and to get his first look at the works of continental artists. 
Large numbers of goldsmiths were arriving in Geneva at this time, most of them Huguenot refugees from Paris and Rouen. Among a group admitted on 15 October 1557 was Pierre Olivyer from Rouen, presumed to be the father of Isaac Oliver, future pupil and then rival of Nicholas Hilliard. Elizabeth I acceded to the English throne at the death of her half-sister, Mary, on 17 November 1558, and this, together with the church settlement of 1559, allowed the protestant exiles to return home. John Bodley received permission to leave Geneva on 5 September 1559; he settled in London and young Hilliard probably remained in the household. He was now able to study the miniatures of Hans Holbein the younger, who had fallen victim to an outbreak of plague in London at the end of 1543. Later he was to express profound admiration for the German master: 'the most excellent [easel] painter and limner... after the life that ever was' (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 69). 
Nicholas Hilliard and his younger brother John were both apprenticed to, and lodged with, leading goldsmiths in Cheapside, the most famous street in the city of London. (The third and fourth brothers, who remained in Devon, were Jeremy, who died in 1631/2, an Exeter goldsmith with their father, and Ezekiel, a clergyman). Goldsmiths' Hall was, and the present one still is, on the north side of Westcheap, near St Paul's and in the parish of St Vedast, Foster Lane, and Goldsmiths' Row was the particular glory of the south side. John Stow, in his 'Survey of London' (1598), describes the row, built in 1491, as 'the most beautiful frame of fayre houses and shoppes... within the Walles of London, or else where in England' -- ten houses and fourteen shops within the frame, all four storeys high (1.345). Hilliard's master, Robert Brandon, a wealthy man who had become a freeman of the Goldsmiths' Company by redemption (purchase) in 1548, had his establishment at the sign of the Gilt Lion, and from 1583 until his death in 1591 he was chamberlain of London -- in effect chief executive. John Hilliard's master, Edward Gylbert, at the sign of The Ship, was an alderman in the early 1560s. 
Robert Brandon had married his first wife, Katherine Barber, on 13 June 1548 at the church of St Mary Woolnoth in Lombard Street, so it was she who kept a motherly eye on young Hilliard when he joined the household on 13 November 1562. Of the couple's seven children who survived to adulthood the third, Alice, was baptized at St Peter Westcheap (adjoining St Vedast to the east) on 11 May 1556. At the age of twenty she became Hilliard's wife and, subsequently, the mother of his children. Brandon played an important part in Hilliard's career: he was a leading goldsmith and jeweller to Queen Elizabeth, and taught those arts -- so closely allied to limning -- to his apprentice. 
Most of the artists in London at the time were foreigners, as Hilliard notes in his treatise: 'generally they are the best, and most in number' (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 69). Henry VIII had secured the services of members of two of the leading Ghent-Bruges families, the Horneboltes and the Bennincks, to enhance the lustre of the Tudor dynasty. Gerard Hornebolte of Ghent, court painter to Margaret of Austria, regent of the Netherlands, and renowned for his miniatures in illuminated manuscripts, travelled to London with his family about 1525. He probably returned to the continent later, but his son Lucas and daughter Susanna stayed on, and Lucas appears in the royal household accounts as king's painter, and was granted a property in the parish of St Margaret's, Westminster, where he would have had his home and studio. He is said to have taught Holbein the techniques of limning, and he died very shortly after him, in the spring of 1544. Susanna, also a painter, died while Hilliard was still a boy but he would have seen work by her when he eventually reached London. Simon Benninck, born in Ghent but buried in Bruges, was regarded as the best illuminator in Europe. His eldest daughter, Levina, who certainly became a miniaturist, married George Teerlinc of Blankenbergh, and was appointed 'paintrix' to the Tudor court, with an annuity of $40, in 1546. Although a rather shadowy figure, of modest talent, she remained in office until her death thirty years later. She and/or others may have given Hilliard some advice, and he probably had her partly in mind when he wrote in the treatise of 'an excellent white... made of quicksilver which draweth a very fine line; this white the women painters use' (ibid., 91). It was a subject of particular interest to him; exquisite renderings of the Elizabethan ruff are a feature of many of his limnings. 
No doubt Robert Brandon often took his apprentice to help when he was working at court, and presumably he presented Hilliard to the queen when his skill in limning became apparent. Hilliard himself does not disclose who may have given him instruction in any art: inscriptions in gold are a feature of some of his finest miniatures, and he would presumably have sought some instruction from a master calligrapher. Hilliard states, more than once, his conviction that in painting or drawing from the life the most important part is 'the truth of the line' (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 85), and that in limning the face should usually be done without shadowing. If shadowing really is required it must be done 'with the point of the pencil [tip of the brush] by little light touches' (ibid., 101). He strongly advises the aspiring limner to begin by repeatedly copying the hatching (shadowing) in Durer's small engraved pieces with the pen until the print is so accurately copied that 'one shall not know the one from the other'; then, when the tip of the brush can be used in the same way, he may begin to limn. 'This is the true order and principal secret in limning' (ibid.). 
Most of the artists mentioned in the treatise were, like Albrecht Durer (1471-1528), the sons of master goldsmiths and were better known at the time of writing as engravers rather than painters. Hilliard considers Durer the most perfect engraver on copper 'since the world began', although his rules for painting and engraving are for the most part hard to remember and tedious to follow (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 69). There were plenty of works of all kinds by the 'strangers' in London for Hilliard to study, and Graham Reynolds takes the view that in limning Hilliard was largely self-taught. 
This exists, so far as is known, only as the first part of a manuscript now in Edinburgh University Library. It is dated 'the 18 of March 1624 Londres' (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 115) and is in the hand of an unknown copyist. It was not published in full, as a book on its own, until 1981, and the editors, R. K. R. Thornton and T. G. S. Cain, gave it the short title 'The Arte of Limning'. A long title preceding the text at Edinburgh is in the hand not of Hilliard but of the eighteenth-century antiquary George Vertue, who owned the manuscript for a time. They do not consider the copyist to have been very intelligent or careful (ibid., 33-4) and provide an exact transcript with a facing text (quoted in this article) with modernized spelling and several emendations. In 1598 Dr Richard Haydocke of New College, Oxford, had published a translation of Paolo Lomazzo's treatise on the arts (Milan, 1584), of which the first part is on easel painting. He then, by his own account, persuaded Hilliard -- so famous at home and abroad -- to write something similar on limning. The result is thought to date to about 1600 and sets out the author's beliefs, experiences, and accumulated knowledge at the end of the greatest period of his career. It seems to be an early draft, which perhaps partly accounts for its freshness and spontaneity. It is one of the most important documents in the history of English art and, unusually, includes insights into the mind and character of the author. 
Hilliard emphatically declares that limning is the highest form of art, and the perfection of it 'to imitate the face of mankind' (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 75). It is most properly practised by gentlemen and 'for the service of noble persons very meet', since it requires the presence of the sitter for most of the time: the limner must be a gentleman 'of good parts and ingenuity', able to provide 'seemly attendance' (ibid., 65). Hilliard has sometimes been derided for making unjustified claims to gentility but this charge is not borne out by the evidence. He spent his whole professional life at the higher levels of society; he is nearly always referred to in contemporary records as Master Hilliard; and it is an undoubted gentleman who appears in the celebrated self-portrait miniature of 1577 (V&A), dressed in black with an elegant ruff and a black bonnet -- embellished with ornaments no doubt fashioned by himself -- set on the curly hair inherited from his father. In a declaration signed by his son Laurence Hilliard, provided in 1634 in response to an official inquiry into arms and pedigrees, the head of the family (and grandfather of Nicholas) is entered as John Hylliard, a gentleman of Cornwall the south-western tip of England adjoining Devon. 
Hilliard writes as a perfectionist in love with his art: it breeds delight, removes melancholy, avoids 'evil occasions' and cures rage (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 67). Near the start there is an outburst against 'botchers' and 'bunglers' who increase so fast that good artists tend to abandon their best skill, 'for all men carry one price' (ibid., 63). His indignation erupts again later on, sandwiched between 'The Sapphire' and 'The Emerald', in a long passage about colours and precious stones (ibid., 107). The best practitioners -- of whatever art -- are usually poorer than the bunglers, because their work takes them longer. They prefer to demonstrate their art in a single piece, while the others turn out six or seven, pleasing most people, since time is of the essence and a lower price all-important. This time the main target is the bungling jeweller, who often spoils a precious stone, while the expert improves on nature in the cutting, polishing, and setting, thereby doubling its value. 
The treatise sets out strict rules for the conduct of the limner: moderation in eating and sleeping, and no 'violent exercise in sports', although a little dancing or a game of bowls is permissible; everything must be scrupulously clean, with no dust, smoke, noise, or stench (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 73, 75). This must have been difficult when Hilliard was working at home in one of the small alleys off Westcheap. The aspect of the workplace should be 'northward, somewhat toward the east, commonly without sun shining in'. 'Discreet talk or reading, quiet mirth or music, offend not' -- they 'quicken the spirit' in limner and sitter. In an apparent tribute to his father Hilliard says that a wise man finds out the natural inclinations of his children early and sets them on the right course. But natural ability is not enough and he urges the limner to be 'diligent, yea ever diligent... to excel all others' (ibid., 65). 
The limner must use only the finest vellum (parchment), 'from young things found in the dam's belly' (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 97), 'dressed as smooth as any satin' (ibid., 99), and stuck onto card. Hilliard was extremely innovative technically and, with the specialized knowledge of a jeweller, he writes much of the importance of 'giving the true lustre to pearl and precious stone' and 'working gold and silver with themselves' (ibid., 63). He ground leaves of the metals to powder, mixed them with a little gum water, and burnished them with 'a pretty little tooth of some ferret or stoat or other wild little beast' (ibid., 99). Of the sitters he writes with delight of 'those lovely graces, witty smilings, and those stolen glances which suddenly like lightning pass' (ibid., 77); and with disgust of know-all sitters and studio visitors who try to instruct the limner. He has no space to recount all the 'ridiculous, absurd speeches' he has had to endure. His advice to the limner is to keep his temper, proceed with his work, and 'pity their ignorance' (ibid., 97, 99). 
Nicholas Hilliard completed his apprenticeship, and became a freeman of the Goldsmiths' Company, on 29 July 1569. He entered the new decade a complete and versatile artist, at the age of about twenty-two -- goldsmith, limner, jeweller, calligrapher, and designer for engravings. (The editors of 'The Arte of Limning' use a woodcut border dating to the 1570s, with an NH monogram centre top and probably designed by Hilliard, for the title-page of their book; the border was used for several different titles in the sixteenth century.) Queen Elizabeth had been alarmed in the early years of her reign by the poor quality of royal representations, and she was no doubt much relieved that an artist of distinction was now free to serve her. She was just as much aware of the importance of 'the image' as any public figure in our own times. 
Hilliard's first known adult miniature is dated 1571, when his sitter was 'A Man Aged 35' (priv. coll.); the next, dated 1572, is of 'A Man Aged 24' (V&A) and shows the full excellence of Hilliard's developed style. Sadly both have to be described as 'Unknown'. All researchers would echo the words of John Aubrey (1626-1697), author of 'Brief Lives', who once lamented, ''Tis pity that in noblemen's galleries [and elsewhere] the names are not writ on or behind the pictures'. 
Hilliard took a number of apprentices, both English and foreign, during his career; the first was John Cobbold, who was transferred to him in 1570 by the widow of Cobbold's former master on payment by Hilliard of 40's'. for her goodwill, with the promise of a further 20's'. in a year's time. In 1571 a foreign goldsmith called Gualter Reynolds (born in Brunswick and attending the Dutch church), who had come to England to increase his knowledge of his art, was probably being supervised by Hilliard, on his company's orders, to ensure that Reynolds did not try to usurp any privileges enjoyed by native-born goldsmiths. On 13 March 1573 William Smythe was apprenticed to Hilliard; on the following 20 July, William Franke (probably a German), who had begun an apprenticeship with Edward Gylbert, former master of Hilliard's brother John, was transferred to Hilliard and entered his household, replacing Cobbold, who had been freed the month before. John Pickering was apprenticed to Hilliard on 21 March 1575. 
Years later, in a letter dated 28 July 1601 to his loyal patron Sir Robert Cecil (then the queen's chief secretary), Hilliard recalled that the original intention in taking apprentices had been 'to provide for the Queen's better service' (Hilliard, MS letter, Hatfield House, CP 87/25). The apprentices -- it is possible to find clues to about nine in all -- had 'pleased the common sorte exceding well' (by 'common' he means people of good but not noble birth: 'commoners', as we would say); but he too had been forced to do 'common woorkes for other persons' in addition to his royal duties, since they were 'more proffitable' (ibid., 69). In the treatise he pointedly refers to Henry VIII's 'royal bounty' to his artists, implicitly criticizing the parsimony of his daughter (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 69). In other countries, he maintains, artists are by 'pension or reward of princes... competently maintained', but not in England, 'the more is the pity' (ibid., 109). In defence of Queen Elizabeth, she had acceded to the throne of a country encumbered by debts, inflation, and a debased currency, and was determined to practise extreme thrift and caution in the manner of her grandfather Henry VII. But although in private she was a woman of frugal habits, no expense was spared on her public appearances, which were designed for the greater glory of her realm. 
The first of Hilliard's many limnings of the queen (NPG) is dated 1572. He had met members of the Knollys family during the period of English protestant exile in Geneva, and it is likely that Sir Francis, the queen's first cousin by marriage, who had become treasurer of the royal household on 13 July 1572, actually commissioned the artist. During the first sitting, by his account, Elizabeth asked about shadowing, and Hilliard replied that while 'great pictures', displayed high up or far off, required 'hard shadows', these were not necessary for small ones, which had to be 'viewed... in hand near unto the eye' (ibid., 85, 87). Shakespeare mentions the art of limning several times; both 'Hamlet' and the treatise are supposed to have been written about 1600, and in the former the prince, confronting his mother in her bedchamber, invites her to: '
Look here upon this picture, and on this, 

The counterfeit presentment of two brothers. 
('Hamlet', III. iv)' Hilliard, in his advice to the queen, advocated 'open light' for a limning and he reports that it was she who 'chose... to sit in the open alley of a goodly garden, where no tree was near' (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 87). The artist, in his mid-twenties, was about 6 feet (his recommended distance for a portrait miniature) from the queen, in her late thirties, and they may well have sat in the privy garden of the palace of Whitehall. Hilliard concludes that it would take 'some better clerk' to speak or write about later conversations with the queen, which probably were spread over the years. 
At some time in the 1570s Hilliard became involved in a typical Elizabethan 'adventure' -- one of his frequent over-optimistic attempts to make some money. This one was to promote goldmining in Scotland. A Dutch fellow artist and lapidary, Cornelius Devosse, persuaded Hilliard to take part in the scheme, no doubt believing that his powerful connections would be helpful. Another friend, Arthur Van Brounckhorst, acting as their agent, would 'set sundry workmen to work' at Crawford Moor in Lanarkshire, as Stephen Atkinson, in 'The Discoverie and Historie of the Gold Mynes in Scotland' (written 1619; ed. G. L. Meason, 1825), recorded. Not surprisingly, 'Mr Hilliard and Cornelius Devosse lost all their charges, and never since got any recompense' (Atkinson, 35). 
Hilliard notes that artists are 'generally given to travel, and to confer with wise men' (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 109). By 1576 he must have decided that he would do well to follow suit. In that year he painted a limning of the queen's favourite Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, then aged forty-four (NPG). On 25 June he may have ridden out to the then fashionable village of Stepney for the funeral of Levina Teerlinc -- if indeed she had helped him during his youth. Three weeks later, on 15 July, he married Alice Brandon at the church of St Vedast, Foster Lane, and in the following month they sailed for France. 
The newly appointed English ambassador to France was Sir Amyas Paulet, a prominent puritan and a faithful servant to the queen who, like so many Elizabethan Englishmen, incurred much personal expense in the performance of public duties. He landed at Calais on 25 September 1576, 'en route' for Paris. By December, sending his latest expense account to the exchequer in London, he complained that his train had been greatly enlarged by 'divers gentlemen' recommended by the queen, including 'Mr Helyer' (Edmond, 61). Elizabeth had presumably instructed her limner to provide likenesses (which he did) of Francois, duc d'Alencon, the subject of her last and longest matrimonial ploy (examples in the Musee de Conde, Chantilly; Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna; and BM). Alencon was the third son of Catherine de' Medici and brother of Henri III of France, and for a time both women had wanted an alliance. In 1577 the words 'Nicolas Beliart, peintre anglois' appear in Alencon's household accounts. 
Hilliard's fluent French, acquired during his time in Geneva as a boy, allowed him to fit easily into French society, and there is considerable evidence of his friendship with leading artists and others. One of his greatest admirers was Blaise de Vigenere, philosopher and man of letters, who negotiated with him to provide wood-engravings of the duc and duchesse de Nevers. Hilliard seems to have stayed with the goldsmith and medallist Germain Pilon and to have met Jacques Gaultier the painter and Leonard Gaultier the engraver, and the poet Ronsard. 
Queen Elizabeth became restive at the continuing absence of her gifted limner, and on 19 February 1578 Ambassador Paulet wrote to Sir Francis Walsingham to give an assurance that 'Helyar' had no intention of leaving her service. He had gone to France simply 'to increase his knowledge... and upon hope [apparently unfulfilled] to get a piece of money of the lords and ladies here for his better maintenance in England at his return' (Edmond, 65). He intended to return 'very shortly', bringing his wife with him; he was understandably anxious to do so since Alice was in the later stages of her first pregnancy. But on 16 June the ambassador wrote from Paris to tell the earl of Hertford that Hilliard had been ill. He now hoped to finish a promised jewel 'within three weeks' and would then send or deliver it. It had been supposed that Richard Hilliard went over to France to collect his daughter-in-law in 1577, since that is the date on his son's miniature of him (V&A), but recent rigorous re-examination, using the most advanced techniques, suggests that the last figure had flaked away and been repainted at some stage, so perhaps the date should read 1578, for Alice's baby was baptized (Daniel) at St Vedast, Foster Lane, on 16 May of that year. 
In London, on 22 August, Hilliard's apprentice William Franke sought to be admitted to the Goldsmiths' Company, but his master was still 'beyond the seas', and he was told to wait for six weeks, while Master Warden Robert Brandon wrote to his son-in-law. A master was required to present his young man to the company's court in person, and in fact Franke had to wait more than six weeks. He finally became a freeman on 3 November 1578. 
Shortly after Hilliard's return from France the family settled into a tenement at the sign of The Maidenhead, owned by the Goldsmiths' Company and close to their hall. The exact date of the move is not known. The Maidenhead was on the west side of Gutter Lane and just within the parish of St Vedast, Foster Lane, where the rest of the Hilliard children were baptized: Elizabeth (1579), Francis (1580), Laurence (1582), Lettice (1583), Penelope (1586), and Robert (1588). The queen herself may have been godmother to Elizabeth; it was not unknown for a Tudor monarch to oblige when a baby was born to a member of the household or, like Hilliard, a close servant. The godfather of Francis was probably Sir Francis Knollys; Laurence took his name from his paternal grandmother; the names of the last three powerfully suggest godparents from the circle of the queen's principal favourite, Lord Leicester, and his successor, the second earl of Essex. Lettice was the name of the eldest daughter of Knollys, wife of the first earl of Essex and mother of their eldest daughter, Penelope ('b'. 1562?), and a brother, Robert ('b'. 1566). Leicester had become stepfather to the pair by secretly marrying Lettice in 1578, and he did much to promote the advancement at court of the young earl. No likeness is known to survive of the formidable Penelope, but in 1581 she was married off to Robert, third Baron Rich, and about eight years later the poet Henry Constable wrote a sonnet addressed to 'Mr Hilliard, upon occasion of a picture he made of the Ladie Rich'. This includes a reference to Hilliard's universally admired method of portraying jewels. Before him: '
no man knew aright, 

To give to stones and pearls true dye and light. 
('The Poems and Sonnets of Henry Constable', ed. J. Gray, 1897, cited in Edmond, 94)' The original employment of limners had been to provide small, private portraits for 'noble persons', as Hilliard explains -- for themselves and their peers (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 65) -- but inevitably, as time went on, the range of sitters widened to include men of achievement, such as Hilliard's fellow Devonians Ralegh (NPG) and Drake, and indeed anyone who could pay. In addition to the men Hilliard limned a number of beautiful but often sadly 'Unknown' ladies. He was convinced that 'rare beauties are... more commonly found in this isle of England than elsewhere' (ibid., 73). 
In the 1580s and earlier part of the 1590s Hilliard continued to paint many of his finest miniatures. A draft warrant dated 1584 states his monopoly right to paint limnings of the queen but it has sometimes been misinterpreted to mean a diminution of his duties in relation to those of the then serjeant-painter, George Gower. In fact the serjeant-painter's court office was in the realm of painters and decorators rather than of art: the holder of the office headed a department responsible for the maintenance and embellishment of the royal palaces and other residences. The activities of successive serjeant-painters are more often than not to be found in the works accounts (Exchequer E 351 series, TNA: PRO). 
In 1584 Hilliard's responsibilities increased: he secured the important, but costly and time-consuming, commission to design the second great seal of the realm, the first being more or less worn out. This probably caused some resentment among engravers. The actual engraving, or most of it, seems to have been done by Derick Anthony, of an immigrant family originally from Germany, and the seal came into use in 1586. On 8 November of that year Hilliard delivered a letter from Sir Francis Walsingham to the chancellor of the exchequer, saying that the queen 'was pleased to bestow' on her limner 'a lease in reversion' of $40 a year for his work on the seal and 'divers other services', for which he had received no recompense or allowance (Blakiston, 103). This was but one of a number of dubious royal promises, several involving small properties, leases, and tithes, which did not benefit Hilliard in any way; they were a device for avoiding spending real money. 'In reversion' usually meant 'after someone else' -- in practice, 'never'. The main benefit of the office of royal limner was undoubtedly the prestige it conferred -- the value of being 'spoken of', as Hilliard once said (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 109). 
From the 1580s, for a short period from about 1587 to 1595, Hilliard began to produce a few limnings, larger than his customary small oval ones, known as cabinet miniatures, all full-lengths of men, and all but one rectangular. (The word miniature did not necessarily mean something very small; like limning and illumination it derived from the Latin 'minium', the red lead used by medieval illuminators to embellish their manuscripts.) It is surely more than mere chance that Hilliard's decision to do something different coincided with the emergence of his former pupil Isaac Oliver as a serious rival. Oliver's first known miniature, dated 1587, is of a young, middle-class woman (priv. coll.), three-quarter length -- perhaps an experiment -- but it is immediately followed, in 1588, by assured and accomplished limnings of a youth of nineteen (priv. coll.) and a bearded man of seventy-one, both unidentified, and of a fifty-nine-year-old Dutchman (Dutch royal collection, The Hague). Their sober, naturalistic style is in complete contrast to Hilliard's enigmatic man raising his right hand to clasp one emerging from a cloud -- also dated 1588 (V&A) -- but reverting to the small oval shape. The significance of the Latin inscription 'Attici amoris ergo' defeats all scholars. 
Of Hilliard's larger miniatures the 'Young Man among Roses' (V&A), perhaps the first of the new-look group, is without doubt the most famous of all his works, and probably of all English miniatures of any period. It is a unique elongated oval and a supreme example of the miniature as a kind of emblem, device, or 'impresa'. The classic definition of the 'impresa', 'as the Italians call it', is by the historian and herald William Camden: ('a device in picture with his motto... borne by noble and learned personages, to notify some particular conceit [conception, notion] of their own' W. Camden, 'Remaines of a Greater Worke Concerning Britain', 1605, 158). The motto should be in 'some different language'. Hilliard's theme is fidelity -- but to whom? The roses with their sharp thorns perhaps symbolize pleasure and pain, fidelity enduring through good times and bad. The inscription, 'Dat poenas laudata fides', is taken from a passage by Lucan -- known in translation at the time -- saying that fidelity, though praised, can carry penalties when given to people in trouble. Even at the time the significance of this privately commissioned and obviously costly work would have been known only to a small number of people; the meaning of the motto, required by Camden to be 'neither too obscure, nor too plain', is now -- four centuries and more later -- surely irretrievable. It was David Piper who suggested that the young man might be the earl of Essex (Edmond, 202, n. 16) and this has been strongly argued by Roy Strong in 'The English Renaissance Miniature' (1983) and elsewhere. According to Strong, Hilliard must have visited Fontainebleau during his time in France; in his view the 'Young Man among Roses' is much influenced by Italian works there. 
The subjects of Hilliard's other cabinet miniatures are all well known and include 'George Clifford, 3rd Earl of Cumberland' (NMM), 'Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex' (priv. coll.), and 'Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland' (Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam). There are links with the accession day tilts, popular public shows held on 17 November, the date on which Elizabeth became queen. 
Hilliard's duties as royal limner continued. He must have known the famous face better than anyone but, as the years passed, he had the delicate task of combining something of a likeness with the need to promote the legend of the Virgin Queen. No sittings would have been required and the royal tirewomen would have produced the necessary robes and adornments. The queen's jeweller, Robert Brandon, died on 30 May 1591 and was buried at St Vedast, Foster Lane, on 8 June. His long will lists his surviving son, Edward; Alice Hilliard's four married sisters and their husbands, and a young unmarried half-sister by Brandon's second wife; also seventeen grandchildren, not including the Hilliards. Alice's sisters had all 'married well', as Brandon would have seen it. For Alice there was a $50 annuity, to be paid quarterly by way of the Goldsmiths' Company, towards her maintenance. Of Hilliard there is no mention. In 1579 Brandon had lent him the large sum of $70, to be repaid one year later. He wrote in the treatise of artists being 'commonly no misers, but liberal above their little degree'; of sometimes not being in the mood ('in humour') to concentrate on the main work in hand; and of sometimes giving away a rare work 'for very affection' (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 109). He attacked the 'common slander' that such men are 'ever unthrifts', which may hint at resentment over criticisms by an exasperated father-in-law (ibid.). 
Hilliard's father, Richard, had made his will on 2 November 1586 but he did not die until the summer of 1594. He bequeathed to Nicholas property in Exeter, and his best gown and gold ring with a cornelian stone in it. In the manner of the day he lists the sons first (John was unnamed, which perhaps confirms that he had died), and then the four daughters -- two married and two unmarried. Dates and order of births are unknown. Francis, son of Nicholas Hilliard, is named; his brother, Robert, had not been born when the will was made. Bequests fulfilled, the remainder of the estate went to Richard's widow and executrix, Laurence, who proved the will on 9 August. 
Troubles accumulated for Hilliard towards the end of Elizabeth's reign, and his miniatures of this period lack some of his earlier assurance. One deserves mention for literary rather than artistic reasons, that of 'Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton' (FM Cam.) -- Shakespeare's patron -- who came of age in 1594, the date of the miniature, which had presumably been specially commissioned. If the earl was indeed the 'lovely boy' of the sonnets, as is widely supposed, sonnet 16 would be highly significant. The poet writes of the sitter's 'painted counterfeit' (presumably that of 1594) and in line 10 he refers to 'this times pencil [limner's brush] and my pupil pen'. 'This time's pencil' can surely mean no other than the famous portrayer of the age. 
In 1591 Hilliard had been commissioned to design a third great seal; work went on for years in fruitless attempts to satisfy the queen, and in the end the second seal remained in use until her death. This time Hilliard's colleague was Charles Anthony, probably a son of Derick, and it seems that his appointment may again have caused some resentment. On 2 June 1599 Anthony delivered to Sir Robert Cecil a letter in which Hilliard denied that he was competing for Anthony's office, graver of the mint. He had indeed spoken about it at one stage to a member of the household but had learned that Anthony had a written promise from Cecil's late father, Lord Burghley. This incident serves as a reminder of how much lobbying court servants had to do on their own behalf. Hilliard went on to claim that he had missed many commissions because of the work on the projected seal, and he reported that -- predictably -- he had received only one instalment of the $40 annuity 'in reversion' promised by the queen in 1591. He was now 'brought into great extremes'. 
Probably it was thanks to Cecil that an unconditional warrant followed, on 17 August, granting a $40 annuity to her majesty's 'goldsmith and our limner' and making Hilliard a member of the household (warrant, letters patent, TNA: PRO). The sum represented no advance on the one granted to the royal 'paintrix' Levina Teerlinc more than half a century earlier. Three years later Hilliard was forced to mortgage the annuity and hand over the patent to meet debts, although the patent was restored in 1611. His father-in-law may well have feared something of the sort when he omitted Hilliard from his will; he was trying to block money intended for his daughter from being diverted to her husband's creditors. On 28 July 1601 Hilliard wrote to Cecil, seeking the queen's permission -- which was of course refused -- to go abroad again for a year or two. He was sure he could earn enough to pay off his debts 'very easeilye'. 
The Goldsmiths' Company were having difficulty during these years in extracting Hilliard's annual rent of $3 for The Maidenhead, and were refusing to renew his lease. Their minutes show that on 19 March 1599 he offered $20 for the lease plus 'a picture' (presumably a miniature, subject unspecified) worth 20 nobles ($6 13's'. 4died); the queen intervened on her servant's behalf by way of the privy council; on 4 July 1600 the company insisted on $30 for the lease, and the 'picture' had become 'a faire picture in greate' of the queen. A minute dated 28 November 1600 notes that Hilliard had promised to pay the money on receipt of the lease; as for the picture the winter was a 'verie unseasonable tyme to worke' (Goldsmiths' Company records). He would do it in the summer. There the matter seems to rest; the company probably stopped pressing for the picture at the queen's death. In any case the entries do not constitute hard evidence that Hilliard ever painted easel pictures, although it is sometimes argued that they do. Various portraits of Elizabeth, in particular the 'Phoenix' (NPG) and the 'Pelican' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), are now often attributed to him on stylistic grounds. The queen died on 24 March 1603, and Hilliard attended the funeral in Westminster Abbey on 28 April, having received the customary allowance of 4 yards of black cloth for his livery. The lord chamberlain's book names the hundreds of people who had been serving the last of the Tudors at the end of Elizabeth's reign; Hilliard is listed as 'picturedrawer' (LC 2/4 (4), TNA: PRO). 
Hilliard continued as limner to James I, with the $40 annuity. For the first time in fifty-six years England had a married monarch, and James's queen, Anne of Denmark, soon had her own household. Unlike her husband the queen was genuinely interested in art -- as their sons, the princes Henry and Charles, would be -- and in 1605 she appointed Isaac Oliver as her limner, again at $40 a year. Hilliard was kept busy for almost the whole of his remaining years, turning out presentation miniatures and gold medals of King James and members of the royal family. The lugubrious Scottish face clearly did not interest him, and he sometimes seems to devote more attention to the clothes and accessories than to the man. Occasionally Hilliard painted a more attractive and characteristic work if the sitter was to his liking. On 7 June 1605 he presented his son Laurence to the Goldsmiths' court to become a freeman of the company, and a week later his last apprentice, Richard Osbaldeston. He was assisted in his work by Laurence, by the painter Rowland Lockey, who had served an eight-year apprenticeship with him from 1581, and perhaps by others. Lockey died in 1616. 
Robert Cecil was created earl of Salisbury in 1605. In an undated letter to him, endorsed '1606' by a secretary, Hilliard reports that -- true to form -- he had sought to 'trim' the late queen's tomb but had been told by the serjeant-painter that that was 'his' responsibility. If he had known, Hilliard writes, he would not have been so bold for he had once had 'envy inoughe about a great seale, for... dooing well in other mens offices' (Hilliard, MS letter, Hatfield House, 119/8). In his last surviving letter, dated 26 March 1610, he extols goldsmiths' skills in repairing the highways, which the 'playne Cuntree folke and common laboring men' cannot manage on their own (Hilliard, MS letter, TNA: PRO, SP 14/53/43). 
At some unknown date Hilliard moved from London to Westminster, presumably to be nearer the court; rent and lease books of this period are notoriously misleading, and no conclusions can be drawn from the Goldsmiths' records. The present frame of Alice Hilliard's miniature (1578; V&A) bears the words 'UXOR PRIMA', and an Alice Hillyard, who could be the miniaturist's wife, was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 16 May 1611. The loss of a homemaker usually prompted a widower and/or son to seek another quickly, and it may be significant that the bachelor Laurence Hilliard married on 4 December 1611 and settled in the parish of St Bride, Fleet Street. The date of Alice Hilliard's burial, if she is correctly identified, would rule out a Susan Gysard, married to a Nicholas Hilliard in 1608, as the supposed second wife. There were a number of Hilliards (variant spellings) in London and Westminster at the time, and more than one Nicholas. 
Hilliard and Francis Bacon -- now Baron Verulam and lord chancellor -- had known each other since their time in France in the 1570s, and it may be that Bacon heard about Hilliard's last illness; a small account book covering 'gifts' and 'rewards' in the autumn of 1618 includes a note about $11 for 'old Mr Hillyard' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/99, no. 86). Hilliard died shortly afterwards and was buried at his parish church of St Martin-in-the-Fields on 7 January 1619. He bequeathed 20's'. (not then a negligible sum) to the poor of the parish, money for his sister Mrs Anne Avery, and bedding and his best household stuff to his servant Elizabeth Deacon. His estate passed to Laurence Hilliard, who laid out 52's'. -- much more than for any other parishioner at the time -- for the funeral. The estate included what must have been a handsome gold creation, which incorporated miniatures -- copied from earlier portraits -- of Henry VII, Henry VIII, Edward VI, and his mother, Jane Seymour. It was called the Bosworth jewel and commemorated the battle of 1485, which resulted in the death of Richard III and the start of the Tudor dynasty, and it was eventually conveyed by Laurence to Charles I. The jewel was presumably broken up and sold during the Commonwealth but the miniatures are now back in the Royal Collection. 
Nicholas Hilliard has rarely been out of favour, and his reputation has never been higher than in the twentieth century. A major exhibition, entitled 'Nicholas Hilliard & Isaac Oliver', was mounted in London in 1947, marking the quatercentenary of Hilliard's supposed birth. A second exhibition, of miniatures from 1520 to 1620, followed in 1983. $3 or $4 was the standard rate for a Hilliard miniature without an elaborate setting in his day. A limning of twenty-one-year-old 'Jane Coningsby, Mrs Boughton' (priv. coll.), which he did in 1574, sold for $75,000 at Sothebys in 1980, then an auction record for any portrait miniature. The development of colour photography and printing, and television, have enhanced Hilliard's renown. He writes in the 'Treatise' of artists in England being mostly immigrants, although he recalls Ronsard saying that when 'the islands' do occasionally produce one, it is often 'in high perfection' (Hilliard, 'Arte of Limning', 69). Hilliard, never one for false modesty, continues: 'I hope there may come out of this our land such a one, this being the greatest and most famous island of Europe' (ibid.). It is not difficult to deduce whom he has in mind. He is one of the outstanding English artists in any medium. It is a happy accident that he was born in time to portray the leading figures of a notable period of English history. 


@@@@@


doc= 13321


Hillier, George Alexander (1815-1866), antiquary and publisher, was born in Kennington, Surrey, the son of William Hillier, commander RN, and his wife, Ann (died 1862). He was educated at Place Street House Academy, Ryde, Isle of Wight ('DNB'), and it is known that he lived afterwards at 3 Crescent Place, Mornington Crescent, London, and Sedley Lodge, Ryde, Isle of Wight. In 1847 he was granted permission to make drawings from manuscripts in the British Museum and collected material relating to the Isle of Wight. He was commissioned to research into the history of a number of aristocratic families both in the British Museum and in their own archives. From 1853 he sold manuscripts to the British Museum but their quantity and quality aroused the suspicions of Sir Frederic Madden, keeper of manuscripts. Hillier could not demonstrate title, and some may indeed have been forgeries. In 1854 he was suspended, and despite threats it was felt expedient to keep the affair out of the gaze of the law courts and the public (Hockey). 
Despite such setbacks Hillier was actively publishing. 'The Topography of the Isle of Wight' appeared in 1850 and ran to several editions over the next few years. He published four historical works, 'A Narrative of the Attempted Escapes of Charles the First from Carisbrook Castle' (1852), 'The Sieges of Arundel Castle' (1854), 'A Memorial of the Castle at Carisbrook' (1855), and 'The Stranger's Guide to the Town of Reading, with a History of the Abbey' (1859). 
Hillier also carried out archaeological investigations which he published as 'Result of the Excavations on Brighstone and Bowcombe Downs, Isle of Wight, August 1854' (1854) and subsequently in the 'Journal of the British Archaeological Association' (vol. 9, 1855, pp. 34-40). In 1855 he excavated an early Anglo-Saxon cemetery at Chessell Down (Arnold, 'The Anglo-Saxon Cemeteries of the Isle of Wight'), which attracted considerable antiquarian attention and acclaim. Further controversy ensued after he sold the artefacts to Lord Londesborough, but subsequently pledged them to a Dorset pawnbroker. In 1867 they were acquired by the British Museum, some from Charles Warne, another Dorset antiquary who had employed Hillier as an illustrator. 
One obituarist implies that throughout this period Hillier suffered financial problems and a breakdown ('GM'); his difficulties were exacerbated by the lack of subscribers to his projected 'History and antiquities of the Isle of Wight', which was never completed. The only finished section surveyed the archaeology and history of the Isle of Wight to the medieval period and was illustrated with his own hand-coloured engravings, notably of his discoveries at Chessell Down. The second section, a study of the borough of Newport, finished in mid-sentence after only thirty-two pages. 
Hillier died on 1 April 1866 in Ryde and was buried at Binstead church, Isle of Wight. The lease of their property was transferred to his wife, Marie, as he died 'without leaving any property for her maintenance' (Isle of Wight RO, uncatalogued draft leases). 
For his time Hillier was an accomplished excavator whose detailed records have fortunately survived. In his latter years he had enjoyed considerable support from noted antiquaries -- hence his glowing entry in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' -- but they were probably unaware of the questionable side of Hillier's life, about which equally influential individuals preferred to remain silent. 


@@@@@


doc= 13322


Hills, Henry, senior (c.1625-1688/9), printer, was, according to a broadside of 1684, the son of a ropemaker in Maidstone, Kent; the 'Dictionary of National Biography' characterized both this work and a similar tract of 1688 as 'scurrilous' but Muddiman argued that 'nearly all their statements can be corroborated' (Muddiman, 5). It is possible that Hills was indeed from Kent as one of his apprentices was the son of a Henry Hills from Sevenoaks, although equally Hills may also have had links with Wales, from where no fewer than five other of his apprentices came. According to the 1684 broadside, just before the outbreak of the civil war Hills served under the future regicide Thomas Harrison, who 'put him out an Apprentice to a Printer for his better qualification to serve the 'Cause'' ('A View'). A marginal note named the 'printer' in question as the London partnership of Matthew Simmons and Thomas Paine but, if this was the case, neither man formally bound Hills as his apprentice. Either way, Hills did not remain long with them but 'Lifted himself in the 'Rebel-Army' under 'Essex'', fighting 'fiercely' at Edgehill (ibid.). 
According to the broadside, it was in the late 1640s that Hills began the series of political and religious tergiversations that made him one of the most notorious printers of the seventeenth century: 'He ever made it his business to be of the rising side, let what Card would turn up Trump, he would still follow the Suit, his Heart and Hand were also so well furnish'd' ('A View'). In summer 1647 he was printing for the New Model Army at Oxford with the printer John Harris. By the following year he was based in London at Southwark, where he had his first brush with the authorities, who ordered the seizure of a 'very dangerous book' being printed by Hills ('CSP dom.', '1648-9', 7). In 1649 he was printing again for the army and also appears to have been made printer to the council of state; however, this did not prevent him from printing in the same year at least two editions of 'Eikon basilike' as well as a number of Leveller tracts. 
Hills joined the Particular Baptist church of William Kiffin and in 1650 he was living openly with the wife of a Blackfriars tailor, Thomas Hams, although he was apparently already married. His conduct led to a fine and imprisonment in the Fleet, from where he wrote 'The Prodigal Returned to his Fathers House', recanting his crime and asking to be readmitted to the congregation; this work survives only in a reprinted form in 'The Life of H. H.' (1688). The broadside of 1684 claimed that Hills went on to become both a printer and a preacher for the Baptist movement before misappropriating their funds, and he did indeed sign a letter from the London Baptists in 1653, as well as publishing many Particular Baptist works between 1652 and 1661. 
According to the broadside Hills participated in the battle of Worcester of September 1651 and was seen in Lieutenant-General Charles Fleetwood's tent the day after the battle. If this is true, it was evidently not the first time that Hills had come to Fleetwood's attention: a month earlier the Stationers' Company of London received letters from Fleetwood, recommending Hills for the freedom of the company. Hills was accordingly freed by redemption (that is, by payment rather than apprenticeship) on 7 October. His imprints of this time do not often specify a location of his business but in 1652 he was at the sign of Sir John Oldcastle in Fleet Yard, while in the following year he appears to have moved his business to Pie Corner, just to the north-east of the city walls. When he bound his first apprentice in April 1654, he had moved further west, as he described himself as a printer in Aldersgate Street; he was probably already married to Dorothy (died 1666) as the first of at least four sons, Henry Hills junior ['see below'], was born to them about this time. 
Hills's close relationship with Cromwell as both printer to the council of state and to the lord protector evidently aided him in his attempt, with John Field, in 1655 to secure a monopoly in printing English bibles and psalms, privileges that belonged to the king's printers (whose office had been in legal limbo since the civil wars) and the Stationers' Company respectively. In March 1656, despite protests from members of the trade, the company acceded to an order from Cromwell ordering it to register the rights of the 'Bible' with the two men. In July the two men also secured the right to print bibles for the university press at Oxford and in October they were elected to the company's livery. Their intimacy with Cromwell was such that they walked in his funeral cortege, while their long-standing position as printers to the government was evidently financially beneficial -- in April 1659, for example, the two men received almost $2800 from the treasury. 
The Restoration presented obvious new challenges for Hills. He seems to have been briefly imprisoned and was a suspected plotter against the king in 1662, but when the rights of Christopher Barker and John Bill to the king's printing office were reaffirmed, Barker almost immediately assigned his share to a group of stationers including, perhaps pragmatically, Hills. The history of the privileges related to the office of king's printer is particularly complicated in this period as shares were reassigned and subdivided, patents expired, and new reversions were granted. Nevertheless Hills not only remained as an assign for the rest of his life but in 1672 he bought a one-sixth share of the thirty-year reversion in the king's printing office that would come into effect with the expiry of the original patent in January 1680, while in December 1675 he and the manager of the printing house, Thomas Newcombe, received a thirty-year patent to begin following the termination of this reversion in 1710. In 1677 Hills and Newcombe were formally recognized as the king's printers. A year later Hills was elected to the governing body of the Stationers' Company. 
Hills served as the company's under-warden for two successive terms between 1682 and 1684 and was in office when the company, along with most of the other chartered London livery companies, was forced to surrender its original charter in March 1684 as part of Charles II's policy of remodelling England's corporations. Hills was one of the few not to resign his position and his name was included on the fresh charter issued to the company in May 1684. He served as upper-warden for 1684-5, a position he used to initiate a series of legal challenges against Oxford University Press regarding its printing privileges, which led to a new agreement between the company and the university in September 1685. It was also during his term of office and shortly after the accession of James II in February 1685 that Hills formally converted to Catholicism. However, despite his earlier professed conformity to the Church of England especially at the time of the new charter, it seems likely that Hills's Catholic sympathies dated as far back as 1666. On 14 April of that year, less than two months after the burial of his first wife, Hills married Elizabeth Versing, alias Knoff (died in or after 1707), a widow of St Margaret's, Westminster, who later described herself as 'being born beyond [the] sea and bred a papist' ('CSP dom.', '1694-5', 206). Together they had two further sons who, according to their stepbrother Henry, were 'brought up that [Catholic] way' ('CSP dom.', '1690-91', 485). Significantly, three of Hills's children by his first marriage, including Henry, were baptized on 23 August 1681 at St Martin Outwich, Threadneedle Street, London, when they were all in their twenties, suggesting that they too had been brought up outside the Church of England, although probably as Baptists rather than Catholics. 
The purges and counter-purges of London's liverymen by James II in 1687 had its impact on the Stationers' Company and as a result Hills became master of the company in October. He was re-elected unanimously the following June and remained in post until 27 November when a final purge restored the pre-1684 'status quo' and Hills was ousted. With William of Orange already landed in England, Hills evidently believed he would not be able to survive another change in national government. On 10 December 1688 he drew up his will and fled to St Omer; on the night of 11-12 December an anti-Catholic mob 'destroy'd Mr. 'Henry Hills' Printing-House; spoil'd his Forms, Letters, &c and burnt 2 or 300 Reams of Paper, printed and unprinted' ('English Currant', 2). Hills died at St Omer before 24 December 1689. His widow, Elizabeth, was convicted of recusancy in 1691; the Stationers' Company charitably turned a blind eye to the news, allowing her to retain her share, inherited from her husband, in the company's joint-stock venture. She surrendered this share only in December 1707 when she was noted as recently remarried. 
The career of Hills's son 
On 13 July 1680 Hills, described as a bachelor of St Anne's, Blackfriars, and aged about twenty-six, married Mrs Ann Buckstone ('c'.1657-1700x12), a widow of about twenty-three from St Mary's, Surrey, at the Charterhouse chapel. They baptized their first child, Henry, on 17 April 1681 at St Anne's and in 1695 they were noted as living in Holland Street in the same parish with three children; they were still in the parish in 1700. Hills seems to have begun printing books from about 1680. In November 1682 he borrowed $100 from the Stationers' Company (in 1686 he was ordered to pay it back or find new sureties). He fined for the office of renter warden in 1687 and this seems to have been the highest company office he held; however, in August 1688 he successfully petitioned for the company to acknowledge his service as the messenger (that is, inspector) of the press and to receive an annual wage of $10. 
The events of 1688-9 changed Hills's fortunes. His support of the new regime apparently estranged him from his father, whose will, although describing him as 'my welbeloved son', left him only a relatively small legacy as he had 'been by me advanced already' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/398, fol. 45'r'). In April 1689 the crown ordered the arrest of Henry Hills for high treason but whether this referred to father or son is unclear; the son was definitely back in favour with the authorities later in the year, as he was reconfirmed as the messenger of the press. Henry senior's will was proved on 21 January 1690 but the conviction of Henry senior's widow as a recusant and the bankruptcy of the other executor led to Henry junior's younger brother, Gilham, being granted both the administration of the estate on 18 September 1691 and his mother's share of his father's interest in the king's printing house. Effectively disinherited, Henry Hills petitioned the crown in 1691 and 1694 claiming that his father had forfeited his rights in the printing house because of his Catholicism; a further petition in 1698 went further, claiming that Gilham was supporting the Catholic side of the family with the profits from the king's printing house. 
Hills's notoriety stemmed from his activities during 1708-9 when he pirated a multitude of short literary works (including pieces by Dryden, Rochester, Congreve, Defoe, and Swift) and sermons -- all sold very cheaply and claiming to be published for the benefit of the poor. He even reprinted a run of 'The Tatler'. The bookseller John Dunton described him as 'that ARCH-PIRATE and hard'ned Wretch' (Bond, 264). However, the 'Copyright Act' of 1710 seems to have curbed his activities, although he did reprint his father's 1649 edition of John Lilburne's trial in that year. He died at some point before 29 March 1712, when his son Peter was granted administration of his estate; his stock was sold off in November 1713. 


@@@@@


doc= 13323


Hills, Robert (1769-1844), landscape and animal painter, was born at Islington, Middlesex, on 26 June 1769. He received lessons from the drawing master John Alexander Gresse, possibly at Mrs Broadbelt's school in Queen Square, Bloomsbury, and he entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1788. The artist made his debut at the academy in 1791, showing a 'Wood Scene with Gypsey Fortune Tellers', but he exhibited few works in the following decade, concentrating, instead, on producing and publishing an extensive set of 'Etchings of Quadropeds' (1798-1815). This eventually comprised 780 images of domestic, farm, and wild animals, and, according to the title-page, was aimed at amateur and student artists 'for the embellishment of landscape'. The etchings, covering a wide range of characteristic poses, were the outcome of a vast number of studies made from nature, as well as close anatomical study. The print room at the British Museum holds a collection of over 1200 of the finest impressions and proofs. 
Hills's animal and landscape studies from the 1790s show a fluent draughtsmanship, but his use of watercolour -- his favourite medium -- was rather old-fashioned. From around 1800, however, he had begun to move in more advanced watercolour circles. Along with his friend James Ward, and neighbours Samuel Shelley and William Henry Pyne, Hills took a leading role in a sketching society which met from 1800 to 1806 in the winter months to sketch and talk about art, as well as undertaking expeditions to study from nature in the summer. The society encouraged the ambitions of watercolourists and the members, including Hills, Shelley, and Pyne, were prime movers in the foundation of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1804 as an independent exhibition. Hills was the society's first secretary and, during the period from 1805 to 1812, one of its staunchest supporters, showing 203 works. He resigned in 1812 when it was decided to allow oils into the exhibitions, though he continued to exhibit until 1818. Resuming his connection with the society in 1823, he acted as treasurer from 1827 to 1831, and as secretary again from 1832 until his death in 1844. In all, Hills showed almost 600 works at the society, including collaborations with artists such as George Fennel Robson, George Barret the younger, David Cox, and William Andrews Nesfield. 
Hills's exhibited works ranged in scale and price. The simplest comprised small animal groups and were often described as sketches in exhibition catalogues. The artist also produced more complex farm scenes which featured picturesque buildings and rural activities. Hills's most ambitious works, however, were larger in scale, typically combining a highly detailed landscape setting, based on careful topographical studies, with skilfully composed animal groups. Hills was perhaps at his best in works such as 'A Village Snow Scene' (1819; Yale U. CBA), which shows his characteristic stipple technique and an inventive use of blank areas of paper. However, many of his later finished works were spoilt by an overheated palette, and today it is the more immediate colour sketches made on the spot, often accompanied with notes in shorthand, that maintain his reputation as both a sensitive observer of the natural world and an accurate recorder of the early nineteenth-century agricultural landscape. The most important group of sketches is to be found in Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery. Hills occasionally produced oil paintings, and a number were among the forty-four works he showed at the Royal Academy from 1791 to 1824; he also modelled a number of animals in clay. 
Hills's travels in Britain were primarily confined to the Lake District and to the south-eastern counties, particularly in Kent near the home of his main patron, John Garle. There is some evidence of a link with the group of artists surrounding Samuel Palmer at Shoreham known as the Ancients. In addition, Hills made a number of visits to the continent: in 1814 he went to Paris, and in July 1815 he travelled through Holland and Flanders to visit the battlefield of Waterloo, where he made a series of sketches. These formed the basis of fifty-three aquatints etched by himself which were published as 'Sketches in Flanders and Holland with some account of a tour shortly after the battle of Waterloo' (1816). Although Hills emerges as a curiously dispassionate observer of the aftermath of war, the images also provide a compelling record of Flemish topography and its people. The artist also visited Jersey twice, the second time with G. F. Robson in 1833. 
Hills died unmarried at 17 Golden Square, London, on 14 May 1844. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery, Middlesex. The long list of bequests left in his will reinforces the impression of a man dedicated to the art of the watercolour who had a wide circle of friends. Among the benefactors was Isaac Mendez Belisario of Kingston, Jamaica, an exhibitor at the Society of Painters in Water Colours from 1815 to 1831 whose works were in a style close to that of Hills, his friend and teacher. 


@@@@@


doc= 13324


Hillyar, Sir James (1769-1843), naval officer, eldest son of James Hillyar, surgeon in the navy, was born on 29 October 1769 at Portsea, Hampshire. He entered the navy in 1779, on the 'Chatham', under Captain John Orde, and was in her at the capture of the 'Magicienne' off Boston on 2 September 1781. The 'Chatham' was paid off at the peace in 1783, but Hillyar, continuing actively employed on the North American and home stations, was in 1793 appointed to the 'Britannia', flagship of Admiral Hotham. From there he was removed to the 'Victory', flagship of Lord Hood, who rewarded his conduct at Toulon, and afterwards in Corsica, with a commission, on 8 March 1794, as lieutenant of the 'Aquilon' with Captain Robert Stopford. In her he was at the action of 1 June 1794; he was shortly afterwards moved, with Stopford, into the 'Phaeton', one of the frigates with Cornwallis in his retreat of 17 June 1794, and remained attached to the Channel Fleet until June 1799. Hillyar, again following Stopford, was then moved into the 'Excellent', from which in April 1800 he was promoted to command the 'Niger', armed 'en flute', and sent out to the Mediterranean with troops. On 3 September 1800 he commanded the boats of the 'Minotaur' and 'Niger' in the cutting out of two Spanish corvettes at Barcelona; and in the following year, while on the coast of Egypt, served under Sir Sidney Smith in command of the armed boats on the lakes and the Nile. 
Throughout 1803 Hillyar continued in active service, cruising under the orders of Nelson, who wrote to Lord St Vincent, on 20 January 1804, specially recommending him for promotion and immediate employment. 'At twenty-four years of age he maintained his mother and sisters and a brother,... he declined the 'Ambuscade' which was offered him, because although he would get his rank, yet if he were put upon half-pay his family would be the sufferers. ('GM', 651)' The armament of the 'Niger' was increased, and she was made a post ship, Hillyar being continued (29 February 1804) in the command, which he held, attached to the Mediterranean Fleet, until the end of 1807. In 1809 he commanded the 'St George' (98 guns) as flag captain to Rear-Admiral Sir Eliab Harvey, and afterwards to Rear-Admiral Pickmore in the Baltic, where Sir James Saumarez appointed him to the 'Phoebe', a 36-gun frigate. In her, in the following spring, he went out to the East Indies, where he assisted in the capture of Mauritius (December 1810) and of Java (August 1811). 
After returning to England, Hillyar was early in 1813 sent out to the Pacific to destroy the American fur establishments in the north. At Juan Fernandez, where he was joined by the sloops 'Racoon' and 'Cherub', he heard that the United States frigate 'Essex' (46 guns) was taking British merchantmen on that station. Having gone as far north as the Galapagos Islands, he sent the 'Racoon' to execute his former orders; and, with the 'Cherub' in company, ranged down the coast looking for the 'Essex'. After five months' search he found her, at the beginning of February 1814, at Valparaiso, Chile, where she was lying with three prizes, one of which she had armed as a tender, renamed 'Essex Junior'. David Porter, the captain of the 'Essex', expected an immediate attack; and, if Hillyar had found her, as he had been informed, with half her men on shore and quite unprepared, he might perhaps have closed with her. But as she was ready for action, he gave up any such intention and, allegedly, meeting Porter on shore assured him that he would respect the neutrality of the port. The story, however, rests on Porter's uncorroborated assertion, and is intrinsically improbable, for the 'Essex's' armament of 32-pounder carronades was, at short range, enormously superior to the 'Phoebe''s long 18-pounders. 
Nevertheless, the 'Phoebe' and the 'Cherub' maintained a blockade for six weeks; and after several vain attempts to elude it, Porter resolved on 27 March to force his way through, but he had scarcely got outside before, in a sudden squall, the 'Essex' lost her main topmast. He tried to regain the anchorage but failing ran into a small bay about 3 miles from the town, and anchored within a few hundred yards of the shore. Under heavy fire and after sustaining significant damage, Porter surrendered. Hillyar was accused of a breach of faith, and of making an unfair attack on the 'Essex', though he had merely pressed home his advantage. The 'Essex Junior' surrendered without resistance, and the 'Essex', having been sufficiently repaired, sailed in company with the 'Phoebe' for England, where they arrived in the following November. Hillyar was made a CB in June 1815. 
In 1830-31 Hillyar commanded the 'Revenge' (74 guns) in the experimental squadron under Sir Edward Codrington, and for a short time as senior officer in the North sea during the siege of Antwerp. He was then appointed to the 'Caledonia' (120 guns) and employed on the coast of Portugal during 1832 and the beginning of the following year. On 10 January 1837 he became rear-admiral. He was made KCH in January 1834, and KCB on 4 July 1840. 
Hillyar married on 14 July 1805 Mary (1787/8-1884), a daughter of Nathaniel Taylor, naval storekeeper at Malta. They had three daughters and three sons, among whom were Admiral Sir Charles Farrell Hillyar (died 1888) and Admiral Henry Shank Hillyar. Hillyar died at his home, Tor House, Torpoint, Cornwall, on 10 July 1843, and was buried on 15 July in the parish churchyard, Anthony, near Torpoint. 


@@@@@


doc= 13325


Hilsey, John (d. 1539), bishop of Rochester, may have originated at Hildsley in Berkshire. He is said to have been educated at the Dominican house in Bristol, before becoming a friar there, and subsequently transferred to the Oxford convent, where he became BTh in 1527 and DTh in 1532. Of his religious inclinations at this time little is known, but having become prior of the Bristol Dominicans, he preached against the sermons of Hugh Latimer; in May 1532 he wrote to Thomas Cromwell in apologetic terms explaining why he did so. A little later Cromwell saw his potential value to the crown and the penitent Hilsey, no doubt eager to reassure the king of his loyalty, was appointed provincial of the English Dominicans on 13 April 1534, and at the same time was commissioned with the Augustinian friar George Browne to visit all the friaries in England; they soon secured acceptance of the royal supremacy. In 1535 Hilsey requested the Charterhouse monks to attend at Paul's Cross every week to lighten their hearts by knowledge and save their souls -- that is, by assenting to the supremacy. Such was his impact that in May of that year the conservative bishop John Stokesley of London stopped Hilsey from preaching at Paul's Cross, fearing that like George Browne he might have 'some pernicious doctrine' ('LP Henry VIII', 8, no. 1054). 
Nevertheless, Hilsey's diligent and effective advocacy of the supremacy quickly brought him rewards, though of a modest sort, when on 7 August 1535 he was elected bishop of Rochester, the poorest and smallest English diocese, in succession to John Fisher, who had been deprived and executed for treason. Royal assent was granted on 12 August, he was consecrated by Cranmer on 18 September, and the temporalities were restored on 4 October. Hilsey's own background, when set against his predecessor's indefatigable stand against the royal supremacy and exemplary record as diocesan, was bound to make his appointment controversial among conservatives, but for the crown and reformers like Cranmer it was a perfectly logical one -- the diocese was often held by men with a theological training and its proximity to London could ensure that Hilsey's energy and talents were fully employed. 
Hilsey immediately encountered problems with the administration of his temporalities (and consequently saw the royal supremacy from a rather different angle) -- he reported to Cromwell that crown agents in his woodland seemed to be taking everything, and asked him for Fisher's mitre, staff, and seal, pleading poverty. This was genuine as Hilsey also pleaded for livings 'in commendam' to supplement his meagre $200 per annum. Cromwell finally licensed him to hold two additional benefices, though at the expense of losing Frekenham manor to Edward North, chancellor of augmentations. During his episcopate the London residence of the bishops of Rochester, Lambeth Marsh, was also lost. It is unlikely that he ever had surplus income, and while it is as well to be cautious about Bishop Griffith's statement in 1558 that the $100 that 'he' had spent on repairs was more than anybody had spent in the last twenty-four years at Rochester, the claim does seem plausible. On the whole Hilsey seems to have been competent at managing his leases and finances, in contrast to some other bishops who had once been monks. 
Following his consecration Hilsey appointed Maurice Griffith his chancellor to carry out his primary visitation of the cathedral and diocese. Almost immediately, however, Hilsey's authority was suspended during a royal visitation and he seems to have encountered some hostility from Richard Layton, the king's visitor, late in October telling Cromwell that Layton wanted the advowson of a benefice which Rochester Cathedral priory hoped to give to Hilsey's chaplain. The same letter provides evidence for Hilsey preaching in favour of the royal supremacy, and shows him eager to demonstrate his conformity and reliability. He was installed in person in his cathedral on 30 November 1536 before a large congregation. During his short episcopate he showed himself concerned to appoint those favoured by Cromwell to religious houses. Two clergy were deprived of benefices for reasons unknown, and a mariner named Foster of Greenwich abjured heretical opinions before the bishop at Lambeth Marsh palace on 6 April 1538. Hilsey did not ordain any clergy during his episcopate, but diocesan administration appears to have been efficient, the detailed list of church incomes hinting at thoroughness for taxation purposes at least. 
It was preaching the supremacy which brought Hilsey to prominence, and preaching which maintained his high profile. He was appointed by Cromwell to certify preachers for Paul's Cross and himself twice preached there early in 1536. But his most notable appearances there were on 24 February 1538, when he exposed the rood of Boxley to ridicule, and on 24 November following, when he did the same with the blood of Hailes. Hilsey found appointing preachers difficult, partly because of clashes with the conservative Stokesley, but also because of the hostile reception reformers often had from listeners. In 1539 Hilsey suggested that the bishop of London was in a better position to certify preachers, as only Hilsey himself or his chaplain John Bird were willing to take a reforming line. Bird preached at the cross on 20 July 1538 and clearly followed Hilsey's reformist thinking, as Stokesley complained, although Bird's subsequent career as bishop of Chester suggests pragmatism rather than thoroughgoing protestantism, which might raise questions about Hilsey's own theological radicalism. Hilsey's devotion to the pulpit is nevertheless clear -- his last sermon at Paul's Cross was delivered only eight days before he died -- and his preaching aroused much opposition; in 1539 he claimed to go in fear of his life. His strong views, and perhaps his earlier performance as visitor of the friaries, prompted demands for his removal during the Pilgrimage of Grace, and though he does not seem to have been as radical as fellow bishops like Latimer and Shaxton, in 1537 he was described as 'Knave bishop and heretic' and as 'heretic and Loller' ('LP Henry VIII', 12/1, no. 530; 13/1 no. 715). 
As far as monks and friars were concerned, Hilsey continued to demonstrate reforming zeal. He criticized one Harcocke of Norwich for seditious preaching and moral laxity, so showing that he maintained his broader role of provincial of his order with some diligence. But he clearly felt no automatic hostility towards the regulars, for in 1535 he defended the patronage rights of Langley Priory, and in 1538 he wrote to commend a friar to Cromwell for his learning. There is no record of disharmony with his own cathedral priory, notwithstanding his enthusiasm for preaching in favour of the royal supremacy. 
Hilsey has been described as one of the 'more pliable' bishops who helped the royal cause in the last session of the Reformation Parliament (Lehmberg, 39). He may have assisted in the compilation of the ten articles of 1536. This, and his staunch defence of the royal supremacy, would account for his unpopularity with the Pilgrimage of Grace, but does not reveal much more about his theology than that he was a reformer who supported the king. In 1539 he published 'The manuall of prayers, or the prymer in Englyshe, most necessary for the educacyon of chyldren', at Cromwell's instigation, a mildly protestant work which reduced the number of saints invoked in the litany from fifty-eight to thirty-eight but upheld the doctrine of the real presence. He initially opposed the more conservative six articles of 1539, but even at this stage he was probably less doctrinally radical than Cranmer, Latimer, Shaxton, or Fox. Overall he can perhaps best be characterized as pragmatic, conformist, and eager to please his royal master, but none the less sincere and diligent as a diocesan bishop. Hilsey died in Rochester on 4 August 1539, his last letters complaining of 'cyatica' and of being sick and asleep, although he preached as late as 27 July, and was still discussing the publication of his manual and the management of leases in his diocese two days later. He was buried in Rochester Cathedral on 8 August, leaving no will. 


@@@@@


doc= 13326


Hilton, John (1599-1657), organist and composer, was probably born in Cambridge, the son of John Hilton, composer and organist of Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1594 to 1607. Having according to his own account studied music for ten years, he graduated MusB from Trinity on 1 July 1626 and published 'Ayres or Fa Las for Three Voyces' the following year. On 15 June 1627 he married Frances Trapp at St Margaret's, Westminster, and in 1628 was appointed organist and parish clerk there, receiving for the former office a salary of $6 13's'. 4died, or 10 marks a year. 
In addition to the 'Ayres or Fa Las' Hilton's works include songs, dialogues, and catches, as well as a certain amount of church music which is hard to disentangle from his father's. There is also an elegy on the death of his friend William Lawes ('Bound by the near conjunction of our souls'), published in Henry Lawes's 'Choice Psalmes' (1648), and some consort music, including fourteen three-part fantasias. Hilton is best known as the compiler of 'Catch that Catch Can', a collection of rounds and catches published by John Playford in 1652 and subsequently enlarged in 1658 and 1663. It contains twelve canons and thirty catches by him together with similar compositions by numerous other composers. Among those by Hilton which have remained popular over the years are 'Come follow, follow' and 'Turn Amaryllis to thy swain'. Most of his songs and dialogues survive in manuscript: the dialogues, especially those on the judgment of Paris ('Rise princely shepherd'), the judgment of Solomon ('When Israel's sweet singer slept'), and the temptation of Job ('Amongst my children dares the fiend appear'), are among the most interesting manifestations of this musico-dramatic form in England. The solo songs, which include settings of Donne's 'Hymne to God the Father' ('Wilt thou forgive the sin where I begun?') and Wotton's 'On his Mistress the Empress of Bohemia' ('You meaner beauties of the night'), are, for the time, somewhat old-fashioned in style but none the less attractive. In contrast to the seriousness of the songs, the consort music shows a lightness of style that has more in common with the 'Ayres and Fa Las'. Hilton died in 1657 and was buried in St Margaret's, Westminster, on 21 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 13327


Hilton, John (1805-1878), anatomist and surgeon, eldest son of John and Hannah Hilton, was born in Sible Hedingham, Essex, on 22 September 1805. He was the uncle of the physician Charles Hilton Fagge (1838-1883). Hilton's father, originally of humble circumstances, subsequently engaged in the straw-plaiting industry, purchased brickfields, and built Hilton House in Swan Street, later a general-practice surgery. After attending King Edward VI Grammar School, Chelmsford, Hilton studied in Boulogne, becoming fluent in French, before entering Guy's Hospital, London, as a student in 1824. He became MRCS in 1827 and was appointed anatomy demonstrator in 1828. Many of his meticulous dissections were copied in wax by Joseph Towne at Guy's Hospital, and these copies remained preserved in its Gordon Museum. Hilton's mastery of anatomy enabled him to deduce that the same nerve trunks supplied articulations, their controlling muscles, and overlying skin, to ensure harmonious interaction and, in response to pain, physiological rest for inflamed or injured joints, a concept since known as Hilton's law. For this and research on the superior laryngeal nerve, Hilton was elected FRS in 1839. 
One of the original fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1843, Hilton became assistant surgeon to Guy's Hospital in 1844. He was in effect starting his surgical apprenticeship, as until this point he had not been exposed to surgical practice, his work previously being restricted to anatomical dissection and teaching. Hilton became anatomy lecturer at Guy's in 1845 and full surgeon in 1849; he also consulted privately from his home at 10 New Broad Street, City of London. At the Royal College of Surgeons he was elected a council member in 1854, Hunterian professor from 1859 to 1862, and president in 1867, when he gave the Hunterian oration. Hilton's lectures at the college between 1860 and 1862 were published individually in 'The Lancet', and reprinted in 1863 in a collected edition entitled 'On the influence of mechanical and physiological rest in the treatment of accidents and surgical disease, and the diagnostic value of pain'. This was edited with comments by W. H. A. Jacobson, as 'Rest and Pain', in 1876, 1880, 1887, and 1892, and by E. W. Walls and E. E. Philipp in 1950. Hilton wrote: 'Rest is the necessary antecedent to the healthy accomplishment of both repair and growth' (J. Hilton, 'Rest and Pain', ed. E. W. Walls and E. E. Philipp, 1950, 6). Reflecting a pivotal interest in nerves, he commented: 'I have striven, by agency of a more precise nervous anatomy, to unravel and render patent the meaning of pains which have so often been described as anomalous or obscure.' He concluded: 'Pain the monitor, and Rest the cure, are starting-points for contemplation which should ever be present in the mind of the surgeon' (ibid., 477). 
After retirement from Guy's in 1870, Hilton continued in private practice, being appointed surgeon-extraordinary to Queen Victoria and becoming president of the Pathological Society. Hilton, who was twice married, died at Hedingham House, Clapham, London, from a carcinoma of the stomach, on 14 September 1878. He was survived by his second wife, Elizabeth Mary Ann, formerly Clarke, by his stepson Fielding Clarke, and by the children from his first marriage. 
In the biographical introduction to the sixth edition of 'Rest and Pain', H. J. B. Atkins observed that Hilton's obituary notice in 'Guy's Hospital Reports' had appeared only in 1892, with an apology for the delay by Jacobson. Further 'The Lancet', which had published Hilton's lectures, and the 'British Medical Journal', printed unduly terse factual obituaries. In explanation Atkins suggested that Hilton may not have had a socially endearing character. None the less his unrivalled knowledge made him a fascinating lecturer and teacher. To be Hilton's dresser at Guy's was considered a 'blue riband' of attainment, even if he was no easy master, being rough in speech and prone to sarcasm, with a particular dislike of eponymous terminology. In 1892 S. Wilks and G. T. Bettany reported: 'It was his misfortune to say disagreeable things, for he was really a kind-hearted man' (Wilks and Bettany). 
Hilton made many contributions to 'The Lancet', 'Guy's Hospital Reports', and 'Proceedings of the Medical and Chirurgical Society' but his name is perpetuated in 'Rest and Pain', a classic of medical literature, influencing among others the anatomist F. Wood Jones who encouraged all medical students and practitioners to read it. 


@@@@@


doc= 13328


Hilton, Walter (c.1343-1396), religious writer, was born about 1343, a date deducible from his academic career. Neither his birthplace nor the date of his ordination is known. It is presumed that he studied at Cambridge University, on the assumption that he is identical with the Walter Hilton, bachelor of civil law, a clerk of Lincoln diocese, who was granted the reservation of a canonry and prebend of Abergwili, Carmarthen, in January 1371, and with the Walter Hilton, bachelor of civil law, recorded at the Ely consistory court in 1375. He is described in two fifteenth-century manuscripts as inceptor in canon law -- that is, as one who qualified for the doctorate but did not take it. Given the exigencies of the academic curriculum, he could have been a bachelor of canon law in 1376, and ready to incept as doctor in 1381-2. 
Links have been established between Hilton and various northern clerks employed by Thomas Arundel, bishop of Ely from 1374 to 1388. Some were given preferment at Peterhouse, a college with a strong bias towards canon law. Arundel and his circle at Ely were active in responding to incipient Lollardy; after Arundel's translation to York in 1388, Hilton and others would have been instrumental in the policy of imposing rule and order upon an 'enthusiastic' piety that was influenced by the tradition of the hermit Richard Rolle (died 1349), as well as in the conflict with Lollardy. 
Hilton's letters reveal that, having renounced a promising legal career, he spent some time as a solitary, but they show him unfulfilled in this condition; he was at heart a pastor and a 'community' man. He joined the priory of Augustinian canons at Thurgarton, Nottinghamshire, presumably 'c'.1386, the year when a correspondent, Adam Horsley, joined the Beauvale Charterhouse, and he remained there until his death on 24 March 1396. In 1388 the prior of Thurgarton was authorized, with others, to examine heretics. But while Hilton's writings are severely critical of 'heresy' and of 'enthusiastic' piety, his fame as a spiritual writer rests rather on his positive statement of orthodox ascetic and mystical theology, to which contemporary controversy has added precision. 
Hilton's greatest work is 'The Scale of Perfection' (the title is editorial), in two books. The first book, datable to his early years at Thurgarton, is addressed ostensibly to an anchoress, and speaks of the renewal of God's image in man as the prelude to contemplation, with practical counsel on meditation and prayer, on humility and charity, and on the conquest of the capital sins. The second, which can only have been completed shortly before his death, is addressed to a wider readership, and views contemplation as an integral aspect of the fulfilment of the baptismal life, to which all Christians are called. His account of the journey towards contemplation through the 'luminous darkness', the way of the Cross, develops further the teaching of the first book. There are indications of mutual influence between Hilton and the unknown author of 'The Cloud of Unknowing', who may have been a monk of Beauvale, but Hilton firmly eschews the element of negative, or 'apophatic', theology to be found in the 'Cloud'. 
Closely associated with the first book of 'The Scale of Perfection', is 'Mixed Life', addressed to a devout layman with temporal responsibilities; this prescribes a rule of life appropriate to such men living in the world. The 'Scale' was translated from English into Latin, probably before 1400, by the Carmelite Thomas Fyslake, who had become BD at Cambridge 'c'.1375. The 'Scale' (in English) and 'Mixed Life' were printed in London in 1494 by Wynkyn de Worde (died 1534), and continued to be reprinted until the Reformation changed the pattern of English religion. Augustine Baker (1575-1641), an English Benedictine, used the 'Scale', among other authorities, for the nuns under his direction at Cambrai. A fresh edition of the 'Scale' and 'Mixed Life', probably prepared by Serenus Cressy, also a Benedictine, was printed in 1659 for sale in London. Since the nineteenth century there has been renewed interest in Hilton, with fresh editions and studies, first among Roman Catholics and then among Anglicans. 
Hilton's Latin letters to individuals contain material which is taken up in the 'Scale' within a broader framework. He is also credited with 'Conclusiones de ymaginibus', defending the veneration of images, and with 'Of Angels' Song', a response to the enthusiasm of Rolle's followers for this phenomenon. An English commentary on the psalm 'Qui habitat' may well be his. He was also responsible for 'Eight chapters on perfection', a translation of a work by Luis de Fontibus, an Aragonese Franciscan whose regency in theology at Cambridge may be dated to either 1391-3 or 1392-4. The 'Prickynge of Love', an expanded English version of the popular 'Stimulus amoris', compiled by the thirteenth-century Franciscan Giacomo da Milano and later writers, is also attributed quite plausibly to Hilton in some manuscripts. 
While Hilton's Latin letters provide some personal details, his English writings are an authoritative statement of doctrine, and partly, though not wholly, veil his own personality. They reflect his clear legal mind and interest in moral theology, as well as his wide grasp of spiritual theology, especially in the tradition of Augustine, Gregory the Great, and the Cistercians. He avoids the appearance of innovation, but can still give fresh applications to old principles. He emerges as a firm yet compassionate pastor, with a sense of moderation in ascetic practices. His openness to people in varying states of life goes beyond the more strictly monastic bias of 'The Cloud of Unknowing'. 


@@@@@


doc= 13329


Hilton, William (1786-1839), painter, was born in Lincoln on 3 June 1786, the son of the japanner and scenery and portrait painter William Hilton (1752-1822) and his wife, Mary (1755-1835). He was renowned as a painter of history and like Benjamin Robert Haydon attempted to turn the taste of English collectors away from portraiture and landscape in the interests of establishing the school of grand manner painting as advocated by Sir Joshua Reynolds. He retained close connections with Lincoln and is commemorated in the cathedral alongside his close friend Peter DeWint, with whom he had studied under the engraver John Raphael Smith ('c'.1801) and who became his brother-in-law. A visit to Paris in 1814 was followed by his tour of Italy with Thomas Phillips in 1825 when they met David Wilkie, Dawson Turner, and Seymour Stocker Kirkup. Hilton entered the Royal Academy Schools on 4 January 1806, was elected associate of the Royal Academy in 1813, Royal Academician in 1819 ('The Theft of Ganymede', RA Diploma Gallery), and became keeper in 1827. His friends included John Taylor, John Keats, Charles Lamb, and John Clare, who described him as 'the most unlike Londoner I saw' (Clare to J. A. Hessey, 2 April 1820, 'Letters'). His uncompromising stance towards portraiture (fine portraits survive of his family -- for example 'Mrs. Harriet de Wint and her Daughter', Usher Art Gallery, Lincoln) -- and the production of large-scale oil paintings necessitating great investment of time and materials resulted in hardship. But recognition came in limited but, for the period, significant ways. In 1814 the British Institution purchased his 'Mary Anointing the Feet of Jesus' for $525 and presented it to St Michael, Cornhill (des.; version Usher Art Gallery). Sir John Fleming Leicester commissioned two works: in 1818 'The Rape of Europa' (250 guineas; sold de Tabley sale, 7 July 1827, 300 guineas to the earl of Egremont; still at Petworth House, Sussex) and in 1820 'The Mermaid' (100 guineas, still at Tabley House, Cheshire). Both were hung at his purpose-designed gallery in Hill Street, London, alongside works by Gainsborough, Reynolds, and West. Robert Vernon, another pioneer patron of contemporary British art, bought his 'Rebecca at the Well' (exh. RA, 1833; Tate collection). In 1827 Hilton was commissioned to design an east window for St George's Church, Liverpool (rebuilt 1819-25). Hilton was paid 1000 guineas for his triptych 'The Crucifixion' (painted window dem. with church, 'c'.1902; design in Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). The city of Lincoln granted Hilton its freedom on 28 January 1828. In 1834 Sir John Soane commissioned 'Marc Antony Reading Caesar's Will' for his house in Lincoln's Inn Fields (100 guineas, Sir John Soane's Museum, London). 'The Crucifixion' was engraved by W. Finden for the Art Union in 1847. Other works by Hilton deemed sufficiently popular to be engraved were 'The Rape of Europa' and 'Sir Calepine Rescuing Serena', purchased by subscription after his death and presented to the National Gallery, London. By 1839 commissions from churches had dwindled, domestic accommodation seldom permitted canvases measuring 8 feet by 6, and interest in mythological and biblical subjects had given way to contemporary genre painting. Hilton died at Peter DeWint's house at 40 Upper Gower Street, London, on 30 December 1839, two years after his wife Justina ('nee' Kent) and just before the scheme to decorate the houses of parliament brought both employment and frustration to a new generation of artists. He was buried in the chapel of the Savoy, Strand, London. At a studio sale on 4 June 1841 organized by his executor, DeWint, the efforts of a lifetime went for what Hilton's sister saw as lamentably low sums. Hilton employed bitumen in his work and as a result many of his paintings are now in poor condition. At best it is still possible to see why the 'Art Journal' in 1855 thought his poetical compositions distinguished by the highest qualities and why a German connoisseur, Waagen, found his 'an unusual talent for historical painting, being intellectual in invention' while the 'slender encouragement he received' showed 'how little the taste for historical painting prevails in England' (Waagen, 1.372). 


@@@@@


doc= 13330


Hinchliff, John Ely (1777-1867), sculptor, was baptized on 29 April 1777 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, London, the son of William Hinchliff and his wife, Mary. At an early age Hinchliff was apprenticed as a mason to John Hinchliff the elder, who may have been his grandfather. In 1806 the quality of Hinchliff's carving brought him to the attention of the sculptor John Flaxman, whose chief assistant he became for the next twenty years. In January 1808 he entered the Royal Academy Schools, when his age was given as thirty. 
During that time Hinchliff established himself as a neo-classical sculptor in the style of Flaxman. In 1814 he exhibited at the Royal Academy a group, 'Christian and Apollyon'. The following year he exhibited another group, 'Leonidas at Thermopylae'. These were followed over the next thirty years by six further works at the British Institution and some thirty-six groups at the Royal Academy. Of these 'Venus and Aurora as the Morning and Evening Star' was described by M. H. Grant as 'of first rate excellence, recalling the triumphs of Flaxman' (Grant, 126). 
After Flaxman's death in 1826, Hinchliff completed many of Flaxman's unfinished civic and imperial commissions, including the statues 'The Marquis of Hastings' (Calcutta), and 'John Philip Kemble' (Westminster Abbey). He also executed a few busts, including one of his former master, which he exhibited at the British Institution in 1849. Hinchliff is best-known for his monumental work. His bas-reliefs and mural tablets can be found in Chichester and Canterbury cathedrals, York Minster, and Bermondsey and Marylebone parish churches. He died on 23 November 1867, aged ninety, at his home of many years at Mornington Place, 185 Hampstead Road, London. His obituarist noted that he 'enjoyed the sincere regard of a large number of friends' ('Art Journal', 48). In the 1950s M. H. Grant noted his 'real talent' in subjects of a 'classical and poetical nature' (Grant, 126). But Gunnis described his 'neo-hellenic' work as neither 'exacting' nor 'very inspired' (Gunnis, 202). 
Hinchliff's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 13331


John James Hinchliff (1805-1875), landscape engraver, engraved after topographical and architectural works by T. H. Shepherd (1829-31), and for J. Brittan and E. W. Brayley's 'Devonshire and Cornwall Illustrated' (1832). He contributed illustrations to S. C. Hall's 'Book of Gems' (1838). In 1847 he engraved a portrait of Benvenuto Cellini after Vasari for Cellini's 'Memoirs' (1847). He provided illustrations to W. Beattie's 'Castles and Abbeys of England' (1848) and H. Gastineau's 'Picturesque Scenery of Wales' (1860), and several portraits for the 1872 edition of John Evelyn's 'Diary and Correspondence'. He retired to Clifton, Bristol, and later moved to Walton by Clevedon, Somerset, where he died on 16 December 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 13332


Hinchliff, Thomas Woodbine (1825-1882), mountaineer and writer, was born on 5 December 1825 at 25 Park Street, Southwark, London, the eldest son of Chamberlain Hinchliff of Lee, Kent, and his wife, Sarah Parish, sister of Sir Woodbine Parish. The spelling of the family name changed from Hinchliffe to Hinchliff between 1849 and 1852. After attending the grammar school at West Ham and then the Blackheath proprietary school, he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1849, and MA in 1852. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1849 and was called to the bar in 1852, but did not practise. 
Hinchliff did much to bring mountain climbing into vogue. He was an active mountaineer in the 1850s and a prominent figure in the Alpine Club, which he helped to found in 1857. That year, after numerous alpine ascents over the preceding three summers, he published 'Summer Months among the Alps', a work that was well regarded by other mountaineers. From 1858 to 1860 he climbed in the Alps with Leslie Stephen, who remembered him for his good humour, boyish enthusiasm, and lack of ambition: 'He was not tormented by the feverish ambition of us youngsters, who were for winning glory as well as pleasure' ('Alpine Journal', 41-3). Early meetings of the Alpine Club were held in Hinchliff's rooms at Lincoln's Inn, and he served as the club's first honorary secretary, and its president from 1874 to 1877. 
In 1862, when he lost part of his right hand in a gun accident, Hinchliff stopped climbing. He nevertheless continued to travel in the Alps and outside Europe. In 1861 he toured Argentina, Uruguay, and Brazil, a journey later described in 'South American Sketches' (1863), and in 1871 he returned to South America. In 1873-4 he went around the world, a trip he later described in 'Over the Sea and Far Away' (1876). He was also an amateur botanist, and wrote articles (1876-81) on the Italian lakes and Lake Geneva for 'Picturesque Europe'. While on his way to the Italian lakes, Hinchliff was taken ill. He died a few hours later, on 8 May 1882, at Aix-les-Bains, France, where he was buried. He never married. A memorial obelisk was erected by his friends on the flanks of the Gorner Grat, near the Riffelalp Hotel. 


@@@@@


doc= 13333


Hinchliffe, John (1731-1794), bishop of Peterborough, was born in Westminster, London, the son of Joseph Hinchliffe, a livery stable-keeper in Swallow Street. Despite his origins Hinchliffe was appointed on the foundation of Westminster School in 1746. One contemporary argued: '[h]is promotion afforded a strong instance of what may be done by merit alone' ('GM', 93) and Hinchliffe in a speech in 1779 would pronounce himself 'raised... to a situation in life far above my expectations' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 20.1055). In 1750 he was chosen one of the Westminster scholars to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated as pensioner in 1751. His academic career thereafter revolved around Trinity: scholar in 1751, BA in 1754, fellow in 1755, MA in 1757, and DD in 1764. He took clerical orders as deacon in 1756 and priest in 1757. 
Hinchliffe served from 1757 to 1764 as assistant master (usher) at Westminster School. One of his pupils and friends was John Crewe of Crewe Hall, Cheshire. In 1763, while travelling with Crewe, he met the duke of Grafton; most of Hinchliffe's ecclesiastical and political patronage was thereafter tied up with the rise and fall of Grafton and his allies. He married Elizabeth Crewe, sister of John Crewe; they had two sons and three daughters. Hinchliffe was chosen headmaster of Westminster School in 1764. 'Our new Master, Dr. Hinchliffe', wrote one senior, 'is, I believe, very good natured: he did not flog anyone the first week, but he has gone on at a good rate since', though he was apparently careful 'never to beat a boy of rank' (Tanner, 31). Unfortunately Hinchliffe resigned the post only three months later on account of ill health. From 1764 to 1766 he tutored the duke of Devonshire. Through Grafton's patronage Hinchliffe received the valuable living of Greenwich in 1766. 
Grafton's administration, although brief, brought a rapid series of promotions to Hinchliffe: he was chaplain-in-ordinary to George III in 1768-9; appointed and installed master of Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1768 to 1788; vice-chancellor of the university in 1768-9. One professor complained of the last-mentioned sinecure: 'our Vice-Chancellor, Dr Hinchliffe, is not here and is not expected for some months. To say the truth, we have not had much... of his company this year'. Although often an absentee from Cambridge, Hinchliffe did play a role in university electoral politics into the 1780s. His disapproval of the 1786 memorial of the 'ten junior fellows' led by George Waddington, and their ensuing legal appeal, demonstrated that he was not interested in increasing the academic rigour of the procedure for examining and electing fellows. When at the end of 1769 he was consecrated bishop of Peterborough he resigned the vicarage of Greenwich, though he was able to retain the mastership of Trinity. 
Hinchliffe was a fairly vocal and outspoken bishop in the Lords, and his worry in 1776 that he would be seen as 'a busy meddler in political matters' was not unfounded. In early 1775 he defended the luxury duty on tea and the related Massachusetts enforcement acts ('a necessity of adopting coercive measures... condescension would defeat its very purpose'), although wishing for 'the middle way' of 'reconciliation upon the very easiest terms... consistently with the just authority' (Simmons and Thomas, 5.398-400). Yet by the end of 1775 his view was that coercion had already failed to bring about the desired cowing of faction, 'reconciliation', and 'lasting re-union with the colonies'. Arguing 'we now certainly know that they can and will fight... if [not for] liberty itself,... at least [for] the opinion of liberty', he proposed acceptance of the congressional petition for conciliation (ibid., 6.80-82). He was a vocal supporter of the duke of Grafton's 1776 motion for conciliatory measures on grounds that coercion had already proven unworkable (ibid., 482-4). He was one of the few bishops who opposed the Anglo-American War, referring to it in 1778 as an attempt to 'establish desolation upon system' by use of 'savage fierceness', and arguing in 1779 that it had led to a general 'spirit of dissention, animosity, and resentment' of lower orders in Britain as well as rebelliousness and threats of loss in its possessions (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 20.9-11, 1054-6). 
In the debate in 1778 on the 'Bill for the Security of the Protestant Religion', Hinchliffe supported Catholic relief on grounds of 'reason, justice, and Christian benevolence', but worried that it might be a time 'peculiarly unfavourable for such an experiment', since any change during the crisis might provoke 'the phrenzy of religious zeal'. He also objected that relief did not forbid 'Popery' from making converts of protestants through schools or bribery, did not reiterate strongly enough forbidding papists from civil or military power, and did not favour potential protestant heirs to Catholic estates. He maintained until the 1790s his opposition to any form of Catholic relief that might allow Catholic seminary-keepers to convert children of protestant parents. His moderated anti-Catholicism won him the support of the Gordon agitators, who conducted his carriage 'with great respect and honour' to the house, although they attacked other politicians (W. S. Lewis and A. D. Wallace, 'Horace Walpole's Correspondence with the Countess of Upper Ossory', 2, 1965, series volume 33.175, n. 8). 
The remainder of Hinchliffe's parliamentary career included support for the commutation of tithes for outright grants of lands to clergy in cases of bills of enclosure (1781) and advocacy of excluding crown revenue officers from the right to vote for MPs (1782; Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 22.47-67; 23.99-100). His association with 'reforming bills' rather than the high-church clerical interest meant that he was one of only two bishops who attended the first levee of Lord Rockingham's ministry, one of his last brief connections with the 'ins' before his final decade of renewed oppositionism. Although Walpole thought that Hinchliffe was one of the two likeliest choices to be the new bishop of Salisbury in June 1782, he was not chosen. 
Hinchliffe's political career in university and parliamentary life seemed dedicated to the principle which he had articulated in 1780, 'that so long as prejudices and passions form a part of human nature, there is no preserving any government whatever in peace and security without attending to them' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 21.754). His opposition to university reform, his sympathy with the prejudices of the American rebels, and his fears about consequences of a more general Catholic emancipation all pointed to a belief in 'quieta non movenda' that was far more akin to earlier old whiggism than the nineteenth-century 'Liberalism' of which he has been seen as a progenitor. By 1788 Hinchliffe had so offended George III that Pitt wrote to the king of a 'means of preventing any application for his farther advancement on the Bench' (Aspinall, 394-5), while at the same time placating Grafton. Pitt's stratagem was to offer the rich deanery of Durham to Hinchliffe on condition of his resigning the mastership of Trinity. Hinchliffe was appointed dean of Durham on 24 September 1788. 
Hinchliffe died at his palace in Peterborough on 11 January 1794 of paralysis, after a long illness, and was buried in the cathedral there. He was survived by his wife. His literary career was marked by 'very fond' friendship with Horace Walpole, who admired him for his 'patriotism', and who 'sent him his Chatterton, and invited him to dine at Strawberry Hill' in 1779. Unfortunately '[n]either side of the HW-Hinchliffe correspondence has been found' (Cole's MS note at the end of To Cole, 12 April 1779, Lewis and Wallace, 'Horace Walpole's Correspondence with the Rev. William Cole', 2, 1937, series volume 2.155-6, n. 1). His 1763 travels had introduced him to Sir Horace Mann and George Montagu. He also attended meetings of the Antiquary Society about 1773. 
Hinchliffe was famous in his day as a speaker and preacher, being noted for his 'remarkable mellow voice' ('GM', 94) and fine delivery. His speeches in the Lords as reported are good specimens of polished oratory. His only pamphlet publications were single sermons. A volume of thirteen collected sermons on apologetic and practical devotional theology was published in 1796. These sermons favoured 'the rational belief and steady practice of religion' and refuted 'scepticism and infidelity' by giving rationalistic arguments for biblical miracles and religion's value to the 'happiness of society' (Hinchliffe, 'Sermons', 1796). They were thus solidly in the latitudinarian tradition, written 'with correctness and simplicity... to promote virtuous manners' ('Monthly Review', Sept-Dec 1796, second series, 21.71-3). He was also the translator of 'A sermon preached by order of her imperial majesty on the tomb of Peter the Great in the cathedral church of St. Petersbourg' (1770). 


@@@@@


doc= 13334


Hinckley, John (1617/18-1695), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born in Coughton (or possibly Chilvers Coton), Warwickshire, the son of Robert Hinckley. Hinckley states that 'I was borne of, and educated by religious parents' ('Two Sermons', sig. t7). Influenced by his schoolmaster, Josiah Packwood, Hinckley was persuaded early on to prepare for the ministry. He later wrote 'I came [to Oxford]... well principled in... Religion towards God. My dearest friends were accounted Puritanes, in those days' ('Fasciculus literarum', 243). He matriculated at St Alban Hall on 4 July 1634, aged sixteen. He graduated BA on 11 April 1638 and MA on 22 March 1641. A sermon by Peter Wentworth of Balliol College in St Mary's challenged several of his own political and religious assumptions, propelling him into a convinced conformity within the Church of England. 
Hinckley was invited by George Purefoy of Wadley, near Faringdon, Berkshire, to serve in his household, perhaps as a teacher. Subscription records indicate Hinckley was ordained priest on 28 May 1643. He was presented as vicar of the nearby parish of Coleshill, Berkshire. On 14 January, probably in 1647, he married Susannah Shelley ('c'.1621-1671) of Sussex. They had nine children, three of whom -- Walter (1648-1699), John (1654-1705), and Henry (1660-1732) -- followed their father into the ministry. After the death of his wife on 24 July 1671, Hinckley married Frances Tracy ('c'.1625-1701) in 1675, their twenty-year marriage ending at his death. 
In 1660 Hinckley accepted the rectory of Northfield, Warwickshire. He experienced early success in attracting local nonconformists to his preaching ministry. But after publishing his 'Piqanalogia, or, A Persuasive to Conformity by Way of a Letter to the Dissenting Brethren' (1670) he became involved in an increasingly rancorous dispute with nonconformists in general and Richard Baxter in particular. Baxter took offence at published remarks which he considered unfair and responded by letter in a series of four private exchanges with Hinckley from August 1670 to February 1672. In 1680 Hinckley undertook to publish the entire correspondence, as well as another letter in which he dismissed Baxter's own published defences of nonconformity as 'Canting Gibberish' ('Fasciculus literarum', 269). Charging Hinckley with a breach of faith, Baxter published his own defensive response in 1681, 'A Third Defense of the Cause of Peace'. Both parties claimed victimization by the other, and neither accepted responsibility for the increasingly shrill tone. It was a conflict which served mainly to diminish both men. During the course of this controversy Hinckley was honoured by his colleagues among the clergy and at Oxford. On 15 October 1673 he was made a prebendary of Lichfield Cathedral, and on 9 July 1679 the degrees of BD and DD were conferred on him by Oxford University. 
Hinckley's last years at Northfield were marred by a bitter conflict with Thomas Jolliffe, lord of the manor at Cofton Hackett. According to Hinckley, in 1690 Jolliffe broke an agreement made twenty years earlier which exempted him from having to pay Jolliffe an annual pension of $7 from the living. Hinckley's indignant account, 'The tru stating of something concerning the parsonage of Northfield', is written on the back pages of the second volume of Northfield parish register. In it Hinckley claims that, following the death of the one witness to their agreement, Jolliffe instigated legal proceedings and unfairly used his influence to procure a judgment against Hinckley in which he was forced to pay $600. Hinckley died at Northfield on 13 April 1695 and was buried on 17 April in the chancel of St Laurence's Church, Northfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 13335


Hincks, Edward (1792-1866), orientalist, eldest of the seven children of Thomas Dix Hincks (1767-1857) and his wife, Anne Boult (1767-1835), was born at Princess Street, Cork, on 19 August 1792. His younger brothers included William Hincks and Francis Hincks. The family moved to Windmill Hill (later St Patrick's Hill) about 1797. After education by his father and some time at Midleton School from 1800, he proceeded on 2 November 1807 to Trinity College, Dublin, where he was elected a scholar on 18 June 1810 and graduated BA with the gold medal on 11 February 1812. He was elected a junior fellow on 14 June 1813. He was ordained deacon in 1815 and priest in 1817, taking his MA in the same year. After acting for various periods as deputy librarian, he later published a 'Catalogue of the Egyptian Manuscripts in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin' (1843). In September 1819 Hincks was named rector of Ardtrea, leaving Dublin possibly because of differences with the provost. On 6 February 1823 in Lurgan church he married Jane Dorothea Boyd (1792-1870); they had four daughters. Hincks became BD in July 1823 and DD in 1829. In October 1825 he was appointed rector of Killyleagh, co. Down, where he lived until his death. His hopes of advancement in the church remained unfulfilled, probably because of his liberal views. 
Despite the seclusion of his country rectory, Hincks established a reputation of the first order among the pioneers of decipherment, with articles published mainly in the 'Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy'. His earlier contributions were chiefly on the subject of Egyptian hieroglyphs, and Hincks was the first to employ the true method for their transliteration. From 1846 his studies were directed to cuneiform, as was shown by his papers on Babylonian, Assyrian, old Persian, and Elamite inscriptions, and the Urartian inscriptions from Van. The analytical powers displayed in these essays were very considerable. Hincks enjoyed the distinction of the discovery of the true nature of the Babylonian cuneiform syllabic system, showing greater perception than Sir Henry Creswicke Rawlinson (1810-1895) in his work on the same subject at Baghdad. Many other discoveries may be noted among his numerous articles. He was one of those chosen in 1857 in a public demonstration of the accuracy of cuneiform decipherment and was awarded the Prussian order of merit in 1863. But Hincks was disappointed at the lack of public recognition of his achievements in Britain, and his failure to obtain a more financially secure position to allow him to devote more time to his studies. He died suddenly at Killyleagh rectory on 3 December 1866 while reading in bed, possibly from a heart attack or stroke, and was buried in the old parish graveyard there. 


@@@@@


doc= 13336


Hincks, Sir Francis (1807-1885), politician and journalist in Canada, was born on 14 December 1807 at Cork, Ireland, the youngest of the seven children of the Revd Thomas Dix Hincks (1767-1857) and his wife, Anne Boult (1767-1835). Edward Hincks was his elder brother. Hincks's father left the Presbyterian ministry for a teaching career, and in 1821 joined the Royal Academical Institute at Belfast, where Hincks received his early education. Two of his brothers became prominent academics and a third, William Hincks, became a Unitarian minister; Hincks was also a Unitarian for most of his life, though about 1871 he became a member of the Church of England. After a year at the University of Belfast, Hincks worked for five years at John Martin & Co., a Belfast shipping firm. Restless, he visited the Canadas in 1830-31, and in September 1832 he returned there with his new bride and settled in York (renamed Toronto in 1834), Upper Canada. Martha Anne Stewart (died 1874), whom he married on 29 July 1832, came from Legoniel in northern Ireland; they had five children. In premises rented from some protestants from Cork, William Warren Baldwin and his son Robert, he started a mercantile business. 
Despite the growth of Upper Canada's population from 75,000 people in 1812 to 450,000 by 1842, Hincks failed in his business and moved into banking and insurance. Although he managed businesses only of the second rank, he acquired a lasting reputation as a top-class financial manager. The 1830s were formative in other ways, too. Given his father's reformist political views, Hincks's close relationship with Robert Baldwin, the colony's leading moderate reformer, was predictable. The Baldwins were well-off lawyers, members of Upper Canada's patrician elite. Hincks, while hardly poor -- his mother enjoyed a substantial inheritance -- was more the respectable man on the make with an eye for the main chance, but he was, like the Baldwins, an Irish protestant. In the increasingly bitter political conflicts that beset the colony in the 1830s, Hincks became a prominent political tactician and controversialist. 
In 1836 Hincks was appointed secretary of Toronto's Reform Constitutional Society, which protested against the 'unconstitutional proceedings' (Read and Stagg, 48) of the lieutenant-governor, Sir Francis Bond Head, an avid supporter of the tory family compact. Increasingly frustrated, some reformers followed William Lyon Mackenzie in an unsuccessful armed rebellion in 1837. Although Hincks opposed rebellion and favoured a form of responsible government which would render the executive council answerable to the assembly, some of the directors of the Bank of the People, which he managed, were implicated in the affair. Hincks went into hiding until tempers cooled. Discouraged, he considered moving to Iowa, but a land deal collapsed. When the British government appointed Lord Durham (the earl of Lambton) to determine the reasons for the Canadian uprisings, reformers rallied. Hincks resigned from the bank and became owner and editor of 'The Examiner', a Toronto paper dedicated, as its masthead proclaimed, to 'responsible government and the voluntary principle'. Leading tories soon branded Hincks as the most effective reform leader: his writings, one tory lamented, are 'of a character to unhinge the public mind -- and are leading to much and serious mischief' (Sanderson, 2.283). Hincks's editorials helped move Durham towards the moderate reform camp. 
When Durham's recommendations for closer links between the executive council and the assembly and for uniting the two Canadas reached Upper Canada in April 1839, reformers rejoiced. Realizing the importance of reform unity under the proposed union, Hincks quietly encouraged an alliance between the leading French-Canadian reformer, Louis-Hippolyte LaFontaine, and Robert Baldwin, and by acting as political broker helped construct the framework within which union politics would unfold. 
The union's first governor, the ex-businessman Charles Poulett Thomson (Lord Sydenham), had an important influence on Hincks. Thomson opposed party development and wished to govern in harmony with the assembly. Hincks initially feared that this would mean tory one-party rule and strongly opposed Sydenham's position. But after being elected as a member of the assembly for Oxford, a rural Upper Canadian community, he gradually re-evaluated his stance. In fact Hincks and Sydenham had much in common: both were pragmatists; both wished, as Sydenham put it, to 'take the moderates from both sides' (Mills, 117), or, as Hincks later advised Baldwin, 'to select [for patronage] Tories from the same class that we select our friends' (Mills, 120), and both looked to the politics of economic development as the ultimate means of effecting political and social stability. Hincks supported many of Sydenham's economic policies: a proposed Bank of Issue, the creation of district councils and a board of works, and the use of a British loan of $1.5 million for canal construction. His support of Sydenham led to a temporary break with Baldwin and other Reformers and, more lasting, to his being labelled a political opportunist. 
In 1842 Hincks sold 'The Examiner' and became inspector-general (finance minister) under Sydenham's successor, Sir Charles Bagot. Baldwin and LaFontaine soon joined him in the ministry. Before conflict could emerge over whether responsible government was in operation (whether the governor or the executive council answerable to the assembly controlled patronage), Bagot, severely ill, resigned. Hincks saw responsible government as an opportunity to play an important role on an expanding colonial stage. He visualized himself fighting the 'battle of the middle classes against the aristocracy' (Mills, 117), and through control of the executive he hoped to effect a social revolution, putting in place a society run by respectable men of business. The imperial government had to provide sufficient scope for the realization of these ambitions. Bagot's successor, Sir Charles Metcalfe, refused to provide such scope: Baldwin, LaFontaine, and Hincks resigned in November 1843 in protest at his refusal to allow them control of patronage. 
Hincks then moved to Montreal and founded a Reform paper, 'The Pilot', and helped unite Irish and French-Canadian workers for the Reform cause. After being defeated in the ensuing election he spent much of his own money in a struggle to keep 'The Pilot' afloat. In 1848, when LaFontaine and Baldwin, victors in the 1847 election, were asked to form a ministry, Hincks sold 'The Pilot' and joined them as inspector-general. 
Arguably Hincks was the ministry's most important member. He stabilized the government's chaotic financial affairs. When the 'Rebellion Losses Bill', which indemnified rebels for property losses in 1837, excited tory riots in Montreal, Hincks kept London investors on side. He argued for strict punitive measures against public officials who signed the annexation manifesto circulated as a response to England's repeal of the 'Navigation Acts' and the apparent end to protected trade with Britain. He worked for a reciprocity trade agreement with the United States, and signed one in 1855. Following Sydenham's ideas, he promoted the immigration of Britain's surplus population, who would work on public projects financed by imperial loans. The loans would be paid off by the sale of public lands to the immigrants. But a major weakness in the programme, overlooked by Hincks, was the fact that the most valuable crown land had long since been sold. 
Between 1848 and 1851 as inspector-general, and from 1851 to 1855 as co-leader (with A. N. Morin) of the Reform government, Hincks followed this programme. When the imperial government refused financial support, Hincks attracted leading British capitalists and railway builders by providing loan guarantees for several large railways, such as the Grand Trunk, the Great Western, and the Northern. He passed legislation which allowed Upper Canada's municipal governments to borrow money for local improvements. Unlike the government's more cautious London financial agents, Glyn Mills & Co. and the Baring Brothers, Hincks correctly believed that British investors would pour capital into the colony. By 1851 Baldwin and LaFontaine, finding this speculation somewhat distasteful, retired, leaving Hincks at the helm. 
Hincks occupied the shifting centre, opposed by Clear Grits, led by George Brown, the editor of the influential Toronto 'Globe', on the left and tories on the right. To make matters worse, he became tainted by scandal. He used his position as a public representative to further his private profit. He argued that in no case did the public lose out by such activity and that private speculation by public officials, even in areas of public policy, was in accord with much past and present practice. So it was, but Hincks, in this era of rapid change, failed to keep pace with changing perceptions of public morality, leaving his ministry open to fatal attacks. 
Hincks resigned in 1855, but his public career continued. The Colonial Office wished to reward colonial statesmen with imperial appointments and offered Hincks the governorship of Barbados and the Windward Islands in 1856. During his five years there he worked to better the educational and living standards of the islands' native populations. While he instituted a programme of non-sectarian education, his attempts to improve living conditions were defeated by an entrenched planter class who desired cheap labour. None the less, in 1861 England rewarded him with the governorship of British Guiana (later Guyana) and a CB. For the next eight years Hincks bickered with the colony's chief justice and with colonial businessmen known as the Bermuda clique. He did not receive a new appointment, although he did acquire a knighthood in 1869. 
That same year Hincks became Canada's finance minister in Sir John A. Macdonald's Conservative government. The appointment angered many Conservatives, but Hincks applied his skills as a broker and financial expert to good effect. He resolved an impasse between bankers and government concerning government involvement in issuing public currency, and he allowed small banks to commence operations with a lower amount of paid-up capital. In 1874 he quit formal politics and returned to his old careers in banking, insurance, and journalism. His banking business ended in a scandal: he did not pay sufficient attention to the activities of an underling who embezzled funds, and the courts censured him for his negligence. 
On 14 July 1875 Hincks married Emily Louisa Delatre (died 1880), the widow of Robert Baldwin Sullivan. He published several partisan defences of his past politics: 'The Political History of Canada between 1840 and 1855' (1877) and 'Reminiscences of his Public Life' (1884). He died of smallpox in Montreal on 18 August 1885 and was buried at St Jude's Church on 19 August. After the payment of debts, he warned his executor, there would be 'little if any surplus' (Careless, 196) left for his heirs. He bequeathed Canada a similarly mixed legacy: railways were built, including the world's longest, the Grand Trunk, but they were not profitable. Government guarantees came due and money for such unanticipated debts proved extremely hard to find. Hincks's focus on economic development over religious and ethnic strife, however, provided a common ground on which politicians from both the Canadas could unite. 


@@@@@


doc= 13337


Hincks, Thomas (1818-1899), Unitarian minister and naturalist, was born on 15 July 1818 at Exeter, one of the eight children of William Hincks (1793?-1871), Unitarian minister and naturalist, and his wife, Maria Ann Yandell (1788/9-1849). His grandfather, Thomas Dix Hincks, was a Presbyterian minister in Ireland, his uncle Sir Francis Hincks was prime minister of Canada, and another uncle, Edward Hincks, was an orientalist. From 1833 to 1839 he attended the Unitarian Manchester New College at York (where his father was on the staff), where he trained to be a minister; his first post was in Cork, Ireland, from 1839. In 1840 he gained a BA from London University. His rise in the Unitarian church was rapid. He held ministries at Eustace Street Chapel, Dublin; Warrington; Exeter; Upper Chapel, Sheffield; and, from 1855, at Mill Hill Chapel, Leeds, one of the most noted Unitarian congregations. 
In 1846 Hincks married Elizabeth, daughter of John Allen of Warrington. In Leeds he was an active minister, from 1862 organizing an Old Scholars Society which met regularly for tea followed by a lecture. He also presided over the Leeds Literary and Philosophical Society for three years, and was responsible for arranging its museum. His bi-monthly 'Mill Hill Chapel Record' ran for 102 issues, from January 1858. Many of his sermons were published. He also published a collection of fifty-two hymns (including three of his own) in 1868, the year in which he permanently lost his voice. He retired from the ministry in 1869, and moved first to Taunton and then to Stokeleigh, Leigh Woods, near Bristol. 
As a zoologist Hincks specialized in two marine animal groups, the Hydrozoa and the Bryozoa. In retirement he continued with the biological research he had begun while serving as a minister, and he was elected FRS in 1872. Between 1851 and 1893 he published about fifty papers on Hydrozoa and Bryozoa, much of his research based on his own dredging off the coast of south-west England from Swanage to Devon, and especially around Salcombe. His 'History of British Hydroid Zoophytes' (1868) and his 'History of Marine Polyzoa' (1880) both remained standard works for more than a century. His 'Collected Papers' (2 vols., 1894-5) brought together the articles which he wrote over many years for the 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History'. His work was marked by precise observation, was prepared lucidly for publication, and was accompanied by highly accurate illustrations. 
In later life Hincks continued with voluntary work for the Unitarian church, serving as honorary secretary of the Lewin's Mead Domestic Mission between 1886 and 1889. He also helped plan the 1898 Bristol meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science but was unable to attend due to failing health. He died at Stokeleigh on 25 January 1899 and was buried, at his own request, near Leeds. He was survived by his wife and his two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 13338


Hincks, Thomas Dix (1767-1857), non-subscribing Presbyterian minister and academic, was born at Bachelor's Quay, Dublin, on 24 June 1767. His father, Edward Hincks (died 1772), had moved in that year to Dublin from Chester. Dix was his mother's maiden name. On her husband's early death she retained his post in the Dublin customs. Hincks went to school in Nantwich, Cheshire, and Dublin. Originally intended for medicine, he was apprenticed in 1782 to a Dublin apothecary, but after two years he entered Trinity College, Dublin. He did not finish his course, but in September 1788 entered Hackney New College, under Drs Price, Kippis, and Rees. Kippis recommended him as assistant to Samuel Perrott at Cork. He began his ministry there in 1790, but was not ordained until 1792 by the southern presbytery. In September 1791 he married Anne (1767-1835), eldest daughter of William Boult of Chester, the grandfather of Swinton Boult, director of the London, Liverpool, and Globe insurance company. They had seven children. 
Meanwhile in 1791 Hincks opened a school, which he continued until 1803, when he became a member of the Royal Irish Academy, and a salaried officer of the Royal Cork Institution, of which he was the planner. He lectured on chemistry and natural philosophy (1810-13). He left his church and the institution and moved to Fermoy, co. Cork, in 1815, succeeding Dr Adair as tutor of the Fermoy Academy. There in 1818 he formed a small Presbyterian congregation which met in the court house. He resigned his positions and from 1821 to 1836 he was classical headmaster in the Royal Belfast Academical Institution, filling also the chair of Hebrew in the collegiate department of the institution until the establishment of the Queen's College in 1849. 
Hincks was a member of most of the scientific societies of Ireland. His published works include several school textbooks and while in Cork he edited the 'Munster Agricultural Magazine'. After settling in Belfast he was admitted a member of the Antrim presbytery and attended the church of William Bruce, who was a friend and colleague. His theology was Arian, but he avoided polemics, and got on well with clergy from all denominations. In 1834 he was made LLD of Glasgow. He died on 24 February 1857 in Murray's Terrace, Belfast, and was buried in the churchyard of Killyleagh, co. Down, his eldest son's parish. There is a memorial window to him in the First Presbyterian Church, Belfast. Three of his sons, Edward Hincks, Francis Hincks, and William Hincks, attained distinction. Thomas (1796-1882) was archdeacon of Connor from 1865. John (1804-1831) was minister at Renshaw Street, Liverpool (1827-31). A daughter, Anne, died unmarried in 1877 at Montreal. 


@@@@@


doc= 13339


Hincks, William (1793?-1871), Unitarian minister and naturalist, was born on 16 April, about 1793, in Cork, the second of five sons and two daughters born to Thomas Dix Hincks (1767-1857), Irish Presbyterian minister, and his wife, Anne (1767-1835), daughter of William Boult of Chester. His brothers included Edward Hincks and Francis Hincks. He was educated in his father's school and in 1809-14 was a student at Manchester College, York. 
In 1814 Hincks was ordained in his father's chapel in Prince's Street, Cork; the next year, after a ministry of more than two decades, the elder Hincks moved to Fermoy Academy, and in 1816 William Hincks was appointed to George's Chapel, Exeter, following Lant Carpenter (1780-1840) as junior colleague to the Revd James Manning (1754-1831); his yearly stipend averaged $205. In 1817 he married Maria Ann Yandell (1788/9-1849), who had been adopted by the wife of William Jillard Hort (1764-1849), minister at Cork from 1817 to 1849; the eldest of the Hinckses' eight children, Thomas Hincks (1818-1899), became a reputable zoologist and a Unitarian minister whose theological views diverged sharply from his father's. 
In 1822 William Hincks moved to an even more prestigious congregation, Renshaw Street, Liverpool, where he was active in the intellectual life of the town. In 1827, with reluctance, he was persuaded to accept the tutorship in mathematics and philosophy at Manchester College, York, along with management of student residence, fees from which supplemented his salary; to these posts he brought abundant energy and a buoyant personality. One student noted occasions when Hincks was less than fully in command of mathematics, but to his mind it was a pursuit inferior to metaphysics, to which he brought full command of the natural religion and necessitarian philosophy then dominant among the Unitarians. Throughout his life an active botanist, a subject that meshed well with his religious convictions, he also lectured on botany at the York medical school. 
A serious dispute in 1838 with the college committee -- itself preoccupied with the declining state of the college and the imminent retirement of the principal, Charles Wellbeloved (1769-1858) -- about income and outlay on the student residence led to Hincks's resignation in 1839. He accepted the ministry at Stamford Street Chapel in London, taking students at University College, London, as boarders and doing private tutoring as well. In 1842 he added the editorship of a newly founded Unitarian newspaper, 'The Inquirer'. The perils of the paper's early days were considerable, with uncertain readership and rapid turnover in ownership, but by 1843 Hincks had established it firmly, with a readership of about 900, and had become proprietor as well. Doing much of the work himself, he had scope to indulge his passion for politics -- which his pupil W. R. Wood thought more important to him than science or philosophy -- and he confidently defended the Unitarian tradition descended from Joseph Priestley (1733-1804) and Thomas Belsham (1750-1829) against the rising revisionism associated with James Martineau (1805-1900). A general, not merely a denominational paper, 'The Inquirer' may never have been livelier than it was in those early years. 
In 1847 Hincks stepped down. Ownership of 'The Inquirer' was transferred to the printer Richard Kinder (1814-1884), and the editorship, after a brief period in committee, passed to John Lalor (died 1856). At loose ends and suffering financially -- Stamford Street at best paid $60 a year -- Hincks undertook an unsuccessful lecture tour of the United States and in 1849 returned to native soil as professor of natural history at the newly founded Queen's College, Cork. His wife died that year, and on 6 October 1852 he married Sarah Maria Hodges ('b'. 1806/7), the widowed daughter of George Lucas, a farmer. 
In 1853 Hincks was made professor of natural history at University College, Toronto, despite powerful support for another candidate, Thomas Henry Huxley (1825-1895). Hincks's experience and scientific conservatism must have influenced the decision, but one cannot overlook Huxley's wry observation that testimonials, however strong, could hardly prevail against the superior qualification of having a younger brother, Francis Hincks, as Canadian premier. 
Hincks's books, papers, specimens, and apparatus were all lost in the sinking of the ship carrying them to Canada, but his teaching may have been more seriously hampered by outdated methods -- reliance on rote memory and adherence to the 'quinarian' system of biological classification associated with William Swainson (1789-1855) and William Sharp Macleay (1792-1865), a fashionably persuasive innovation when Hincks was at Manchester College. Recollections of Toronto students depict a large, florid man with perfect manners who was accorded the indulgence owing to a 'character'. 
As he had done at Cork, Hincks built up the natural history collections of the University Museum, a forerunner of the Royal Ontario Museum. In 1869-71 he served as president of the Canadian Institute, whose journal he edited, and to which he contributed twenty-five articles, among them efforts to revise the quinarian system and to reassert the divine plan of creation against the rising doctrine of evolution by natural selection. He was also acting minister of the Unitarian church in Toronto from 1853 to 1857 and officiated from time to time thereafter. He died in Toronto of kidney disease on 10 September 1871 and was buried in the necropolis there on 13 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 13340


Hind, James (bap. 1616, d. 1652), highwayman and royalist soldier, was baptized at Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, on 15 July 1616, the tenth of thirteen children of Edward Hind (died 1656), a saddler, and his wife, Anne Smythe. His father was evidently a man of some position in the parish, three times serving as churchwarden. On 24 February 1638 Hind married Margaret Rowland at Chipping Norton, where they baptized four children between 1640 and 1648. According to the Oxford antiquary Anthony Wood, who knew men who had been Hind's accomplices, 'the great robber' was 'a little dapper desperat fellow' ('Life and Times', 1.155-6). 
A legend grew up around Hind as highwayman and royalist during his lifetime and thirteen pamphlets published in the last year of his life or shortly afterwards have survived. Wood dismissed the fullest of these, George Fidge's 'The English Gusman' (1652), as 'very weakly performed. Many things are true in it, but most are false, and many material things are omitted' ('Life and Times', 1.156): an apt comment on most of Hind's lives. According to chapbook accounts Hind was sent to Chipping Norton grammar school for a couple of years, but 'profited little or nothing' from the experience; later evidence as to whether he could read is contradictory (Fidge, 'English Gusman', sig. B1'v'). His father tried to teach him his trade but, failing, bound him apprentice to a butcher. At the age of seventeen Hind ran away to London where he joined Thomas Allen's band of highwaymen and gained a reputation for committing robberies which were hallmarked by polite, gentlemanly behaviour and by wit. An ardent royalist, he served in the garrison of Sir William Compton at Banbury during the first civil war; he was present at the siege of Colchester in 1648 in Compton's regiment but escaped when the town fell to Sir Thomas Fairfax. 
Hind himself provided an account of his services in the royalist cause from May 1649 onwards. After spending three days in the Netherlands in meetings with the king's council, he spent nine months in Ireland where he served under the marquess of Ormond and was wounded at Youghal. To avoid the plague he spent eight months on the Scilly Isles and then a further three months on the Isle of Man before leaving for Scotland. Granted an audience with Charles II at Stirling, Hind pledged his services in the imminent invasion of England and was recommended by the king to serve as a trooper in the life guard of George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham. Hind seems never to have been an officer in the king's army: his acquired epithet of 'captain' was an ironic reference to his leadership of his gang. He fought at the battle of Worcester where the royalists were decisively defeated. After making his way to London and spending five weeks in hiding he was captured at a barber's shop in Fleet Street on 9 November. 

'Hind's Ramble' was published a fortnight before his capture (the London bookseller George Thomason dated his copy 27 October). Hind's royalism was always a part of the persona created around him. Indeed the earliest chapbooks were blatantly cashing in on a rumour current in the weeks following Worcester -- when the whereabouts of the king were still unknown -- that Hind was helping the fugitive Charles II. On 15 September a broadside had appeared, 'Another victory in Lancashire obtained against the Scots... also the Scots king going with Hind the great robber', though on the latter subject all it could say was that 'its thought he [Charles II] lies sculking about in some private corners with Hind his guide' (Ollard, 95-6). A pamphlet recounting the earl of Derby's scaffold speech promised, but failed to deliver, an account of 'the manner how the King of Scots took shipping at Graves-end on the fourth of this instant October, with Captain Hind, disguised in sea-mens Apparel and safely arrived at the Hague in Holland'. 

'Hind's Ramble' duly played on the same hunger for news of Charles II's whereabouts, claiming on the title page to recount Hind's 'going to the Scotch King, where he was made scoutmaster general, and afterwards (as 'tis generally reported) was the onely man that conveyed the Scotch King to London, who since is shipt away far beyond seas'. However, again this was hardly spoken of in the pamphlet; the 'many flying Speeches' that he had brought the king safely from Worcester to London and thence to the Netherlands providing a peg to sell a collection of picaresque anecdotes, mainly fanciful stories of Hind's career as a highwayman. If his part in the escape were true, it concluded, 'he hath done things unparallelled, but if not true, he hath the name of it' (Fidge, 'Hind's Ramble', 41). 
However, Hind's royalism forms only a small part of an unstructured set of anecdotes, and seems mainly to have added a couple of parliamentarian figures to the cast of social types -- gentlemen, lawyers, clergymen, usurers, and the like. Thus one of Hind's victim's was a county committee man, one of those figures whose financial demands for the parliamentarian regime could make him appear a bigger thief than any highwayman. On another occasion he set upon a troop of young soldiers fit enough for collecting taxes but not up to facing determined highwaymen. However, Fidge (in a section dropped from his later life of Hind) presented Hind's royalism sardonically, describing how Hind had used the opportunities provided by service at Banbury to run a protection racket and harry local carriers. When the closing in of the parliamentarian forces on Banbury made his 'trade' there no longer profitable, he stole the governor's best horse to return to the life of a highwayman. Other pamphlets in similar picaresque vein followed: 'An excellent comedy, called the prince of priggs revels, or, The practices of that grand thief Captain James Hind, relating divers of his pranks and exploits, never heretofore published by any' (11 November; a play which concluded its stories of cozenage and disguise with a short scene in which Hind leads the king from the field of Worcester) and the two volumes of 'Hind's Exploits' (of which only the second, dated by Thomason 19 November, survives). 
Hind was committed to Newgate prison on 11 November. From there he actively promoted himself -- or was promoted -- as a soldier, a royalist, and honest rogue rather than as a highwayman in two pamphlets: 'The True and Perfect Relation of the Taking of Captain James Hind' (14 November) and 'The Declaration of Captain James Hind' (18 November). Although strict orders were given that he should be put in isolation, he was able to play to the crowd of curious visitors and fellow prisoners while his irons were being put on and his cell prepared, offering a toast to the king's health as he was being shackled; 'The True and Perfect Relation' was a journalist's first-hand account of his words on this occasion. 'The Declaration', evidently by the same writer, claimed that it had been authorized by Hind himself: 'Whereas there hath been sundry and various Relations of the proceedings of Capt. James Hind, fraught with impertinent fictions; I am (in order thereunto) desired by the said Mr Hind, to publish this ensuing Declaration, for satisfaction, and true information, of the People. ('Declaration', 1)' The account it presented of Hind's royalist service over the previous two years appears in its essentials to be Hind's own: if not (as the pamphlet implied) smuggled out of Newgate, then probably a version of the testimony that he had given before the council of state. The hostile 'Weekly Intelligencer' confirms that these pamphlets were at most elaborating rather than imposing on Hind a stance of defiant royalism: it also recorded Hind's toast, while sourly noting as evidence of the calibre of the king's supporters only Hind's fellow convicts joined him in it. 
Hind truthfully denied any part in the king's escape. 'The True and Perfect Relation' described an exchange between Hind and a gentleman from Chipping Norton in Newgate. When the visitor commiserated with his plight Hind replied 'That imprisonment was a comfort to him, in suffering for so good and just a Cause, as adhering to the KING', and when the gentleman refused to join in the toast, Hind angrily cried, 'The Devill take all Traytors: Had I a thousand lives, and at liberty, I would adventure them all for King Charles; and pox take all Turn-coats' ('True and Perfect Relation', 4). Hind also at once distanced himself from, while appealing to, the picaresque myth. The stories about him in 'Hind's Ramble' and 'Hind's Exploits' were 'fictions' but, he added, 'some merry Pranks and Revels I have plaid, that I deny not' (ibid., 6). He was happy to portray himself both as a loyal subject of the king and an administrator of rough-and-ready social justice. 'Neither did I ever wrong any poor man of the worth of a penny: but I must confess, I have (when I have been necessitated thereto) made bold with a rich Bompkin, or a lying Lawyer, whose full-fed fees from the rich Farmer, doth too too much impoverish the poor cottage-keeper. (ibid., 5)' When he met a poor man he would challenge him whether he was for king or parliament: if the former, he would give him 20's'., if the latter he would leave him alone. In both these pamphlets Hind denied ever shedding any innocent blood. 
Hind appeared briefly at the Old Bailey on 12 December 1651, accused of treason in accompanying Charles Stuart to Worcester, but no indictment was drawn up against him. Because there was evidently no wish to make a martyr of him, the political charges were dropped and the council of state chose to pursue another course, sending him to stand trial at the next assizes for Berkshire, where there were outstanding indictments against him. He was taken from Newgate to Reading where he was tried at the beginning of March for the murder of one Poole, whom he was accused of having killed in a row over a bet. Found guilty of manslaughter, Hind was qualified to receive benefit of clergy -- the commutation of the death penalty to a branding on the thumb on condition of reading a passage from the 'Bible'. He was unable to read the 'neck-verse' but his luck held: the judge reprieved him and he came within the terms of the recently passed 'Act of Oblivion', which offered a general pardon for all crimes except high treason. 
However, the positive image of Hind as a royalist hero meant that the authorities could not release him, fearing that he would remain 'a rallying point for royalist sentiment' (Faller, 13). The account of Hind's trial at the Old Bailey, published on 15 December, had recycled material from the earlier Newgate pamphlets while presenting him as a figure accepting his likely fate for his loyalty with humour and nobility. The pamphlets which continued to appear about Hind followed the fanciful and anecdotal tone of the earliest chapbooks, adding new material: Fidge's 'The English Gusman' introduced the tale that a cunning woman had given Hind a charm which had kept him free from capture for three years. Most had absorbed material from the Newgate pamphlets and continued to contain elements of anti-parliamentarian satire, some more explicit than others. 'A pill to purge melancholy, or, Merry newes from Newgate: wherein is set forth the pleasant jests, witty conceits, and excellent couzenages, of Captain James Hind' (26 January 1652) deployed a carnivalesque Hind to criticize the new regime. 'It hath bin a constant custom observed among the people of this Nation, to spend the time of Christmas in mirth and jollity, using to have maskings, mummings, wasselings, &c.', it opened (recalling a whole set of customs which the new regime was bent on suppressing), before describing a Christmas-time lark in a brothel in Chancery Lane which had culminated in Hind, dressed as a woman, robbing a lecherous old lawyer ('Pill', 3). 'We have Brought our Hogs to a Fair Market, or, Strange Newes from New-Gate' (14 January 1652) purported to print Hind's instructions to 'Our Royal Gang and Fraternity' urging them 'to be in charity with all men, except the Caterpillars of the Times, viz., Long-gown men, Committee-men, Excize-men, Sequestrators, and other Sacrilegious persons' (p. 1). It also told how, in Newgate, Hind had received a vision of Charles I, with his crown upon his head, urging him to 'Repent, repent, and the King of Kings will have mercy on a Thief' (p. 5), and how Hind had once conjured up a vision of a lion rampant (the Scottish symbol no doubt an allusion to Charles II) to scare away his pursuers. 
So Hind stayed a prisoner and the council of state fell back on the charge of treason: in July 1652 it sent down the examinations which it had collected against Hind the previous winter to the assize judges, heavy-handedly advising them that it left it to them to proceed against him according to law. At the beginning of September he was convicted at the Worcester assizes of treason. Reportedly, as the sentence was delivered 'he lookt very austerely, and said, 'Gentlemen, I thank you; this is no more but what I ever expected, since the time of my captivity in Iron; and this I am assured of, that as envy must cease in the grave, so will my bloud be requir'd at your hands'. ('The Faithful Scout', 85, 27 Aug-3 Sept 1652, 665)' The council of state rejected his wife's appeal for a reprieve, claiming that it could not interfere in the matter. Hind went to the gallows at Worcester on 24 September 1652. A letter published in a newsbook recorded how he knelt at the foot of the gallows and read over a little book for a while, before taking leave of his son and giving money to a butcher in the town. His last words presented himself both as penitent thief and loyal subject, interrupted by a burst of anger against the men whom he blamed for his death: 'after he had fetcht two or three very deep sighs, he said, He was sorry that he had not been ruled by his Wife, who had upon her knees many times begged of him to give over his unlawful course of living, for it would at last bring him to an untimely death. Then he railed against one Mr Moor, and Mr Wall, saying, that they were the cause of his death... For which he was checked by... the Gaoler... [He said that] he had taken the Oath of Allegiance, to be true to his King 'and prayed God to bless his King, and all that wished him well.' ('A Perfect Account', 91, 22-9 Sept 1652, 728)' Hind was spared the full horrors of a traitor's death: he was apparently not drawn on a hurdle to his execution; his body was mutilated and dismembered only after he was completely dead; and his body (or at least his torso) was allowed a proper burial. His fate is a striking testament to the power of his reputation: only a handful of English royalists were executed for their part in the war of 1651, and they in its immediate aftermath, not a full year later. 
Hind was remembered as a royalist, the first in a literary tradition where highway robbery was combined with loyalty to the crown. However, in much of the literature in his lifetime and afterwards, the individuality of the man and his convictions was lost in favour of a generic type of rogue to which he himself had been willing to appeal. 'No jest like a true jest being a compendious record of the merry life and mad exploits of Capt James Hind the great robber of England' was the characteristic title of a chapbook first published in 1657 and republished several times up to 1800. This was the version of Hind's life elaborated in early eighteenth-century criminal biographies: the jovial rogue whose exploits cocked a snook at England's puritan rulers. According to Alexander Smith the Allen gang had tried to hold up Oliver Cromwell at Huntingdon; heavily outnumbered, most of the gang were taken and later hanged, though Hind managed to escape. Later Hind ambushed notorious regicides; according to Smith these were John Bradshaw and the puritan preacher Hugh Peters, while Charles Johnson added the Fifth Monarchist Thomas Harrison. 


@@@@@


doc= 13341


Hind, John (1796-1866), mathematician, was born in Cumberland. He entered St John's College, Cambridge, as a sizar, on 2 February 1813 and was elected to a scholarship in 1815. He completed his BA in 1818 as second wrangler and second Smith's prizeman, and the following year was chosen Taylor mathematical lecturer and fellow-commoner (BA) of Sidney Sussex College. In 1821 he obtained his MA and was ordained; he was elected a fellow of Sidney Sussex College in 1823 and served as tutor, but resigned his lectureship and his fellowship on his marriage in 1824. His wife's name was Elizabeth. Of his family, one son, John Norman Parker Hind ('b'. 1831) and two daughters, Mary Georgina and Elizabeth Stoddont, are known. Hind acted as moderator of the tripos in 1822, 1823, and 1826, and as examiner in 1824 and 1827. He was a fellow of the Cambridge Philosophical Society and of the Royal Astronomical Society. In 1829 he was given the care of the parish of Madingley in Cambridgeshire. 
Hind published seven mathematics textbooks and one book of solutions to exercises in the period 1827-56. Most of these books were reissued in anything up to eight editions, and were highly regarded at the time. He died at 22 Trumpington Street, Cambridge, on 17 December 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 13342


Hind, John Russell (1823-1895), astronomer, was born on 12 May 1823 in Nottingham, the son of John Hind, a lace manufacturer. He was educated privately, then at Nottingham grammar school, and when aged seventeen was placed as assistant to a civil engineer in London. He had been devoted to astronomy since the age of twelve, and in late 1840 he obtained a junior assistantship in the magnetic division at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. He relieved tedious night duties by calculating orbits, and in his leisure time he used the Sheepshanks equatorial to search for comets. Having been elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society (RAS) in 1844, he was recommended by the astronomer royal, George Airy, as observer to George Bishop (1785-1861). On 10 July 1846 he married Fanny ('b'. 'c'.1828), the daughter of Matthew Fuller, a gentleman, at St Pancras Old Church, and in 1849 the first of their six children was born. 
Bishop's observatory, built in 1836 at his home, South Villa, Regent's Park, had a Dollond refracting telescope of 7 inches aperture, then a powerful instrument. Aspiring to make the observatory useful, he first employed from 1839 to May 1844 William Rutter Dawes, who measured double stars. When Hind arrived at South Villa in October 1844, the solar system comprised the seven major planets and four minor planets (asteroids) discovered between 1800 and 1807 orbiting between Mars and Jupiter. In December 1845, after a fifteen-year search, Karl Hencke, a German amateur, discovered the fifth asteroid, Astraea. In September 1846 came the sensational discovery of Neptune. Bishop decided to devote his resources to searching for planets. From November 1846 Hind began a systematic search using the newly available Berlin charts. He discovered two comets in 1846 and 1847. In July 1847 Hencke found the sixth asteroid, and by October Hind had discovered the seventh and eighth. These were considered of such interest and importance that John Couch Adams, ignoring thoughts of a medal for Neptune, recommended that Hind and Hencke each have the RAS medal in 1848. Instead, they, Adams, and nine other nominees received testimonials. 
The Berlin charts were incomplete. Bishop undertook to produce better charts to fainter limits. The consequent night-time exposure and overwork led to the first breakdowns in Hind's health, in 1848 and 1849. He borrowed $15 from John Lee to fund his recuperation, and a year later lodged his testimonial as security. In September 1850 he discovered his third asteroid, Victoria. Hind's financial stress was relieved in 1851 when he received $100 from the Royal Bounty Fund and in 1852 by the scarce award of a civil-list pension of $200 for important astronomical discoveries. 
In 1850 Bishop engaged Norman R. Pogson (trained by Hind) as second assistant, then from 1852 Eduard Vogel, from 1853 to 1855 Albert Marth, and in 1860 George Talmage. In July 1851 Hind travelled to Sweden and successfully observed the total eclipse. In 1852 Hind found four asteroids and in 1854 two more, the last, aptly named Urania, being his tenth. He then gave up regular observing but continued supervision. Great interest in minor planets waned only after 1860, when powerful telescopes indicated they might exist in infinite numbers. After Bishop's death in 1861 his son removed the observatory to Twickenham. Talmage rejoined; Hind moved there and supervised the publication of seventeen of the twenty-four charts before the observatory closed in 1877. 
The variety of Hind's discoveries demonstrated the skill and perseverance which underlay his achievements. In 1848 he discovered the second 'temporary star' or nova of the nineteenth century, and only the seventh ever recognized in the West; N Oph 2 suddenly appeared in the constellation Ophiuchus at fifth magnitude, then faded to tenth. Comets remained mysterious; when Biela's comet returned in December 1848 Hind reported its pear shape, and ten days later it divided in two. In October 1852 Hind discovered a small nebula adjacent to the star T Tauri; 'Hind's nebula' became famous for displaying unmistakable yet inexplicable changes. In 1855 Hind made his first discovery of many variable stars, U Geminorum. 
In 1853 the superintendence of the 'Nautical Almanac' office at Gray's Inn became vacant. Against stiff competition the Admiralty chose Hind, who superintended the 'Nautical Almanac' until 1891 and introduced important changes. After making a comparison, in the early 1860s he dropped Buckhardt's lunar tables and adopted those of Hansen, later modified by Newcomb; similarly, Le Verrier's uniform solar and planetary tables were adopted. Hind ensured the 'Almanac''s punctuality and accuracy. 
Hind was never a theorist. His enduring reputation is as a first-rate practical astronomer. He was an able and tireless computer, calculating for everything he discovered or observed, including one comet so precisely that he observed it at midday when close to the sun. Beyond writing seven popular books and booklets (1841-63), he made a considerable contribution to current practical astronomy by correspondence and more than 130 papers and notices to the international journals of four nations; the astronomer William Plummer said: 'few men have made fewer mistakes' (Plummer, 'Nature', 202). Hind was foreign secretary of the RAS (1847-57, 1878-80) and served on its council (1846-59, 1864-7). In deference to Airy, who was seeking a fourth term, he withdrew from the presidential nomination for 1864. Popular and respected, he was again proposed by Adams in 1879. When Airy, aged seventy-eight and nearly deaf, intimated he would stand again, Adams with unusual speed procured unanimous nomination of Hind, who was duly elected for 1880-82. Hind was elected FRS in 1863. His many distinctions included in 1851 corresponding membership of the Academie Royale des Sciences, associateships of the Russian academy and the Swedish academy, and in 1882 an honorary LLD from Glasgow University. He received the gold medals of the Royal Society (1855), the RAS (1853), and the king of Denmark (1847), and was awarded the Lalande medal three times. 
Hind retired in 1891. Of a kindly disposition, he was generous with information, but of a very shy nature. Behind a strong appearance, he suffered repeated attacks of nervous exhaustion throughout his career. His recreation was learning 'much curious information' on old comets from ancient records, and recalculating their orbits (Plummer, 'Nature', 202). He continued his contributions until a chill precipitated his death from heart disease at his home, 3 Cambridge Park Gardens, Twickenham, on 23 December 1895. He was buried in the churchyard of St Mary the Virgin, Twickenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 13343


Hinde, William (1568/9-1629), Church of England clergyman and author, was almost certainly born at Kendal, Westmorland. He was probably educated at Kendal, and on 9 December 1586, aged seventeen, was admitted as a 'plebeian' to Queen's College, Oxford. He graduated BA on 2 July 1591 and proceeded MA on 2 July 1594. Subsequently elected a fellow of Queen's, he was ordained some time after 1595. While at Oxford he acquired the godly values that were to dominate his life. 
About 1603 Hinde was appointed curate in the parish of Bunbury, Cheshire. In or before 1605 he was married, probably to Margaret, the wife mentioned in his will; she was probably the daughter of William Foxe of Rhodes, near Pilkington, Bury. Another of Foxe's daughters, Anne, was married about this time to the iconoclast John Bruen, whose biography Hinde later wrote. A son, Joseph (himself admitted to Queen's in 1623), was born by early 1606, and in total William and Margaret had nine surviving children. He soon became an active and outspoken puritan minister, participating regularly in teaching exercises within the county and speaking vigorously against popery and recreations on the sabbath. At the same time he maintained contacts with puritans in other areas. In 1614 he published, with John Dod, 'Bathshebaes Instructions to her Sonne Lemuel', the work of 'a godly and learned man, now with God' sometimes mistakenly attributed to Robert Cleaver. In his editions of two works by John Rainolds, 'The Prophecies of Obadiah Opened' (1613) and 'The Discovery of the Man of Sinne' (1614), Hinde held church ceremonies to be matters indifferent and attacked the wealth of the richest clergy. 
Increasingly such behaviour brought Hinde into conflict with Bishop Thomas Morton of Chester, and in 1617, following several discussions about church government, he was presented and fined. When in 1618 Morton's relations with his nonconformist clergy were further undermined by the publication of the bishop's 'Book of Sports', Hinde became disillusioned with the episcopate. He devoted the rest of his life to his family and scholarship, although he continued to be presented for nonconformity. His 'A Path to Pietie' (1613) was followed up by 'A Brief and Plaine Catechisme' (1623). 'The Office and Use of the Moral Law of God' (1622), reissued a year later, revealed that he had not lost a taste for controversy. He also completed 'A Faithfull Remonstrance of the Holy Life and Happy Death of John Bruen', finally published posthumously by his son Samuel in 1641, but became exhausted by a life of self-sacrifice. Following a short illness, he died at Bunbury in June 1629 and was buried in Bunbury churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 13344


Hinderwell, Thomas (1744-1825), philanthropist and antiquary, was born on 17 November 1744 at St Nicholas Cliff, Scarborough, the elder son of the four children of Thomas Hinderwell ('bap'. 1705, died 1798), master mariner and shipowner, and his wife, Rebekah (1716/17-1797). At Coxwold grammar school, as a boarder, he studied classics and then, at the age of eleven, he was apprenticed to Robert Burn, a Scarborough master mariner. As ship's boy, master, and eventually owner he spent the next twenty years at sea. By 1775 he was rich enough to retire and settle ashore permanently at Scarborough. Three years later he was elected to the Common Hall, the corporation's ruling body, and in 1781-2, 1784-5, 1790-91, and 1799-1800 he served as one of the two bailiffs, the town's most senior officers. He finally stepped down as 'father of the Hall' in 1816. 
Unmarried and with more than sufficient income from his shipping interests Hinderwell devoted himself to many charitable causes: 'feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, instructing the ignorant, visiting the afflicted [and] saving the drowning' (Bottomley, 9). He was president of Scarborough's Trinity House and its Merchant Seamen's Society, both of which had local hospitals for 'broken seafarers', widows, and orphans. He was trustee and president of the Amicable Society, an Anglican charity that clothed and schooled the town's poorest children. Both the Lancasterian School and the School of Industry, which gave moral and practical instruction to poor girls, received gifts in his will. In 1812 he was founder and became first president of Scarborough's Auxiliary Bible Society. One of his most beneficial and lasting achievements was his campaign to provide Scarborough with a lifeboat, the second in Britain. He launched a public appeal for the lifeboat fund, chaired the lifeboat committee, and supported Henry Greathead's design. During its first year Scarborough's lifeboat saved the lives of at least five crews. Later he was responsible for founding Scarborough's Humane Society, which gave food, clothing, and accommodation to shipwrecked seamen. After his death his private collection of fossils and minerals formed the basis of Scarborough's Rotunda Museum when it opened in 1828. 
Though he published many essays on subjects as varied as shipwrecks and Sunday observance, Hinderwell is most valued today for his 'History and Antiquities of Scarborough and the Vicinity', first published at York in 1798. A second, improved edition, dedicated to his friend and fellow campaigner against slavery, William Wilberforce, appeared in 1811; a third, posthumous revision, which included a tribute to the original author, was published in 1832. Hinderwell's was the earliest history of Scarborough, yet two centuries later it remains indispensable -- the mature fruit of wide reading, extensive travel, unrivalled local knowledge, privileged access to the corporation's rich archive, the expert research of his many professional assistants, and his own humanitarian wisdom. For his pioneer work Hinderwell engaged the services of Dr Belcombe, Scarborough's resident physician, Dr William Travis, surgeon and local antiquarian, the Revd Daniel Lysons, who devilled for him in the Tower of London and the British Museum, and the Revd Francis Wrangham, a formidable scholar and bibliophile, who gave him 'many interesting favours' (T. Hinderwell, 'The History and Antiquities of Scarborough', 2nd edn, 1811, vi). 
Hinderwell died at his home in Newborough, Scarborough, on 22 October 1825 and was buried three days later in St Mary's parish churchyard, under the same plain gravestone as his father, mother, sister Ann, and brother-in-law. The executors of his will were directed to distribute $50 worth of bread to the town's poor and 'to avoid the ostentation of a public funeral' (Cole, 39). 


@@@@@


doc= 13345


Hindle, John (1761-1796), singer and composer, was the son of Bartholomew and Mary Hindle of Westminster. He was a student of Benjamin Cooke, and by 1783 he was described as a harpsichordist and teacher of music. A countertenor, Hindle is recorded as singing at the Worcester festival in August 1780, at the Handel commemoration concerts at Westminster Abbey and the Pantheon in May and June 1784, at the Tottenham Street concerts in 1786, and at the Covent Garden oratorios in March 1792. He was a lay vicar of Westminster Abbey. On 16 November 1791 he matriculated from Magdalen College, Oxford, and was apparently awarded a BMus. He published a collection of songs and one of glees. His best-known composition was the glee 'Queen of the Silver Bow', published in the 'Professional Collection of Glees' ('c'.1790). Hindle died in London, apparently unmarried, in 1796; his mother was granted the administration of his estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 13346


Hindley, John Haddon (bap. 1765, d. 1827), orientalist, was born in Manchester, where he was baptized at Manchester Cathedral on 18 October 1765, the son of Charles Hindley, a cloth mercer, and his wife, Ellen, 'nee' Haddon. He was educated at Manchester grammar school before matriculating on 21 April 1784 at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he was elected a Hulme exhibitioner in 1788 and graduated BA in 1788 and MA in 1790. In 1792 he became chaplain of Manchester collegiate church and librarian of Chetham's Library, resigning the latter position in 1804. In his later years his mind gave way. He died unmarried at Clapham on 17 June 1827 and was buried at St Mary, Stratford Bow, London. 
The many valuable oriental manuscripts at Chetham's Library led Hindley to the study of Persian. He translated several books from Persian including works by Hafiz, Attar, and Jami. His versions from Hafiz are in both prose and verse. His verse is very pleasant and at times quite elegant. 


@@@@@


doc= 13347


Hindmarsh, Sir John (bap. 1785, d. 1860), naval officer and colonial governor, was baptized on 22 May 1785, the son of John Hindmarsh, gunner on the 'Bellerophon', and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Roxburgh. He entered the navy in March 1793 as a volunteer on the 'Bellerophon', in which he remained for seven years, and was present at the battle in the north Atlantic on 1 June 1794, in Cornwallis's retreat (17 June 1795), at the battle of the Nile (1 August 1798), and at the capture of the forts at Gaeta in 1799. In the battle of the Nile the 'Bellerophon', while accidentally anchored, was exposed to the full weight of 'L'Orient's' broadside, was dismasted and sustained exceptional loss. The captain, Darby, went below wounded, and for a few minutes Hindmarsh was the only officer on deck, just as 'L'Orient' burst into flames. He ordered the cable to be cut, and, setting the spritsail, got the ship clear of the imminent danger in a manner that elicited the warm approval of Captain Darby, who afterwards personally introduced him to Nelson and Lord St Vincent as having saved the ship. He lost the sight of an eye. In May 1800 he followed Captain Darby to the 'Spencer' (74 guns), and in her was present in the actions at Algeciras on 6 July and in the Strait of Gibraltar on 12 July 1801. 
In 1803 Hindmarsh went out to the Mediterranean in the 'Victory' (100 guns), and in August was promoted by Nelson to lieutenant of the 'Phoebe' (36 guns), in which he was present at Trafalgar on 21 October 1805. In November he was moved into the sloop 'Beagle' (18 guns) for four years' cruising against the French coasting privateers. In April 1809 the 'Beagle' convoyed the fireships to the Basque Roads, and took part in the subsequent operations. On 4 November 1809 Hindmarsh married Susannah Wilson Edmeades: they had three daughters and a son. 
Hindmarsh was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Nisus' (38 guns) with Captain Philip Beaver, and in her took part in the capture of Mauritius and Java. In May 1813 he returned to England invalided, and was promoted commander on 15 June 1815. In March 1830 he was appointed to command the 'Scylla' (18 guns), in the Mediterranean, and was posted from her on 3 September 1831. He went out to Alexandria in September 1834 in the hope (in the event unfulfilled) of assuming command of the Egyptian navy. 
At his own request, and through influence, in February 1836 Hindmarsh was appointed first governor of South Australia (at a salary of $800), and in May was made KH. He sailed in the 'Buffalo' (6 guns) for Australia in June. On 28 December he and his party landed at Holdfast Bay, where the orders in council creating South Australia a British colony and Hindmarsh's commission as governor were read. With its new capital, Adelaide, the settlement grew, and Hindmarsh made a large profit from selling land. Hindmarsh was associated with John Fisher, as commissioner for the sale of crown lands, but the dual government did not work well, and after disputes and controversy Hindmarsh was recalled in February 1838, and sailed for England on 14 July, hoping to be reinstated. In the event, although Fisher was removed, the new governor, George Gawler, was vested with sole authority. 
From September 1840 until 1856 Hindmarsh was lieutenant-governor of Heligoland. On 31 January 1856 he was advanced to flag rank. Hindmarsh's wife died at Brighton on 2 April 1859, and he died at 11 Denbigh Terrace, Belgrave Road, London, on 29 July 1860. They had one son, John, a barrister, and three daughters, one of whom, Mary, married G. M. Stephen, brother of Sir Alfred Stephen, chief justice of New South Wales; another, Jane, married A. M. Mundy, colonial secretary for South Australia, and nephew of Admiral Sir George Mundy. 


@@@@@


doc= 13348


Hindmarsh, Robert (1759-1835), Swedenborgian preacher, was born in Alnwick, Northumberland, on 8 November 1759, the son of James Hindmarsh (1732-1812) and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1775). His father was one of the schoolmasters at Wesley's school at Kingswood in the 1760s, and subsequently an itinerant preacher for Wesley. Hindmarsh was a student at this school and was converted during a revival in the school in 1768. Apprenticed to a Quaker printer in London, he was introduced to 'mystical' literature and became a devotee of the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg, which he published when he became a printer in his own right. If his cheerful and purposeful character appears somewhat at odds with the image of the early Swedenborgians, his rational distaste for the Trinity attracted him to the new doctrines; his efficiency and his gift for languages made him very valuable to the 'new church'. In 1783 he was appointed the secretary of two of the early Swedenborgian societies and he sat as an equal alongside an intellectual elite in a society of talents. As former Methodists, he and his father wanted a chapel where they could worship God according to Swedenborgian theology, and his father became the first preacher when the New Jerusalem church was established. On 7 May 1782 Hindmarsh married Sarah Paramor (died 1833) of Monckton, Thanet; they had five children. 
Hindmarsh was certainly a high-profile figure in the early Swedenborgian group, promoting the doctrines even to Joseph Priestley in 1791, but he was also not frightened to follow the bolder ideas of some Swedenborgians about spiritual marriage and was expelled from membership of the chapel, although he was later encouraged to produce its magazine. He further soured of the society by 1793 when they rejected the episcopalian status sought by his father in favour of the more usual nonconformist congregational system of church government, at a time when such views were politically charged. He did little for the cause apart from attempting to found a new London congregation of the 'new church' in 1799 and publishing translations of Swedenborg's works until 1810. During this period he was an active member of the stock exchange, but was then invited to serve as minister of a proprietary chapel of the New Jerusalem church in Salford, Lancashire. He withdrew again from active involvement in the denomination in 1824, spending his retirement in writing his history of the sect, a highly partisan interpretation which was not published until 1861, but has influenced all subsequent interpretations of the sect, despite his curious bias. He then caused an abiding controversy in that sect through his claim that he did not need ordination when he commenced his ministerial career in 1810 because he had been ordained 'by the divine auspices of heaven' at the time of the first ordinations of the church in 1788. Hindmarsh died in his daughter's house in Gravesend on 2 January 1835, two years after his wife, and was buried in Milton-next-Gravesend. He is a striking blend of the sectarianism on the fringes of the evangelical revival. His career is controversial even to the church he founded, and his biographer pictures him 'with the sword in one hand and the trowel in the other' (Odhner). 


@@@@@


doc= 13349


Hinds, Samuel (1793-1872), bishop of Norwich, was born in Barbados on 23 December 1793, the son of Abel Hinds (died 1808) and his wife, Elizabeth Thornhill, 'nee' Rock (1776-1853). Some members of his family had been among the earlier settlers and chief land and slave owners on the island. He was educated at Charterhouse and then entered Queen's College, Oxford, in November 1811, and graduated BA 1815 (2nd class), MA 1818, and BD and DD 1831. In 1818 he won the chancellor's prize for a Latin essay, and in 1822 he was ordained. He married, in Barbados on 4 April 1821, Eleanor Ann Clinckett (1800-1834), daughter of Abel Clinckett of Barbados. 
Early in life Hinds was connected as a missionary with the Society for the Conversion of Negroes. He was for some time principal of Codrington College, Barbados. In 1827 he became vice-principal of St Alban Hall, Oxford, under Richard Whately DD, who had been his private tutor; on Whately's elevation to the archbishopric of Dublin in 1831, Hinds was appointed his domestic chaplain. This office, however, he was obliged to resign owing to ill health, in 1833, when he returned to England. In 1834 he was presented to the vicarage of Yardley, Hertfordshire, which benefice he held with the rural deanery of the district until January 1843, when he was appointed to the vicarage of the united parishes of Castleknock, Clonsilla, and Mullahidart, with the prebend of Castleknock in St Patrick's Cathedral, in the diocese of Dublin. At the same time he again became one of Archbishop Whately's chaplains. In 1846 he was appointed first chaplain to the earl of Bessborough, lord lieutenant of Ireland, and in the following year to the earl of Clarendon, who had succeeded to the lord lieutenancy. He resigned the benefice of Castleknock in September 1848, when he was presented by the crown to the deanery of Carlisle. In October 1849 he was raised to the bishopric of Norwich, on the death of Bishop Stanley, and he held it until 1857, when ill health required him to resign amid comment about his unsuitability for episcopal office ('The Times', 31 March 1857). 
In 1850 Hinds chaired the royal commission on Oxford University, being appointed by Lord John Russell (who had considered him for the regius chair of divinity in 1847). His chairmanship reflected both his liberal credentials and his competence. His commission's report, in 1852, provided an opportunity of a turning point in the history of the university, of which the latter only partially took advantage. 
About 1856 Hinds married his second wife, Sarah Emily, who survived him. He published many sermons, pamphlets, and books of a broad-church character on a variety of subjects, including 'History of the Rise and Early Progress of Christianity' (2 vols., 1828), 'The Three Temples of the one True God Contrasted' (1830), 'Sonnets and other Short Poems, Chiefly on Sacred Subjects' (1834), and 'On the Colonisation of New Zealand' (1838). He became a promoter of the Canterbury Association to establish a settlement on New Zealand. His 'Introduction to Logic' (1827) was taken from Whately's 'Elements'. Several of his works were originally articles in the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana'. 
Hinds was a man of learning, ability, and engaging character. In politics he was a moderate Liberal, while he represented one of the most 'advanced' schools of thought on religious questions, especially during the last few years of his life. He died at 40 Clarendon Road, London, on 7 February 1872, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 13350


Hine, Henry George (1811-1895), comic artist and landscape painter, born at Brighton, Sussex, on 15 August 1811, was the son of a coachman, William Hine, and his wife, Mary Roffey. He was entirely self-taught as an artist, though he was encouraged in his study of nature by a vicar of a neighbouring Sussex village, who had a collection of watercolours by Copley Fielding, whose style strongly influenced Hine's own. Hine made his name in Sussex with seapieces and scenes of the coast near Brighton before moving to London, where he was apprenticed as a draughtsman to the engraver Henry Meyer. He then spent two years in France, at Rouen, developing his skills in oil painting, before returning again to Brighton. On 13 November 1840 he married Mary Ann Eliza ('b'. 1818/19), daughter of James Egerton, a coach maker; they had ten daughters and four sons. 
Not finding the commissions he desired, Hine moved once more to London, where he became a professional wood-engraver. In 1841 he was discovered by Ebenezer Landells, who at that time was projecting the publication of a landscape periodical called 'The Cosmorama'. Pleased with a little comic sketch by Hine of a dustman and his dog, Landells recommended that he become a contributor to 'Punch', the first number of which had appeared on 17 July 1841. Hine's first contribution appeared in September and he continued to work for 'Punch' until 1844, supplying 'blackies' (black comic sketches) and cartoons. Thereafter, he contributed to several short-lived rival publications, such as 'Puck', 'Joe Miller the Younger', and the 'Man in the Moon', as well as to the 'Illustrated London News', before returning to landscape painting. His favourite subject remained the Sussex countryside of his youth (which he depicted, according to the 'Magazine of Art' in 1893, with 'something of a geologist's knowledge of the land'), though he did paint many scenes of Northumberland and London, as well. 
Between 1830 and 1851 Hine had sent six pictures to the Royal Academy; he also sent twelve to the Suffolk Street Gallery, including, in 1856, 'Picts Wall in Carrfield Crags, Northumberland'. By 1861 he had sent eight works to the Royal Academy, the most successful of which was 'Wrecks on the Beach at Brighton' (exh. 1861). In 1863 Hine was elected as associate of the Institute of Painters in Water Colours, and exhibited there 'St. Paul's from Fleet Street'. He was elected a full member in 1864, and became a regular contributor to the Institute (from 1885 Royal Institute) of Painters in Water Colours, even serving as vice-president from 1884 to 1895. Hine died at his home, 4 Gayton Crescent, Hampstead, London, on 16 March 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 13351


Hine, William (1687-1730), organist and composer, was born at Brightwell, Oxfordshire. He was a chorister of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1694, and clerk in 1705. He studied music with Jeremiah Clarke in London, and in 1707 was appointed deputy to the organist of Gloucester Cathedral. He succeeded as organist in 1713, and shortly afterwards married Alicia, daughter of Abraham Rudhall (1657-1736), the famous bell-founder. The dean and chapter were so appreciative of his services that they voluntarily increased his annual salary, and recorded their generosity on the tablet over his grave. He died on 28 August 1730 at the age of forty-three; his widow survived until 28 June 1735. Both were buried in the cloisters of the cathedral. His chief pupils were Richard Church and William Hayes. After Hine's death, his widow published by subscription 'Harmonia sacra Glocestriensis', containing anthems for one, two, and three voices, and a 'Te Deum' and 'Jubilate'; all were by Hine except the 'Te Deum', which was by Henry Hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 13352


Hingeston, John (c.1606-1683), instrumentalist and composer, was born in the parish of St Lawrence, York, the son and one of at least seven children of Thomas Hingeston (died 1619/20), vicar-choral at York Minster and rector of St Lawrence in the city, and his wife, Dorothy. Through his father he secured a place in the choir at York Minster. The date on which Hingeston became a chorister is unknown, but his name is included among two lists of singing boys recorded in a medius decani partbook in the years 1618 and 1619. On 17 March 1620 he played 'upon the organs' (Chatsworth, Bolton MSS, book 98, fol. 142) in an entertainment given for Emanuel Scrope, lord president of the council in north, by the Yorkshire nobleman Francis Clifford, fourth earl of Cumberland, a 'worthy lover and patron of that facultie music' (W. Byrd, 'Psalmes, Songes and Sonnets', 1611). Hingeston joined the Clifford household in 1621 and was formally apprenticed to the earl in August of that year. He was sent to London the following month to study with the organist and composer Orlando Gibbons, whom he later described as 'my ever hono'rd Master' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/375, q. 134). Some time before February 1625 Hingeston returned to the Clifford estates at Skipton and Londesborough in Yorkshire, where, in addition to his musical duties, he served as butler and yeoman of the wine cellar. He remained in the family's employment until 1645 when the household was dispersed following the capture of Skipton Castle by parliamentary forces. 
Hingeston's career blossomed during the interregnum. In 1651 he was listed in John Playford's 'Musicall Banquet' as one of nine 'excellent and able masters' for the organ and virginal. Shortly after the establishment of the protectorate household in April 1654, he was appointed organist to Oliver Cromwell at a fee of $100 per annum, and was placed in charge of 'his Highness Musique', a band of eight musicians and two apprentices. According to Anthony Wood, Hingeston 'breed up two Boyes to sing with himselfe Mr. Dearings printed latine songes for 3 voices [Richard Dering's 'Cantica sacra', 1662]; which Oliver was most taken with' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood D19/4). Hingeston's concern for the plight of his fellow musicians led him to petition the Council for the Advancement of Musick on 19 February 1657. He sought the incorporation of a college with powers to regulate the practice of music and instrument making, and funding to maintain and encourage professors of the art. His final act as master of Cromwell's music was to head the band of musicians who marched in the protector's funeral procession on 23 November 1658. 
Hingeston joined the royal household at the Restoration and was appointed as a violist in the Private Musick and the Chapel Royal, and as keeper of his majesty's wind instruments. He became a member of the Corporation of Musick, holding office as warden (1662-4 and 1674-5) and deputy marshal (February-June 1672). In his will Hingeston mentions two apprentices -- his nephew Peter Hingeston, who later became organist of St Mary-le-Tower in Ipswich, and Henry Purcell -- and a scholar named John Blagrave. Hingeston died, unmarried, at his home in Great St Anne's Lane, Westminster, between 12 and 17 December 1683, and was buried on 17 December in St Margaret's New Chapel yard beside Stretton Ground. His bequests amounted to about $600 in money, excluding arrears of pay from the royal household, six portraits, including one of Orlando Gibbons which he gave to the music school at Oxford, several stringed instruments, an organ, music books, and various properties. 
Hingeston was a prolific composer. His consort music for viols and violins with continuo is mainly preserved in a set of partbooks which he presented to the music school at Oxford between 1661 and 1682 (Bodl. Oxf., MSS Mus. Sch. D.205-11), and in a related autograph organ book acquired by the university some time after the composer's death (Bodl. Oxf., MS Mus. Sch. E.382). The fantasias and airs for three bass viols (BL, Add. MS 31436), which probably date from Hingeston's employment in the Private Musick, are unusual in their scoring for three equal instruments. His suites for cornets and sackbuts written for the protectorate court survive in an incomplete set of partbooks bound with the personal coat of arms of Oliver Cromwell (V&A, Clements TT14-15). 


@@@@@


doc= 13353


Hingston, Thomas (bap. 1799, d. 1837), antiquary, third son of John Hingston, a clerk in the custom house, and Margaret, his wife, was baptized at St Ives, Cornwall, on 9 May 1799, and educated there. His medical studies began in the house of a general practitioner, and in 1821 he moved to Edinburgh. In 1822 he won the medal offered by George IV to Edinburgh University for a Latin ode on the occasion of the king's visit to Scotland. The original poem is lost, but a translation made by Hingston's brother is preserved in 'The Poems of Francis Hingeston' ['sic'] (1857). In 1824 he was admitted to the degree of MD at Edinburgh, after publishing an inaugural dissertation, 'De morbo comitiali', and in the same year he brought out a new edition of William Harvey's 'De motu cordis et sanguinis'. He was admitted to Queens' College, Cambridge, in December 1823 and matriculated in 1824, but took no degree. 
Hingston practised as a physician first at Penzance from 1828 to 1832 and subsequently at Truro. He contributed to the 'Transactions of the Geological Society of Cornwall' and to volume 4 of Davies Gilbert's 'Parochial History of Cornwall' (1838). He died at Falmouth, where he had moved for the benefit of the sea air, on 13 July 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 13354


Hinton, James (1822-1875), otologist and writer on philosophy, second son of John Howard Hinton (1791-1873), Baptist minister, was born at Reading, Berkshire. He was educated by his uncle at a school in Old Butcher Row, Oxford, which was founded by his grandfather, and afterwards at a school for nonconformists at Harpenden, Hertfordshire. He was a strictly religious and somewhat meditative boy. Following a family move, in 1838 he worked as cashier in a wholesale woollen-drapery shop in Whitechapel. The degradation of Whitechapel life made an indelible impression on his mind. Afterwards he obtained a clerkship in an insurance office and devoted his nights to the study of languages, history, mathematics, and philosophy. At nineteen Hinton fell in love with Margaret Haddon ('b'. 1825/6), daughter of John Haddon, a printer; he proposed, and was rejected. He could not have been a very prepossessing suitor, as he had no social graces and no small talk, and was very solemn. After an illness caused by work and anxiety, on the recommendation of his family doctor he became a medical student at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London; during his studies he made a voyage to China as the surgeon of a passenger ship, the 'City of Derry'. On his return in 1847 he gained the MRCS. Meanwhile, at the cost of prolonged mental suffering, he had lost his belief in Christianity; Miss Haddon rejected a second proposal from him on this account, and later in 1847 he became medical officer on board a ship chartered by the government to carry free black people from Sierra Leone to Jamaica. 
Returning home in the spring of 1850 Hinton was oppressed by a sense of sin, read the 'Bible', David Nelson on 'The Cause and Cure of Infidelity', and other apologetic books, and was almost persuaded to be a Christian. Miss Haddon now consented to an engagement, and Hinton began general practice in London at Bartholomew Close. They subsequently married on 17 June 1852; the writer Charles Howard Hinton was their son, and their daughter Ada married the painter John Trivett Nettleship (1841-1902). After his marriage Hinton went into otological practice on his own. 
Hinton's first few years as a specialist were strenuous but not altogether happy. He ardently wished to devote his time to philosophy and was somewhat repelled by the necessary commercial side of medicine. Writing to his wife he said: 'I fully perceive and understand that the part I have to act by my profession is not to do my best for 'it' but for myself. I must make it yield me, in the first place, tables and chairs and a house, butcher-meat and bread, a good coat and a gold watch, and then I may seek from it scientific and philosophical pleasure, moral elevation, the happiness of doing good, etc.. I perceive and assent. (Hopkins, 105)' Much of his spare time was occupied in arranging and classifying the Toynbee collection. Thus started his close association with Joseph Toynbee (1815-1866), with whom he spent time on the wards, in the consulting room, and in the laboratory. 
Hinton became interested in the theory of sound and gave a course of lectures in 1854-5. About this time he was befriended by William Gull, physician at Guy's Hospital, who gave him the use of the dissecting rooms and later was influential in his appointment in 1863 as the first aural surgeon to Guy's. Gull and Hinton were in the habit of walking together in the early morning before work. Hinton would talk unceasingly, mostly of his philosophical ideas. After they had parted one day Gull was asked the whereabouts of Hinton. He replied: 'The last I saw of him he was up there,' pointing to the clouds (Reading, 465). 
Hinton began his literary career in 1856 with the publication, in the 'Christian Spectator', of some papers on physiology and ethics. In October 1858 he contributed to the 'Medico-Chirurgical Review' an article entitled 'Physical morphology, or, The law of organic forms', in which he maintained that organic form is the result of motion in the direction of least resistance. In 1859 he published a little book on the relations of religion and science, 'Man and his Dwelling-Place', which was so favourably received that he gave up surgical practice to devote himself entirely to philosophical meditations and writing. Two years later he published 'Life in Nature', which was not financially profitable, and with the pressure of an increasing family he returned to practice. He wrote the treatise on diseases of the ear for Timothy Holmes's 'System of Surgery' (1862), and was one of the editors of the 'Year-Book of Medicine' (New Sydenham Society) in 1863. In 1866 he published a little essay entitled 'The Mystery of Pain', which is probably the best-known of his writings. He then joined the newly established Metaphysical Society. In the autumn of 1870 he visited the island of St Michael in the Azores, where he had bought a small estate. On his way there he considered asceticism, which shortly led to such a thorough change in his ethical views that he was accustomed to describe it as a 'moral revolution'. The change consisted in the substitution of altruism for individualism as the basis of morals. To resolve this idea he determined to retire from practice, and, to be the better able to do so, threw himself with redoubled energy into otology. Initially in practice in Hanover Square, on Toynbee's tragic death in 1866 Hinton took over his extensive practice in Savile Row. He had extraordinary powers of observation and with an otoscope which reflected daylight into the external meatus he was able to view the tympanic membrane. His wife, Margaret, was a skilled watercolourist and on his instruction faithfully reproduced his observations: these were later published in the 'Atlas of the membrana tympani, with descriptive text, being illustrations of the diseases of the ear' (1874). He noted that an aural polyp was not a disease of the external meatus alone but 'might grow through a perforation in the membrana tympani'. He showed how 'molluscous tumours' (cholesteatoma) might lead to death by eroding bone and causing intercranial spread. He recommended 'early puncture of the membrane in acute suppuration within the tympanum' and observed that 'an important sign of disease of the mastoid process is a red swelling of the posterior wall, which might be confounded with a boil if the symptoms did not indicate a more serious affection.' Hinton was the first in Britain to perform a mastoid operation, hitherto practised only in Europe. He urged prompt surgery, employing a drill with a moveable guard, 'enabling the bone to be penetrated to the desired extent'. 
Hinton was a prolific writer. In 1874, besides editing a manual of physiology entitled 'Physiology for Practical Use, by Various Writers', he published 'The Place of the Physician, being the Introductory Lecture at Guy's Hospital, October 1873'; 'Essays on the Law of Human Life and on the Relations between the Organic and Inorganic Worlds'; and translations of works by A. F. van Troltsch on the surgical diseases of the ear, and by H. Helmholtz on the mechanisms of the ossicles and the membrana tympani, both for the New Sydenham Society. In his book 'The Questions of Aural Surgery', also published in 1874, he describes otitis media with effusion (glue ear) and the attempt to insert ventilation tubes (grommets). 
By 1873 Hinton's behaviour and speech had become erratic and he grew more and more absent-minded. His disabilities forced him to retire in 1875 to his estate in the Azores, and he died the same year, on 16 December, in hospital on Ponta Delgada of 'inflammation of the brain'. He was buried in the English church on Ponta Delgada. Sadly, Hinton never lived to enjoy the pursuit of abstract thinking which had been his goal and the reason why he reluctantly worked so hard as a brilliant otologist. Dr (later Sir) Samuel Wilks in his 'Lancet' obituary of Hinton wrote: 'When I say he was one of the most remarkable men in our profession, I feel astonished that he was ever in it but being 'in it', was never 'of it'. I believe accident alone must have made him a medical student, just as a kind of chance gave him his speciality.... It was certainly not his forte to deal with his fellow creatures, and treat their various complaints in a commonplace way, any more than it was his inclination to devote himself to medicine with a purely scientific spirit. So far from his being able to pursue a special department of science in the chemical or physiological laboratory, I believe he was totally unfitted for such work. It was the ideal, speculative, philosophic and metaphysical, which occupied his mind. Whatever chance it might have been which led him to his professional speciality, he could not but bring a great force of intellect to bear upon it, and it necessarily grew in his hands.... I feel that I have not a full conception of his views, and am not sure that I have ever grasped them, for all his doctrines are very visionary, and his writings 'mystic, wonderful'. (Wilks, 72-3)' Hinton's fugitive essays were edited by his son, C. H. Hinton, with an introduction by Shadworth Hodgson, under the title 'Chapters on the Art of Thinking, and other Essays' (1873). Two volumes of selections from his commonplace book (printed for his own convenience in 1874) were published: one entitled 'Philosophy and Religion', edited by his sister-in-law Caroline Haddon (1881), and the other 'The Law Breaker and the Coming of the Law' (1884), edited by his widow with considerable help from his young disciple Havelock Ellis, who at an impressionable age had read Hinton's 'Life in Nature' and had undergone a 'conversion' to Hinton's conviction that all life was one and that he and nature were not separate and apart but each flowing into the other. Ellis, while in Australia, had also read Ellice Hopkins's 'Life and Letters of James Hinton' and had experienced a similar awakening to Hinton's, namely that he should follow a career in medicine. With very little personal funds his medical education at St Thomas's was supported by Caroline Haddon who ran a girls' boarding-school at Dover. Ellis always felt a great sense of obligation both to her and to the Hintons. This was later borne out in his wife Edith's book 'James Hinton: a Sketch' (1918). 
As a thinker Hinton, whatever his faults, lacked neither originality nor comprehensiveness. Accepting from idealism the doctrine that existence is limited by consciousness, he sought in the activity exhibited in volition, which he identified with spirit, the key to the interpretation of the noumenal, or, as he preferred to say, the 'actual' world, and the reconciliation of religion and science. Ideas of matter and force, and also the ordinary theological idea of God, must give place to that of universal spirit as the 'actuality' of things. Accordingly Hinton named his system 'actualism' as opposed to idealism and materialism. 
In the moral sphere Hinton believed that as an individual self, man is a negation, a limitation of the divine spirit, and can thus only attain his true life through unselfishness, whereby he transcends himself and becomes one with God. Man has in fact done just the opposite, making himself the centre of the universe, his own supposed interest, mundane or spiritual, being his principal concern. Hinton therefore advocated that the moral centre of gravity should be shifted from self-regard to regard for others, from egoism to altruism or mutual service. This was perhaps a seductive argument for doing as one likes as long as one persuades oneself that the main object is to give pleasure to others. Caroline Haddon was later forced to reveal the true sexual side of Hinton who was involved with all sorts of women and whose justification for his behaviour was that he was 'serving' them as an artist in love. At that time (1885) there were rumours of Hinton's madness possibly due to syphilis and even of his suicide. Caroline Haddon confirmed that Hinton was in a disturbed sexual state shortly before his death: 'What upset his morals was not his own morbid sexual desire, but the conviction that was forced upon him of the needs of women' (Grosskurth, 99). This championship of women and indignation about the fetters that marriage frequently placed on them proved to have a major influence on Havelock Ellis. Hinton supported polygamy as did Caroline Haddon, and even his son Howard was arrested in 1885 for bigamy. This last revelation caused a strong opponent of Hinton's beliefs, Karl Pearson, to react, as Grosskurth puts it, with the wrath of an 'Old Testament' prophet in the face of this 'most dramatic proof of Hintonian immorality!' (Grosskurth, 102). 


@@@@@


doc= 13355


Hinton, Sir John (1603?-1682), physician, was born in London. He had at least three brothers, all of whom supported the crown during the civil war. On 10 April 1633, aged thirty, he entered Leiden University, where he probably proceeded MD. He presented himself as a practitioner of midwifery at the censor's board of the College of Physicians, London, on 6 February 1634; but as he had not been engaged in practice for the statutable period of four years, was not examined. On 7 November 1640 Hinton again appeared at the college, and presented letters from the earl of Dorchester, testifying that he had been appointed physician to the queen. After the outbreak of the civil war Hinton busied himself in promoting a petition to the Long Parliament styled 'The inns of court peticion for peace', for which he was repeatedly examined, as he alleges, by the House of Commons, and before long 'was forced to fly from my house and family, whereupon they immediatly plundered mee to the losse of above one thousand pound, and my wife and children were left in very bad condition...' (Hinton, 7). There is no mention of any such examination in the 'Journals' of the House of Commons. Hinton joined the king at York, marched with the army to Beverley, Hull, and Nottingham, and was present at the battle of Edgehill (1642). After accompanying the king to Oxford, he was there created MD on 1 November 1642, and was appointed physician-in-ordinary to Prince Charles. By the king's command he attended the queen to Exeter, where she gave birth in 1644 to the Princess Henrietta; afterwards he saw the queen into Cornwall and safely embarked for France. 
In 1646 Hinton was living at Fulwood's Rents, London, having been in Exeter when it was taken by Sir Thomas Fairfax. Hinton was examined before the council of state on 27 August 1649. He appears to have lived for some time at The Hague in the suite of Charles II. On his return to London he was arrested and frequently examined. He claimed that he was on one occasion interrogated by Cromwell, who, he said, 'swore by the liveing God, hee would wrack every veine in my heart if I did not discover the designes against him' (Hinton, 27-8). Fortunately for Hinton, 'by the means and intercession of some zealous women, my patients', he was freed. According to his own account, a close watch was, however, kept on him until the Restoration. 
Hinton was certainly in London in July 1655, and, although under suspicion, was allowed to remain there on account of his patients. After the Restoration he was appointed physician-in-ordinary to the king and queen, a position he held until 1673, and in December 1664 was admitted an honorary fellow of the College of Physicians. 'At the latter end of the plague' (1665) he was knighted, in recognition of his having procured a private advance of money for the duke of Albemarle to pay the army. In 1672 he purchased fee farms from the crown. In 1679 he presented a memorial to the king in which he set out, in the form of an autobiography, the losses he had incurred during the civil war and afterwards, and praying that such might be made good either to him or his children. One hundred copies of these 'Memoires' were printed from the original manuscript in 1814. Hinton lived in the parish of St Bride, London, but before his death moved to the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields. He must have died in poverty during the autumn of 1682, for on 14 November of that year administration of his estate was granted to Humphrey Weld (1612-1685), a principal creditor. 


@@@@@


doc= 13356


Hinton, John Howard (1791-1873), Baptist minister and theologian, was born on 24 March 1791 in Oxford, where his schoolmaster father was the minister for thirty years. James Hinton (1761-1823) was one of those Baptist leaders who, at the end of the eighteenth century, secured the revival of Baptist life in Britain. His wife, Ann (1765-1832), was the daughter of Isaac Taylor (1730-1807), the engraver, a member of an important Congregational family. John Howard was so named by his mother at the request of John Howard, the prison reformer, after the loss of his own son. 
After secondary education in his father's school, Hinton studied medicine with an Oxford surgeon. Influenced by John Sutcliffe and Andrew Fuller, his father's close friends in the work of the infant Baptist Missionary Society, and called by the church in Oxford to ministry, Hinton entered Bristol Baptist college in 1811 for training, but in 1813 proceeded to Edinburgh University, where he graduated MA in April 1816. He married, in 1818, Eliza, only daughter of the Revd Isaiah Birt, then minister of Cannon Street Chapel, Birmingham. They had two sons; the younger was James Hinton, ontologist and writer on philosophy. 
Following a first pastorate at Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire (1816-20), Hinton moved to Reading (1820), where he led his congregation into more prestigious premises in the King's Road, which established Hinton's reputation as a denominational leader. In 1837 he succeeded Thomas Price, the editor of the 'Eclectic Review', as minister of the historic Devonshire Square Chapel in the City of London, where he remained until 1863. He was both a formidable writer on theological topics (which he undertook in the context of a busy London pastorate, rather than with the support of any academic community) and an activist in a large number of important religious societies. 
A keen campaigner against slavery, it was Hinton who proposed a divisive motion seeking to exclude slave holders from membership of the infant Evangelical Alliance in 1846. He was a lecturer for Joseph Sturge's Complete Suffrage Union and was also active in the Christian Instruction Society, using its platform to argue against Owenism. He helped found the Liberation Society, or the Anti-State Church Society as it was first called, and earned a reputation as the most distinguished of the society's lecturers; for it he wrote 'The Test of Experience, or, The Voluntary Principle in the United States' (1851). With other Baptists, however, he withdrew from the work of the society after 1855, troubled by the increasing aggressiveness of Edward Miall. His voluntary church principles led him to attack in print the education clauses of Graham's 'Factory Bill' of 1843. Temperance, with its built-in tendency towards intervention once education into temperance was shown to be an unrealistic hope, led him in later life to become critical of absolute voluntarism in all aspects of life: he defended government initiatives in social legislation and underlined the need for Christian ministers to combat class distinctions, arguing that labour and capital were properly to be seen as joint partners in the creation of wealth. An evangelicalism shared with many Anglicans made him an enthusiastic supporter of the Evangelical Alliance, though he was bitterly critical of new ritualistic developments within the established church. 
In 1841 Hinton became secretary of the Baptist Union, a post then vacant because of the resignation of Joseph Belcher who was unhappy with having to communicate the British union's censure of American Baptists who owned slaves. Hinton, who edited 'The History and Topography of the United States' (2 vols., 1830, 1832), was, by contrast, clear in his hostility to slavery. In his new position, which he held for a quarter of a century, Hinton found himself in the ironic position of being a complete individualist seeking to engineer the unity of a group of independent churches, but his obituarist was fair in his judgement that the Baptist Union 'owed its preservation in times of comparative feebleness to his perseverance' ('Baptist Hand-Book'). 
Hinton sat on the committee of the Baptist Missionary Society, for which he wrote 'A Vindication of Christian Missions in India' (1826) and a 'Memoir of William Knibb' (1847), but he was uncertain whether the missionaries or the London committee should determine mission strategy and action. He came to believe that missionaries should not create dependent churches but should move on swiftly to open up new areas of work, always remembering that much missionary work remained to be done in Europe. Hinton himself visited Holland, Germany, and Sweden in support of the newly planted Baptist Missions in these countries. In 1840 one of the leaders of the Baptists in Germany, G. W. Lehmann of Berlin, travelled to London to be ordained by him. 
Full of enthusiasm for Jonathan Edwards and the New Divinity revivalism which Edwards stimulated, Hinton saw the development of church life in the USA as abundant corroboration of free-church principles. Hinton was sometimes regarded as the successor to Andrew Fuller as the leading moderate Calvinist among the Baptists, but his attempts to secure a new synthesis in the Calvinist-Arminian debate were less than satisfying, leading him into unsatisfactory teaching on human responsibility and original sin, for which the rationalism of his Edinburgh education may be in part to blame. In his 'The Work of the Holy Spirit in Conversion' (1829) he sought to provide a theology of revivalism, but in its endeavour to release human capacity from the old shackles of a theology of inability it went too far, fatally limiting the work of the Spirit in maintaining that 'a sinner has power to repent without the Spirit'. Such a controversial affirmation, enunciated by the occupant of one of the Particular Baptists' historic London pulpits, was one reason for the establishment of the London and East Anglian associations of Strict Baptist churches outside the Baptist Union. A strenuous advocate of personal evangelism, however, Hinton became seriously worried by the drift from historic orthodoxy among the Congregationalists. In 1860 he joined with Charles Haddon Spurgeon in opposing Baldwin Brown's 'Divine Life in Man', upon which he published strictures, characterizing Brown's thinking as 'the first inroad into English Nonconformist churches of a theology totally deficient in the truth and power of the gospel' (C. H. Spurgeon, 'Autobiography of C. H. Spurgeon', 1899, 2.269). 
Hinton retired from Devonshire Square in 1863 and the Baptist Union in 1866, and returned to Reading, where he founded the new Carey Chapel. He twice occupied the chair of the Baptist Union, in 1837 and 1863. In 1868 he moved to 1 Redland Terrace, Bristol, where he died on 17 December 1873, having the previous year represented the Baptist Union at a service in St Paul's Cathedral to give thanks for the recovery of the prince of Wales. He was buried on 22 December in Arnos Vale cemetery, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 13357


Elizabeth Hippisley (fl. 1742-1769) first took to the stage as Angelina in Colley Cibber's 'Love Makes a Man' on 25 January 1742 at Giffard's playhouse in Goodman's Fields. In her first season she adopted the role of Rose in Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer', which she was to play numerous times in her career. She established herself at Lincoln's Inn Fields and Covent Garden and spent summer seasons performing at her father's theatre in Bristol. In the 1750s and 1760s she played numerous secondary roles at Drury Lane, her last recorded appearance being on 8 April 1769 as Myrtilla in Cibber's 'The Provoked Husband'. As Mrs Fitzmaurice, she apparently played in York and Bath, though she ended her career as a dresser in Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 13358


Jane Hippisley (1719-1791) made her first appearance at her father's benefit at Covent Garden on 18 March 1735 as Cherry in Farquhar's 'The Stratagem'. She had considerable success in her stage career, and played Ophelia to Garrick's Hamlet in his first season at Goodman's Fields, Kitty Pry in Garrick's 'The Lying Valet', and Biddy in his 'Miss in her Teens'. She was said to have had a liaison with Garrick in 1746-7, and it is possible that she called herself Mrs Green after 1747 to cover the birth of a child: Samuel Cautherley was rumoured to be the product of her relationship with Garrick, but neither parent can be confirmed. Mrs Green performed in Dublin in 1751-2, was the first Mrs Hardcastle in Oliver Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer' (1773), and was the first Mrs Malaprop in 1775. She acted in Garrick's 'The Irish Widow' in Bristol as late as 4 July 1781. She made her last appearance on the London stage, as Mrs Hardcastle, on 26 May 1780 and died in her house at Jacob's Wells, Bristol, in the winter of 1791. Hippisley's son, John Hippisley, began his career as a child actor, but is better remembered as a writer on African economics. 


@@@@@


doc= 13359


Hippisley, John (1696-1748), actor and theatre manager, was born on 14 January 1696 near Wookey Hole in Somerset. He made his theatrical debut as Fondlewife in William Congreve's 'The Old Bachelor' at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 7 November 1722. Although he was then billed as having appeared on the stage previously, there is no account of his having done so elsewhere. Later in the same season he played Scrub in George Farquhar's 'The Stratagem', Sir Hugh Evans in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', Gomez in John Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar', and various other comic parts, including Polonius and Pandarus, and these certainly indicate that he may have had some experience in such roles. He remained with John Rich at Lincoln's Inn Fields until the 1732-3 season, when he began working at Covent Garden, first appearing there on the theatre's opening night, 6 December 1732, as Sir Wilful Witwould in Congreve's 'The Way of the World'. Over the previous decade his repertory of characters had grown impressively and now included Scapin in Thomas Otway's 'The Cheats of Scapin', Sir Francis Gripe in Susannah Centlivre's 'The Busy Body', Barnaby Brittle in Thomas Betterton's 'The Amorous Widow', Sir William Wisewood in Colley Cibber's 'Love's Last Shift', Scruple in Charles Shadwell's 'The Fair Quaker', and Sancho in Aphra Behn's 'The Rover'. 
Hippisley was popular for his portrayal of fools and scoundrels, for his provincial accents, and for his portrayal of female roles. He was equally renowned for his comic presentation of the aged -- Corbaccio in Ben Jonson's 'Volpone' being a notable success. For his benefit on 3 May 1723 he played Pandarus in 'Troilus and Cressida' and for that of 23 April 1731 he took the part of the Welshman David Shenkin in his own farce 'The Journey to Bristol, or, The Honest Welshman'. This production may well have first been presented the previous year at Bristol, where Hippisley had built a playhouse. 
Hippisley's connection with Bristol had begun in 1728, when he travelled there to perform his play 'The English Thief, or, The Welsh Lawyer' on 14 August. Towards the end of that year he leased land adjacent to the Horse and Groom in Jacob's Wells, where the city's first permanent theatre was later erected; it opened on 23 June 1729 with Congreve's 'Love for Love'. The building was only modest in size and required actors exiting on one side of the stage to walk round the exterior of the building if they had then to enter from the other wing. The first decade of his management incurred great debts, however, and by 1736 Hippisley had to mortgage his Covent Garden salary in order to sustain the venture. Between 1741 and 1747 he regularly occupied the theatre over the summer seasons, and he performed a series of roles there, including Scapin, Permain, Day in Sir Robert Howard's 'The Committee', and Dogberry in 'Much Ado about Nothing'. In November 1747 he proposed to build a larger playhouse in Bath, though he did not live to see the project completed. Despite commitments in the west country, Hippisley also managed to participate in the summer fairs, and appeared on 22 August 1730 at Bartholomew fair. In July 1731 he played with the Richmond troupe to offer a collection of performances and in August he joined in the co-management of a booth at Bartholomew fair, where he performed Shallow in 'The Emperor of China'; the production transferred to Southwark fair that September. 
From 1732 until his death Hippisley remained at Covent Garden. New parts performed over the years included Shallow in '2 Henry IV', Scaramouch in Behn's 'The Emperor of the Moon', Phaeax in Dryden's version of 'The Tempest', Muckworm in Henry Carey's 'The Honest Yorkshireman', Ananias in Jonson's 'The Alchemist', Clown in 'The Winter's Tale', Drudge in the pantomime 'Orpheus and Eurydice', and Gardiner in 'King Henry VIII'. On 17 January 1747 he was also the original Sir Simon Loveit in Garrick's 'Miss in her Teens'. 
In the epilogue to his own work 'Journey to Bristol', Hippisley declared that 'his ugly face is farce', and according to Samuel Foote in 'Roman and English Comedy' 'the left corner of his Mouth, and the Extremity of his Chin, became very near Neighbours' (Foote, 33). This was the result of a burn sustained as a youth, and Hippisley fully exploited his unconventional appearance for its on-stage comic potential. Davies refers to him as a 'comedian of lively humour and droll pleasantry' ('Life of Garrick', 1.356), and informs us that, although it was customary to compare his performances negatively with those of Benjamin Johnson, Hippisley's Corbaccio was considered the superior of the two. His Fondlewife matched Cibber's own portrayal of the character and his performance of Fumble in Thomas D'Urfey's 'Plotting Sisters' was considered to have saved the play. 
Hippisley was not a prolific dramatist. After the apparently unpublished 'The English Thief' (1728) he adapted Thomas Doggett's 'Hob, or, The Country Wake' as the ballad opera 'Flora', performed and published in 1729. His other two ballad operas, 'Journey to Bristol' and 'A Sequel to the Opera of Flora', were published in 1731 and 1732 respectively. His monologue 'The Drunken Man', published posthumously in 1776, remained popular with public and performers for the remainder of the century. 
Hippisley died in Bristol on 12 February 1748, having been ill for several months, and was even reported as dead in October 1747 (provoking a witty denial in response from the actor). He had drawn up a will on 1 February in which he had properly provided for his partner, Mary Charley, and two of his children (Elizabeth Hippisley ['see below'] was left out of the testament) as well as for his legal wife, Elizabeth. It is not known when he married and separated from his wife, nor whether he had more than three children. The Hippisley family's association with the theatre and circus continued into the twentieth century. 
The three of Hippisley's children of whom something is known all appeared on the stage. 




@@@@@


doc= 13360


Hippisley, John (bap. 1729, d. 1766), writer on trade and administrator in west Africa, was baptized on 21 June 1729 at St Andrew's, Holborn, London, the son of John Hippisley (1696-1748), an actor and theatre manager, and his partner, Mary Charley. Little is known of his early life and education. He played Tom Thumb in Henry Fielding's 'Tragedy of Tragedies' at Covent Garden in 1740 but otherwise seems not to have followed the theatrical life of his father and two sisters, Elizabeth Hippisley (fl. 1742-1769) and Jane Hippisley (1719-1791) ['see under 'Hippisley, John (1696-1748)]. His later writing indicates an education that complemented an above-average intellect. 
By the mid-century, probably through his family's Bristol connections, he was in the employ of the Committee of Merchants Trading with Africa, which had taken over the functions of the chartered Royal African Company in 1750. The committee was responsible for the forts in west Africa which (with the help of the Royal Navy) protected British interests in the slave trade. Its officers were few in number, mainly stationed in forts on the Gold Coast, and these Hippisley joined in a junior capacity at a salary of $80 a year. The committee employed men of good education, from the middle class, and with respectable connections. Promotion was rapid, largely because of high mortality, and in 1751 he was in charge of the fort at Succondee. His record was not without blemish and in the following year he was reported for a misdemeanour and warned that he might be dismissed for further misconduct. He later served in Tantumquerry, Anamaboe and Winneba, but in mid-1760 he left the service, possibly dismissed for the sale of slaves, in which officers of the committee were forbidden to participate. 
The next four years Hippisley probably spent as a merchant in Bristol, for he described himself as such in his will of 1764, though his name does not appear in the records of the city's Society of Merchant Venturers. Certainly he spent time preparing a slim volume of 'Essays' which appeared in 1764, one among many publications in the eighteenth century on various matters relating to the slave trade. The first essay, 'On the populousness of Africa', is the most interesting and original, and one of the earliest extant discussions of this theme. It defended the need for the slave trade and the capacity of Africa to continue to supply this need, but it was no crude defence and displayed a level of knowledge and understanding of contemporary thinking, for example in references to Montesquieu's 'Esprit des lois' and to certain medical matters. Hippisley was certainly influenced by the Enlightenment and, notwithstanding his activities, displayed a remarkable degree of humanity. The other essays are more polemical and less well written. 'On the trade at the forts on the Gold Coast' argued that officers of the committee should be permitted to participate in the trade in slaves, and probably reflected his experience of dismissal from the service. 'On the necessity of erecting a fort at Cape Appolonia' stressed the need for further protection of English interests against the Dutch and the French. The 'Essays' have been frequently referred to by historians but remain to be examined in detail. 
How he came to regain favour with the Committee of Merchants is not known, but in his will he stated that he was 'bound for the coast of Africa'. His preferment was rapid and in March 1766 he became governor of Cape Coast Castle, the senior appointment on the Gold Coast, but his time in office was brief and he died there in August the same year. His death was recorded by Philip Quaque, then chaplain at the castle, in a letter dated 28 September, thus correcting a later announcement in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' that it took place in January 1767. Hippisley, he wrote, 'proved to us in all points a worthy friend... very humane and hospitable... a great observant of the public worship of Almighty God' (Priestley, 113-14). Even with allowance for some overstatement (and Quaque was later suspended) these words match a view of Hippisley to be gained from his writing. 
His estate, of which there are no details, went to his wife, Mary, whom he married in Bristol in 1764 and with whom he had a son. However, the Cape Coast Castle chaplain recorded that he christened in June 1766 a son of Hippisley, then twelve, borne presumably by his west African 'wench', as was common among Europeans on the Gold Coast at the time. Both sons carried their father's name. 


@@@@@


doc= 13361


Hippisley, Sir John Coxe, first baronet (1745/6-1825), politician, was born in Bristol and baptized (a little belatedly) John Cox Hipsley at Christchurch, Bristol, on 17 February 1747. He was the elder and only surviving son of William Hipsley ('bap'. 1718, died 1800), haberdasher, and his wife, Anne (died 1776), daughter of Robert Webb of Cromhall, Gloucestershire. He was educated at Bristol grammar school and Hertford College, Oxford, whence he matriculated in 1764. He proceeded to the Inner Temple in 1766 and was called to the bar in 1771; he later held the offices of master of the bench (1803), reader (1812), and treasurer (1813-14). He was awarded an honorary DCL from Oxford in 1776, and MA from Cambridge in 1811. 
An ambitious barrister, Hippisley became the lover of the Countess Percy, with the hope of becoming Lord Bute's son-in-law. When she eventually left him he pursued her ineffectively to Germany, whence, in dire straits, he hitched a ride to Rome in 1779. There he acted as 'cicerone' to visiting grandees, but also sent confidential information to the government. He married in Rome on 1 February 1780 his first wife, Margaret (1754/5-1799), second daughter of Sir John Stewart, third baronet (died 1796), of Allanbank, Berwickshire, and Margaret Agnes Smith (died 1807). They had three daughters and one son. He returned home in 1781, but soon departed to Madras to take up a position in the East India Company that had been secured for him through the influence of Lord Bute, and of William Windham, whom he had met in Rome. He served as company writer (1782), factor (1783), and paymaster at Tanjore (1786-7) and returned to England in 1789 with a fortune of over $100,000, having bought up company bills at discount. He now aspired to parliament and, assisted by Windham, he became recorder (1789), then member (1790) for Sudbury. The election contest cost $6000: ironically he had rejected Bristol to avoid expense. In the 1790s he bought a country estate at Warfield Grove in Berkshire. 
In parliament Hippisley acted as an opposition spokesman on India but illness forced him to relinquish this role to others in February 1791. On his recovery in April he denounced belligerent expansion, and pressed for payment of arrears to the native army, which was secured in June. In 1792 his complaints about Cornwallis's wartime recruitment of native allies stung the viceroy into characterizing Hippisley's fortune as ill-gotten. His bronchitis prevented his voice being heard at Westminster from 5 April 1792, but he none the less distanced himself from his more radical whig colleagues by instigating a Sudbury address against sedition, and urging government to prosecute radical publications. He returned to Rome in the hope of restoring his health, stopping 'en route' at Paris for Louis XVI's trial in December 1792. His enthusiasm for Pope Pius VI's projected Holy Alliance against France spurred him to bring about Cardinal Erskine's mission to London, and to pester friends at home for official recognition of his role in 1793. He purveyed supplies for the British fleet from the Romagna and, following Windham into supporting Pitt's administration, he proceeded to lobby the new government. In August 1794 he petitioned for a baronetcy. He returned home the following summer endowed with the Roman senate's insignia, and reappeared at Westminster on 3 December to support anti-radical measures. Despite his efforts to secure new Italian markets for the depressed Sudbury wool trade, his prolonged absence from his constituency counted against him, and his erstwhile patron, Sir James Marriott, stood himself as a candidate and so, facing a contest at the approaching election, Hippisley withdrew. He received his baronetcy, through the duke of Portland's influence, on 30 April 1796. 
Hippisley next busied himself by successfully negotiating the princess royal's marriage to the duke of Wurttemberg's heir, which attracted the king's notice. In 1799 he espoused the cause of Henry, Cardinal York, last of the royal Stuarts, and procured him a pension from George III. In 1800 he was sheriff of Berkshire, and was later vice-president of the West of England Agricultural Society. He was a founder member of the Royal Institution, a fellow of the Royal Society and of the Society of Antiquaries, and vice-president of the Literary Fund. He also promoted literary institutions in Bristol and Bath. As a governor of the Levantine Company he warned government about Napoleon's designs on India. In September 1799 his wife had died and he married, on 16 February 1801, Elizabeth Anne (1762/3-1843), widow of Henry Hippisley Coxe MP, of Ston Easton, and only daughter of Thomas Horner of Mells Park and Elizabeth Paget. They had no children. Through his marriage he acquired enough property to consider standing for Somerset. A vacancy at Sudbury, however, obviated this and he was elected unopposed at his old constituency in 1802. 
Although Hippisley joined Windham in opposition in 1804 he was neither reliable nor loquacious, except in championing the Irish petition for Catholic relief in 1805. He had first championed the Irish Catholic cause in 1799-1800, which earned him the gratitude of the Irish Roman Catholic hierarchy, and led him to petition for an Irish peerage. In 1806 he published his plan for Catholic relief in his 'Observations on the Roman Catholics of Ireland', which was followed by 'Additional Observations' (1806), and, until 1818, by a stream of speeches and correspondence on the question. Windham, in office under Grenville in 1806, could not achieve Hippisley's wish for an Irish peerage although Hippisley's annual income was then $8000. Hippisley failed in his attempt to win office as governor of the Cape, as privy councillor, as a member of the Board of Trade, or even any appointment in India under the new viceroy, Lord Minto, in 1807. His only real gesture of support was his vote against Grenville's dismissal on the Catholic question on 9 April 1807. He afterwards voted with the opposition spasmodically. His annual speeches in favour of Irish Catholic relief were overlong and overelaborate; fearing popular prejudice he insisted on securities to guard against interference from Rome and to ensure a royal veto on Irish episcopal appointments. The whigs' failure to regain office dashed his hopes of entering the privy council and, after his re-election in 1812, a party agent advised Lord Grey that he surrender his seat, since Catholic relief monopolized his attention. On 11 May 1813 he exasperated its supporters by trying to halt the 'Catholic Relief Bill' and substitute a committee on securities; he abstained at the division on 24 May, when the bill was defeated. Thereafter he obstructed all measures for Catholic relief that were not on his exact terms, which greatly perturbed Catholic opinion. In 1816 and 1817 he voted against Grattan's motions for Catholic relief on the grounds that there should be scrutiny of securities that existed elsewhere in Europe, a matter on which he claimed expertise. He deserted the opposition more generally, for example he supported the government's proposed penalties against seditious meetings on 10 March 1817. 
Weary of politics, and having failed to persuade the regent to send him as emissary to Wurttemberg, Hippisley returned to Rome in 1818, whence he sent his dimittis to Sudbury before the 1818 election. In his final years he turned to the question of prison discipline, and publicly advocated the handcrank instead of the treadmill in a pamphlet of 1823; he was also an active magistrate in Somerset. He died in Grosvenor Street, London, on 3 May 1825 in his eightieth year and was buried in the crypt of the Inner Temple Church on 12 May. Monuments were erected to him in both Ston Easton and Inner Temple churches. He was survived by his wife and was succeeded by his son, John. Hippisley's unflagging, though wholly unsuccessful, quest for office led Joseph Jekyll to describe him in 1811 as 'Sir John Coxe Hippisley MP FRS SAS XYZ etc.' (Stokes and Thorne, 206). 


@@@@@


doc= 13362


Gruffudd Hiraethog (d. 1564), poet and herald, was born in Llangollen, the son of Mathew, the son of Mawd y Glyn and Owain Cyfeiliog. He married Catrin, the daughter of Edward ap Robert ab Ieuan ab Owain Glyndwr. The warrant granted to Gruffudd in 1545/1546 on graduating as 'disgybl pencerddaidd' (senior pupil) has survived, and in it Lewis Morgannwg is named as his teacher. Later on he graduated as 'pencerdd', and became 'athro' (teacher) for the three bardic provinces of Aberffraw, Dinefwr, and Mathrafal. As herald he was deputy over Wales under Garter, Norroy, and Clarenceux, the first known holder of the office. A copy of the instructions issued to him by the College of Arms is extant. Among his pupils were the notable Cywyddwyr (strict-metre poets) Lewis ab Edward, 'Sir' Owain ap Gwilym, Owain Gwynedd, Sion Phylip, Sion Tudur, Wiliam Cynwal, and Wiliam Llyn, and on account of this alone he would have secured himself a significant place in the history of bardism in Wales. 
Of Gruffudd Hiraethog's poems, 125 compositions in the form of 'awdlau' (10) and 'cywyddau' (115) have been preserved in manuscripts, as well as 'englynion' (stanzas). They are typical of the strict-metre poetry of 1300-1650, and consist of eulogies, elegies, satires, and begging and debate poems. They are well crafted, as expected, but for the most part are not particularly memorable. Their period is 'c'.1535-1564, and in the main they celebrate the generosity of patrons throughout north Wales. Only two poems to patrons living in south Wales have survived. 
Gruffudd accomplished immense work as a genealogist and herald, and his collections contain material for both north and south Wales, and beyond. He was a careful and discerning chronicler, and his contributions in these fields are well regarded. 
The miscellany consisting of proverbs, prose, and poetry compiled by Gruffudd Hiraethog to entertain expatriate Welshmen and to preserve the language in their midst is known as 'Lloegr drigiant ddifyrrwch Brytanaidd Gymro' ('Entertainment for the Britannic Welshman residing in England'), and is deserving of special notice. The work was dedicated to Rhisiart Mostyn of Bodysgallen (near Llandudno), himself living in exile at the time. It was never published, and perhaps was only meant to be circulated in manuscript copies. 
Gruffudd is also significant on account of his friendship with the great Renaissance scholar William Salesbury. Among the first books printed in Welsh was Salesbury's 'Oll synnwyr pen Kembero ygyd' (1547), a collection of proverbs copied from one of Hiraethog's manuscripts, and in the preface he pays a generous tribute to the poet's achievements to date. Salesbury's 'Llyfr rhetoreg' (1552) ('Book of rhetoric') is dedicated to Gruffudd Hiraethog 'and others of his craft'. This work was not intended for publication, but rather to acquaint the Welsh poets with the art of rhetoric. Here he refers to Gruffudd as 'my chief companion in such matters'. 
Gruffudd died in Llangollen in May 1564, and was buried there. The elegy for him by his pupil William Llyn is deservedly well known. 


@@@@@


doc= 13363


Hirschell, Solomon (1762-1842), chief rabbi, was born in London on 12 February 1762 (not 1761 as often cited). He was the third and youngest son (there were also three daughters) of Polish-born Hirsch Lewin (1721-1800), who as rabbi of the Great Synagogue, Duke's Place, London, from 1754 to 1764 was generally known as Hart Lyon, and his wife, Golda (died 1794), daughter of David Tevele Cohen, a leader of the Jewish community of Glogau, Silesia. On his father's side Solomon Hirschell (as he spelled his name, which also appears as Hirschel or Herschell) came of a long line of continental rabbis, some extremely eminent. In early life he was known as Solomon Hart. His formative years were spent in the German states, for in 1764 his father became rabbi of Halberstadt, accepting a call to Mannheim in 1770 and in 1773 to Berlin. Sent to Poland for a traditional Jewish education, and becoming an able Talmudic scholar, Solomon Hirschell toyed with the idea of becoming a wine merchant before embarking on a rabbinic career and taking up a position at Prenzlau, Prussia. In 1791 he offered himself for the vacancy at the Great Synagogue occasioned by the death of his father's successor there, Rabbi David Tevele Schiff, but for economic reasons the congregation made no appointment until 1802, when Hirschell was comfortably elected to the post from a shortlist of three. His British birth helped his case, yet he never mastered the English language, relying on certain congregants when he needed to communicate with the secular authorities. His habitual vehicle was Yiddish. A few of his sermons, notably one giving thanks for the British victory at Trafalgar, were translated into English and appeared in print. 
Hirschell married, about 1778, a distant cousin, Rebecca Konigsberger (died 1832). The couple had four sons, David Tevele, Saul, Ephraim, and Hirsch, and four daughters, Golda, Rosa, Feiga (known as Fanny), and Shayndel (known as Jeanette). Apparently despairing of the comparatively lax Jewish observance in London, he sent his children to live in Poland as soon as they reached marriageable age, and consequently left no descendants in Britain. Two of his sons eventually settled in Jerusalem, where the eldest, Rabbi David Tevele Hirschell (or Berliner), was murdered in 1851. 
By the time of Hirschell's appointment the Ashkenazi Jews of Britain significantly outnumbered their Sephardi counterparts, and their three synagogues in London had begun to co-operate with each other on such matters as charitable relief. This trend led to Hirschell, as rabbi of the senior and largest Ashkenazi congregation, being regarded as their natural spokesman, and his authority steadily increased in range. All queries regarding Jewish law and procedure, from Ashkenazi congregations and individuals in Britain as well as in the colonies, came to be directed to him, and he thus became the first chief rabbi of the British empire. He was widely dubbed, in the general press, the 'high priest' of Anglo-Jewry. The designation Doctor, which was used by him from the outset of his career in Britain, was an honorific, presumably adopted to enhance the dignity of his office. 
Hirschell's incumbency coincided with several noteworthy developments. There was an upsurge in millenarianism and consequently in missionary activity, with Hirschell vigorously condemning the activities of the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews, founded in 1809. There was, too, a burgeoning genuine philosemitism on the part of influential Britons; a highlight of Hirschell's ministry was a visit to a service at the Great Synagogue that same year by three pro-Jewish sons of George III. In 1827 the Post Office demonstrated its goodwill by quite extraordinarily waiving all postage due on unstamped letters to impecunious Jews in England from friends and relatives in Russia and Poland which were arriving care of Hirschell in ever-increasing numbers and whose cost he would otherwise have continued to bear. The closing years of his life were marked by failing health and by crisis and controversy, such as the trumped-up ritual murder accusation against Damascus Jewry in 1840, about which he issued a public statement, and the formation that same year of a Reform congregation in London, which aggravated him and made him weary of the rabbinate. As a single-minded, inflexible rabbi of the old eastern European type, he could not accommodate demands for change and found himself out of his depth; his successor in office was the moderate and sophisticated Nathan Marcus Adler, who had enjoyed a secular university education. 
In 1840 Hirschell fell and broke his thigh, a mishap which sapped his spirit. Two years later he fell again, breaking his collarbone. He died shortly afterwards, on 31 October 1842, at his long-time residence, 5 Bury Court, St Mary Axe, in the City of London. He was buried on 2 November at Mile End, many non-Jewish as well as Jewish shops in the area closing as a mark of respect. A frugal lifestyle and prudent investments enabled him to leave $14,000 in addition to a library of Hebraica, which was acquired by the London Bet Hamidrash ('house of study'), and a Judaica collection which was auctioned. In accordance with his wishes, his personal papers were destroyed at his death. 
Hirschell penned no significant writings and made no pastoral visits to congregations outside London except Portsmouth's. Yet he had loyal admirers both within and without the Jewish community; the latter included the eminent Dublin Hebraist James Henthorn Dodd (1805-1869) and Henry Hawkes, a staunchly philosemitic Unitarian minister in Portsmouth, both of whom paid public tribute to Hirschell on his death. Hawkes's address was subsequently published as a pamphlet advocating Jewish emancipation. A medal in Hirschell's memory, bearing his likeness on one side, was commissioned in 1844 from City of London jeweller Henry Hyams; forty were struck, symbolizing the number of years he held office. 


@@@@@


doc= 13364


Hirst, Thomas Archer (1830-1892), mathematician, was born on 22 April 1830 in Heckmondwike, West Riding of Yorkshire, the youngest son of Thomas Hirst (1797-1842), wool-stapler, and his wife, Hannah, daughter of John Oates, wool merchant and shipowner. In 1828 his father retired from business and moved to Wakefield to educate his three surviving sons, and in 1840 Hirst entered the West Riding proprietary school where 'Mathematics was my favourite study' (Hirst, 799). In 1845 he was articled for five years to an engineering surveyor in Halifax, surveying for the West Yorkshire Railway, and meeting and working with John Tyndall, a close friend whom he greatly admired and who would have a major influence on his life. 
On arriving in Halifax, Hirst began to record his experiences in a journal, which became a major chronicle of scientific life in the Victorian era. Covering over forty-five years and amounting to almost two million words, his diaries describe with clarity and perceptiveness the scientific circles in which he lived and the people he met -- both in England and on the continent. Inspired by Tyndall, he embarked on a programme of self-improvement, enrolling at the Halifax Mechanics' Institute and reading widely in literature and the sciences. Meanwhile, in 1848, Tyndall had left Halifax with Edward Frankland to study for a doctorate in Marburg, Germany. Hirst visited them, and on completing his apprenticeship in 1850 returned there to study chemistry with Robert Bunsen, physics with Christian Gerling, and mathematics with Friedrich Stegmann. He was particularly interested in geometry, which became a lifelong passion, and within two years wrote a PhD dissertation on conjugate diameters of the triaxial ellipsoid. 
With the successful completion of his dissertation in July 1852, Hirst decided to travel, first to Gottingen, where he conducted magnetic experiments with Wilhelm Weber and met Carl Friedrich Gauss, and then to Berlin, where he spent the winter semester attending the lectures of Lejeune Dirichlet, the analyst and number theorist, and the geometer Jakob Steiner. On returning to England in mid-1853 he secured a teaching job at Queenwood College in Hampshire, where practical work was encouraged, and he presented geometry in the context of surveying, rather than through rote learning of Euclid's 'Elements'. Whenever he could he visited London to see Tyndall and attend the lectures of Michael Faraday and others at the Royal Institution. 
In Marburg, Hirst had struck up an acquaintance with Anna Martin, the sister of the Irish naturalist John Martin (1812-1875), and he married her on 28 December 1854. Shortly after their wedding Anna began to exhibit signs of advancing tuberculosis. Hirst gave up his post to look after her, and they visited the spas of southern France vainly seeking a cure. In July 1857 Anna died. Hirst never fully recovered from the tragedy of her death, and did not marry again. He decided to devote his life to research rather than returning to teaching, and settled in Paris where he befriended some of the foremost French mathematicians of the day -- Michel Chasles, Joseph Liouville, and Louis Poinsot. He read widely, translated many mathematical and scientific works into English, and investigated problems in geometry. In August 1858 he left for Italy to work with mathematicians in Rome, Naples, and Milan. He was able to live on his own resources, having inherited a substantial sum from his mother in 1849. In mid-1859 he returned to England, obtaining lodgings near Tyndall, who introduced him to the London scientific scene. He became acquainted with the mathematicians James Joseph Sylvester and Arthur Cayley, and attended lectures by Thomas Huxley and others. From 1860 to 1864 he taught mathematics at University College School. 
Hirst quickly became a key figure in the London scientific establishment. In April 1861 he became a fellow of the Royal Society, and he was elected to its council in November 1864. He was a founder member of the X Club, a group that met monthly to debate the scientific issues of the day, untrammelled by religious dogmas; this club was to influence the organization and image of English science for the next twenty years. He was active in the formation of the London Mathematical Society in 1865, becoming its first vice-president and later (in 1872-4) its president. In 1866 he was admitted a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, and became general secretary of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, an onerous post which he held for four years. Meanwhile, he continued to travel widely throughout Europe, meeting mathematicians and attending meetings. 
On 18 August 1865 Hirst was appointed professor of mathematical physics at University College, London, one of only seven physics professors in the country. Two years later he became professor of mathematics, replacing Augustus De Morgan who had resigned. However, his duties took up much time, and in 1870 he resigned his chair and became assistant registrar in the University of London in order to gain more time for his researches. One of his lasting contributions was to mathematics education. Long convinced that Euclid's 'Elements' should be supplanted as the main geometry textbook in English schools, he helped to establish the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching (later, the Mathematical Association), and was its first president, for eight years. 
In 1873 Hirst embarked on his final role when he became the first director of studies at the Royal Naval College in Greenwich. This position enabled him to stay in touch with the international mathematical community, entertaining such major figures as Felix Klein and Pafnuty Chebyshev. In 1878 he was elected to membership of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, and in 1883 the Royal Society awarded him its prestigious royal medal. He resigned his Greenwich post in 1883, due to ill health. As the 1880s continued, he increasingly withdrew from his various activities. In the winter of 1891-2 London was hit by one of the worst influenza epidemics of the century, and Hirst quickly succumbed. He died at his home, 7 Oxford and Cambridge Mansions, Marylebone, on 16 February 1892 and was buried in Highgate cemetery four days later. 
Hirst's geometrical researches are largely forgotten today. Although his twenty papers were published in major journals, his work on such topics as equally attracting surfaces, the inversion of curves, and the correlation of planes, quickly went out of fashion as mathematics developed in other directions. 


@@@@@


doc= 13365


Hirst, William (d. 1770?), astronomer, was the eldest son of William Hirst DD (died 1760), master of Hertford Free School, vicar of Bengeo, and rector of Sacomb, Hertfordshire. He was educated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, where he obtained his BA in 1750-51 as fifteenth junior optime and proceeded MA in 1754. He became a naval chaplain. In April 1754, being then resident at Hornsey, Middlesex, he sent the Royal Society an account of a fire-ball seen there, which led to his election as fellow on 20 February 1755. That year he sailed in the 'Hampton Court' (64 guns) to Lisbon after the earthquake, and made a drawing of the city in its ruins. In 1759 he was chaplain of the 'Lenox' (74 guns) and secretary to Rear-Admiral Samuel Cornish on the East India station, where he was present at the sieges of Pondicherry and Vellore. On 6 June 1761 he observed the transit of Venus across the sun at Government House, Madras, in company with the governor, afterwards Lord Pigot. 
In March 1762, Hirst left the Royal Navy and joined the East India Company, to be appointed chaplain to the factory of Calcutta by the favour of Henry Vansittart, then governor of Bengal, and in November of that year he sent to the Royal Society an account of a severe earthquake in Bengal and of two eclipses of the sun and moon observed at Calcutta. His astronomical observations were used in the compilation of Dunn's map of Bengal. Among the surveys taken home by Vansittart was a 'map of the River Samelpore, laid down by Mr Hirst' (BL OIOC, Orme MSS, 134). In December 1764 Hirst returned to England with Vansittart in HMS 'Medway'. On the voyage he took a view of the Cape of Good Hope, which was engraved in 1766 by Peter Charles Canot. At the invitation of the astronomer royal, Hirst observed the second transit of Venus on 3 June 1769 at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, with Vansittart recording the times for him. 
Hirst then took chambers in Fig Tree Court, Inner Temple, London. Though in comfortable circumstances, his old friendship induced him to accompany Vansittart, sent out as one of three commissioners by the East India Company in 1769 to investigate alleged corruption in company affairs in India. Hirst was chaplain to the commission, and his friend William Falconer was purser of the 'Aurora', the frigate in which they sailed. A Latin ode, 'Ad amicum navigaturum', addressed to Hirst on the occasion by James Kirkpatrick MD, was printed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (39, 1769, 550). The 'Aurora' sailed for Bengal from the Cape of Good Hope on 27 December 1769, but was never heard of again. Some of Hirst's letters to John Duncombe and William Fazakerley were printed in Duncombe's 'Letters by Several Eminent Persons Deceased' (Duncombe, 3.84, 94, 142, 154, 159). 


@@@@@


doc= 13366


Hislop, Stephen (1817-1863), missionary and geologist, was born at Duns, Berwickshire, on 8 September 1817, the youngest of the six children of Stephen Hislop, mason and an elder in the Relief church, and his wife, Margaret Thompson. Even as a boy he was a keen observer of nature and interested in geology, and after local schooling he went to Edinburgh University, in 1834. He then tutored for a year before beginning the study of divinity at Glasgow University. He returned to Edinburgh for the remainder of his course and was completing his preparations for the ministry when the Church of Scotland was split by the Disruption of 1843. He joined the Free Church and while waiting for his licence became secretary of the Ladies' Society for Female Education in India. In January 1844 Hislop volunteered as a missionary to the Foreign Missions Committee. On 16 July he married Erasma Hull, daughter of William Hull, plumber, of Olney, Buckinghamshire, and granddaughter of Erasmus Middleton. He was then ordained by the Free Presbytery of Edinburgh, in September, and he and his wife reached Bombay in December of the same year. During their time overseas they had three daughters and a son. 
The Free Church's main problem in India was that although it had secured the services of all its missionaries stationed there, it had lost a great deal of property. A substantial legacy was available for the establishment of a new mission at Nagpur, however, and Hislop was charged with its foundation. After a long and arduous journey, mostly on horseback, he arrived at Nagpur on 22 February 1845. Based at first at the British camp just outside the town he equipped himself for the task ahead by learning Marathi. In May 1846 he founded the school which eventually became Hislop College. In March 1847 he was joined by Robert Hunter, a man of similar interests but of very different character. The two men were particularly absorbed by the geology of central India. They collected fossils which they sent to the Geological Society of London and Hislop published a joint memoir in their own 'Quarterly Journal', as well as contributing to the 'Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society'. Hunter left India in 1855 but Hislop continued to pursue his interests; a greenish mineral which he discovered was called 'hislopite' after him. 
The aboriginal inhabitants of the region, the Gonds, were considered to be a promising and unprejudiced audience for missionary effort and Hislop also studied and preached in Gondi. The people were the subject of a paper to the British Association in 1859, and after Hislop's death his manuscript of 'Papers Relating to the Aboriginal Tribes of the Central Provinces' (1866) was prepared for publication by Sir Richard Temple. In 1850 Hislop acted as deputy in Madras for John Anderson, but he resisted attempts to abandon Nagpur as a mission station and make his attachment there permanent. He survived the upheaval of the Indian mutiny unscathed, having received a timely warning by which the Europeans in Nagpur were saved. He reluctantly returned home on two years' sick leave in 1858 and ministered for a while in the fishing community of Ferryden in Forfarshire, then in the grip of a religious revival. He returned to India at the end of 1860. 
Hislop's last years at Nagpur were his most influential. He had long objected to the presence of British officials at Hindu festivals and, once the area was annexed to British rule, he continued to criticize the civil administration through letters to the 'Friend of India'. After Temple became chief commissioner of the central provinces in 1862, the two men worked closely together and it was while they were on a joint tour of inspection that Hislop met his end. While returning to Bori from the study of some archaeological remains at Takalghat on 4 September 1863, in falling darkness Hislop's horse plunged into a swollen backwater and he was unseated and drowned. The turf clutched in his hands when he was found spoke of his desperate misfortune. Hislop had already cheated death several times, having survived a shipwreck, a bite from a mad dog, and a beating from a vengeful mob. He was buried in the Nagpur cemetery at Sitabaldi. Over $4000 was subscribed for the care of his family. 
Hislop was thought distinctively Scottish: tall, wiry, and rugged, with a 'full roundish face -- broader than common across the somewhat high cheek bones... prominent eyebrows, partially-sunk eyes, and deep lines slanting from the outer edges of the nostrils to the corners of the mouth' (Smith, 9); a contemporary described him as 'just fit for a missionary pioneer, a man full of bodily and mental energy, practical sense, and indomitable determination' (Mackenzie, 298). His words, which were few but weighty, were delivered slowly and earnestly; yet those who pierced his initial reserve found also the warmest friendship. The range of his scientific and scholarly interests was substantial, but it never interfered with his missionary ambitions. The fact that his efforts were cut short served only to emphasize the extent of his achievements. 


@@@@@


doc= 13367


Hislop, Sir Thomas, first baronet (1764-1843), army officer, was born on 5 July 1764, the third and youngest son of Lieutenant-Colonel William Hislop (died 1779), Royal Artillery. His two elder brothers were killed in India, James at the battle of Polillur in 1781, when aide-de-camp to Sir Eyre Coote, and William, captain Royal Artillery, at Cundapore in 1783. 
Hislop entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, on 31 March 1778, and on 28 December the same year was appointed ensign in the 39th (East Middlesex) foot, with which he served throughout the siege of Gibraltar (1779-83) and was promoted lieutenant on 28 January 1783. He became captain by purchase in the 100th foot on 28 January 1785, exchanged back to the 39th on 4 February 1785, and in December 1792 was appointed aide-de-camp to Major-General David Dundas, on whose staff he served in Ireland, at Toulon, and in the expedition to Corsica. He brought home the dispatches announcing the capture, on 19 February 1794, of San Fiorenzo, for which he was promoted major on 16 August 1794. In May the same year he was appointed aide-de-camp to Lord Amherst, then commander-in-chief. He was employed by the prince of Wales on a special mission in Germany, and on his return was appointed, on 25 March 1795, lieutenant-colonel of the 115th foot, from which he exchanged once more to the 39th on 1 September 1795. He accompanied the 39th to the West Indies, and commanded it at the capture of Demerara, Berbice, and Essequibo in 1796. He remained in military command of those settlements until their restoration to the Dutch at the peace of Amiens in May 1802. On 6 September 1798 he became lieutenant-colonel of the 11th West India regiment, which he raised. He was promoted colonel on 29 April 1802, joined the 8th West India regiment in 1803, and became lieutenant-governor of Trinidad. He joined the army under Sir George Beckwith at Martinique in 1809, and commanded the 1st division at the capture of Guadeloupe in 1810. He was promoted major-general on 25 October 1809. He left Trinidad in ill health in 1811. 
On 28 March 1812 Hislop was appointed commander-in-chief at Bombay with the local rank of lieutenant-general, and sailed in the frigate 'Java', which in December 1812 was captured by the United States frigate 'Constitution' off the coast of Brazil. Hislop, whose bravery was conspicuous during the action, was put on shore at San Salvador, and returned home. On 27 May 1813 he was appointed commander-in-chief at Madras (Fort St George). He was given the full rank of lieutenant-general on 4 June the same year, and on 2 November was created a baronet. He was made KCB in 1814. 
Hislop arrived at Madras late in 1814. During the Third Anglo-Maratha War, of 1817-18, he was commander-in-chief of the army of the Deccan. After a delay from illness he assumed the command at Hyderabad on 10 November 1817. At Mehidpur on 21 December, with a force of 5500 men, Hislop signally defeated the Maratha army of Indore, consisting of 30,000 light cavalry, 5000 infantry, and 100 guns, under the command of the youthful Malhar Rao Holkar. The surrender by the Marathas of certain border fortresses followed. The division under Hislop's personal command arrived before the fort of Talnar, the governor of which, after a parley, refused to obey the order to surrender. By Hislop's order he was hanged as a rebel, and the garrison of 300 men killed. When the chief objects of the campaign had been accomplished, the army of the Deccan was broken up at Aurangabad in March 1818, and Hislop returned to his command at Fort St George, which he held until 1820. He was made GCB in 1818. 
Explanations of Hislop's severities at Talnar had been called for by Lord Moira, the governor-general ['see 'Hastings, Francis Rawdon], and the home government; the House of Commons, in voting thanks to the army of the Deccan, specifically excepted Hislop in consequence. Wellington defended Hislop in the House of Lords on the ground of his previous high character. The explanations eventually sent home were never made public, and the subject dropped. Another controversy arose from the conflicting claims of the Bengal and Madras armies to the spoils known as the Deccan prize. The privy council, after hearing counsel, decided that the Bengal army under the marquess of Hastings, though at a great distance from the scene of capture, were co-operating by their presence in the field, and entitled to share equably with the troops under Hislop's command. Wellington remarked that the sole satisfaction he felt at the decision was that, had the sum thus put into the pockets of the army fallen to Sir Thomas Hislop, it would have vanished in Mexican bonds or Columbian securities, like Hislop's private fortune. 
In 1822 Hislop received an 'honourable augmentation' to his arms in recognition of his distinguished services in India. On 30 October 1823 he married Emma, daughter of the Rt Hon. Hugh Elliot, governor of Madras, and they had one daughter. He was appointed colonel of the 51st foot on 4 June 1822 and of the 48th foot on 25 December 1829, and served for many years as equerry to the duke of Cambridge. He died at Charlton, Kent, on 3 May 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 13368


Hitcham, Sir Robert (bap. 1573, d. 1636), barrister and politician, was born at Levington, Suffolk, the only son of Robert Hitcham, yeoman, of Nacton, Suffolk, and his wife, Joan Gillet; he was baptized at Nacton on 8 March 1573. After attending Ipswich's free grammar school he went on to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1587, and entered Gray's Inn, as from Barnard's Inn, in November 1589. Hitcham was called utter-barrister in 1595 at the reading of Richard Barker, a Cecil protege. The same connection probably underlies his return for West Looe in the parliament of 1597 and his appointment by September 1603 as Queen Anne's attorney-general. In June 1604 Hitcham was knighted and again returned to parliament, this time for the borough of King's Lynn. His colourful report to the Commons in March 1606 following a rumoured attempt on the king's life was almost immediately contradicted by other testimony, whereby 'Sir R [H]Itchams credit in the opinion of divers was much impaired' ('Diary of Robert Bowyer', 89). Neither this reverse nor his relatively infrequent subsequent contributions to debate curtailed Hitcham's parliamentary career. In 1614 he represented the borough of Cambridge, where he had been retained as fee'd counsellor since at least 1609-10, as he was also at Ipswich, while in the three parliaments from 1624 to 1626 he succeeded Sir Edward Coke as member for Orford, where he had earlier replaced Coke as recorder. His 1624 speech defending the legality of impositions aroused so much resentment that Sir Thomas Wentworth moved successfully for it to be struck from the clerk's record. 
Called ancient and permitted to sit at the Gray's Inn readers' table from January 1604 in respect of his royal office, Hitcham was chosen reader towards the end of the following year. The 1606 Lent readings at all four inns incurred the judges' displeasure, but Hitcham's bad example was particularly censured. His temporary suspension from commons for providing over-lavish entertainment and an abbreviated reading may have been a symbolic punishment, but cannot have enhanced his professional reputation. This perhaps explains why he was sarcastically termed 'a great learned man' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.541) on the news of his call as serjeant in 1614. Having given up his attorney-generalship, Hitcham's legal practice thereafter appears to have been confined largely to the court of common pleas and local East Anglian jurisdictions. Although promoted king's serjeant in 1616, he never rose above the rank of chief serjeant, except as a commissioned assize judge. His stalled career may have reflected a lack of effective patronage after Buckingham's rise to power; a 'writhen face and sneering look' (BL, Harley MS 6395, fol. 53) possibly also told against him, though his contemporary likeness displays no such traits. 
Yet if there were doubts about Hitcham's legal learning and professional morality, his overall ability was unquestionable. Indeed he was possibly no more anxious for promotion to the judicial bench than to end his jealously guarded bachelorhood. In material terms his career was outstandingly successful: 'not born to $200... not to $20 or $2' a year (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 2.319), his land purchases culminated with a payment of $14,000 for the earl of Suffolk's castle and manor of Framlingham. He died at Ipswich on 15 August 1636 and was buried at Framlingham. 
Hitcham's will made passing allusion to the 'glorious and incomprehensible Trinity' but only a cursory statement of personal faith (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/173, fol. 249'r'). Most of his fortune went to his old Cambridge college, on condition that it should erect and maintain almshouses and a school for the poor at Framlingham. The wording of this bequest occasioned disputes and litigation which continued into Charles II's reign. 


@@@@@


doc= 13369


Hitchcock, Richard (1825-1856), antiquary, was the son of Rodney Hitchcock (died 1853), a farmer, of Spring Vale, co. Cork, Ireland. He was born at Blennerville, near Tralee, co. Kerry, in March 1825. He spent much of his early life studying the antiquities of his native county, which he examined enthusiastically, writing accurate descriptions of them illustrated with his own minute drawings. His work soon brought him to the notice of Dr Charles Graves, later bishop of Limerick, Ardfert, and Aghadoe, who had him appointed an assistant librarian at Trinity College, Dublin. He made good use of his position as librarian and contributed many papers to the 'Journal of the Kilkenny and South-East of Ireland Archaeological Society'. These were invariably characterized by accuracy. Ogham writing was his favourite study; two manuscript volumes of his notes on ogham inscriptions are in the Royal Irish Academy. Hitchcock died at Roundwood, co. Wicklow, on 3 December 1856, leaving a widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 13370


Hitchcock, Robert (fl. 1573-1591), soldier and writer, described himself as a gentleman of Caverfield, Buckinghamshire, and the family is known to have had property in the county in the late fifteenth century. His right to Caverfield was disputed by two other claimants, but in March 1573 judgment was given in Star Chamber, apparently in his favour. Hitchcock's vocation was war. In the early 1580s, as England prepared for war with Spain, he was selected among the 'Marshall men & captaines... to be presently imployd' (BL, Lansdowne MS 113, fol. 148'r'), and other sources also testify to considerable experience. In 1586 he raised nearly 200 'voluntarie men' from Buckinghamshire for a company in Dutch service, though it was among several 'cassed' (disbanded) by the states general in spring 1587. Hitchcock received the last $145 owed him by the Dutch only on 29 June 1588, and since he collected the arrears due to three other English captains, he was probably liked and certainly trusted by his fellow officers. Between July and October 1587 he commanded a 150-strong band from Buckinghamshire in the royal army that unsuccessfully attempted to relieve Sluys. This was his last active service. 
Hitchcock was also a writer. His early works were on military strategy and circulated only in manuscript, though they attracted attention. John Foxe kept a copy of Hitchcock's 'A discourse for defence against the threatened invasion of the Holy League' (BL, Lansdowne MS 389, fols. 339'r'-350'v'), which Strype praised in his 'Annals of the Reformation'. Written in 1571, it was submitted to the queen in 1580; her grant to Hitchcock a year later of lands worth $133 6's'. 8died a year suggests she approved of it. In January 1581 Hitchcock published his first book, 'A politique platt for the honour of the prince, the greate profite of the publique states, reliefe of the poore, preservation of the rich, reformation of roges and idle persons, and the wealthe of thousands', with a preface by his brother Francis. It detailed a scheme for developing the Newfoundland herring fisheries that had come before parliament in 1576. Hitchcock had invited virtually all the MPs for seaport boroughs to a lavish dinner in an attempt to win their support. Thomas Digges, another soldier interested in technical matters, introduced the proposal into the Commons, but an early prorogation of parliament prevented further progress. In 1590 Hitchcock published 'The Quintessence of Wit', a translation from the Italian of a miscellany of Francisco Sansovino's work. Finally, in 1591 he published 'The Arte of Warre', written by William Garrard, another veteran of the Dutch wars, who had died in 1587. Hitchcock 'corrected, finished and published Garrard's MS' (Webb, 48), but appended an original work on logistics, 'A Generall Proportion and Order for Provision'. 
The soldier-writers in late sixteenth-century England formed a close circle. Robert Hitchcock, unlike Thomas Churchyard, Barnaby Rich, Barnaby Googe, Roger Williams, or George Gascoigne (all of whom he must have known), wrote neither prose narratives nor verse. Nor does he compare to them in literary quality: as he admitted, others wrote with 'pleasanter wordes and [more] sugred stile then I' ('A Politique Platt', preface). Nevertheless, he was a member, albeit a marginal one, of a group that was of great importance in the English literary renaissance. The date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 13371


Hitchcock, Robert (d. 1809), actor and playwright, was a member, with his wife, Sarah, of the company of the Theatre Royal, Norwich, from 1769 to 1771 when they both joined Tate Wilkinson's travelling company, based in York. Here they remained until 1777. Hitchcock's comedy 'The Macaroni' was produced in York in 1773, and at the Haymarket Theatre later that year. It was published first by subscription in York, and then in London, Belfast, Dublin, and Philadelphia. 'The Coquette, or, The Mistakes of the Heart', his adaptation for the stage of Eliza Haywood's novel 'The History of Miss Betsy Thoughtless', was first performed in Hull in 1775, and two years later was produced at the Haymarket Theatre and published in Bath. 
The Hitchcocks performed with their son Robert (then aged only eight or nine) in Bristol and Bath in the summer of 1776, and joined the company at the Haymarket the next year. Sarah Hitchcock performed a large number of roles here, but her husband appeared much less frequently on the stage, taking up duties as prompter. His son and his daughter Mary Anne also made debuts at the Haymarket in 1777, in Garrick's 'Lilliput'. Both she and her brother Robert would be actors in their youth, but later leave the stage: Robert became a member of the Irish bar; Mary Anne married a Dublin barrister, Jonas Greene. 
Hitchcock was the model for the character of the prompter in 'The Manager in Distress' (1780) by George Colman the elder, the manager of the Haymarket. In the winter seasons, Hitchcock and his wife continued to act for Wilkinson's York company. In 1781 the family moved to Dublin to work for Richard Daly at Smock Alley, Hitchcock as prompter, his wife and daughter as actresses. In 1788 Hitchcock published 'An Historical View of the Irish Stage; from the Earliest Period Down to 1788' (vol. 2 published 1794). In this year he moved with Daly to Crow Street, where he worked until his death, at 5 Clarendon Street, Dublin, in 1809 ('European Magazine', 54, 478). His wife continued to be a successful actress, and was still performing in 1810, but the date of her death is unknown. The Hitchcocks had at least seven children, the seventh, Sarah, being born in 1781. Hitchcock's character is described in Tate Wilkinson's memoir, 'The Wandering Patentee' (1795). 


@@@@@


doc= 13372


Fortescue Hitchins (1784-1814), born at St Hilary on 22 February 1784, became a solicitor at St Ives. He published a number of poems and other slight works, admired in their day, and compiled material for a history of Cornwall, which after his death was edited by Samuel Drew and published in 1824. He died at Marazion on 1 April 1814. 


