@@@@@


doc= 13373


Hitchins, Malachy (bap. 1741, d. 1809), astronomer, the son of Thomas Hitchins, was born at Little Trevince, Gwennap, Cornwall, where he was baptized on 18 May 1741. His mother was a sister of Thomas Martyn, the compiler of a map of Cornwall, and the missionary Henry Martyn (1781-1812) was his cousin. The topographical writer Richard Polwhele, a friend of Hitchins, says that he worked first as a miner, but went to Exeter to assist Benjamin Donn in the creation of his map of Devon, which was published in 1765. Hitchins had previously contributed mathematical replies to the 'Ladies' Diary' for 1761. In December 1762 he was residing at Bideford. On 10 October 1763 he matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford. Polwhele says that the expenses of his university education were met by his wife, Joanna Hawkin, whom he married on 10 January 1764 at Buckland Brewer, Devon. Hitchins did not, however, graduate BA until 27 February 1781; in 1785 he was incorporated at St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated MA in the same year. 
The first British 'Nautical Almanac' was that for the year 1767. It was edited by the astronomer royal, Nevil Maskelyne, who devised a 'cottage industry' system of computation whereby all important calculations were done twice, by two 'computers' working quite separately in their own homes; these two sent their results to Maskelyne at Greenwich, and he would forward them to the 'comparer' for checking the one against the other. Late in 1767 Hitchins was recommended to Maskelyne by Thomas Hornsby as a possible computer, which he became in 1768. In 1769 he became the comparer, a post he retained, working in Cornwall, until his death forty years later. 
From April to August 1769 Hitchins was at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, temporarily acting as Maskelyne's assistant in the place of William Bayly, who went to Norway in order to observe the transit of Venus on 3 June. Hitchins himself successfully observed the transit in the eastern summer house at Greenwich with the Revd William Hirst. While at Greenwich he entered holy orders, and after moving to Exeter was for a short time vicar of Hennock. On 6 November 1775 Bishop Keppel presented him to the vicarage of St Hilary, Cornwall, and on 23 May 1785 to that of Gwinear. Hitchins retained both livings until his death. 
In 1793 there occurred a crisis in the affairs of the computers of the 'Nautical Almanac' when the board of longitude decided that, because much improved astronomical tables were about to be produced in France, the 'Nautical Almanac' should in future be published five, rather than ten, years in advance. (That for 1804 was already published.) Hitchins petitioned the board: 'Having been employed for 26 years past by the Hon. Board of Longitude in computing and revising the 'Nautical Almanac'... he is sorry to find that he is now suddenly and unexpectedly to lose his Appointment for 7 or 8 years to come, and perhaps for ever. (CUL, RGO MS 14/22, fol. 221)' In the event, work was found for the computers, but their income was much reduced.Hitchins assisted Polwhele with his 'History of Cornwall', published between 1803 and 1808. He was a friend of Davies Gilbert, a fellow Cornishman who became president of the Royal Society. Hitchins died at St Hilary on 28 March 1809 and was buried in the church there. 
Hitchins and his wife had four sons. The eldest, Richard Hawkin Hitchins (1764-1827), was a fellow of Exeter College, Oxford, and rector of Baverstock in Wiltshire. The youngest, 


@@@@@


doc= 13374


Hoadly, Benjamin (1706-1757), physician and playwright, was born on 10 February 1706 in Broad Street, London, the elder surviving son of the Revd Benjamin Hoadly (1676-1761), who became bishop of Winchester, and his first wife, Sarah Curtis (1676?-1743) ['see 'Hoadly, Sarah]. His father was musical, and his mother a trained portrait painter. He was educated at Dr Newcome's academy, Hackney, Middlesex, and from 1722 at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. He read humanities and mathematics, and attended the lectures of the blind professor Nicholas Saunderson. He graduated MB in 1727, and MD in April 1728, having been elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1726. He was made registrar of Hereford by his father, who was bishop there from 1721 to 1723. 
Hoadly was married twice: first, on 6 November 1733 to Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Betts, of Suffolk; they had one son, Benjamin, who died young. On 4 June 1747 he married Ann, daughter of General Armstrong; they had no children. 
Settling in London, Hoadly was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1736 (censor, 1739); in 1737 he delivered uninteresting Goulstonian lectures on respiration, and in 1742 a commonplace Harveian oration, all of which were published. He was physician to St George's Hospital (1736-46); in 1736 he also became physician to the Westminster Hospital. In 1742 he became physician to the king's household, and in 1746 physician to the household of the prince of Wales. 
Hoadly was fond of the stage, as was his brother John Hoadly, and wrote a popular comedy, 'The Suspicious Husband', which was first acted at Covent Garden on 12 February 1747 and often repeated. There were at least twenty-four different printings and editions between 1747 and 1829. It is a comedy of lovers, muddles, escapes, ladders, and bedrooms, with a happy ending. Garrick wrote both the prologue and the epilogue, and acted the part of Ranger. Johnson said that Ranger was 'just a rake, and a mere rake, and a lively young fellow, but no 'character'' (Boswell, 'Life', quoted in 'Medical Bookman', 25). The play was dedicated to George II, who sent Hoadly $100. The plot and style were widely, though not universally, praised. Hoadly's father the bishop did not go. A satire by Charles Macklin, 'The Suspicious Husband Criticized, or, The Plague of Envy', was acted in March 1747, but was a failure and not printed. 
Hoadly wrote another comedy, 'The Tatlers', which was acted at Covent Garden on 29 April 1797, but was never printed, and also published 'Observations on a Series of Electrical Experiments' (1756) with Benjamin Wilson FRS. He died on 10 August 1757 at his house at Chelsea, which he had built ten years before. 


@@@@@


doc= 13375


Hoadly, Benjamin (1676-1761), bishop of Winchester, was born on 14 November 1676 at Westerham in Kent, the sixth of the nine children of the Revd Samuel Hoadly (1643-1705), schoolmaster at Westerham, and his second wife, Martha (1639-1703), the daughter of Benjamin Pickering. He came from a strongly puritan and clerical family. His paternal grandfather, John Hoadly, had emigrated to New England in Charles I's reign before returning to Scotland in the 1650s to become chaplain of Edinburgh Castle, while his maternal grandfather had been a member of the Westminster assembly. His uncle John was rector of Halsted, Kent, and his younger brother John Hoadly (1678-1746) also pursued a clerical career, rising to become archbishop of Armagh. 
In 1678 the family moved to Tottenham High Cross, Middlesex, and thence in 1686 to Brook House school in Hackney. Benjamin was educated at home by his father and acquired a reputation as an excellent musician. On 18 February 1692 he entered St Catharine's College, Cambridge, as a pensioner. It was at this time, according to his son, that he contracted smallpox and the intervention of an unskilful surgeon left him crippled ('Biographia Britannica', 99). For the rest of his life he used crutches to walk at home and sticks in public, kneeling on a stool in order to preach. He was indulged seven terms on account of his serious illness, before graduating BA in 1695 and MA in 1699. Hoadly was ordained deacon by Henry Compton, bishop of London, in December 1698 and priest on 22 December 1700, almost certainly on the title of the fellowship of St Catharine's, to which he had been elected in 1697. In 1699 he became tutor and praelector, but two years later he resigned his fellowship, probably on the occasion of his marriage, on 30 May 1701, to Sarah Curtis (1676?-1743), a portrait painter of some reputation who had trained under Mary Beale ['see 'Hoadly, Sarah]. Together they had five sons: Samuel ('b'. 1703), Benjamin Hoadly (1706-1757), John Hoadly (1711-1776), and two who were stillborn. 
In 1701 Hoadly was appointed to the lectureship of St Mildred Poultry, serving at the same time as curate to William Hodges at St Swithin's. His first published work was a sermon preached at St Swithin's on 2 September 1702, the anniversary of the great fire, warning in conventional providential language that London was once again threatened by the wrath of God. In the following year Hoadly identified himself much more clearly with whig and low-church opinions. First, in a sermon delivered on 30 January, he not only omitted any direct reference to the execution of Charles I but also implied his support for the comprehension of moderate dissenters within the Church of England by yielding 'Things of little Importance... for the sake of a greater Union' ('Works', 3.661). Then, in November, he wrote a tract defending the bishops who had voted against the 'Occasional Conformity Bill', arguing again for a comprehension and defending the practice of occasional conformity as a support of protestant unity. 
Between the publication of these two tracts Hoadly produced a far more substantial work, 'The Reasonableness of Conformity to the Church of England' (1703), an answer to the defence of dissenting separation by the eminent Presbyterian Edmund Calamy in his 'Abridgment' (1702) of Richard Baxter's 'History of his Life'. The ensuing controversy lasted until 1707 and included four further tracts from Hoadly, most notably 'A Persuasive to Lay-Conformity' (1704) and 'A Brief Defense of Episcopal Ordination' (1707). At first sight this pamphlet might appear to sit uneasily alongside the rest of Hoadly's 'oeuvre'; Archbishop Thomas Herring certainly found it hard to reconcile with his famous sermon on the kingdom of Christ. It condemned the dissenters' separation as leading unavoidably to 'Confusion and Disorder, Indecency in the Worship of God, Irregularity, Strife, and Emulation, Heat, and Passion, Ill-will, and Malice' ('Works', 1.264). Its arguments were powerful enough to be instrumental in convincing the leading New England high-churchman Samuel Johnson to abandon Congregationalism. 
In fact Hoadly's position was based on sound low-church principles. His tract was aimed at the moderate nonconformists, who supported the ideal of a national church, and he argued that it was 'unaccountable, and inconsistent, to 'separate' from an 'imperfect' Church, in order 'to press a farther Reformation'' ('Works', 1.262). He accepted that the constitution of the Church of England was imperfect and declared that he favoured some reform himself. Crucially, however, he provided a strong defence of the church on one of the major issues in dispute with the Presbyterians: the government of the church by bishops. He denied that episcopacy was 'jure divino' and thus ''essential' to a 'Christian Church''. However, he did argue that the practice was of apostolical origin, that it was supported by tradition, and that it was binding on the church unless ''Imitation' is unpracticable' (ibid., 477). Thus he refused to condemn the foreign reformed churches and, unlike most high-churchmen, he accepted the validity of Presbyterian ordination during the interregnum. 
In March 1704 Hoadly was appointed to the rectory of St Peter-le-Poer by the dean and chapter of St Paul's, apparently on the recommendation of the dean, William Sherlock, whose son Thomas had been Hoadly's contemporary at St Catharine's. In later life there was considerable rivalry between Hoadly and Thomas Sherlock, who were widely regarded as the leaders of rival parties in the church. At this time, however, there was no hint of any animosity, and William Sherlock had assisted Hoadly in the composition of his 'Letter to the Reverend Mr Fleetwood, Occasioned by his Late Essay on Miracles' (1702). In this pamphlet Hoadly took issue with Fleetwood's claim that only God could work miracles, but at the same time he strongly defended their importance as one among a number of the evidences of true religion, concluding that it was clear that Christ was sent from God because of the ''long uninterrupted Series of great Miracles'' that he performed ('Works', 1.14). Far from alienating Fleetwood, who was himself a rising star among whig low-churchmen, the 'Letter' secured his admiration, and his recommendation also played a part in Hoadly's preferment. 
As the new rector of St Peter-le-Poer one of Hoadly's first acts was to preach a sermon on 8 March, the anniversary of Queen Anne's accession. Published at the request of his parishioners, this was a rallying cry to the whigs directed against 'the Abuses of that Day' ('Works', 3.620). Praising the achievements of William III, he reminded his audience that Anne's title was dependent on the revolution settlement, as William's had been, and called on her subjects to 'pursue the Paths of Peace, and Union' and 'to entertain... a true Christian 'Moderation'' (ibid., 2.108). This sermon brought Hoadly to the attention of Sarah Churchill, duchess of Marlborough, who pressed the queen to give him a prebend at Canterbury. Her efforts were unsuccessful, foundering on the opposition of Archbishop John Sharp, Anne's ecclesiastical confidant, but the episode marked the beginning of a friendship that was to play a significant part in Hoadly's life. By the 1730s the two had fallen out and the duchess condemned Hoadly for ingratitude, but for many years he was an intimate in the Marlborough household, he was supported financially by the duchess, and he wrote an early version of her justification of her conduct during the reign of Queen Anne. Meanwhile he continued his defence of the revolution in a sermon preached before the lord mayor of London at St Lawrence Jewry on 29 September 1705. Selecting as his text 'Romans' 13: 1, a passage often used by high-churchmen to expound the duties of non-resistance and passive obedience, Hoadly glossed it in whig fashion, developing a doctrine of conditional obedience. While admitting that government was 'ordained of God', he argued that it was ordained for 'the Good of the Public'. Thus it would be 'the highest profaneness' to treat rulers who abused their power as the 'Vice-gerents' of God; 'a 'Passive Non-Resistance'' would be a greater sin than resistance (ibid., 20-21). 
The appearance of this sermon pushed Hoadly to the forefront of political debate. As he noted in 1754, it brought down upon him 'a Torrent of 'angry Zeal'' ('Works', 3.621). The lower house of convocation complained that it contained 'positions contrary to the doctrine of the church' and demanded synodical censure, and in the Lords Bishop Compton accused Hoadly of encouraging rebellion and resistance (Cardwell, 2.723). Hoadly's major contribution to the ensuing controversy was 'The Measures of Submission to the Civil Magistrate Considered' (1706), an extended defence of his sermon in which he argued that the doctrine of 'absolute 'Passive-Obedience'' ('Works', 2.93) was a recent innovation for which no justification could be found in scripture, the homilies, or the works of the most esteemed Anglican divines. While all high-churchmen were infuriated by these views the exchanges between Hoadly and Francis Atterbury developed into a more personal feud, spilling over into other issues. As the debate between the two continued through 1708, Hoadly seized on expressions dropped by Atterbury in a funeral sermon and a charity sermon to criticize his notions of virtue and morality, even accusing his adversary of arguing that vice was preferable to virtue. 
It was, however, the related issues of obedience and allegiance that lay at the heart of Hoadly's polemical endeavours in this period. He further developed his ideas in two assize sermons preached at Hertford in 1708, in which he attacked the scriptural foundations of divine-right theories by arguing that strict lineal succession had not even prevailed among the Israelites and that the behaviour of St Paul supported his case that oppression could be lawfully resisted. Equally controversially he stated unequivocally the view, not universally shared even among fellow whigs, that the crown and the two houses of parliament shared a co-ordinate power. In the following year Hoadly took on another prominent tory, Offspring Blackall, who had recently been promoted to the bishopric of Exeter and had preached a sermon on the anniversary of the queen's accession advancing an unequivocally high-tory interpretation of 'the divine institution of magistracy'. Hoadly attacked Blackall for abandoning his earlier, more moderate views, and in the course of two pamphlets he restated the twin argument that government was instituted for the good of the people and that civil authority was vested in the magistrate by their agreement. He concluded by pointing out that Blackall's doctrine of non-resistance led inevitably to Jacobitism. 
One of Hoadly's most effective adversaries was Charles Leslie, whose journal, 'The Rehearsal' (1704-9), was a vehicle for attacking Locke, Hoadly, and other whigs and for expounding high-flying notions of patriarchalism, non-resistance, and passive obedience. In the eyes of the whigs Leslie was the more dangerous because, as a nonjuror, he was freed from the need to reconcile high-church principles with the events of 1688-9. Consequently when he published 'The Constitution, Laws and Government of England, Vindicated' (1709), itself a contribution to the controversy between Hoadly and Blackall, it was inevitable that it would provoke an answer from Hoadly. Thus when his 'Original and Institution of Civil Government' appeared in December 1709 it was first and foremost a polemical response to Leslie. But, as Frederic Ward points out, it was also 'the most extensive political treatise published in this period' (Ward, 90), an important contribution to whig thought that was crucial in reintroducing Lockean political theory to the debates of the early eighteenth century. There were important differences between the 'Original and Institution' and Locke's 'Two Treatises', if only because Hoadly was combating Leslie rather than Filmer. None the less Hoadly's contractarianism was deeply Lockean. The basic structure of the 'Original and Institution' owed a great deal to Locke. Like the 'Two Treatises' it was divided into two halves, the first examining patriarchalism and the second developing Hoadly's views. Like Locke, moreover, Hoadly adopted the pretence of defending Richard Hooker's views on civil government, even quoting the same passages as a way of legitimating their own more radical ideas. 
Leslie Stephen may have been right to claim that Hoadly said nothing new (Stephen, 2.153), but in the context of the political debates of the middle of Anne's reign it is difficult to overestimate the tract's significance. Appearing at a time when the attention of the public had been gripped by Henry Sacheverell's incendiary sermon 'The Perils of False Brethren', which was widely seen as an overt attack on revolution principles, the whigs seized gratefully on Hoadly's tract. On 13 December 1709, the same day that the whig majority in the Commons agreed to impeach Sacheverell, it also passed a resolution recommending Hoadly to the queen for preferment 'for having often strenuously justified the principles, on which her Majesty, and the Nation proceeded, in the late happy Revolution' ('JHC', 16.242). Hoadly became a national figure, widely seen as the low-church counterpart to Sacheverell. With his high-flying antagonist he was one of the first clergy to be the subject of satirical prints; throughout 1710 he was portrayed as the representative of 'moderation', latitudinarianism, and heterodoxy, and he was depicted in one print with 'Asses Ears and two Horns, with a Couple of Wings' ('Remarks', 2.20). In the tory celebrations following the Sacheverell trial and at the elections later in 1710 he was burned in effigy at Oxford, and his books were consigned to the flames in places such as Exeter, Hereford, and Sherborne. 
The Commons' resolution in favour of Hoadly was a calculated criticism of the queen's religious policy; Blackall's sermon, against which Hoadly had written, had after all been preached before the queen and published at her request. Unsurprisingly the Commons' request was ignored, but on 13 February 1710 Elizabeth Howland, 'unasked, unapplied to' ('Works', 3.622), presented Hoadly to the rectory of Streatham, and at the same time her grandson the duke of Bedford made him a domestic chaplain, qualifying him to hold the living in plurality with St Peter-le-Poer. Hoadly then threw himself into the 1710 election campaign, writing a series of pamphlets in support of the whig cause. In the aftermath of defeat he attacked high-church attempts to use convocation to condemn the heterodox views of William Whiston but in general he was less active as a pamphleteer, contributing only the occasional sermon to the struggle against the principles of toryism in Anne's last years. 
It is important, however, not to see Hoadly merely as a political clergyman. Little is known of his pastoral work within his parishes, although he admitted 'many Imperfections in the discharge of... my Office' due to his disability. None the less he did preach a series of sermons at St Peter-le-Poer, 'The Terms of Acceptance with God', which in their published form were intended as a manual for piety to be 'read, either in the Family, or the Closet' ('Works', 3.495). Hoadly considered the duties of a Christian and how to achieve salvation. He emphasized the practical duties of Christianity -- the practice of virtue and the renunciation of sin -- but he explained those duties in strongly biblical language and stressed the role of Christ as redeemer. He argued against the errors both of 'relying upon Faith' and of 'relying upon External Performances' -- works were the fruit of true faith, yet without 'Holiness of Life' (ibid., 562) the performance of external duties was worthless. Like many low-churchmen Hoadly also emphasized that Christianity was, if not an 'easy' religion, then one suited to man's condition. God did not expect 'absolute Perfection' as a condition of salvation. Indeed 'absolute Perfection' was unattainable; rather God demanded 'a daily Progress, and sincere Endeavour, after Perfection' (ibid., 536). 
Hoadly's theology was therefore firmly grounded in both scripture and the English protestant anti-Calvinist tradition. He was no deist, despite the claims of some contemporaries and later commentators. In 1713 he preached a series of sermons, not printed until they appeared as 'Four Sermons' in 1715, in which he answered 'the many writings... which seemed on the one hand to attack the 'Christian religion' itself, and on the other to discourage a free 'examination' of it' ('Biographia Britannica', 102). Later that year his 'Queries Recommended to the Authors of a Late Discourse of Free-Thinking' was one of a number of responses to Anthony Collins's manifesto. Hoadly again sought to defend free enquiry by Christians, relying on scripture and the reason given to them by God. But he vigorously condemned the methodology and epistemology of the deists, who latched onto trivial, man-made inconsistencies in the gospels and who used wit, ridicule, and banter rather than reason to undermine faith. 
It was to be expected that, as one of the leading whig clergymen and propagandists from Anne's reign, Hoadly would receive some reward on the Hanoverian succession. In fact it was some time before he was taken notice of by the new administration. As the royal chaplaincies were filled during 1715, Hoadly's name was conspicuously absent, perhaps because he did not frequent the court and perhaps because the princess of Wales suspected that he 'was not a Churchman' (Beinecke Library, Osborn MS f.c. 110, fol. 20). By the end of the year, however, his name was being canvassed at Whitehall. His friends believed that 'a good Deanry, or Residentiaryship of St Pauls' would be most 'proper' for him, but he preferred a bishopric and, having failed of Lincoln, was nominated to Bangor in December 1715 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. A. 269, p. 52). He was created DD by Archbishop William Wake on 26 January 1716 and only then was he appointed to a royal chaplaincy, on 14 February. In later years the duchess of Marlborough claimed the credit for Hoadly's promotion, and over the next few years he was one of the most prominent episcopal allies of the earl of Sunderland, the duchess's son-in-law. Another strong supporter was Charlotte Clayton, one of the ladies of the bedchamber to the princess of Wales, who persuaded Caroline to adopt a more favourable opinion of Hoadly. The acquiescence, at least, of Lord Townshend, the secretary of state, would have been essential, and he may well have played a more active role. According to one radical whig report Hoadly's appointment was 'a lay triumph' pushed through in the face of the opposition of a united episcopal bench (Surrey HC, Somers MSS, letter, 29 Dec 1715). It was certainly controversial: when he visited his diocese in 1718 he was attacked by a mob at Brecon. 
William Whiston's claim that Hoadly never set foot in Bangor has long been demonstrated to be false. There is clear evidence that he was there in both 1718 and 1719, although the disappearance of the records for his episcopate makes any assessment of his pastoral work very difficult. His disability undoubtedly restricted him; Edmund Gibson was concerned that he might find regular attendance in the House of Lords difficult, noting that 'at first 'Crutches' will look a little ungainly there!' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. A. 269, p. 52). But other bishops were willing to provide assistance, and Bishop John Wynne performed an ordination tour in the summer of 1720. 
Hoadly's pastoral efforts, however, continued to be overshadowed by his controversial work. He preached against the Jacobite rising in 1715, and one of his first acts after his consecration in 1716 was to deliver the Restoration day sermon before the king. Both were strongly whig in tone, the latter arguing that the Restoration had only been made a 'blessing' to the nation by the securing of the succession in the protestant line in 1688. But his most significant work during the early months of George I's reign appeared anonymously in May 1715: his 'Dedication to Pope Clement XI', prefixed to Richard Steele's 'Account of the State of the Roman Catholic Religion'. In this tract he highlighted what he saw as the similarities between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, arguing that the former had inherited the intolerant and persecuting practices of the latter. Both asserted an infallible authority and both denied the individual the right to interpret the scriptures, though the Church of England claimed to do the opposite. The only difference between the two churches was 'That You 'cannot' Err in any Thing You determine, and We never 'do': That is... You are Infallible, and We always in the Right' ('Works', 1.535). The Church of England indeed was becoming more and more like the Church of Rome. In time, Hoadly told the pope, 'no Man of Sense will be able to see any Difference between 'Your Popery', and 'that' of many amongst 'Us', but that 'Ours' is 'Protestant Popery', and 'Yours' is 'Popish Popery'' (ibid., 544). 
This tract marked a change in tone in Hoadly's work. In common with many whigs and low-churchmen he was worried by the increasing stridency and extremism of the nonjurors both politically, in their support for Jacobitism, and theologically, in their adoption of more 'Catholic' rites and practices. Even more worrying, at a time when the protestant succession appeared very precarious, was the creeping sacerdotalism of many high-flying clergy and their apparent sympathy for the nonjuring position. Hoadly's response was to focus, more explicitly than ever before, on the threat from within the Church of England. He highlighted the issue of authority and made the right of private judgement 'the' distinguishing characteristic of protestantism. Over the next two years these themes were developed in two further pamphlets, 'A Preservative Against the Principles and Practices of the Nonjurors' (1716) and 'The Nature of the Kingdom or Church of Christ' (1717), provoking the most famous politico-religious controversy of the eighteenth century, the Bangorian controversy. 
The 'Preservative' was occasioned by the posthumous publication of 'The Constitution of the Catholick Church' (1716), in which the leading nonjuror George Hickes argued that the Church of England was a schismatic church teaching a heretical doctrine of obedience, and that the state had no rights over the church, rendering the deprivation of nonjurors invalid. Hoadly sought first to defend the revolution settlement and the exclusion of all Catholics from the line of succession. He went on to demonstrate that the civil power was 'endowed with every 'Power' necessary to its 'Defense' as a 'Civil Power'' ('Works', 1.582) and thus had the right to deprive bishops who, in 'the Exercise of the 'Episcopal Office'' (ibid., 581), were threatening the state with destruction. Finally he ridiculed the claim of the nonjurors to confine salvation to the 'Communion of your particular, little, 'Body', or 'Church'' (ibid., 592), asserting instead that the essence of true religion lay in 'sincerity': 'Your 'Title' to God's favour... cannot depend Simply upon your adhering to this Communion; because the very adhering to this 'Communion', if it were against your Conscience, would entitle you to His Anger: But must depend upon it, considered as a Conduct honestly entered into, by the Dictate of your Conscience. The favour of God... follows 'Sincerity'... And consequently, equally follows every 'Equal Degree' of 'Sincerity'. (ibid., 593)' This doctrine was an important development in latitudinarian theology and was recognized as such even by Hoadly's more conservative whig colleagues. Bishop Nicolson, for example, was content to endorse Hoadly's justification of the deprivation of the nonjurors and was reluctant to take issue with his denial of the apostolical succession, but he bridled at the idea that 'our people be taught that they are 'not to expect any of God's Graces Benedictions or Absolutions, from any hands but his own'' (Christ Church, Oxford, Arch.W.Epist. 20, fols. 277-8). He believed that Hoadly's doctrines deprived the clergy of the spiritual authority conferred on them at their ordination and were irreconcilable with those of the Church of England. 
If the 'Preservative' was, ostensibly at least, directed at the nonjurors, the doctrines advanced by Hoadly in his sermon 'The Nature of the Kingdom, or Church, of Christ', preached on 31 March 1717, were of more general application. Developing themes explored in the 'Preservative', Hoadly argued that Christ was the 'Sole 'Law-giver' to his Subjects, and Sole 'Judge', in matters relating to Salvation' ('Works', 2.409). Consequently: 'in the Affairs of 'Eternal Conscience' and 'Salvation'... He hath... left behind Him, no visible, humane 'Authority'; no 'Vicegerents', who can be said properly to supply his Place; no 'Interpreters', upon whom his Subjects are absolutely to depend; no 'Judges' over the Consciences or Religion of his People. (ibid., 404)' From this he went on to demonstrate that the rewards and punishments of Christianity occurred in a future state, and that to apply temporal rewards and punishments was 'to act contrary to the Interests of True Religion' (ibid., 406-7). It has been pointed out that Hoadly's words echoed those preached by Arthur Ashley Sykes in an archidiaconal sermon at Cambridge the previous December, but Sykes was at this time a relatively obscure country clergyman. Moreover Hoadly's sermon acquired far greater significance from its context. The bishop was close to the new Sunderland-Stanhope ministry, which was formulating a more radical religious policy that included significant concessions to the dissenters, and he was known to be in high favour at court. The sermon indeed was delivered before the king and printed at his command. It was evident to many that it provided a timely ideological justification for the repeal of the 'Test Act' -- the statute restricting civil office to members of the Church of England -- which was beginning to be canvassed by the administration. 
The response was both immediate and prolonged, the exchange of pamphlets dragging on into 1720. Leslie Stephen comments that 'There is a bewildering variety of theological, ecclesiastical, political, historical, exegetical, and purely personal discussions' (Stephen, 2.156). Much of it was trivial, such as the exchange involving Hoadly, Bishop William Nicolson, and White Kennett over whether the sermon had been altered between preaching and publication. But major issues were at stake. In particular many churchmen believed that Hoadly's doctrines denied any authority to the visible church and thus undermined the position of the Church of England. This was made clear in the report of the committee of the lower house of convocation, which condemned Hoadly for having subverted 'all government and discipline in the Church of Christ' and also for having impugned the king's 'supremacy in causes ecclesiastical, and the authority of the legislature to enforce obedience in matters of religion by civil sanctions' (Cardwell, 2.829). The committee also highlighted the doctrine of sincerity, which, it claimed in an argument developed by William Law, made the truth or falsehood of belief irrelevant and placed all religions on the same level with respect to salvation. The representation was received 'nemine contradicente' by the lower house on 10 May 1717. On the same day the ministry, fearing synodical censure of its episcopal champion, ordered the prorogation of convocation to 8 November 1717. Apart from a brief session in 1741 it did not meet again to do business until 1852. 
There is no denying that the Bangorian controversy was of enormous significance in the politico-religious history of the early eighteenth century. It is important to recognize that it not only reinforced divisions between high- and low-churchmen. Some of Hoadly's most prominent critics were indeed high-churchmen; Andrew Snape and Thomas Sherlock were particularly effective, while the 'Three Letters', written by the young nonjuror William Law, were much admired by nineteenth-century commentators. But the controversy also saw a fracturing of the low-church alliance that had been so powerful during the reign of Queen Anne. Leading whig churchmen like Archbishop Wake and Bishop Gibson, who had championed the low-church cause during the convocation controversy, were privately horrified by Hoadly's writings. Others, including John Potter, bishop of Oxford, and Francis Hare, a former chaplain to the duke of Marlborough, went into print, while Robert Cannon played a leading role in the deliberations in convocation. Hoadly had his supporters, but they formed only a section of whig low-church opinion. 
What is much less clear is whether the controversy marked an important shift in Hoadly's own views. At the time it was commonly believed that his writings at the beginning of George I's reign represented an abandonment of the positions that he had advanced at the outset of his career, particularly in his pamphlets against nonconformity. One country clergyman commented of his sermon in 1717 that 'he gives up Episcopacy entirely' (BL, Add. MS 22560, fol. 48), a view echoed in the twentieth century by Norman Sykes. Part of the problem is that 'The Nature of the Kingdom... of Christ' lacked clarity and could easily be interpreted, or misinterpreted, in many ways. But Hoadly did something to clarify his position in the twelve further pamphlets that he contributed to the Bangorian controversy and other later writings. By emphasizing that the right to judge men's consciences belonged to Christ alone, by asserting that the fundamentals of Christianity were simply the 'Practice of all the Duties we owe to Ourselves, and to our Neighbour' ('Works', 2.509), and by stressing the importance of sincerity, Hoadly certainly diminished the role of visible churches in the economy of salvation. By repeating the Lockean argument that the office of the civil magistrate was confined to the well-being of civil society and had no part in 'the Care of 'True Religion'' (ibid., 536), he was striking at the justification for the 'Test Act'. But he stopped short of questioning the utility of the church establishment, making clear his belief that 'all 'Visible Churches' ought to be 'orderly Societies'' (ibid., 898). He also reiterated his adherence to the Church of England, acknowledging that it was not 'all perfection, and uncapable of Amendment', but insisting that he was convinced 'of its Excellency above any Other' that he knew of (ibid., 3.42). Significantly 'The Reasonableness of Conformity' was reprinted in 1720; Hoadly may not have approved of excluding dissenters from state office but he still believed that they could not justify their separation from the Church of England. His writings in the period 1715-20 are thus best seen in terms of a change of tone rather than substance, a response to what he saw as the growing threat to protestantism and to civil and religious liberty from within the church. 
Having resigned the rectory of St Peter-le-Poer in 1720 Hoadly was nominated to the bishopric of Hereford on 21 September 1721 and confirmed on 7 November. Rumours circulated that this was a reward for his support of the ministry during the South Sea crisis yet in many ways it was an odd promotion. Hereford was worth little, if any, more than Bangor, and the suspicion must remain that the translation was a favour intended to relieve Hoadly of the pastoral care of the large, distant, and mountainous diocese of Bangor. In any event his tenure of the see was short, and on 29 October 1723 he was translated to the bishopric of Salisbury, whereupon he resigned the rectory of Streatham. This was a move to which Hoadly's seniority among the whig bishops entitled him, but he had further recommended himself to the favour of the ministry by his vigorous pamphleteering on its behalf. While Hoadly had been closely identified with the liberal religious programme of the Sunderland-Stanhope administration, he remained a strong supporter of Walpole and Townshend. In September 1722 Walpole took over the leading opposition newspaper, the 'London Journal', and immediately Hoadly started contributing regular articles to it under the pseudonym Britannicus. In the collected edition of Hoadly's works his son included 110 letters for the period from 1722 until 9 January 1725, although not all of these are generally accepted to be by the bishop. 
The Britannicus letters defended the revolution settlement on Lockean principles, much as 'The Original and Institution of Civil Government' had done. But first and foremost they were pieces of journalism focusing on the issues of the moment, such as the plight of the German protestants being persecuted by Catholics in Thorn, or the ministry's case for an excise duty on tea, coffee, and cocoa. No issue of this period attracted more attention, however, than the trials of the bishop of Rochester and other conspirators in the Atterbury plot. Hoadly vigorously defended the sometimes dubious manipulations of the law by the administration from the suspension of habeas corpus onwards and devoted letter after letter to a meticulous dissection of Atterbury's defence of his conduct in the House of Lords. Even after he stopped writing for the 'London Journal' Hoadly continued to support the government's policies and record. In 1727 he even turned to foreign affairs, publishing 'An Enquiry into the Causes of the Conduct of Great Britain', which provided a detailed defence of whig foreign policy and the 1725 alliance of Hanover, emphasizing the crucial role of Britain in the defence of protestantism and liberty. It was followed two years later with 'A Defence of the Enquiry'. 
In 1729 the leading latitudinarian theologian Samuel Clarke died. He had been a close and long-standing friend of Hoadly, who wrote a life of him that was prefaced to his published sermons (1732) and works (1737), laying 'hold on 'His' Fame, to prop and support 'My own'' ('Works of Samuel Clarke', 1.xiv). Clarke was widely viewed in the early eighteenth century as the leading advocate of an Arian doctrine of the Trinity, and Hoadly revealingly declined to offer an opinion on 'so difficult a Question' (ibid., vii). But however much Hoadly admired Clarke as a man and a Christian, and however much he may have sympathized with his desire to see parts of the church's doctrine and liturgy reformed, there were important differences between them. In his later career Clarke had been unwilling to accept any preferment that would require further subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. Hoadly, by contrast, felt no scruples about the terms of conformity imposed by the church and stressed that, while 'a parish-minister', he had always 'observed the rules prescribed; and, amongst other injunctions, that he had never omitted the Athanasian creed, when ordered to be read in the church' ('GM', 53.1029). 
Hoadly was never an uncritical supporter of the Walpole administration or its predecessors. He confided to Lady Sundon, for example, his disapproval of attacks on the liberty of the press through the prosecution of printers. He had never been trusted by Walpole on ecclesiastical policy; the rise of Edmund Gibson, bishop of London, in the 1720s demonstrated the ministry's determination to reassure the clergy that Hoadleian principles would not be applied in the church. It may have been Gibson's influence that determined that the bishopric of Durham was given to Edward Chandler in October 1730 -- a bitter disappointment for Hoadly, though by this time his friendship with Queen Caroline, the other important influence over the disposal of church preferments, also had cooled. Hoadly continued to be a loyal supporter of the ministry in the House of Lords, but the episode contributed to a tension between him and Walpole. Thus in 1732, when Walpole was seeking Hoadly's assistance in discouraging the dissenters from pressing for a repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts', the approach was made through the queen. Hoadly agreed to intercede with his friends among the dissenters, advising them that the attempt was likely to fail and at the same time would damage the whig interest. But he could not resist reiterating his opposition to those laws on account of their 'unreasonableness... in a social light, and the profaneness of them theologically considered', and he declared that if the matter were to come before the House of Lords he would be obliged both to speak and to vote for repeal (Hervey, 1.126-7). He even wrote a tract, developing his views, in answer to Edmund Gibson's 'The Dispute Adjusted', although it was not published until 1736, and even then anonymously, by the Presbyterian Benjamin Avery under the title 'The Objections Against the Repeal of the Corporation and Test Acts Considered'. It would be misleading, however, to see Hoadly's nomination to the bishopric of Winchester on 3 September 1734 as the reward of a grateful court. It was rather, if Lord Hervey's account is to be believed, the performance of a promise extracted from a reluctant Caroline and George II by Hoadly himself, supported by Hervey and Lady Sundon (ibid., 2.395-9). 
The dissenting campaign for the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' also provided the context for Hoadly's last major new publication, 'A Plain Account of the Nature and End of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper', which appeared anonymously in 1735. The political meaning was made explicit by his emphasis that the sacrament was a purely religious duty and that the only obligation to it derived from Christ's institution. More generally his intention was to remove all ''Superstition'', or mystery, from the understanding of the sacrament, believing that the best defence of Christianity against ''Unbelievers'... is to remove from it whatever hinders it from being seen as it really is in itself' ('Works', 3.845). Adopting a resolutely scriptural approach, he attacked both the Catholic and protestant eucharistic doctrines, arguing that the bread and wine were merely symbols and that the rite was simply a remembrance of Christ's sacrifice. 'A Plain Account' was widely condemned, many commentators, including Daniel Waterland, believing that it tended towards Socinianism. Waterland also accused Hoadly of ''novelty'', but in this he was certainly mistaken ('Works of the Rev. Daniel Waterland', 4.465). As some twentieth-century historians have noted, Hoadly's eucharistic beliefs were based on the memorialism of the sixteenth-century Swiss reformer Huldreich Zwingli, although the bishop had probably become acquainted with them through John Hales's 'Tract on the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper', which had first appeared in 1635. 
In pastoral terms Hoadly was not a model bishop and it is futile to attempt to portray him as such. However, he was far more conscientious than many commentators have been prepared to admit. It has been claimed that he never went to Hereford but, as at Bangor, this claim is untrue. He performed an ordination in the cathedral there on 1 July 1722 and then carried out a visitation of the diocese. While at Salisbury he visited the diocese twice, in 1726 and 1729, and he also conducted a personal visitation of Winchester in 1736. In both dioceses he also ordained regularly, conducting as many as eighty-one ordination services between 1743 and 1761, the only period for which his act book at Winchester survives, and there is evidence that he examined candidates rigorously. It is true that he could be a divisive presence in his dioceses -- at Hereford the predominantly tory country gentry refused to wait on him -- and he was widely distrusted by his clergy. On his translation to Winchester the chapter pointedly omitted from the return of the election the conventional formula that he had been chosen ''by the Aid and immediate Direction of the Holy Ghost'' (Lewis Walpole Library, Clarke-Sundon correspondence). Hoadly was well aware of their suspicions and assured them that he would never consent 'to any thing, that may hurt either [the church's] Establishment, or legal Revenues', adding that where his judgement differed from theirs he hoped that they would believe that 'I as truly... and as sincerely intend their Service, as any One of Themselves can do' ('Works', 3.492). But many of them were hardly likely to have been reassured by his patronage of advanced low-churchmen such as Arthur Ashley Sykes, Jonathan Shipley, and Edmund Pyle. 
Hoadly's first wife, Sarah, died on 11 January 1743. Two years later, on 23 July 1745, at the age of sixty-eight, he married Mary Newey, the daughter of the dean of Chichester, at Farnham Castle. By this time he was becoming noticeably less active in the discharge of his episcopal functions. Despite his reputation as a political bishop he had never frequented the House of Lords regularly, and after the fall of Walpole in 1742, he gave up attendance in parliament altogether. By the end of the decade he was relying upon Bishop Matthias Mawson to undertake a confirmation tour for him in the Isle of Wight, and in the 1750s it became usual for him to turn to his colleagues to perform ordinations and confirmations. Hoadly's decline, however, was physical rather than mental. He oversaw the publication of two volumes of his collected sermons, in 1754 and 1755, and in 1757 he was even persuaded to take up his pen again to defend his reputation against the forgeries of Bernard Fournier. He died, after an illness of less than twenty-four hours, at Winchester House, Chelsea, in the evening of 17 April 1761, leaving an estate of $17,000, barely enough, according to Edmund Pyle, to 'pay two annuities, & one legacy, and his funeral charges, & dilapidations of 3 vast houses' (Pyle, 357-8). He was buried in Winchester Cathedral, where 'but a decent monument' was erected, contrary to his own wishes, by his son John. 
Hoadly was arguably the most famous churchman of his generation. As a young and relatively obscure London preacher in the early years of Anne's reign he was able to establish himself as one of the leading whig and low-church propagandists of the period, and as a junior bishop at the beginning of George I's reign he was at the centre of the most famous politico-religious controversy of the century. William Warburton was merely stating the obvious when in 1765 he identified Hoadly as the leader of the low-church party in the early Hanoverian church ('Works', 4.7). Predictably a figure of such prominence attracted praise and condemnation in equal measure. High-churchmen and tories routinely denounced him as heterodox -- 'an infamous and Scandalous Advocate for Rebellion', according to Thomas Hearne ('Remarks', 3.87), a 'true Jeroboam' priest, according to Browne Willis (NL Wales, Ottley correspondence, 1825). For many whigs and low-churchmen, on the other hand, he was 'an exemplary divine', as Henry Fielding described him (Thomas, 75), a leading advocate of the principles of religious and political liberty. Some attempted more balanced assessments. Thus Daniel Waterland, who wrote against Hoadly's doctrine of the sacrament, was none the less prepared to recommend his sermons to undergraduates as 'exact and judicious' models of the preacher's art. It was remarked after his death that he had 'lived to see the Nation become his converts' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.141), but in reality his reputation was contested as much in the second half of the eighteenth century as it had been in the first half. He continued to have his admirers, both Richard Price and William Paley invoking the authority of 'the excellent Hoadly' (Thomas, 74; Gascoigne, 241), while detractors like Lewis Bagot and Samuel Horsley denounced his Socinianism and republicanism. 
In the nineteenth century, however, under the impact of tractarianism and evangelicalism, attitudes became more uniformly critical. The tone of most nineteenth- and even twentieth-century portraits of Hoadly was set by S. H. Cassan in his biographies of the bishops of Winchester. Cassan admitted that Hoadly's private life was 'exemplary and praiseworthy', but he found fault with the 'low-Church principles' of 'this anti-prelatical Prelate', marvelling at 'how so great a Dissenter could have retained, I will not say the episcopal, but even the priestly character' (Cassan, 2.403-5). Like many churchmen Cassan found it particularly hard to forgive Hoadly his role in the destruction of convocation, which was attributed to his 'weakness and time-serving compliance' (ibid., 403). To these attacks on Hoadly's heterodoxy was added a new critique of his pastoral failings, his record, according to C. J. Abbey, being 'glaring even above others' in a century characterized by 'disgraceful absenteeism' (Abbey, 2.2). Even more liberal churchmen, who might be supposed to have been more sympathetic to Hoadly's low-churchmanship, contributed to the tide of condemnation. Thus W. J. Conybeare lamented how the 'comprehensive Christianity of Tillotson and Burnet too soon degenerated into the worldliness of the Sadducean Hoadly' (Conybeare, 350). Leslie Stephen may have praised Hoadly's stand against 'bigotry' but he also dismissed him as a 'bore' who had nothing original to say and who was often 'evasive', refusing to recognize the deist implications of his arguments (Stephen, 2.153, 155). 
Remarkably, perhaps, Hoadly benefited little from the powerful assault launched against nineteenth-century orthodoxies by Norman Sykes. Sykes accepted much of Stephen's interpretation, talking of the 'essentially Deist basis of his thought' and agreeing that a great deal of what Hoadly wrote 'may well be swept to the dustheaps' (Sykes, 'Benjamin Hoadly', 137, 150). Indeed for many historians he still remains the leading example of whig opportunism and 'blatant clerical' careerism (Young, 33). In the last decades of the twentieth century, however, a more positive assessment of Hoadly has emerged. While there has been a reappraisal of his pastoral work it is clear that he still fell some way short of the best standards of the eighteenth-century church. But he was a crucial figure in the propaganda wars of the post-revolutionary years, articulating a powerful rebuttal to the revival of patriarchalism and divine-right ideology during the reign of Queen Anne. In so doing he played a leading role in the transmission of Lockean contractarianism into the mainstream of eighteenth-century political thought in both England and North America. Moreover it is becoming increasingly clear that, despite the allegations of Socinianism and deism, Hoadly stood firmly in a protestant tradition that can be traced back through Hales, Chillingworth, and Hooker. Through his development of the concept of sincerity and through his 'memorialist' eucharistic thought he contributed significantly to the development of an Anglican latitudinarian tradition that minimized the role of the priesthood in the church and of mystery in its doctrines. While not particularly innovative Hoadly none the less exercised a profound influence over political and religious thought in eighteenth-century England. 


@@@@@


doc= 13376


Hoadly, John (1678-1746), Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was born at Tottenham, Middlesex, on 27 September 1678, son of the Revd Samuel Hoadly (1643-1705) and his second wife, Martha, 'nee' Pickering (1639-1703); his elder brother was Benjamin Hoadly (1676-1761). He was educated at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1697. In September 1700 he was appointed deputy headmaster of Norwich grammar school, of which his father was headmaster. Having passed some years there he became chaplain to Bishop Gilbert Burnet, who preferred him to the rectory of St Edmund's, Salisbury, and made him successively prebendary (21 February 1706), archdeacon (6 November 1710), and chancellor (16 April 1713) of that diocese. In 1717 Lord King, then chief justice of the common pleas, presented him to the rectory of Ockham in Surrey. He was also appointed chaplain-in-ordinary to George II. 
On 3 September 1727 Hoadly was consecrated bishop of Ferns and Leighlin. William Whiston violently objected to this appointment on account of Hoadly's standard of learning. Others were more complimentary about his accomplishments: 'I know', wrote the primate, Archbishop Hugh Boulter, 'his affection for his majesty, and that he has spirit to help to keep up the English interest here.' In July 1729, when the archbishopric of Dublin fell vacant, Boulter again wrote of Hoadly's loyalty to the crown, this time to Sir Robert Walpole. Hoadly was accordingly translated to Dublin on 13 January 1730. When Boulter died, Hoadly was chosen to succeed him as primate and was appointed on 7 October 1742. 
As primate Hoadly displayed a tolerant spirit by consenting to the abolition of restrictions on Roman Catholic services. As archbishop of Dublin he built the residence of Tallaght, co. Dublin, at a cost of $2500. Unlike his brother, Hoadly was not a prolific theological writer. His few publications included several sermons, a pastoral letter on the Jacobite rising of 1745, a defence of Gilbert Burnet, and a commentary on the work of Bishop William Beveridge of St Asaph. Details of Hoadly's marriage are unknown but his only daughter, Sarah, married Bellingham Boyle, MP for Bandon Bridge (1731-60) and for Youghal (1761-8). 
Hoadly was for many years influential in managing the Irish privy council and the House of Lords, especially after his appointment as a lord justice on 25 November 1742. He died at Rathfarnham on 16 July 1746, of a fever caught while superintending workmen, and was buried at Tallaght. 'He gave universal content and satisfaction', said a writer in the 'Dublin Courant' (22 July 1746) 'by his easiness of access, his knowledge of affairs, and capacity for business'. 


@@@@@


doc= 13377


Hoadly, John (1711-1776), poet and playwright, born in Broad Street, London, on 8 October 1711, was the youngest son of the Revd Benjamin Hoadly (1676-1761), subsequently bishop of Winchester, and his first wife, Sarah Curtis (1676?-1743) ['see 'Hoadly, Sarah], a portrait painter. He attended Dr Newcome's school at Hackney where he distinguished himself by his performance as Phocyas in John Hughes's 'Siege of Damascus'. Hoadly's love of the theatre proved to be lifelong. He assisted his brother, the physician Benjamin Hoadly (1706-1757), in writing 'The Contrast, or, A Tragical Comic Rehearsal of Two Modern Plays', which was brought out at Lincoln's Inn Fields theatre on 30 April 1731, and performed several times. With its ridicule of living authors such as James Thomson, the wits and the critics were both intrigued and offended in equal measure. The play, which many critics regard as a model for Henry Fielding's 'Pasquin' (1736), was quickly suppressed at Bishop Hoadly's request. Thought lost, a manuscript copy of the play was part of four quarto volumes discovered in 2004 and now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 
Hoadly matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1731 and graduated LLB in 1735. Though originally admitted at the Middle Temple on 1 November 1726, he opted to pursue a career in the church, if only because of the patronage his father, newly translated to the wealthy see of Winchester, could confer on him. He was ordained deacon on 7 December 1735 and priest on the 21st. On 26 December he was named chaplain to Frederick, prince of Wales, having been appointed as chancellor of the Winchester diocese (29 November 1735) even before taking holy orders. On 10 February 1736 Hoadly married Elizabeth, daughter of James Ashe, of Salisbury. There were no children. Over the next two years Hoadly received further ample patronage: the rectory of Mitchelmersh, Hampshire, on 8 March 1737; that of Wroughton, Wiltshire, on 8 September; that of Old Alresford, Hampshire (with the chapelries of New Alresford and Medstead), on 29 November. The same day he was collated canon of the second prebend in Winchester Cathedral. This was far from the end of his accumulations. Hoadly was rector of Wield, Hampshire, from 1737 to 1776; on 9 June 1743 he was instituted to the rectory of St Mary's, Southampton, and on 16 December 1746 to the vicarage of Overton, Hampshire. On 4 January 1748 the LLD degree was awarded to him by Thomas Herring, archbishop of Canterbury. Hoadly was appointed a chaplain in the household of Augusta, the princess dowager of Wales, on 6 May 1751. In May 1760 he was awarded the mastership of St Cross, Winchester. He was a valued assistant to his father in the latter's declining years, on whose behalf he held a visitation in the Winchester diocese in 1759. 
Hoadly spent his summers in alternate years at his houses in Old Alresford and Southampton. He told William Hogarth jestingly that he visited Alresford occasionally as the shepherd should always be seen among his flock even if only to fleece them. A regular visitor to David Garrick at Hampton (who dubbed him the 'Rev'd Rigdum Funnidos'), he persuaded his friends to take part in amateur theatricals at every opportunity. Hoadly wrote a variety of texts for performance, many anonymously. They included 'Florimel, or, Love's Revenge' (1734), a dramatic pastoral, set to music by Maurice Greene; 'Jephtha' (1737), an oratorio, music by Greene; 'The Judgment of Hercules' (also known as 'The Choice of Hercules'), a masque (1739?), music by Greene (lost); 'Phoebe' (1748), a pastoral opera, music by Greene; 'The Force of Truth' (1744), an oratorio taken from the book of 'Esdras', again with music by Greene; and 'Love's Artifice' ('c'. 1750), a masque set to music by John Stanley. Hoadly composed the fifth act of James Miller's tragedy adapted from Voltaire, 'Mahomet the Imposter' (1744), and completed and revised George Lillo's 'Arden of Feversham' (1764). He may have assisted his brother Benjamin in the writing of 'The Suspicious Husband'. Hoadly left several dramas in manuscript, including 'The Housekeeper, a Farce', on the plan of James Townley's 'High Life Below Stairs'; 'The Beggar's Garland', a one-act burlesque opera; and a tragedy on the life of Thomas Cromwell. He also dabbled in humorous versifying; some of his poems are in Dodsley's 'Collection', with the best a translation of Edward Holdsworth's 'Muscipula' in volume 5 (1758). Ever protective of Bishop Hoadly's reputation, John Hoadly edited his father's works in three volumes in 1773, to which he prefixed a short life originally contributed to the supplement to the 'Biographia Britannica'. He also wrote for Greene's academy at the Apollo, and composed the verses for Hogarth which were placed under the prints of 'The Rake's Progress'. A friend of the novelist Sarah Fielding, Hoadly erected a monument in her memory. 
After many years suffering from acute gout, Hoadly died on 16 March 1776 at St Mary's rectory, Southampton, and was buried in Winchester Cathedral. He had retained all his preferments except the rectory of Wroughton and the prebend of Winchester which he had resigned on 12 June 1760. A final oratorio text, 'The Song of Moses', was set to music by Thomas Linley the younger and first performed in 1777. Hoadly's talents may not have run to serious theology, but there was a charitable side to his life which became apparent to all when his will set aside money for apprenticing the poorer children of the diocese. There was also a generous bequest to the widows of clergymen lodged at Bishop Morley's Wolvesey College in Winchester. In 1793, following his wife's death, her estate was inherited by her nephew Robert Ashe ['see 'Ashe, Robert Hoadly-], who took the additional surname of Hoadley. John Hoadly had gifts of loyalty, good humour, friendship, and personal modesty -- qualities evident in his recently published correspondence with the literary critic Richard Warner -- which were not spoilt by his rich accumulation of church livings. 


@@@@@


doc= 13378


Hoadly, Samuel (1643-1705), schoolmaster, was the son of John Hoadly (1617-1668), a clergyman, and his wife, Sarah ('bap'. 1625, died 1693), widow of one Bushnel; the couple had met aboard the ship which was taking them to New England in April 1639, refugees both from the Laudian persecution. Samuel, their first child, was born at Guilford, Connecticut, on 30 September 1643. The family returned to Britain in October 1653, and in the following June, John Hoadly went to Edinburgh as chaplain to the castle garrison. Samuel had his schooling in the city, and at Michaelmas 1659 entered King James's College there. In July 1662 the Hoadlys moved to Rolveden, Kent. In January 1663 Samuel began teaching at the neighbouring school of Cranbrook. On 19 June 1666 he married Mary Wood, a widow, who died giving birth to a stillborn child on 25 November 1668. Hoadly married again on 29 September 1669; his second wife was Martha ('b'. 1639), daughter of the puritan divine Benjamin Pickering, with whom he had nine children. 
Hoadly set up a private school at Westerham, Kent, where his brother John helped him. In 1678 he moved to Tottenham High Cross, Middlesex, and in May 1686 to Brooke House, Hackney. In April 1700 he was appointed headmaster of Norwich School, where he is now remembered only as father of Bishop Benjamin Hoadly, although in his day he was celebrated as an educationist and writer of textbooks. His 'Natural Method of Teaching' (1688) went through many editions, and he also produced an edition of Phaedrus and worked on a Latin dictionary. Several of his letters to the eminent Dutch Latinist Johann Georg Graevius are printed in Bishop Hoadly's 'Works'. Hoadly was in orders, but never beneficed. He died on 17 April 1705 and was buried in St Luke's Chapel, Norwich Cathedral, alongside his second wife (who had died on 13 January 1703). Of their children besides Benjamin, John Hoadly (1678-1746) also attained eminence in the church, Frances married one Hawkins, a dancing-master at the Hackney School, and Sarah married the well-known London bookseller Timothy Childe. 


@@@@@


doc= 13379


Hoadly, Sarah (1676?-1743), portrait painter, is of obscure origins. Little is known of her life or of her work before her marriage on 30 May 1701 to Benjamin Hoadly (1676-1761), who, having given up a Cambridge fellowship to marry her, then took holy orders. Their younger son, John Hoadly, includes a brief account of his mother in his biographical preface to the 'Works' of Bishop Benjamin Hoadly (3 vols., 1773). He states that his mother was 'born at Pontefract, in Yorkshire, about six months before his lordship' (Hoadly, xi), who was born on 14 November 1676; but her birth is not recorded in the Pontefract parish register for or about 1676, and nothing is known of her parentage or of the circumstances that took her to London and secured her a place in Mary Beale's studio. 
Vertue, in his 'Note Books' (3.113), states that Sarah Hoadly 'learnt to paint of Mrs Beal' presumably having started as a teenaged apprentice or assistant in Mary Beale's studio in Pall Mall, and that 'she had been for her self set up in business near 7 years before Mrs Beal dyd [October 1699]' (ibid.), which suggests that she was probably fifteen when she began to work on her own. Vertue adds that 'her first beginnings. was with some difficulties to Subsit'. No works predating her marriage at the age of about twenty-five are now known. The circumstances in which she encountered her future husband throw some light on ways in which young women who had to earn a living in London might group themselves together. Vertue relates that Sarah Curtis had lodgings in a house near Covent Garden with two stairways. She lived up one stairway, while two of Benjamin Hoadly's sisters ('mantua makers') lived up the other; 'by this means came their first acquaintance, and afterwards Marriage' (Vertue, 'Note books', 5.14). 
Vertue asserts that marriage left Sarah Hoadly 'at Liberty to practice the Art or leave it just as her affections inclind her. therefore after that good Fortune. she painted the pictures only of Intimates & friends' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.113). Her 'Liberty to practice the Art' was inevitably curtailed by childbearing -- stillborn twins ('c'.1702); Samuel ('b'. 'c'.1704), who died young; Benjamin Hoadly (b. 1706); John ('b'. 1711) -- followed by successive household moves -- to Bangor (1716), Hereford (1721), Salisbury (1723), and Winchester (1734) -- as her husband moved rapidly up the episcopal ladder; probably his physical disability (he was crippled) threw extra work upon her. Portraits painted (in oils) during the twenty-five years or so after her marriage indicate that she certainly did not choose to 'leave' her art. Those of Bishop Hoadly include an early portrait recorded in George Scharf's sketchbooks as being at Lambeth Palace (but now untraced) and another, as chancellor of the Order of the Garter, of about 1726-30 (NPG). In 1713 she painted Richard Ducane, a director of the Bank of England and governor of Christ's Hospital (priv. coll.); otherwise her known sitters were all clergymen. Her portrait of Gilbert Burnet, historian and bishop of Salisbury (died 1715), now untraced, was engraved in 1723 by Vertue, who also engraved (in 1720) perhaps her most characterful portrait, of William Whiston, theologian and mathematician (priv. coll.; anonymous copy, NPG). 
Sarah Hoadly's portraiture is direct and unaffected, deriving little from Mary Beale's more fully rounded, Lely-inspired style. Though Vertue considered her skill 'remarkable' her competence (on present evidence) was no higher than that of the average portraitist of her day. Sarah Hoadly died on 11 January 1743. 


@@@@@


doc= 13380


Hoar, Leonard (1630-1675), college head, was the son of Charles Hoare (died 1638), a brewer, alderman, and sheriff in Gloucester, and Joanna Hinksman (died 1664). His father's will provided for Leonard to matriculate at Oxford, but following the elder Hoare's death in 1638 and the deprivation of the Revd John Workman, whose ministry the Hoares had followed, Joanna and her children migrated to New England, settling in Braintree, Massachusetts. Hoar thus attended Harvard College rather than Oxford, receiving his AB in 1650 and his MA three years later. 
Like many Harvard graduates of this period, Leonard journeyed to England following his studies in order to pursue a career in the ministry of the reforming English church. He was incorporated MA at Cambridge in 1654. After preaching in various places, in 1656 he was presented by the protector to the post of rector at Wanstead, Essex, which he held until he was ejected following the Restoration. He married Bridget Lisle (died 1723), the daughter of the regicide judge John Lisle and his wife, Lady Alice Lisle, and was active in the dissenting community during the 1660s. During this period he pursued interests in botany and medicine, which brought him into contact with Robert Boyle and other members of the Royal Society. Such connections were instrumental in obtaining a royal order to the University of Cambridge that led to his being granted the degree of doctor of physic in 1671. The university subscription book shows that he signed his name to the three articles despite his puritan religious convictions. During this time Hoar also continued his theological studies and published 'Index Biblicus' (1668), a guide to the historical books of the 'Bible'. 
In 1672 Hoar returned to New England, ostensibly to accept a ministerial post with the Third Church of Boston. The previous year, however, Massachusetts leaders had written to John Owen, John Collins, and other English dissenters seeking aid for Harvard and soliciting advice regarding a successor to the ageing Charles Chauncy as president of Harvard College. When he arrived in the colony, Hoar carried with him a recommendation from Owen and the others that he be the new president. From his installation in December 1672 his tenure was not very successful. Some colonists questioned the fact that Hoar did not bring with him a letter of dismissal from his English congregation, and further criticism concerned the fact that in accepting the Harvard post he had broken an implicit promise to minister to the Third Church. In addition, he was probably the victim of disaffection sowed by unsuccessful candidates for the post. The fellows and students turned against Hoar, and a number of them left the college. Though the authorities gave him lukewarm support, his position became untenable and he resigned the post in March 1675. Yet his vision for the college was a forward-looking one. He had sought to introduce experimental science into the curriculum and provided equipment to do so. He secured a new charter that gave more power to the college fellows and less to the overseers. He had also used his English connections to raise funds to replace some of the older college buildings. 
Hoar's health declined dramatically after he left Harvard. He died in Boston on 28 November 1675, and was buried on 6 December in Braintree, Massachusetts. 


@@@@@


doc= 13381


Hoard, Samuel (1599-1658/9), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was born in London. In 1614, aged fifteen, he became a clerk or chorister at All Souls College, Oxford, where he matriculated aged eighteen on 10 October 1617. After migrating to St Mary Hall he graduated BA on 20 April 1618, and proceeded MA on 25 January 1621, being incorporated at Cambridge the following year. By 1622 Hoard was curate and lecturer at St Christopher-le-Stocks, London, for on 22 August that year he and John Blackwell were cited before the London consistory court and ordered to produce documents empowering them to officiate in that church; there is no evidence of subsequent action in their case. As a chaplain of Robert Rich, earl of Warwick, Hoard was presented to the rectory of Moreton, Essex, in 1625. By 1628 he had married Mary (died 1645/6), whose other name is unknown. A son, Samuel, baptized on 2 December 1628, died young, as did his sister, Mary, baptized on 12 July 1631, but Grace, baptized on 31 October 1632, survived; ten other children were born between 1633 and 1645 or 1646. 
With other ministers patronized by Warwick, Hoard supported Thomas Hooker when the latter's conformity was questioned in 1629, and he proceeded BD on 15 June 1630. By 1633 Hoard had forsaken his Calvinist principles and embraced Arminian tenets, a decision he explained in 'Gods Love to Man-Kinde' (1633). Repudiating the reformed doctrine of predestination as a novelty with little or no acceptance in antiquity and citing its alleged affinity with Manichaean fatalism, he asserted that it dishonoured God by making him the author of sin and responsible for the eternal torment of sinners. By abdicating human responsibility the doctrine undermined government, he asserted. It was contrary to such divine attributes as holiness, mercy, and justice as well as antithetical to the purpose of the word and sacraments, and it hindered efforts to pursue a holy life while encouraging despair. John Davenant, bishop of Salisbury, responded in 'Animadversions... upon a Treatise Intitled 'Gods Love to Mankind'' (1641), accusing Hoard of promiscuously extending the scope of God's love and thereby obscuring his special mercy to the elect. Another refutation came from William Twisse in 'The Riches of Gods Love' (1653), which included a critical examination of material apparently appended to Hoard's book by the London minister Henry Mason. Subsequent editions of 'Gods Love to Man-Kinde' were published in 1635, 1656, and 1673, and the book's thesis was incorporated in a debate between Edward Reynolds and Thomas Pierce of Magdalen College, Oxford. 
Dedicated to Warwick, Hoard's second book, 'The Soules Misery and Recoverie' (1636; 2nd edn, 1658), was a lengthy disquisition on 'Ephesians' 4: 30 in which he explained how Christians could avoid offending God by presumptuous, deliberate sins. He followed this with 'The Churches Authority Asserted' (1637), a sermon preached at Chelmsford, Essex, on the occasion of Archbishop William Laud's visitation on 1 March 1637. Seeking to diminish confusion and disorder in the church, which he deemed the root of heresy and schism, he defended the church's right to impose 'a compleate and cheerfull 'conformity'' (p. 65) even though ceremonies were not part of the substance of religion. Ministers, he insisted, must conform in doctrine and practice and teach their parishioners to do so as well. An accomplished debater, he was well read in the patristics and scholastics. On 29 March 1637 Hoard was collated to the prebend of Wilsden at St Paul's, London. 
In the 1640s Hoard lost his prebend but was not sequestrated from his living. Following his death on 15 February 1658 or 1659, he was buried in the chancel at Moreton. In his will, dated 8 March 1657 and proved on 20 April 1659, he anticipated bequests from the sale of his property totalling $868. By this time his eldest daughter, Grace, had married Nathaniel Eyre. His eldest surviving son, William ('bap'. 9 Aug 1637), after studying at Eton College, had been admitted to King's College, Cambridge, in 1656. He graduated BA in 1660, was ordained on 20 September 1662, and proceeded MA in 1663. He was a fellow at King's from 1659 to 1669, and served as vicar of Sturminster, Dorset, from 8 January 1666 until his death some time before 12 October 1670. 


@@@@@


doc= 13382


Hoare, Charles James (1781-1865), Church of England clergyman, was born in London on 14 July 1781, the third son of Henry Hoare (1750-1828), banker, of Fleet Street, London, one of the founders of the Church Missionary Society, and his wife, Lydia Henrietta (died 1816), daughter and coheir of Isaac Malortie of Hanover and London, merchant. He was educated privately under the Revd John Simons of Paul's Cray, Kent, before matriculating as a pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1802. Here among his friends were Henry Martyn, Charles and Robert Grant, William Dealtry, and J. W. Cunningham. In 1803 he passed as second wrangler, second Smith's prizeman, and second classical medallist, graduated BA in the same year and MA in 1806, and was Seatonian prizeman in 1807. On 24 March 1806 he was chosen Lady Margaret fellow of his college, and was ordained in 1804 as curate to Thomas Rennell, dean of Winchester and vicar of Alton, Hampshire. He was ordained priest in 1806. In 1807 he was presented by the dean and chapter of Winchester to the living of Blandford Forum, Dorset. Hoare married, on 4 July 1811, Jane Isabella (died 1874), only daughter of Richard Holden of Moorgate, Yorkshire, with whom he had seven children. 
In March 1821 Hoare moved to the family living of Godstone, near Reigate, Surrey, which he held for the remainder of his life. In 1829 he became rural dean of South-East Ewell, and on 10 November in the same year the archdeacon of Winchester. On 2 December 1831 he was made a canon residentiary of Winchester Cathedral. He published on the defence of the Irish church, the maintenance of cathedral establishments, and the cause of education. He was a great supporter of religious societies, and held a yearly missionary gathering at Godstone vicarage. 
On 14 November 1847 Hoare was transferred to the archdeaconry of Surrey, where he took an interest in the church extension movement in south London. A committed, but not narrow, evangelical, Hoare was on close terms with Hannah More, Wilberforce, the Thorntons, Venn, Macaulay, and Simeon. He had also been one of Sumner's appointments. He resigned his archdeaconry in 1860. Hoare died at Godstone vicarage on 15 January 1865, and was buried in a vault in the churchyard on 21 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 13383


Hoare, Clement (1788/9-1849), vine grower, cultivated a vineyard at Sidlesham, near Chichester, from where he moved in 1841 to Shirley vineyard, near Southampton. He was the author of several works on the practicalities of vine growing, including, in 1844, 'A Descriptive Account of an Improved Method of Planting and Managing the Roots of Grape Vines'. This proposed growing vines in hollow pillars, a method which 'at once met with the condemnation it merited' ('Cottage Gardener', 1849). Soon after the publication of this work, which he financed himself, Hoare became insolvent, his vineyard was broken up, and 'heart-subdued, he was sunk before his time into the grave' (ibid.). He died on 18 August 1849, at Vauxhall, Surrey, aged sixty. 


@@@@@


doc= 13384


Hoare, Prince (1755-1834), playwright and artist, was born at Bath, the younger son and fourth of the five children of William Hoare RA (1707/8-1792) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Barker (died 1793). He was educated by Mr Hele, first master of the grammar school at Bath, and instructed in art by his father. In 1772 he gained a Society of Arts premium, and in that year moved to London to study at the Royal Academy. In 1776 he visited Rome, and there studied under Mengs, together with Fuseli and Northcote. On his return to England in 1780 he painted for some time, exhibiting at the Royal Academy in 1781 and 1782. His exhibited work included a classical picture called 'Alceste', and a portrait of Sir T. Lawrence when a child. He ceased to exhibit after 1785. 
In 1788 Hoare took a voyage for his health to Lisbon, returning in June to London. During his absence his first play, a tragedy, 'Such Things Were', was acted at Bath on 1 January 1788, and afterwards (as 'Julia, or, Such Things Were') at Drury Lane on 2 May 1796, for the benefit of Sarah Siddons. His best-known production, 'No Song, No Supper', a farce, with music by Storace, was first acted at Drury Lane on 16 April 1790, and often subsequently. Hoare's other productions include: 'The Cave of Trophonius', a musical farce performed at Drury Lane on 3 May 1791; 'Dido', an opera staged at the Haymarket, on 23 May 1792; 'The Prize', a musical farce first performed at the Haymarket on 11 March 1793, and often subsequently; 'The Three and the Deuce', a comic drama played at the Haymarket on 2 September 1795; 'Mahmoud', an opera performed at Drury Lane on 30 April 1796; and 'The Italian Villagers', staged at Covent Garden on 25 April 1797. 
In 1799 Hoare was appointed honorary foreign secretary to the Royal Academy, and in this capacity he published 'Extracts from a Correspondence with the Academies of Vienna and St Petersbourg' (1802), 'Academic Correspondence' (1804), and 'Academic Annals of Painting' (1805; 2nd edn, 1809). He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and of the Royal Society of Literature, to which he bequeathed his library. He also produced several other volumes, including 'An Inquiry into the... Art of Design in England' (1806), 'Epochs of the Arts' (1813), and 'Memoirs of Granville Sharp' (1820). He edited a collection of essays (some his own work) entitled 'The Artist' (2 vols., 1809-10). Prince Hoare died at Brighton on 22 December 1834. 


@@@@@


doc= 13385


Hoare, Sir Richard (1648-1719), banker, was the only child of Henry Hoare (died 1699), a horse-dealer of Smithfield, and his wife, Cicely (died 1679). His parents were resident in the City of London parish of St Botolph, Aldersgate. Nothing is known of Hoare's childhood until 9 June 1665 when he was apprenticed for seven years to the goldsmith Richard Moore, who died before the end of Hoare's term. Hoare was then 'turned over' to Robert Tempest at the sign of the Golden Bottle in Cheapside. He was admitted to the freedom of the Goldsmiths' Company on 5 July 1672, the date considered to mark the foundation of Hoare's Bank. Tempest's death in November 1673 gave Hoare the opportunity to buy his business and operate on his own account in earnest. 
Hoare married Susanna, daughter of John Austen (died 1670) of Brittens, Essex, on 27 July 1672 in the chapel of Lincoln's Inn. They lived in the parish of St Mary Woolnoth, where their first child, also Richard, was born on 24 May 1673. Hoare and his wife had seventeen children, ten of whom died in infancy. 
The early goldsmiths' books reveal that Hoare contracted out much of the plate and jewellery trade, and from the start acted as banker to his customers. He kept 'running cashes' and opened named accounts, honouring drawn notes and issuing receipts. He took money on deposit, and lent at interest. In the autumn of 1690, he moved his business to Fleet Street, to premises formerly called the Golden Hinde, which he renamed the Golden Bottle. He acquired the goodwill of a goldsmith's shop already on the site and added to its customers a list of established clients he had brought from Cheapside. 
Hoare was in an excellent position to attract good customers in London and the country. Many were distinguished in their own fields, and all were looked after assiduously by Hoare, as Lord Ashburnham testified: 'Upon all occasions [you] have so eminently showed your affection, care and diligence in promoting the wellfare and interest of mee and myne... I shall never be wanting nor shall those that belong to mee' (Ashburnham to Hoare, 12 May 1698, Hoare's Bank Archives). Until 1702, when he was joined by his son Henry Hoare (1677-1725), Hoare worked alone, except for the assistance of three clerks. He was a good judge of investments and his standing among City financiers was high, which no doubt assisted his progress in his career as public servant. He was appointed a receiver for the 'Salt Duty Act' (1694) and for the 'Malt Duty Act' (1697), and began his political career in the tory interest by his election to the aldermanic bench for Bread Street ward in 1703. He was elected sheriff in 1708 and attained the office of lord mayor, by seniority, in 1712. In that year he also became one of the founding directors of the South Sea Company. 
Queen Anne conferred on him a knighthood on her visit to the Guildhall on 29 October 1702; and Hoare secured her privy purse account through the offices of her lady-in-waiting, his friend Lady Abigail Masham (died 1734), whose daughter Anne was to be the first wife of Hoare's grandson, Henry Hoare (1705-1785). Interested in the development of his native city, Hoare presided over Christ's Hospital from 1713 to 1719 and over the London workhouse, and served as prime warden of the Goldsmiths' Company (1703-4), and as one of the committee for building fifty new churches in London. He finally succeeded in gaining a seat in parliament in 1710, representing the City of London until 1715. Hoare provided Robert Harley's administration with advice and financial aid, but his support waned over the issue of protecting British trade interests during the War of the Spanish Succession. He joined Sir Francis Child (1642-1713) and other goldsmith bankers in opposition to the whig-sponsored Bank of England, and published his objections to its foundation (1694) and to the renewal of its charter (1707) ('The Anatomy of Exchequer Alley', 16 March 1707). Never allowing politics to be an obstacle to good business, however, he welcomed two of the directors as bank customers. A high-church Anglican, he privately supported the tory preacher and pamphleteer Dr Sacheverell, but while serving as sheriff Hoare was instrumental in the suppression of the published text of the sermon Sacheverell had delivered at St Paul's Cathedral on 5 November 1709. 
Hoare succeeded in establishing an enduring private banking dynasty, but in his lifetime his ambition for four of his sons was that they should be established abroad in the merchant service with a special interest in the diamond trade. He was a conscientious father and a diligent correspondent, offering encouragement as well as strict advice; but his entreaties to his sons abroad to acquire good business habits were doomed to fail, and their incapacity, allied with a wartime depression in the trade, laid waste his plans. His eldest son Richard was perpetually in debt to his father, and so his second surviving son, Henry, became his heir, inheriting the business with his brother Benjamin (1693-1750). 
Seldom at leisure, Hoare nevertheless enjoyed his country house at Hendon and took an interest in its furnishing and garden. By the terms of his marriage settlement he bought an estate in Staplehurst, Kent, where subsequent generations of his family were to settle. From his father he inherited a lifelong interest in horses, and hunted into middle age. Early in 1718 Hoare was taken ill, and he died at Hendon on 6 January 1719. His funeral, on 13 January, at St Dunstan-in-the-West, opposite his banking house, was attended by a great number of people of all ranks. He was buried there, and a monument, designed by Thomas Stayner, was subsequently erected by his heir. His wife, Susanna, survived him. 
Sir Richard's bank at the sign of the Golden Bottle acquired a reputation as one of the most conservative and solid of the West End banking houses. Although he was himself unequivocally a mercantile figure, his son Henry and grandson Henry became landed proprietors as well as bankers, and were responsible for the creation of the gardens at Stourhead. Another grandson, 


@@@@@


doc= 13386


Sir Richard Hoare (1709-1754), banker, was lord mayor of London at the time of the Jacobite rebellion in 1745, and was knighted on 31 October 1745. He married Sarah Tully (died 1736) in 1732, and, after her death, Elizabeth Rust (died 1752) in 1737; he had two sons and two daughters. The younger Sir Richard died on 12 October 1754, and was buried in the family vault in St Dunstan-in-the-West. 


@@@@@


doc= 13387


Hoare, Sir (Richard) Colt, second baronet (1758-1838), landowner and antiquary, was born on 9 December 1758 at Barn Elms, Barnes, Surrey, the eldest son of Sir Richard Hoare, first baronet (1735-1787), banker, and Anne Hoare (1737-1759), known as Nanny, daughter of Henry Hoare (1705-1785), banker, of Stourhead, and his wife, Susan Colt (died 1743). Colt Hoare's parents were first cousins. His mother died when he was six months old and his father married, second, Frances Ann Acland (1736-1800), with whom he had four sons and two daughters. Colt Hoare grew up with his half-brothers and sisters 'in a delightful and extensive villa on the Thames between Putney and Mortlake' (Woodbridge, 71); he was particularly close to the eldest, Henry Hugh (1762-1841). He attended a preparatory school in Wandsworth run by Mr Davis and later studied at Dr Samuel Glasse's seminary in Greenford, Middlesex. He continued his classical studies with a private tutor, the Revd Joseph Eyre, while learning the profession of banker at the family bank in Fleet Street. Henry Hoare favoured his grandson by giving him a house in Lincoln's Inn Fields and an annual allowance of $2000 on his coming of age. His marriage on 18 August 1783, at Barnes, to Hester Lyttelton (1762-1785), daughter of William Henry Lyttelton of Hagley, Lord Westcote, later Lord Lyttelton, and his first wife, Mary Macartney (died 1765), was short-lived. The couple's only surviving child, Henry, was born on 17 September 1784; Hester did not live to see his first birthday for she died on 22 August 1785. Colt Hoare never remarried. In the same year, under the terms of his grandfather's will, he inherited Stourhead, with its estates in Wiltshire, Somerset, and Dorset, and severed all connection with the bank except as a customer. 
Deprived of both wife and career, and needing 'new scenes and new occupations... to detach my mind from melancholy reflections', Colt Hoare turned his back on England and his young son and began his extensive travels abroad, equipped with an annual income of about $10,000 ('Memoirs', Colt Hoare MSS). He was away for an almost continuous period of six years. His copious notes and journals, which chronicle his travels, were written up later in 'Recollections abroad: journals of tours on the continent, 1785-1791' (1815-18), but little is revealed in them of his private life. His focus was on Italy, Rome and Naples in particular, but he travelled as well in France, Switzerland, and Spain, writing home regularly to his steward Thomas Charlton at Stourhead and to his half-brother Henry Hugh Hoare. He visited all the classical sites and immersed himself in the landscape, all the time drawing, recording, and collecting for his house and portfolio. In Rome he discovered the work of the Swiss watercolourist Louis Ducros (1748-1810), whose revolutionary style of painting he believed would have a profound influence on the English school. He brought back large-scale Italian views by Ducros for Stourhead. 
After a brief return home Colt Hoare resumed his travels in 1788, 'no longer as a tourist but as a systematic antiquarian... quitting... the road for the path, the capital for the provinces' (R. C. Hoare, 'A Classical Tour through Italy and Sicily', 1819, x). He passed through the Netherlands, Germany, Venice, and Florence and finally settled in Siena. He sought to locate the major sites of the Etruscan civilization, then explored the Appian way with his sketchbook and returned south in order to visit the recently publicized Greek ruins at Paestum and those in Sicily. His romantic response to Italy was at once tempered and inflamed by a close interest in the classical authors, who turned his attraction into a passion; virtually nothing he saw was without resonance from a documented source: 'every scene bears a classic character and every district acquires double interest from the recollections it calls forth' (R. C. Hoare, 'Recollections Abroad', 2.130). 
The French Revolutionary War closed the continent to travellers, and Colt Hoare arrived in Britain in the summer of 1791 at a time when travel through France was still possible, if not comfortable. He never went abroad again. He carried on the habit of keeping meticulous diaries detailing his visits and journeys until his death. Each spring he would travel in the British Isles and in 1806 he went to Ireland. He had a particular fondness for Wales, as did many of his fellow antiquaries, and he made a significant contribution to its travel literature with his translation of Gerald of Wales, published as 'Giraldus de Barri, Itinerary of Archbishop Baldwin through Wales AD' 1188 (1806). He provided the illustrations for William Coxe's 'Historical Tour of Monmouthshire' (1801) and did the same for his friend Roger Fenton in his 'Historical Tour through Pembrokeshire' (1811). He bought a fishing-lodge at Bala in 1796; throughout his life Colt Hoare was an enthusiast for all field sports. He spent some winter months at his London house in St James's Square and in 1805 served as high sheriff for Wiltshire. 
Apart from time spent touring, Colt Hoare's energies were fully occupied with developing his inheritance at Stourhead and with his ambitious publishing projects on the ancient and modern histories of his own county. He embarked on grand tree-planting schemes in the gardens, and his election as a fellow of the Linnean Society (1812) recognized his particular contribution to the cultivation of exotic plants; according to one expert, 'his collection of Geraniaceae exceeds every other in this country' (R. Sweet, 'Geraniaceae', 5 vols., 1820-22, 1.18). He had been elected as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and admitted to the Society of Dilettanti in 1792. Building work at Stourhead began in 1792 and continued after the outbreak of war with France. After 'finding in the mansion house, as it was, not sufficient room for either his collection of paintings or library of books he made in the year 1800 a considerable addition... by adding two wings' (A. Hoare, introduction). In the picture gallery Colt Hoare gave pride of place over the chimney-piece to his most important Italian purchase, 'The Adoration of the Magi' by Ludovico Cardi (Cigoli) (1605), but it was the library which was his most 'significant contribution to culture' (Woodbridge, 251). He gave his collection of Italian topographical and historical works to the British Museum in 1825 but in its place he collected nearly every book on the history and topography of the British Isles. He created in his house the scholarly atmosphere of a medieval monastery, without any of the discomforts, and provided most of the documentary sources required by himself and his collaborators for their work on the history and archaeology of Wiltshire. This unique collection of books and drawings was dispersed in the Stourhead heirloom sales (Sotheby, Wilkinson, and Hodge, 1883 and 1887). The library was handsomely furnished by Thomas Chippendale the younger, whose ailing business, after he was made bankrupt in 1804, relied heavily on Colt Hoare for survival. 
Colt Hoare's ambition, however, was to be an author, not just a collector of books. In this he had the invaluable assistance of William Cunnington of Heytesbury, a tradesman turned antiquary, who was excavating the prehistoric barrows in his neighbourhood. He was the moving spirit behind the team that produced the first volume (in three parts) of 'The Ancient History of South Wiltshire' in 1812. Colt Hoare was the financier and author. As a survey of Wiltshire barrows it is incomplete but Colt Hoare was commended: 'No antiquary had ever the same means or opportunities before Sir Richard Hoare and no-one ever availed himself more entirely of the advantages which he possesses' ('Quarterly Review', 5, 1811, 118). The second volume, 'The Ancient History of North Wiltshire', appeared in 1819. Cunnington had died in 1812 but Colt Hoare gave him the final word: 'to him alone the discovery of the numerous settlements of the Britons, dispersed over our hills, must be justly attributed' ('Ancient Wiltshire', 2.126). 
Colt Hoare's characteristic desire to promote British artists established him as a significant patron. He continued his grandfather's close association with the watercolourist Francis Nicholson, who recorded the now maturing landscape at Stourhead, and with Samuel Woodforde, who painted the full-length double portrait of Colt Hoare and his son for the collection of family portraits in the hall at Stourhead. Sir John Leicester of Tabley introduced him to the young Turner, who painted a series of watercolour views of Salisbury Cathedral between 1794 and 1806 for Colt Hoare. Furthermore, Turner copied one of Colt Hoare's own drawings for his oil of 'Lake Avernus with Aeneas and the Cumaean Sybil' in 1815. These works were sold in 1883. 
Colt Hoare's son, Henry, showed little interest in anything more serious than the life of pleasure available to a well-born young man of means. He married Charlotte Dering and they had one daughter, Ann, born in 1808. Relations between Colt Hoare and his daughter-in-law were not warm and, following his son's nervous breakdown in 1811, there ensued a bitter period of disharmony between father and son. Henry's instability and propensity for debt led to further unhappiness. He and Charlotte separated, and Colt Hoare was plagued by demands to settle his son's debts at a time when the country was in the grip of an economic crisis. Henry died at Hastings in 1836. 
Colt Hoare was reserved in his manner and intellectual in his tastes but his evident enjoyment of society leads one to suspect that he would have embraced family life. He faced the breakdown in his relationship with his only child while struggling with gout, rheumatism, and increasing deafness, ailments that were to plague him for the rest of his life. Increasingly confined to Stourhead, he went to Bath for relief and assiduously worked on his county history of Wiltshire, taking as his immediate model John Nichols's 'History and Antiquities of the County of Leicester'. The first part, 'The hundred of Mere', appeared in 1822; it described most of Colt Hoare's own possessions. In all, fourteen parts were published on the hundreds of south Wiltshire, under the title 'The History of Modern Wiltshire' (1822-44), usually bound in six volumes. The last two hundreds were written after Colt Hoare's death in order to complete the project. His last fieldwork was to see the Roman Pitney pavement uncovered at Somerton. He published a report on this excavation in 1831, which has proved invaluable as the pavement was destroyed five years later. 
Colt Hoare died on 19 May 1838 at Stourhead and was buried in the family mausoleum in the churchyard of St Peter's, Stourton. His memorial, a marble statue by R. C. Lucas, is in Salisbury Cathedral. The estate passed to his half-brother Henry Hugh Hoare. In due course Stourhead passed to the National Trust and became one of its finest properties. 


@@@@@


doc= 13388


Hoare, William (1707/8-1792), portrait painter, was born near Eye, Suffolk, the eldest of the three children of John Hoare, a prosperous farmer and land agent. The family soon moved to Berkshire and William was sent to school in Faringdon where he showed an early talent for drawing. His father was persuaded to send him to London in the early 1720s, where he joined the studio of Giuseppe Grisoni, an Italian who had come to England in 1718. When Grisoni returned to Italy in 1728, he took Hoare with him. Once in Rome, Hoare shared lodgings in via Gregoriana with Peter Angillis, Laurent Delvaux, and Peter Scheemakers. He joined the studio of Francesco Imperiali, a history painter, and also frequented the studios of the French Academy nearby in the Corso. Personable and well educated, he formed lasting friendships with many young grand tourists who became his patrons: Henry Bathurst, the future third and fourth dukes of Beaufort, Robert Dingley, Henry Hoare (1705-1785) (no relation), George Lyttelton, Charles Hanbury Williams, and Joseph Spence, tutor to the future second duke of Dorset and later to the earl of Lincoln. 
Hoare returned to England in 1737 or 1738. He had connections with the entourage of Frederick, prince of Wales, and drew the 'Prince's Portrait' in pastel (ex Sothebys, 11 April 1991, lot 28), but he did not prosper and decided to move to Bath, where his brother Prince (died 1769) was a sculptor and where the Bath seasons were to furnish him with a constant stream of sitters. He quickly came to the notice of Beau Nash and Ralph Allen, whose portraits he painted in oil (1749, Bath corporation; 1758, Exeter Health Authority). In 1742 Hoare was elected a visitor to the Mineral Water Hospital, the duty of which he performed regularly until 1779. This appointment brought him many commissions and the hospital itself still contains a fine collection of Hoare's works, including 'Self Portrait' (pastel, 1742) and 'Dr Oliver & Mr Peirce Examining Patients' (oil; exh. Society of Artists, 1761). He obtained a major commission for an altarpiece for the Octagon Chapel in Bath, 'The Pool of Bethesda' (1765; Bath Masonic Hall Association). An habitue of Stourhead, he furnished the younger Henry Hoare with many family portraits still 'in situ'. On 4 October 1742 Hoare married at Lincoln's Inn chapel, London, Elizabeth Barker (died 1793); they had five children: Mary (1744-1820), who was also an artist, mainly in crayon, Anne (1751-1821), William jun. (1752-1809), the playwright and painter Prince Hoare (1755-1834), and Georgiana ('b'. 1759), who died in infancy. 
Many of Hoare's old Rome acquaintances had become his patrons, and a very substantial part of his income came from politicians' portraits (for example, 'William Pitt the Elder', 'c'.1754; NPG), their replicas, and the fine mezzotints by Richard Houston commissioned after them. Hoare remained in close touch with the London art milieu. He was connected to the Foundling Hospital and to the Magdalen Hospital, to which he presented a 'Portrait of Robert Dingley', its founder, in 1762. In 1755 he joined others in signing a request for the founding of an academy. He first exhibited publicly at the Society of Artists in 1761 and in 1769 became a founder member of the Royal Academy at the king's special request, exhibiting intermittently ['see 'Founders of the Royal Academy of Arts]. Hoare died in Edgar Buildings, Bath, on 10 December 1792, and his wife on 30 November 1793. There is a wall tablet to both in Walcot church, near Bath, and a wall monument to Hoare by Chantrey (1828) in Bath Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 13389


Hoare, William Henry (1809-1888), divine, born at Penzance, Cornwall, on 31 October 1809, was the second son of William Henry Hoare (1776-1819), a banker, of Broomfield House, Battersea, Surrey, and his wife, Louisa Elizabeth (1784/5-1816), daughter of Sir Gerard Noel Noel, bt, of Exton, Rutland. He held a scholarship at St John's College, Cambridge, from 1827 to 1831, when he graduated BA as thirty-first wrangler and seventh classic, and was bracketed with Dean Blakesley for the chancellor's medals. In 1833 he was elected fellow of his college, and proceeded MA in 1834, but vacated his fellowship following his marriage on 17 July 1834 to Araminta Anne, third daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir John Hamilton, bt (1755-1835). They had three sons and one daughter. 
In 1841 Hoare became curate of All Saints, Southampton, but ill health prevented him from accepting any of the livings which were offered to him. He concentrated on theological study, became a good Hebrew scholar, and produced several works affirming the literal truth of the 'Bible', including 'Harmony of the Apocalypse with the Prophecies of Holy Scripture' (1848) and 'The Veracity of the Book of Genesis' (1860). In 1863 he wrote two treatises attacking Bishop Colenso's view that the 'Pentateuch' was unhistorical. He acted for some time as commissary to the bishop of Newcastle, New South Wales, was diocesan inspector of the diocese of Chichester, and the founder and secretary of the Worth Clerical Association. Hoare died on 22 February 1888 at Oakfield, Crawley, Sussex, which he had purchased, and where he lived after 1848, and was buried on 29 February in Worth churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 13390


Hobart, George, third earl of Buckinghamshire (1731-1804), theatre manager and politician, was born in London on 8 September 1731, the eldest of the two sons (there were no daughters) of John Hobart, later first earl of Buckinghamshire (1693-1756), and his second wife, Elizabeth Bristow ('bap'. 1694, died 1762). He entered Westminster School in 1739 and was elected king's scholar in 1746. He does not seem to have attended university. In 1754 he was elected to one of the parliamentary seats in St Ives, Cornwall. On 16 May 1757 he married Albinia [
With the influence of the Hobart family diminishing in St Ives, Hobart was not returned there in 1761 but was instead elected for Bere Alston, Devon. His ambitions, however, lay in diplomatic service. He had applied for the position of British resident in Hamburg in 1756, and in August 1762 he accompanied his half-brother, John Hobart, second earl of Buckinghamshire, to Russia as secretary to the embassy. The posting was unsuccessful: on 21 October 1762 Buckinghamshire wrote to his aunt Henrietta, countess of Suffolk, that the comfort-loving Hobart was 'a good deal out of spirits' (Buckinghamshire, 1.76) in the bleak surroundings of Moscow, and on 27 December he reported that Hobart was 'determin'd to ask leave to return to England' ('Lothian MSS', 171) and on 13 April 1763 that he was on the point of departure. He arrived in London in July 1763. 
Hobart's diplomatic career was over, but a few years later he found a new direction as manager of the opera at the King's Theatre in the Haymarket. The opera had had aristocratic managers before, such as Charles Sackville, earl of Middlesex (later second duke of Dorset), for several years after 1741, but Hobart showed more application in running the opera as a viable business. He bought a controlling share in the opera patent between July and September 1769 and ran a programme containing both serious and comic operas. The main challenge of his tenure came at the beginning of 1771, when Theresa Cornelys added 'harmonic meetings' to her assemblies at Carlisle House. The leading performer was a countertenor castrato, Gaetano Guadagni, who had been the leading countertenor at the King's Theatre until his resignation, prompted, according to Horace Walpole, by Hobart's promotion of Anna Maria Zamperini -- believed to be Hobart's mistress -- over Guadagni's sister. Hobart employed spies to gather evidence; Cornelys and Guadagni were brought to trial and both were fined. Hobart continued to work to vary the offerings at the King's Theatre, and at the beginning of the 1771-2 season brought the dancer Anne-Frederique Heinel over from Paris to help raise the profile of dance. At the beginning of 1773 he retired from the opera, perhaps through financial strain, and sold at least some of his shares to the actor James Brooke. 
Thereafter Hobart seems to have lived as a gentleman, having inherited the hall and estate at Nocton in Lincolnshire from a distant relative, Sir Richard Ellys, third baronet, when it was relinquished by Ellys's widow in 1766. He visited Paris in 1776 and 1779. It may have been during this period that he met Mary Ann Joseph Delibossart of Paris, possibly his mistress; she and her daughters Augusta Joseph Bezos and Seraphina Delibossart are mentioned in his will, as is Ann Barker, the wife of John Barker of Belgrave Square. He remained MP for Bere Alston until 1780, by which time his half-brother had sold his interest in Bere Alston to Hugh Percy, first duke of Northumberland. He does not seem to have sought another seat, and was probably content to leave the family's political affairs to his eldest son, Robert Hobart, later fourth earl of Buckinghamshire. He maintained connections with the theatrical world; his daughter Albinia (1759-1853) married Richard Cumberland, son of the playwright, in 1784, and he probably retained a financial interest in the King's Theatre. He was a member of the committee of mortgagees and creditors who petitioned the lord chamberlain in 1791 to allow a rebuilt King's Theatre to continue as an opera house when the patent, following the fire of 1789, had been allowed to migrate to the Pantheon. 
However, by this time Hobart had been eclipsed as a public figure by his wife, Albinia. Leading a separate life from her husband, she became well known for her lavish assemblies and for her dramatic performances, which usually featured herself and her daughters, and were often staged at Nocton Hall or at the Hobarts' house on Ham Common. This was modelled on Frederick the Great's villa and named Sans-Souci after it. In 1784 she joined the campaign of her relative Sir Cecil Wray in the notorious Westminster election. She was not the highest in rank of the ladies who supported Wray, the ministerial candidate, nor even the most active, but her obese figure -- her appearance was likened to a beefsteak -- made her a target for satirists seeking a subject who could be contrasted with the Foxite whig campaigner and renowned beauty Georgiana Cavendish, duchess of Devonshire. She could also, like Wray, be charged with apostasy, as most of her social circle were supporters of Fox. 
Hobart succeeded his half-brother as earl of Buckinghamshire on 3 September 1793, but did not inherit the family estates, which the second earl had divided among his daughters. The new countess, already infamous as a gambler, was reported as opening her house for faro games twice a week in order to raise the funds to maintain her new dignity. Charles Pigott, in 'The Female Jockey Club', attacked her as someone who, if she were not of a noble family, 'would in all probability have passed much of her time in the house of correction' (Pigott, 106), and affected to praise her theatrical productions on the grounds that they could cure the most intractable cases of insomnia. In March 1797, alongside Lady Elizabeth Luttrell, she was fined $50 for illicit gambling. 
Buckinghamshire, meanwhile, was happy to accept the additional honours and duties that became his rank. In 1797 he became colonel of the 3rd regiment of Lincolnshire militia, and on 12 January 1799 he was awarded the rank of colonel in the army for as long as his regiment should remain embodied for active service. He died on 14 November 1804 at Nocton, Lincolnshire, and was buried there. He was survived by his wife and by two of his five sons -- Robert, fourth earl of Buckinghamshire, and Henry Lewis ('bap'. 1774, died 1845), dean of Windsor from 1816. Three other sons -- George ('bap'. 1758), George Vere ('bap'. 1764, died 1802), governor of Grenada, and Charles ('bap'. 1766, died 1782), a naval officer killed in action -- predeceased him. His eldest daughter, Albinia, was lady of the bedchamber to the daughters of George III from 1796 to 1812 and was the mother of the army officer Richard Francis George Cumberland; his twin daughters, Henrietta Anne Barbara ('bap'. 1762, died 1828) and Maria Frances Mary ('bap'. 1762, died 1794), married, respectively, the politician John Sullivan and George Augustus North, third earl of Guilford ['see under 'North, Frederick, second earl of Guilford]; and his youngest daughter, Charlotte (died 1798), married Edward Disbrowe, an army officer, and was the mother of the diplomatist Sir Edward Disbrowe. Albinia, dowager countess of Buckinghamshire, died on 11 March 1816 at Nocton, Lincolnshire, and was buried there like her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 13391


Hobart, Sir Henry, first baronet (c.1554-1625), lawyer and judge, was the second son of Thomas Hobart (1522/3-1560) of Plumstead, Norfolk, and his wife, Audrey (died 1580), daughter of William Hare of Beeston, Norfolk. He was the great-grandson of Sir James Hobart, attorney-general to Henry VII. Hobart was admitted to Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1570, and after studying at Furnival's Inn he entered Lincoln's Inn on 30 July 1575, and was called to the bar on 24 June 1584. Hobart was appointed counsel for Great Yarmouth in October 1586, and by 1590 he was made under-steward to Lord Burghley. It was probably Burghley who secured his return to parliament in 1589 for the Cornish borough of St Ives. 
On 20 April 1590 Hobart made a settlement on his marriage (the actual marriage was variously reported as on 21, 22, or 29 April) to Dorothy ('bap'. 1572, died 1641), daughter of Robert Bell of Beaupre Hall, Norfolk, the chief baron of the exchequer. They had twelve sons and four daughters, eight sons and two daughters surviving him. By the early 1590s, when he became a Norfolk JP, Hobart was becoming established in local county society. In 1592 he became a freeman of Norwich; he was appointed counsel for King's Lynn in 1594, and became steward of Norwich in 1595. He was made a bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1596, the same year that he purchased Intwood in Norfolk. In 1597 he was returned to parliament for Great Yarmouth, sitting on the committee of privileges and returns, and successfully defending the port's interests against those of its rival, Lowestoft. He was again elected for Great Yarmouth in 1601, again sitting on the committee of privileges and returns and on the parliament's main business committee. He was made a serjeant-at-law in May 1603, his patrons being the earl of Kent and the judges Francis Gawdy and George Kingswell, and gave the reading at Lincoln's Inn on 27 Eliz. I c.4 (fraudulent conveyance). He was knighted on 23 July 1603. In 1604 he was returned to parliament for Norwich, being appointed to many committees and playing a role in the attack on Bishop Thornborough of Bristol for discussing in a book the debate of the House of Commons on union with Scotland. He was a union commissioner in 1604-6. 
On 2 November 1605 Hobart was discharged from the coif upon his appointment as attorney of the court of wards and liveries, an office he owed to Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury. In 1606, as a government spokesman in the Commons, he responded to the Gunpowder Plot, supported the king's prerogative in the controversy over purveyance, and supported a grant of supply to pay Queen Elizabeth's debts and to improve the state of the coinage. On 4 July 1606 he was appointed attorney-general, much to the chagrin of Sir Francis Bacon. Controversy attended his continuance as an MP, as in his capacity as attorney-general he had been summoned as an assistant to the House of Lords, and there were no precedents for an attorney-general to continue to sit in the lower house. The matter was debated inconclusively on 22 November 1606, and eventually settled when Hobart accompanied the speaker into the chamber and took his seat on 24 November. He then became heavily involved in the legislative business of the Commons. In his capacity as attorney-general in 1608 he appeared for the plaintiff, Robert Calvin, in the case of the post-nati. He was named a commissioner of ecclesiastical causes in 1608, and appointed to the committee of the Virginia Company in 1609. In the 1610 session of parliament he was the principal government spokesman on the great contract and supply, supporting the king's right to impositions. He also led the attack on Dr Cowell's book 'The Interpreter', speaking at a conference with the Lords in May 1610. On 11 May 1611 Hobart was created a baronet, one of the first to receive that honour. In the summer of 1611 he was reported to be seriously ill, but subsequently recovered. In 1612 Hobart became chancellor to Henry, prince of Wales. Following the death of Salisbury in May 1612, he was one of the few mourners at the earl's funeral. Also in 1612 he became a commissioner on the enfranchisement of copyholders and a member of the North West Passage Company. On 26 November 1613 he was appointed chief justice of common pleas, but he was not always regarded as amenable to the court. In 1615, when James I wished to secure the conviction of Edmund Pearson on the western circuit, Hobart was dispatched on the home circuit instead. In November 1616 Hobart purchased the manor of Blickling, Norfolk. On 1 September 1617 he leased part of his house at Blickling, plus the outbuildings and 201 acres, for six years at $110 p.a., presumably to provide some income from the estate while he embarked upon an extensive building programme. Between February 1618 and April 1622 Hobart spent over $6500 on Blickling, and work still continued after his death. Another outlet for Hobart's surplus cash was the East India Company, of which he became a member in 1617. 
Hobart's appointment as chief justice was revoked on 1 April 1617, with a fresh appointment dated 2 April to make allowance for the fact that he was now also chancellor to Charles, prince of Wales. On the bench Hobart opposed the draconian fine which Sir Edward Coke wished to impose on the earl of Suffolk in 1619, following his dismissal as lord treasurer. In 1619 he was named to a commission on the relief of the poor. In 1621 Hobart was one of the commissioners who found in favour of Archbishop Abbot following the accidental death of a gamekeeper who had been killed by a cross-bow shot from Abbot during a hunt. Hobart was reappointed a judge on 29 March 1625, following the accession of Charles I. Hobart's death was variously reported to have taken place on 26, 28, or 29 December 1625, the latter date appearing to be the most likely. 
According to Judge Jenkins: 'in Hobart were many noble things, an excellent eloquence, the eclat of ancestry, the most engaging sweetness animated with a singular gravity' ('Lothian MSS', viii). Hobart was buried on 4 January 1626 at Blickling. He left houses at Highgate and St Bartholomew's in London, and Chapel in the Fields, Norwich. He was succeeded by his son John, the second baronet. Hobart's widow was buried at Blickling on 30 April 1641. In 1641 a volume of his law reports was published, with subsequent editions in 1650, 1671, 1678, and 1724. 


@@@@@


doc= 13392


Hobart, Sir James (d. 1517), judge, was born at Monks Eleigh in Suffolk, the son of Thomas Hobart. He trained at Lincoln's Inn, and gave his second law reading in Lent 1479. Between Michaelmas 1486 and Michaelmas 1506 he was elected annually as the senior governor, and lent the inn significant sums of money to rebuild its hall. Hobart seems initially to have lived at Bacton in Suffolk; appointed a JP for the county in 1466, he sat for Ipswich in the parliaments of 1467-8, 1478, and January 1483. In 1482 he switched to the Norfolk commission of the peace, probably as a result of moving his major residence to Hales Hall, Loddon. 
Hobart's principal early clients were the Mowbray dukes of Norfolk and he continued to serve Elizabeth, the dowager duchess, until her death in 1506. By 1463, however, he was also being employed by Sir John Howard, the future first Howard duke. Hobart appears in the Paston letters as the servant of both families (as well as a personal friend of John (III) Paston). Steward for Howard's Suffolk estates, Hobart was also his principal legal adviser, and one of the retinue. In 1484 he promised to supply at his own expense three armed men for the force that the newly elevated duke was raising for Richard III, and in addition 'to gete hym as many men as he can gete' (Collier, 2.481). Hobart was also feed by Richard himself. 
Given this history it is surprising that James Hobart was not dropped as a JP after Bosworth with other Howard supporters, and even more that on 3 November 1486 Henry VII appointed him as attorney-general, the law officer closest to the monarch. Influence must be presumed -- either the earl of Oxford (another client), or more probably Thomas Lovell, also of Norfolk and Lincoln's Inn, and a professional colleague. 
Hobart rapidly became one of Henry VII's principal courtiers and counsellors. As attorney-general he oversaw all the courts of law, and was a major agent of the king's policy 'to keep all Englishmen obedient through fear' ('Anglica historia', 127). Promoting all and any litigation from which the king could profit, his methods were none too principled. Particularly important were cases where royal rights could be elaborated by judicial construction, such as 'Stonor's case' (1495-6). Perkin Warbeck certainly had some grounds for stigmatizing Hobart in 1496 as one of 'the catiffs and villains of simple birth whom the king alone trusted' and whose 'subtle inventions and pilling of the people' were the 'principal occasions of misrule and mischief now in England' (Pollard, 2.153). From 1500 Hobart joined with a handful of the king's other leading advisers on a special board, known as 'the council learned in the law', which maximized royal profit by every device of law and pressure, and assisted the king in manipulating the bonds and recognizances through which Henry sought to ensnare individuals and families in a web of indebtedness to the crown. 
Hobart was an equally vigorous agent of the royal council on the local scene -- which explains Norwich's selecting him in 1496 as its recorder! In Suffolk Sir James (as he became on 18 February 1503) sat as a JP more often than anyone else (he was probably 'custos rotulorum'), and returned a disproportionate number of cases involving royal rights. Hobart also had the common lawyer's suspicion of the church and its courts. He encouraged defendants to bring charges against clerical judges under the 'Statute of 'Praemunire'' (1393), and construed the promise of costs to informers under a 'Riotous Assembly Act' of 1495 as applying to the act of 1393. In 1505 the attorney-general even brought a charge of 'praemunire' against the bishop of Norwich, Richard Nix, who urged William Warham, archbishop of Canterbury and lord chancellor, to excommunicate Hobart as 'the enemy of God and his churche' (Gunn, 16). 
It has been suggested that the high-profile Nix prosecution led to Hobart's resignation or dismissal in 1507. John Erneley, his successor as attorney-general, was appointed on 12 July. The change, however, signalled no relaxation of royal pressure on the church, and it is more probable that Hobart left in the normal way and on account of age. He had ceased to ride the assizes in 1503. By 1507 he was in his middle or late sixties, and four days before Erneley's appointment he had sued out a replacement copy of his own patent -- a step typical of a royal servant about to hand over office. The crown continued to summon him to the Lords (as it had when he was attorney-general). 
It is possibly another sign of a desire to withdraw from active life that about 1500 Hobart and his third wife put in hand major works of charity. He assisted -- probably completed -- Bishop Goldwell's choir in Norwich Cathedral, and constructed at his own expense a parish church for Loddon. Lady Hobart built the bridge over the Waveney at St Olave's with an adjacent causeway. She was Margaret, daughter of Piers Naunton of Letheringham, widow of John Dorward, and the mother of the sons Walter and Miles and daughter Katherine who survived Sir James. The estates he purchased, principally in Norfolk, were substantial -- sufficient to endow both sons. Hobart's first wife, whom he had married before 1470, had been Margery, the sister of John Lyhert and niece of Walter Lyhert, bishop of Norwich. Hobart named his son and heir after Lyhert, for whom he was an executor (as also for Bishop Goldwell, Lyhert's successor). His second wife was Dorothy, daughter of Sir John Glemham. Sir James died on 24 February 1517 and was buried in a chapel he built on the north side of the nave of Norwich Cathedral but the chapel has not survived, nor have his tomb and military brass. A number of painted panels exist, showing Sir James in armour with a heraldic tabard, and his wife in a heraldic mantle (for instance at Blickling Hall, Loddon church, and Lincoln's Inn). 


@@@@@


doc= 13393


Hobart, John, first earl of Buckinghamshire (1693-1756), politician and courtier, was born on 11 October 1693, the only son of Sir Henry Hobart, fourth baronet (1657/8-1698), of Blickling, Norfolk, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1701), the daughter and coheir of Joseph Maynard of Clifton Reynes, Buckinghamshire. He was educated at Westminster School and at Clare College, Cambridge, where he matriculated on 20 May 1710, but did not take a degree. He probably left there in 1713 or 1714, when he presented the college with a silver punchbowl. At the 1715 election he was returned to the Commons for St Ives, Cornwall, where he controlled one of the two parliamentary seats. On 8 November 1717, at Thorpe Market, Norfolk, he married Judith (died 1727), the daughter of Robert Britiffe, MP for Norwich and legal adviser to Hobart's Norfolk neighbours the Townshends and the Walpoles, and his first wife, Judith Edgar. They had three sons, only one of whom, John Hobart, later second earl of Buckinghamshire, survived infancy, and five daughters, of whom again only one, Dorothy (died 1798), who married Sir Charles Hotham-Thompson, eighth baronet, survived. Hobart was appointed vice-admiral of Norfolk in 1719, and in 1720 he inherited the Maynard family estate at Bere Alston in Devon, with an influence in that parliamentary seat. 
Hobart gained his first ministerial appointment in 1721, as a commissioner of the Board of Trade and Plantations; although he never held high office he remained a holder of government or court positions for the rest of his life. His security was often attributed to the influence that his sister Henrietta Howard, countess of Suffolk, was said to have over George II, but he survived her eclipse at court in the 1730s. He was made KB on 27 May 1725 and was invested on 17 June. In 1727 he became treasurer of the chamber to George II; his influence in Cornwall was also recognized by his appointment as assay master of the stannaries, a post he held until 1738. In the general election of 1727 he was elected for Norfolk, but on 28 May 1728 he was created Baron Hobart of Blickling. Following the death of his first wife on 7 February 1727, he had married, on 10 February 1728, at St Paul's Cathedral, London, Elizabeth (died 1762), the daughter of Robert Bristow (died 1706), who had been heir to estates in Virginia and Hampshire, and the sister of Robert Bristow, MP for Winchelsea and clerk of the green cloth. They had two sons, George Hobart, later third earl of Buckinghamshire (1731-1804), and Henry (1738-1799), MP for Norwich from 1786. 
In December 1739 Hobart was appointed lord lieutenant of Norfolk. In this capacity he raised a regiment to counter the Jacobite rising of 1745, and it was perhaps in recognition of this action that he was created earl of Buckinghamshire on 5 September 1746. The promotion may also have been belated compensation for having to exchange the position of treasurer of the chamber for that of captain of the gentleman pensioners on the formation of the broad-bottom ministry in 1744. At some point he bought an estate in Buckinghamshire, costing approximately $35,000. 
Buckinghamshire died at his home in St James's Square, Westminster, on 22 September 1756, and was buried at Blickling. He left his Norfolk and personal estate to his widow, who died on 12 September 1762 and was buried on 25 September at Richmond, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 13394


Hobart, John, second earl of Buckinghamshire (1723-1793), politician, second, and first surviving, son of John Hobart, first earl of Buckinghamshire (1693-1756), politician, and his first wife, Judith Britiffe (died 1727), was born in Greenwich, Kent, on 17 August 1723. He was educated at Westminster School (1732-9) and at Christ's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted in October 1739, but did not take any degree. On 4 October 1745 he was appointed a deputy lieutenant for the county of Norfolk, and at the general election in June 1747 was returned as a whig to parliament for the city of Norwich and the borough of St Ives, Cornwall, on his family's interest. He elected to sit for Norwich and was again returned for that city at the general election in April 1754. In December 1755 he was appointed comptroller of the household to George II, and on 27 January 1756 was sworn of the privy council. He succeeded his father as second earl of Buckinghamshire on 22 September 1756 and took his seat in the House of Lords on 14 December. Resigning the comptrollership he was appointed a lord of the bedchamber on 15 November 1756. He held the post until dismissed in November 1767 for having supported the duke of Bedford's motion of April 1767 for a Lords' address to the king to take into consideration a Massachusetts Bay act pardoning rioters in the 'Stamp Act' disturbances. 
By this date Buckinghamshire, who on 14 July 1761 had married Mary Anne Drury (1740-1769), daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Drury, baronet, of Overstone, Northamptonshire, had served as ambassador and minister-plenipotentiary to Russia. He accepted the responsibility of concluding a new treaty with Russia on 17 July 1762. The difficulty was that the Russians' priority was a political treaty, whereas Britain desired a treaty of commerce. He commenced negotiating in Moscow in December 1762 but the draft treaty proposed by the Russians in August 1763, which committed Britain to support Russia's interests in Sweden, Poland, and, in the event of war, Turkey, was unacceptable. By his own account Buckinghamshire was made very welcome at the Russian court, but his high social profile did not compensate for the lack of initiative and imagination he displayed in negotiation, and it was clear by August 1764, when Lord Sandwich effectively directed him to get the stalled negotiations moving or return to Britain, that he was not the man to bring a treaty into being. He left Russia in January 1765, having handed over the negotiating responsibility to Sir George Macartney. In October 1766, shortly after the establishment of the Chatham administration, Buckinghamshire refused Lord Shelburne's request for him to become ambassador to Spain. Despite this, he remained eager for governmental employment, but he was neither sufficiently well liked nor sufficiently able to command notice, and this dovetailed with his alienation of the king to ensure a wait of ten years for his next appointment. Indeed, it was only because Lord Dartmouth and Lord Rochford could not be prevailed upon to accept the lord lieutenancy of Ireland that Lord North and George III agreed to grant him the 'very important charge' ('Correspondence of George III', 3.363) that was Ireland. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland on 18 December 1776 and arrived in Dublin on 25 January 1777. 
As a consequence of the augmented role carved out for the lord lieutenant by Lord Townshend (1767-72), sympathy for the cause of the American colonists, and the higher profile of the patriots in the Irish House of Commons, Buckinghamshire took charge of Ireland at a difficult moment. He began badly by choosing a family friend, Richard Heron, who 'was totally unacquainted with politics and parliament' (Rosse MS C/12/1), for the crucial position of chief secretary. He compounded matters by accepting the advice of the duke of Leinster and Thomas Conolly that he should abandon those upon whom his predecessor had relied. One consequence of this was that experienced figures like John Hely-Hutchinson, John Beresford, and Henry Flood were passed over in favour of Philip Tisdall, Hussey Burgh, John Scott, and John Foster. These were not without skill or experience, but they did not possess the same authority as those they replaced in the House of Commons and were not always reliable. Despite this and the problems engendered by the unexpected death of Tisdall in September 1777, Buckinghamshire was able to negotiate the vigorous challenge offered by the patriots during the 1777-8 session with reasonable comfort. Furthermore, the ratification of a measure of Catholic relief and the vote of a record amount of taxes permitted him to put a more positive gloss on the session than a close analysis of proceedings sustains. 
One of the factors that helped the lord lieutenant in early 1778 was the conclusion of a treaty between France and the American colonies. However, privateer activity off the Irish coast and rumours of a planned French invasion in the summer of 1778 prompted the anxious protestant population to found volunteer corps to aid with the defence of the kingdom. The volunteers, as these corps were known, were entirely independent of government, and Buckinghamshire's attempt to establish a modicum of control over them by granting temporary commissions to the officers was repulsed. Irish resentment at the modest trade concessions agreed at Westminster in 1778 combined with the downturn in economic activity due to war gave rise to a non-importation campaign aimed at British goods and a powerful demand for the removal of restrictions on Ireland's right to trade with Britain and the empire in 1779. Buckinghamshire appealed to London to be allowed to respond with commercial concessions when the Irish parliament met again in October 1779, but Lord North, whose preference was for a union, tergiversated, with the result that when MPs reassembled the lord lieutenant found he could not carry the House of Commons. His most difficult moments were the spectacular volunteer protest at College Green on 4 November and the Commons' refusal to sanction other than a six months' money bill. Compelled to agree with Buckinghamshire that the only option was concession, Lord North yielded 'free trade' and it was given legislative effect in 1780. Buckinghamshire was able only then to achieve a measure of control over the House of Commons and to defeat a number of motions on constitutional points in 1780, but his earlier failures and the general frailty of English government in Ireland under his leadership ensured that he was not to be allowed to remain in his Irish posting. He felt so 'slighted and insulted' (J. Hobart to Lord G. Germain, 2 Nov 1780, 'Lothian MSS', 375) by what he regarded as Lord North's mistreatment when news of his replacement was announced that he prepared a lengthy 'vindication' of his conduct during his time in Ireland ('Lothian MSS'). He had grounds in that North was both inattentive and inconsistent with his advice to him. At the same time it is clear that Buckinghamshire was ill-equipped personally and politically to cope with the difficulties he faced in Ireland. Subsequently he had to be content with a minor political role. He supported the Fox-North coalition in 1783 and opposed Pitt's 'Regency Bill' in 1788-9. He was elected FSA on 1 April 1784. 
Following the death of his first wife on 30 December 1769 Buckinghamshire married on 24 September 1770 Caroline Conolly ('c'.1755-1817), third daughter of William Conolly of Stratton Hall, Staffordshire, and Anne Wentworth. She was the sister of Thomas Conolly (1738-1803). They had four children: three sons, all of whom died in infancy, and one daughter, Lady Amelia Anne, who survived together with the four daughters from his first marriage. Buckinghamshire died at his home, Blickling Hall, Norfolk, on 3 September 1793, aged seventy, and was buried in 1794 under the pyramidal mausoleum on the Blickling estate. He was succeeded by his brother George Hobart, third earl of Buckinghamshire (1731-1804), politician. His youngest daughter, Lady Amelia Anne Hobart (died 1829), married on 9 June 1794 Robert Stewart, later second marquess of Londonderry, but better known as Viscount Castlereagh (1769-1822), politician. 


@@@@@


doc= 13395


Hobart, Sir Miles (1598/9-1632), politician, was the son of Miles Hobart of London and his third wife, Elizabeth. He was descended from William Hobart, brother of Henry VII's attorney-general Sir James Hobart. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 30 June 1615, aged sixteen, and was admitted to Gray's Inn the following year. Knighted at Salisbury on 8 September 1623, when he was described as of Halford, Buckinghamshire, he sat for Marlow in the same county in the parliament of 1628-9. 
There is no history of Hobart's having refused to pay the forced loan in 1626-8, but by 1629 he had become one of the group of activists led by Sir John Eliot and John Selden who staged a demonstration in the House of Commons on 2 March 1629. Their aim was to condemn religious change and unparliamentary taxation while preventing the dissolution or adjournment of parliament. During the tumultuous proceedings, as Eliot attempted to read a declaration stating their position while John Holles and Benjamin Valentine held the speaker down in his chair, Hobart locked the door of the house (the serjeant-at-arms having refused to do so) and pocketed the key. This was a significant act which committed Hobart visibly to the protest. It prevented the speaker or indeed any other member from leaving the chamber and the usher of the black rod from entering. The pretension of the house to adjourn itself at the conclusion of the protest was predicated on Hobart's action. 
Hobart was one of nine members of the Commons arrested and interrogated after the session and whose recalcitrance encouraged the king's decision to dissolve the parliament. Hobart refused to give an account of his actions but did not deny having locked the door of the house. On 2 April he was sent close prisoner to the king's bench prison, and on 6 May he and five other of the prisoners sued for writs of habeas corpus, seeking bail. The petition of right (1628) could bear on the case and the cause of imprisonment notified by the crown was contempt and sedition. Hobart was also subject to the Star Chamber information filed by Sir Robert Heath, the attorney-general, which proceedings, answered by an appeal to parliamentary privilege, were later allowed to lapse. In May and June 1629 the habeas corpus arguments were heard in court and Hobart sensibly relied on Sir Edward Littleton's brief for Selden. On 23 June the prisoners were due to appear in court to be bailed, but the king subverted the authority of the law by placing them in the Tower of London where they languished throughout the summer. King Charles, in confronting a significant political and constitutional threat, sought to have the prisoners submit to his authority and legitimize his use of arbitrary imprisonment against them. The prisoners took out further writs for the first day of the Michaelmas term, and most refused a bond of good behaviour when brought before the judges in camera. In court on 5 October they again refused the bond -- which would have amounted to an admission of guilt -- and were remanded to prison. Hobart applied in vain for an alleviation of the conditions of his imprisonment. He was not tried with Eliot, Holles, and Valentine, the ringleaders in the parliamentary demonstration, but nevertheless chose to remain in prison for a further two years. 
In 1631, at a time of plague, Hobart eventually gave the required sureties and was released. He died in a coaching accident in London on 29 June 1632 and was buried at Great Marlow on 4 July. On 18 January 1647 parliament voted $500 to erect a monument to him there. Hobart was not a prominent parliamentary speaker and is famed for his actions more than his words. He leaves the impression of a practical and principled individual who showed solidarity with his parliamentary associates in the face of royal wrath. The events in which Hobart participated in 1629-30 give him an enduring place in English history: they influenced Charles I in his eventual rejection of parliament and European war as well as revealing his inclination to arbitrary rule. 


@@@@@


doc= 13396


Hobart, Robert, fourth earl of Buckinghamshire (1760-1816), politician, was born on 6 May 1760, second but first surviving son among the four sons and four daughters of George Hobart, third earl of Buckinghamshire (1731-1804), politician, of Nocton, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Albinia Bertie (1737/8-1816), elder daughter and coheir of Lord Vere Bertie ['see 'Hobart, Albinia, 'under' Hobart, George]. His parents resided at Nocton from 1766. His surname was then pronounced 'Hubberd'. As a boy he performed in plays produced for select audiences by his mother and, like his father, he became a patron of opera and theatre in his adult life. He entered Westminster School in 1770 and after enlisting as ensign in the 59th foot proceeded in 1776 to Strasbourg military academy for a year. He subsequently served in North America, becoming a captain in the 30th foot in 1778, and major in the 18th light dragoons in 1783. He returned from service in 1784 on becoming aide-de-camp to the lord lieutenant of Ireland; subsequently he was made inspector-general of recruits in Ireland. He was a supporter of the ministry, as he assured Pitt in 1788 when aspiring to a lieutenant-colonelcy, though his father leaned to opposition. He sat in the Dublin parliament for Portarlington from 1784 to 1790 and Armagh from 1790 to 1797, where he was mocked for his affected lisp. He was also by-elected to Westminster as member of parliament for Bramber on 15 December 1788 and was returned, after a contest, in 1790 for Lincoln, a seat for which he had been recommended four years before. His parliamentary career, however, was confined largely to Dublin, especially when in 1789 he was appointed chief secretary to the lord lieutenant and sworn on 21 April an Irish privy councillor. Lord Buckingham valued him for having 'quickness, parts and the most intimate knowledge of every man in Ireland' ('Fortescue MSS', 1.428). On 4 or 5 January 1792 he married Margaretta Adderley (died 1796), daughter of Edmund Burke of Corry and widow of Thomas Adderley of Inishannon, co. Cork, an Irish member of parliament. Lady Holland, in reporting his honourable conduct in so doing, described him as 'pleasing, sensible and well-looking, the finest teeth imaginable' ('Holland', 1.236). The couple had a son, who died young, and a daughter, Sarah, the future countess of Ripon. 
Although Hobart acquired a reputation for a convivial personability in Irish government circles, his parliamentary performance in Dublin was less convincing. In the 1790-91 session he failed to answer the oppositionist Henry Grattan's charge that over a third of the 300 members were in the pay of the government. He refused to accept a petition for enfranchisement from the Catholic Committee at the end of the session; however, no member was willing to present it either. He had nevertheless to come to terms with the British government's wishes, as expressed by Pitt and Henry Dundas, for concessions to be made to the Irish Catholics. During visits to London in November 1791 and April 1792, as well as in correspondence in the interim, he defended the protestant ascendancy in Ireland and, supported in 1792 by Sir John Parnell, persuaded ministers temporarily that, if withstood, the Catholics would back down. Richard Burke, Hobart's former schoolfellow, tried to dissuade him from this role, which caused his father, Edmund Burke, to write off Hobart as a stooge of the ascendancy establishment. A cosmetic 'Relief Bill', affecting just a few of the Catholic disabilities, was substituted. 
On 27 April 1792 Hobart spoke at Westminster in favour of abolition of the slave trade, but three days later disparaged parliamentary reform, particularly in Ireland. Despite his warnings that the Irish administration would be undermined by such a measure, and the lord lieutenant the earl of Westmorland's attempts to dissuade the British ministers, Hobart was by them compelled to introduce a comprehensive 'Catholic Relief Bill' in the Dublin parliament, on 4 February 1793. London insisted on this as a concomitant to the 'Irish Militia Bill' intended to raise Catholic as well as protestant recruits to replace the British regiments being withdrawn from Ireland now that war against revolutionary France had started. Hobart consoled himself with the reflection that, at least on the continent, Catholicism was a crippled creed, but the thrust of the debate on the principle of concession lay rather with the argument that protestants and Catholics, as property owners, should unite against the threat presented by the French Revolution. The bill, though mauled in detail, was carried in five weeks, and so was the 'Militia Bill'. Hobart, sworn of the British privy council on 1 May, was cock-a-hoop, and proposed at the end of the session to induce leading Irish oppositionists to coalesce with government. In October he was named governor of Madras, and dismissed a vengeful letter from Richard Burke on his dereliction of Ireland as downright insanity. When he left Dublin in December he was assured that he might eventually become governor-general of Bengal, and obtained the reversionary grant of the Irish clerkship of the common pleas in exchequer. At Westminster he defended the Irish administration on 8 April 1794, before leaving for India. He did not vacate his seat before the dissolution, and later maintained an interest in Lincoln elections. 
Hobart took over at Fort St George on 7 September 1794. His government began with a personally conducted expedition to Malacca which destroyed the Dutch settlements, but subsequent developments were less favourable to him. The death of Mohammed Ali, nawab of the Carnatic, soon after his arrival prompted Hobart to propose fiscal reforms there conducive to the relief of the oppressed peasantry. The new nawab opposed this policy by reference to a treaty of 1792 which had the assent of the former governor-general, Cornwallis. Recognizing this agreement as his chief obstacle, Hobart proposed, without consulting Sir John Shore, the current governor-general, to seize Tinnevelly as compensation for the nawab's debts to the East India Company. Shore objected to this as being contrary to treaty. After an appeal to the company's court of directors in London, the eventual decision went in favour of Shore, and Hobart's recall was ordered. Meanwhile Hobart had placed himself in similar jeopardy by extracting a surrender of territory from the raja of Tanjore in satisfaction of his debts to the company. Shore objected to this treaty as an exercise of 'force majeure', but this time the court of directors sided with Hobart. Shore was by his own admission better advised by Hobart when the latter refused to back Shore's projected expedition against Spanish Manila, and he ceased to regard Hobart as an unsuitable successor. This prospect, however, was marred by the arrival of the court of directors' order on the Carnatic appeal. Hobart, whose wife had died in Madras on 7 August 1796, left in August 1798, complimented on his services. Later he was credited with having laid the ground for the campaign against Tipu in Mysore. The company awarded him a pension of $1500 a year in view of his disappointed expectation of the governor-generalship; he might have received more, but in May 1798, he had succeeded to his sinecure Irish clerkship for life. He also had hopes of a peerage, but failing this was summoned to the Lords in his father's barony of Hobart on 30 November 1798. In the Lords he supported Pitt's proposals for Irish union, assisting William Eden, first Baron Auckland, in drawing up details. He remained hostile to an accompanying measure of Catholic relief, though he accepted a state subsidy for the Catholic clergy. On 1 June 1799 he married the daughter of Auckland and his wife, Eleanor Eliot, Eleanor Agnes Eden (1777-1851), whom her father had intended to become Pitt's wife. They had no children, but Hobart's illegitimate son, Sir Henry Ellis, was brought up in their household. 
Suitable employment for Hobart had become problematic. He was considered as a possible envoy to Russia, but preferred domestic office, especially as neither the governor-general nor the East India Company board were prepared to reinstate him in India. In March 1801 Pitt's successor, Addington, gratified him by appointing him (as second choice) secretary for war, adding to his duties in July by transferring charge of the colonies to him from the Home Office. In August 1803 his circular curbing the proliferating volunteer militias was not well received, and when Pitt, whose consent to his accession to the cabinet in 1801 he had sought, returned to power in 1804 he lost his office and declined the compensatory captaincy of the yeomen of the guard. He was, however, immortalized in the naming of the new town of Hobart in Van Diemen's Land. 
On 14 November 1804 Hobart succeeded his father in the earldom. In January 1805 he returned to office as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, as part of Addington's uneasy reconciliation with the premier; this gave him a cabinet seat again. In July, however, he resigned with his chief over Lord Melville's naval administration: he had hoped to succeed Melville to the Admiralty. He nevertheless visited Pitt on his deathbed. It was he who induced Addington, by then Lord Sidmouth, to adhere to the Grenville administration in January 1806, and he himself became joint postmaster-general, though without a seat in the cabinet, to his disappointment. Resident at this time at Derby House, St James's Square, of which his father had been a tenant, he was a member of White's Club from 1805. On the dismissal of Grenville in 1807 he was left without office until April 1812 when the new premier, Lord Liverpool, made him president of the Board of Control for India and, for two months only, chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. On 9 April 1813 he vindicated the renewal of the East India Company charter in the Lords. He retained his presidency until his death on 4 February 1816 in Hamilton Place, London, which followed a fall from his horse in St James's Park some time before. He was buried at Nocton and succeeded in the title by his nephew George Robert Hobart, fifth earl of Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 13397


Hobart, Vere Henry, Lord Hobart (1818-1875), administrator in India, was born on 8 December 1818 at Welbourne, Lincolnshire, the eldest son of Augustus Edward Hobart, from 1878 Hobart-Hampden, sixth earl of Buckinghamshire (1793-1885), and his first wife, Mary (died 1825), daughter of John Williams, serjeant-at-law; his brother, Augustus Charles Hobart-Hampden, was a naval officer and adviser to the Turkish fleet. Vere studied under Dr Mayo at Cheam School, Surrey, and in 1836 won an open scholarship to Trinity College, Oxford, where he graduated in 1840 with a second in classics. 
In March 1842 Hobart took up a clerkship procured for him in the Board of Trade by Lord Ripon and later the same year accompanied Sir Henry Ellis as secretary on a diplomatic mission to Brazil. In 1849, on his father's accession to the earldom, he took the courtesy title of Lord Hobart. In 1853 he married Mary Catherine (died 1914), daughter of Thomas Carr, a former bishop of Bombay. They were a close couple and throughout their married life Hobart rehearsed his many political theories and proposals with his wife prior to placing them before the public. 
Hobart took a keen interest in the anti-cornlaw movement and, although from a protectionist background, by 1845 he had swung round to an unflinching belief in free trade and minimal government. In 1850, frustrated in his parliamentary ambitions by a lack of money, he began to publish political articles, initially on Irish topics. He bemoaned the expenditure on public works during the famine as a criminal waste of capital and argued that Ireland's problems lay in under-development, not overpopulation. Much of his writing was designed to show how a proper application of the laws of political economy could ease pauperism. For example, in 1853 he published a pamphlet urging the introduction of limited liability for companies, arguing that such legislation would aid the productive deployment of capital and nurture co-operative societies. A collection of these writings appeared in 1866 under the title 'Political Essays'. 
In 1854 Hobart became private secretary to Sir George Grey, then colonial secretary, but resigned the post early the next year in order to be able to protest against the Crimean War. In a striking letter to 'The Times' of 22 February 1855 he called upon the government to resist the humbug of public opinion and pull back from its over-proud and un-Christian attempt to humiliate Russia. 
In 1861-2 Hobart was dispatched on a Foreign Office mission to investigate the condition of Turkish finances, a labyrinthine undertaking in which he himself had little faith. In 1863 he resigned his Board of Trade clerkship and shortly thereafter returned to Constantinople as director-general of the Ottoman Bank. In 1872 the Gladstone government appointed him governor of Madras. 
Inevitably Hobart was too radical for the Madras civil service and his term in office was marked by controversy. A devout Protestant, he had nevertheless long advocated religious tolerance and the abolition of the established church. In Madras his tolerance manifested itself as a desire to treat all religions even-handedly and in particular to counteract the under-representation of Muslims in government employment, a policy which led to accusations in the civil service and press that he was naively pro-Muslim. He was determined to expand elementary education but without increasing taxation and therefore proposed reallocating the government's existing income to give more weight to education. The government of India, however, refused to sanction any tampering with established heads of expenditure. Hobart was similarly defeated in his attempts to raise funds for major sanitary works, but he did win India Office approval for the construction of a harbour at Madras, and on this score even his critics were loud in their praise. 
Hobart died suddenly, at Government House, Madras, of typhoid fever on 27 April 1875 and was buried in St Mary's Church, Fort St George. In 1885 Lady Hobart, who was created CI for her charitable work in India, published her late husband's 'Essays and Miscellaneous Writings', prefacing them with a biographical sketch. They had had no surviving children and in 1879 she married, secondly, Charles Coates of Bath. She died in 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 13398


Hampden, Augustus Charles Hobart- (1822-1886), naval officer, was born at Walton on the Wolds, Leicestershire, on 1 April 1822, the third son and fourth child of Augustus Edward Hobart, from August 1878 Hobart-Hampden, sixth earl of Buckinghamshire (1793-1885), and his first wife, Mary (died 1825), daughter of John Williams, king's serjeant, and sister to the judge Sir Edward Vaughan Williams; his eldest brother, Vere Henry Hobart, achieved prominence as governor of Madras. Augustus went to Dr Mayo's school at Cheam, Surrey, but did not distinguish himself, and in 1835 he entered the Royal Navy, joining the 'Rover' (18 guns) at Devonport in February. The 'Rover' was paid off at Plymouth in July 1838, and Hobart joined the 'Rose' in October, became acting mate in July 1841, and, when paid off in July 1842, passed his examinations at the Naval College and on board the 'Excellent' at Portsmouth. He qualified as gunnery mate, and joined the 'Dolphin' in the autumn of 1843. His first three ships were all employed off the coast of South America in the suppression of the slave trade. He captured a slaver and took her to Demerara in May 1844. He afterwards returned to England, and was appointed to the royal steam yacht the 'Victoria and Albert' (Captain Lord Adolphus Fitz Clarence). In September 1845 he was promoted lieutenant and joined the pioneer screw steam sloop 'Rattler' in the Mediterranean, and was transferred in 1847 to the 'Bulldog' (Commander Key), where he showed himself 'full of zeal' (W. Parker, 'Life', 3, 1880, 323). In 1848 he married Mary Anne, second daughter of Dr Colquhoun Grant; she died on 13 April 1877. 
On the outbreak of the Russian war Hobart served as first lieutenant on the same vessel in the Baltic squadron, and commanded the 'Driver' for a fortnight (August 1854) at the capture of Bomarsund and the reconnaissance at Abo (Turku). His ship was commended in dispatches, and Hobart's 'ability, zeal, and great exertion' at Abo were specially mentioned. In 1855 he served aboard the 'Duke of Wellington', Admiral Dundas's flagship, and commanded the mortar boats at the attack on Sveaborg (Helsinki), for which he was again mentioned in dispatches and was promoted commander. Then for six years he left the regular service of the navy and became officer of the coastguard at Dingle, co. Kerry, and subsequently (1858-61) of the guardship at Malta. In 1861 he commanded the gun-vessel 'Foxhound' in the Mediterranean, was promoted captain in March 1863, and immediately retired on half pay. 
In spite of his family 'interest', Hobart's rise had been very slow, reflecting his lack of discipline and incompatibility with the rules of subordination. He retired in the middle of the American Civil War, and as a staunch southerner, joined some brother officers in running the blockade off North Carolina. His daring and skilful seamanship, the exciting chases and narrow escapes, when Hobart was in his proper element, are described in 'Never Caught' (1867), which he wrote under the pseudonym of Captain Roberts, and which is practically reprinted in 'Sketches of my Life' (pp. 87-186). American authorities stated that this was substantially accurate ('EdinR', 337). 
In 1867, seeking a new career of adventure, Hobart entered the Turkish service as naval adviser to the sultan, in succession to Admiral Sir Adolphus Slade. His first task was the suppression of the Cretan rebellion by intercepting supplies from Greece. For his successes here he was raised to the rank of full admiral, with the title of pasha (1869). The Turkish fleet was reorganized and improved under his direction, but in the war of 1877 the jealousy of the authorities prevented him, as commander of the Black Sea Fleet, from achieving any notable naval success, though he displayed considerable skill in defeating attacks by Russian torpedoes, a weapon he despised. In 1881 the sultan appointed him mushir or marshal of the empire. Hobart's action against Greece in 1867 breached the 'Foreign Enlistment Act', so he was struck off the British navy list. Restored to his naval rank in 1874 by Lord Derby's influence, he was again struck off in 1877 for his command of the Black Sea Fleet, but was finally restored in June 1885, with the rank of British vice-admiral. On 5 May 1879 he married Edith Katherine (died 1923), daughter of Herbert Francis Hore of Pole Hore, co. Wexford, who edited his 'Sketches'. In 1885 he visited London with a view to forming an offensive alliance between England and Turkey at the time of the Panjdeh incident. In 1886 he went to Italy to recover his health, but died at Milan on 19 June. 
Hobart-Hampden's 'Sketches of my Life' was published posthumously in 1887. John Laughton, in the 'Edinburgh Review' (January 1887, no. 337), demonstrated that he unaccountably confused dates and places, and claimed the exploits of brother officers. Hobart-Hampden was a brave and resourceful junior, but lacked the discipline and reflection for a successful career in the peacetime Royal Navy. 


@@@@@


doc= 13399


Hobbes, Robert (d. 1538), abbot of Woburn, is of unknown origins, and nothing can be said of his life before he became abbot of the Cistercian abbey of Woburn in 1524. On 27 January 1530 he obtained a royal licence for the abbey to hold two annual fairs in the town, and on 5 April 1532 he was one of the 'general reformers' commissioned by the king to hold a visitation of the whole Cistercian order; in that capacity he was present at the investigation into the misconduct of John Chascombe, abbot of Bruern, Oxfordshire. 
In 1534 Hobbes acknowledged the royal supremacy and persuaded the more reluctant members of his abbey to do likewise. Soon, however, influenced by the martyrdom of the London Carthusians and by the suppression of the lesser monasteries in 1536, Hobbes significantly altered his position, declaring in January 1538 that 'The Bysshop of Rome's Auctorite is good and lawful within this Realme accordyng to the old trade, and that is the true waye. And the contrary of the kynges parte but usurpacion disceyved by flattery and adulacion' (Scott Thompson, 137). He may also have been encouraged by the appointment of James Prestwich, a staunch conservative in religion, to be schoolmaster to the small group of royal wards then boarding in the abbey. Although several monks sympathized with Hobbes's stance, notably the sub-prior, Ralph Barnes, and the sexton, Laurence Blunham, others were opposed to his views, and in the spring of 1538 he was reported to Cromwell by William Sherburne, curate of the parish chapel and a former friar with whom Hobbes had had various disagreements. Cromwell acted quickly, dispatching William Petre and John Williams in May to take depositions, and on 14 June Hobbes, the sub-prior, and the sexton were tried at Woburn. Barnes and Blunham recanted but it appears that Hobbes held firm, although in some places it is difficult to establish an exact meaning from the long and rambling depositions of a man physically ill from strangury, and to disentangle apologies for bluntness of speech from repentance on points of principle. It is certain, however, that to the very end he remained opposed to the suppression of the monasteries, the distribution of 'wretched heretic books' by Cromwell, and the royal divorce, all sufficient to make his conviction a formality. Indeed, he confessed his offences and offered no defence. Along with his two colleagues Hobbes was shortly afterwards hanged, drawn, and quartered and the abbey confiscated by attainder. According to local tradition an oak tree in the abbey grounds served as the gallows. 
Despite the account by John Stow and the much later versions by James Froude and Francis Gasquet of the events leading to his execution, it is clear that Hobbes was no political radical and took no part in the northern rising of 1536, as Stow mistakenly believed. On the contrary he was simply a conservative in religion and an able administrator of his abbey (it is significant that no charge of mismanagement or misconduct was brought against him) who opposed the destruction of the monasteries. 


@@@@@


doc= 13400


Hobbes, Thomas (1588-1679), philosopher, was born on 5 April 1588 in Westport, a parish of the town of Malmesbury, Wiltshire, the second of the three children of Thomas Hobbes, curate, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Middleton. 
Hobbes's father belonged to a prosperous family of Malmesbury clothiers. An Edmund Hobbes, probably the philosopher's great-uncle, became 'alderman' (mayor) of the town in 1600; a William Hobbes, possibly Edmund's brother, was also a prominent clothier. Francis Hobbes, the elder brother of Hobbes's father, was a successful glover and, being childless himself, took a special interest in his brother's children, supporting Hobbes's education at Oxford and entering Hobbes's elder brother, Edmund, in his own trade. Of Hobbes's mother's family nothing is known, except that John Aubrey described it as 'a yeomanly family' of Brokenborough -- the parish, just to the north-west of Malmesbury, of which Hobbes's father was curate ('Brief Lives', 1.323). 
Hobbes's father may well have depended financially on his relatives, as his own career in the Church of England was a peculiarly inglorious one. His curacy, Brokenborough, was one of the poorest livings in the district; he appears not to have had a university education, which must have limited his prospects; and in December 1602 he was brought before the archdeacon's court 'for want of quarter sermons and for not catechisinge the younge' (Wilts. & Swindon HC, archdeaconry of Wiltshire act books, office, 1, fol. 132'v'). In the following year he was accused of slandering Richard Jeane, the vicar of a nearby parish, and required to make a public act of penitence in Jeane's church; he failed to do this, and also failed to pay the fine of 33's'. 3died which was subsequently levied on him. As a result he was formally excommunicated. One Saturday morning in February 1604 he came across Richard Jeane in the churchyard of Malmesbury Abbey, shouted abuse, and then physically assaulted him (Wilts. & Swindon HC, episcopal deposition book, instance, 22b, fols. 48'v'-49'r'). Violence against a clergyman was a serious offence, liable to corporal punishment. According to Aubrey, who knew several members of Hobbes's family, Thomas Hobbes senior 'was forcd to fly for it' and died 'in obscurity beyound London' ('Brief Lives', 1.387). His date of death is unknown, and, indeed, after his assault on Jeane he disappears from the records entirely. 
By this time Hobbes was already at Oxford. His early education had taken place in Westport and Malmesbury; particularly influential was the teaching of a young clergyman, Robert Latimer, who had just graduated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford. Latimer (who was vicar of Westport, and took over the curacy of Brokenborough after the departure of Hobbes's father) was a fine classicist, and gave Hobbes a good grounding in Latin and Greek. He later also taught the young John Aubrey; this connection was one reason for Aubrey's special interest in Hobbes, which would eventually bear fruit in his valuable compilation of biographical information about him, on which all modern accounts of Hobbes's life depend. 
Probably because of Latimer's advice or connections, Hobbes was entered at Magdalen Hall, Oxford. His precise date of matriculation is not known; in his autobiography he wrote that it was in his fourteenth year (that is, between April 1601 and April 1602) but Aubrey dated it to 'the beginning of an. 1603' ('Brief Lives', 1.330). The latter date seems plausible, as Hobbes himself recorded that he stayed at Oxford for five years, and it is known that he was admitted BA in February 1608. In the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries Magdalen Hall had a reputation as a stronghold of puritanism -- a reputation enhanced by the appointment of John Wilkinson, a strict Calvinist divine, as principal in 1605. Hobbes's familiarity with Calvinist theology (evident in his later controversies with John Bramhall) may well have been acquired during his Oxford years. 
In his autobiographical writings Hobbes gave a very jaundiced account of his Oxford education, complaining that it consisted mainly of learning the barbarisms of scholastic Aristotelianism. There was some justice in this charge: there had been a definite revival of Aristotelianism at Oxford in the final decades of the sixteenth century, and modern anti-Aristotelian movements, such as Ramism in logic, had made only limited progress there. But Aristotelity, as Hobbes later called it, did not loom as large in the Oxford curriculum as it did in his retrospective complaints. Undergraduate studies were fundamentally humanist, involving wide reading among classical authors on rhetoric, moral philosophy, and history -- an accomplishment clearly discernible in Hobbes's later writings. Many fellows of Oxford colleges also took an active interest in new developments in mathematics and the physical sciences. When Hobbes states in his verse autobiography that, instead of studying the prescribed texts, he preferred to look at maps of the earth and the heavens, he gives the impression that geography and astronomy were excluded from university studies; this is not correct. Unfortunately it is not known whether he had any contact with established Oxford scientists. All that can be deduced from the surviving evidence is that astronomy was one of Hobbes's earliest intellectual enthusiasms -- a point confirmed by his own account, in his manuscript refutation of Thomas White, of his careful observation of a comet that appeared in 1618. 
After being admitted BA in February 1608 and completing the requirements for 'determination' in arts during the following term, Hobbes was recommended for the post of tutor to William Cavendish. William's father, Baron Cavendish of Hardwick, was one of the major landowners of Derbyshire, with estates centred on Hardwick Hall and (from 1616) Chatsworth. The choice of such a young graduate as a tutor -- Hobbes was only two years older than his pupil -- was unusual; the idea, apparently, was to provide intellectual companionship as much as formal pedagogy. At the same time, the fact that Hobbes was recommended by the Magdalen Hall authorities suggests that he was regarded as both morally and theologically sound. His pupil had real intellectual abilities, but was little interested in academic studies; he spent some time at St John's College, Cambridge (where Hobbes joined him in the summer of 1608 and incorporated as a Cambridge BA), but left the university in November 1608. 
In his verse autobiography Hobbes described his time with William Cavendish -- who was knighted in 1609, became Lord Cavendish on his father's elevation to the earldom of Devonshire in 1618, and succeeded him as second earl in 1626 -- as 'by far the sweetest period of my life'; he noted that his pupil became not so much a master as a friend, allowing Hobbes both leisure and whatever sorts of books he needed for his studies ('Opera philosophica', 1.lxxxvii-lxxxviii). These comments probably relate more to the latter part of his service to Cavendish, who came to treat him as a secretary and companion. The early years of his employment may sometimes have tried the patience of this young graduate, who, according to Aubrey, was treated as 'his lordship's page, and rode a hunting and hawking with him, and kept his privy purse' ('Brief Lives', 1.330-31). As Cavendish was a notorious spendthrift, the responsibility for his purse was onerous, involving frequent meetings with creditors. At the same time, however, Hobbes's page-like duties would have brought him into contact with the Anglo-Scottish courtier society of Jacobean London. (Cavendish married the daughter of a prominent Scot and royal political agent, Lord Bruce of Kinross.) But Cavendish also had literary interests, including an evident passion for Bacon's 'Essayes', and in 1611 he published an extended essay of his own, 'A Discourse Against Flatterie'; it can be assumed that Hobbes was involved (at the very least secretarially) in the preparation of this work. 
The household accounts of Cavendish's father mention a number of books purchased during the period 1609-13, presumably for Cavendish's studies with Hobbes: these included works by Plutarch, Cicero, Ramus, Montaigne, Huarte, Bacon, Keckermann, and Botero, as well as 'iii of the kinges bookes in defence of the othe of allegiance' (Hardwick MS 29, pp. 91, 219b, 303, 316, 355). The same source also reveals that Hobbes co-operated with the surveyor William Senior in his mapping of the Cavendish estates -- which suggests that Hobbes had, or acquired, at least some practical knowledge of geometry at this early stage (ibid., p. 128, entry for April 1610). 
Also listed among the books purchased were several primers and dictionaries of French and Italian, evidently in preparation for a continental tour. The traditional dating of this tour, 1610-15, given in most biographies of Hobbes, is incorrect; the household accounts show that Hobbes and Cavendish left in June 1614 and returned by October 1615 (Hardwick MS 29, pp. 371, 453). Their main destination was Venice; from there they made a trip to Rome in October 1614, returning to stay in Venice until the summer of 1615. Here Cavendish worked hard on his Italian, translating Bacon's 'Essayes' into that language -- once again, presumably, with Hobbes at his side. He also met the most influential intellectual in Venice, Paolo Sarpi, a man of wide scientific interests, suspected of protestant sympathies or even atheistic tendencies, who as 'state theologian' had defended Venice during its great dispute with the papacy in 1606. Cavendish (and, it may be assumed, Hobbes) cultivated the acquaintance of Sarpi's assistant Fulgenzio Micanzio, and Cavendish began corresponding with him during their return journey, via Paris, to England. 
The correspondence with Micanzio continued for thirteen years, being ended only by Cavendish's death. Only Micanzio's letters have survived, in English translations by Hobbes. These were made, evidently, not for Cavendish (who knew Italian well) but for circulation to other readers, who might be interested not only in Micanzio's detailed political news but also in his thinking about foreign policy (which aimed at a strategic anti-papal and anti-Spanish alliance). Micanzio took a special interest in the Croatian-Venetian churchman Marc' Antonio de Dominis, archbishop of Split, who fled to England in 1616, joined the Anglican church, supervised the publication in London of Sarpi's 'Historia del concilio tridentino', and published a major anti-papal treatise of his own, 'De republica ecclesiastica'. In 1617-18 de Dominis helped to revise Cavendish's Italian translation of Bacon's 'Essayes' for publication, and therefore probably came into direct contact with Hobbes. Admiration for Bacon united Cavendish, Micanzio, and de Dominis; Micanzio's letters show that Cavendish was in personal contact with Bacon from 1616 onwards, and Hobbes is known to have visited Bacon on the legal business of the Cavendish family in 1619 and 1620. Aubrey records that Hobbes also did secretarial work for Bacon, taking dictation from him and translating some of his essays into Latin; biographers have traditionally assumed that this work took place after Bacon's fall from office in 1621, but it is now clear that Hobbes's connections with Bacon predated that event by several years. 
Another sign of Cavendish's admiration for Bacon was his composition of a collection of essays of his own, published (anonymously) in 1620, under the title 'Horae subsecivae'. The volume also contained his 'Discourse Against Flatterie' and three other discourses: a description of Rome (arising from Cavendish's visit there with Hobbes in 1614), 'Discourse upon the beginning of Tacitus', and 'Discourse of lawes'. A fair copy manuscript of the essays (but not the discourses) in Hobbes's hand survives at Chatsworth; this demonstrates that he was not the author of the essays, as his occasional misreadings of the text he was copying are corrected in manuscript by another hand. However, a recent 'wordprint' analysis has suggested that the three new discourses printed in 1620 have the characteristics of Hobbes's own prose, and can therefore be attributed to him ('Three Discourses', especially 10-19). This claim has not been universally accepted by Hobbes scholars. Nevertheless, even if Hobbes's role in the preparation of these texts was little more than that of a sounding board, secretary, or stylistic improver, they must constitute important evidence of the cultural and political attitudes to which he was most directly exposed at this time. Particularly striking are the coolly political analysis of religion, the Tacitean emphasis on the role of interest and the value of dissimulation in political affairs, and the stress laid on the special evil of anarchy and civil war. 
Cavendish himself had some experience of politics: he was a member of the parliaments of 1610, 1614, 1621, and 1624, and it can be assumed that Hobbes would have followed the debates in which he took part. More importantly, Hobbes was also associated with his master's activities in two trading and colonizing companies, the Virginia Company and the Somers Islands Company. Hobbes was granted a share in the former in 1622; the precise date at which he joined the latter (which dealt with the Bermudas) is not known. Between 1622 and 1624 Hobbes attended thirty-seven meetings of the governing body of the Virginia Company; there he must have encountered prominent politicians and writers such as Sir Edwin Sandys, Sir Dudley Digges, and John Selden. Both as an assistant to Cavendish and in his own right, Hobbes was thus involved in public or quasi-public affairs; it is significant that in the first surviving item of his own correspondence, a letter to him from a Cambridge don, Robert Mason, in 1622, he is treated as a well-placed source of social and political gossip. 
In 1626 Cavendish succeeded his father as second earl of Devonshire. His tendency to lavish spending was now unchecked, and, given his literary interests, it is likely that he was an active and generous patron of other writers. These may have included Ben Jonson, with whom, according to Aubrey, Hobbes was well acquainted by 1628. Cavendish's patronage certainly extended to the physician and minor poet Dr Richard Andrews, a friend of Donne (and of Jonson), who visited him in Derbyshire; in August 1627 Cavendish, Andrews, and Hobbes went on a tour of the Derbyshire Peak District, visiting the so-called 'wonders of the Peak'. Travelogue poems celebrating this tour were written by Andrews (in English) and Hobbes (in Latin), and Hobbes's work later received a small, undated printing (probably in 1636), under the title 'De mirabilibus pecci'. 
Before the composition of that poem Hobbes had probably already completed a much more significant work: a complete translation of Thucydides, taken (unlike the only existing English version at the time) directly from the Greek. In his verse autobiography Hobbes explained that Thucydides was his favourite ancient historian; what apparently attracted him was the cool dissection of political motivation and the 'realist' approach to power, together with the peculiarly Thucydidean analysis of the role of rhetoric in political debate. This translation was an important achievement, establishing Hobbes at a stroke as one of the leading Grecianists of his day. Hobbes also drew the elaborate map of ancient Greece which accompanied the text. Possibly he had planned to add further materials of his own; otherwise it is not clear why he did not hasten to publish the work, eventually remarking in the preface: 'After I had finished it, it lay long by me' ('English Works', 8.ix). In the end, the catalyst for its publication was the sudden death of his pupil-patron in summer 1628. By November Hobbes had prepared the dedication (a eulogy of the late second earl, addressed to his young son), and was nervously clearing it with the dowager countess: no doubt he hoped that such a public monument to his former employer would earn her approval and guarantee his re-employment. The book was published in early 1629; Hobbes was not, however, re-employed. 
Hobbes spent much of 1629 and 1630 in the service of a Nottinghamshire landowner, Sir Gervase Clifton, escorting his son Gervase on a European tour. The reason for this temporary departure from the Cavendish family is not clear; the dowager countess was making what savings she could, but she still needed a tutor for her two sons (aged twelve and nine in 1629), and did indeed employ one. Possibly Hobbes had hoped to carry on working as secretary and librarian, and was reluctant to teach at such an elementary level; his new pupil, Gervase Clifton, was aged seventeen or eighteen. On the other hand, although a later memorandum drawn up by Hobbes stated that he was 'discharged' after the death of the second earl (Hobbes MS D.6, fol. 2'r'), he was still receiving a half-yearly payment from the dowager countess as late as June 1630. So perhaps his service to the Cliftons might better be described in terms of being 'on loan' from the Cavendishes. 
Hobbes and his new pupil travelled to France in October 1629 and spent the winter in Paris; in March-April 1630 they moved to Geneva, where they lodged with a Reformed minister. A planned visit to Italy was aborted because of the warfare raging there, and by late June they were in France again, at Orleans. At this stage they were intending to spend the coming winter in Paris; but the trip was curtailed, and Hobbes was back in England by the beginning of November 1630. He returned to the countess of Devonshire's house, Hardwick Hall, and wrote from there to Sir Gervase Clifton on 2 November: 'That I am welcome home, I must attribute to yor favorable letter, by wch my lady understandes yor good acceptance of my service to Mr Clifton' ('Correspondence', 1.17). 
Hobbes now re-entered the service of the countess, replacing the tutor who had been teaching her elder son -- 'wch imployment', as he put it in his later memorandum, 'he [Hobbes] neverthelesse undertooke, amongst other causes cheifly for this, that the same did not much divert him from his studyes' (Hobbes MS D.6, fol. 2'r'). In his verse autobiography Hobbes recorded that he gave the young third earl tuition in Latin, rhetoric, 'the precepts of demonstration' (meaning either logic or mathematics, or both), geography, and law ('Opera philosophica', 1.lxxxviii-lxxxix). Some traces of this teaching survive among the manuscripts at Chatsworth: exercise books with geometrical problems and passages from the ancient historians Livy and Valerius Maximus. Of special interest is a dictation book in which the young earl took down Hobbes's Latin translation of Aristotle's 'Rhetoric' -- a text concerned as much with psychological analysis as with the rhetorical art. An English translation of this Latin 'digest' was later published as 'A Briefe of the Art of Rhetorique' (1637). 
Biographers of Hobbes have traditionally dated the emergence of his serious philosophical interests to the early 1630s. The neat dichotomy between his 'humanist' period (up to the 1630s) and his 'philosophical' one (thereafter) is perhaps too neat, as his earlier interests had evidently not been confined to classical literature. His early passion for astronomy has already been noted; his connection with Bacon must have prompted some interest in that author's scientific and philosophical writings; and, whether or not Hobbes was himself the author of the three 'Discourses', it seems likely that he had shared the interest displayed in those texts in the analysis of religion, politics, and law. The earliest library catalogue at Chatsworth (Hobbes MS E.1.A) was drawn up by Hobbes, about 1629 (with a few items inserted as later additions); given Hobbes's later recollection, cited above, that the second earl had supplied him with all sorts of books for his studies, it can be assumed that many of the items in this list were bought by and for Hobbes. It includes numerous items by Calvin, many works of Catholic and protestant controversial theology, especially ones relating to the political issues disputed by Bellarmine, Suarez, and King James, and works by Machiavelli, Guiccardini, Botero, Bodin, Charron, Grotius (his 'De jure belli ac pacis' is a late addition), and Selden. Scientific writings are less well represented, but the list includes the works of the geometrician Clavius, Napier and Briggs on logarithms, and textbooks by Case and Keckermann on physics. It may be significant that scientific works feature more prominently among the later additions (made, it seems, soon after Hobbes's return in 1630): these include Clavius's edition of Euclid, the works of Robert Fludd, Gilbert on magnetism, Vieta's algebra, and two volumes of the astronomer Tycho Brahe. 
In his prose autobiography Hobbes stated that it was during his European trip with Clifton that he acquired his special interest in geometry, when he happened to look at a copy of Euclid's 'Elements'. (Aubrey, telling this story, gives the place where this happened as '..... a', with the number of dots corresponding to the missing letters of Geneva; Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 9, fol. 36'r'.) What Hobbes emphasized in his account, however, was that Euclid impressed him 'not so much because of the theorems, as because of the method of reasoning': in other words, he may well have known some geometry before this, but he had not previously thought about the power of a deductive method based on definitions and axioms ('Opera philosophica', 1.xiv). This suggests that he was already thinking about some philosophical problems to which Euclidean method seemed to supply a solution. 
The only surviving clues as to the nature of those problems are a comment made by Hobbes in 1641, when he wrote that he had explained his 'doctrine of the nature and production of light, sound, and all phantasms and ideas' to the earl of Newcastle and his brother in 1630 ('Correspondence', 1.108), and a similar claim addressed to Newcastle himself in 1646, referring to 'that wch about 16 yeares since I affirmed to your Lopp at Welbeck, that Light is a fancy in the minde, caused by motion in the braine' (BL, Harley MS 3360, fol. 3'r'). William Cavendish, earl of Newcastle, was a cousin of the earl of Devonshire, and had houses close to Hardwick (at Bolsover in Derbyshire and Welbeck Abbey in north Nottinghamshire); Hobbes would certainly have had contact with him during the second earl of Devonshire's lifetime, and his friends Jonson and Andrews both benefited from Newcastle's patronage. Newcastle had scientific as well as literary interests, and his brother Sir Charles Cavendish had a passion for mathematics and physics. The Newcastle Cavendishes played a key role in awakening Hobbes's scientific interests: thanks to them, he was put in touch during the early 1630s with the scientists Walter Warner (a survivor of the circle of Thomas Hariot) and Robert Payne (Newcastle's chaplain), with whom he discussed problems of optics and epistemology. 
The central principle of the new epistemology explored by Hobbes was that developed by Galileo (and Beeckman and Descartes), the subjectivity of secondary qualities -- meaning that 'redness' or 'heat' were not qualities or forms inhering in nature, but features of the human experience of external bodies whose motions impinged on the brain in certain ways. Hobbes made a special effort to find a copy of Galileo's 'Dialogo' in London in 1634, at Newcastle's request; and it is possible that he actually met Galileo in Italy at the end of the following year. 
Whether Hobbes wrote up his own theories in any systematic form during the early 1630s is very uncertain. A manuscript on the principles of physics and psychology, known as the 'Short tract', has commonly been attributed to Hobbes and assigned to this period; it has sometimes been dated to 1630 on the strength of the remarks by Hobbes quoted above. However, those remarks referred to claims made in conversation, not to any written work, and in his verse autobiography he emphasized that he began to write up his theories only after his return from his third European tour in 1636. Recent studies of the 'Short tract' have shown on the one hand that it contains phrases that reappear in Hobbes's later works, and on the other hand that it is not in his handwriting (as previously thought) but in Payne's, and that its theory of light is closer to Payne's views than to Hobbes's. The attribution of this text remains uncertain, therefore, and it is possible that Payne may have composed it (perhaps in the mid- to late 1630s) while making use of some Hobbesian ideas or materials. 
In April 1634 Hobbes and the third earl of Devonshire were planning to travel to France within a few weeks; instead they reverted to a previous plan, which involved spending the summer months in Oxford (from where Hobbes visited his family and old friends in north Wiltshire). But by October they were in Paris, where they stayed until the end of August 1635. Then they travelled via Lyons to Italy: their destination was Venice, but it is not clear whether they reached it, or whether the military situation forced them to change their route. If they did stay in Venice, it seems likely that Hobbes would have renewed his acquaintance with Fulgenzio Micanzio. In November or December Hobbes and Devonshire travelled to Rome; on 26 December they dined at the Jesuit English College there. 
It is during their journey to Rome that the meeting of Hobbes and Devonshire with Galileo (in his villa outside Florence) is traditionally supposed to have taken place. Tantalizingly, there is a reference in a letter written by Galileo on 1 December 1635 NS to a recent visit by an English lord, who told him that his 'Dialogo' was translated into English: this probably alluded to a manuscript translation commissioned by the earl of Newcastle, a fact which strengthens the possibility that his informants were Devonshire and Hobbes. Yet Galileo's letter was addressed to Micanzio, and he obviously had no inkling that he was referring to mutual friends. An element of mystery still surrounds this episode, though Aubrey's definite statement that 'When he [Hobbes] was at Florence... he contracted a friendship with the famous 'Galileo'' must carry considerable weight ('Brief Lives', 1.366). Aubrey's reference may in fact be to the period of several weeks in April 1636 when Hobbes and Devonshire stayed in Florence on their way back from Rome. 
In May they moved to Turin, and then to Geneva and Lyons; they reached Paris on 1/11 June. Hobbes had kept up a correspondence with the earl of Newcastle during this tour; Sir Charles Cavendish put him in touch with the French mathematician Claude Mydorge, and it was probably thanks to Sir Charles's contacts that Hobbes made the acquaintance of the Minim friar, scholar, scientist, and intellectual impresario Marin Mersenne. In his verse autobiography Hobbes wrote that it was during this stay in Paris that he discussed his ideas about matter and motion with Mersenne, proudly adding that 'from that time, I too was counted among the philosophers' ('Opera philosophica', 1.xc). 
When Hobbes returned with Devonshire to England in October 1636 he was in the grip of a 'furor philosophicus': 'the extreame pleasure I take in study', he wrote to Newcastle, 'overcomes in me all other appetites' ('Correspondence', 1.37). Physics, optics, epistemology, psychology, metaphysics, and logic seem to have been his main concerns. In a letter to Newcastle in 1635 he had expressed a wish to be the first person to explain 'the facultyes & passions of the soule'; by late 1636 he had informed Sir Kenelm Digby (who had been with him in Paris) of his plans to write a 'Logike' (ibid., 1.29, 42). His interest in optics received a special stimulus in October 1637 when Digby sent him a copy of Descartes's 'Discours de la methode', the work which also contained an essay on refraction, the 'Dioptrique'. Hobbes made a careful study of this essay, and sent a lengthy criticism of it to Mersenne (a 56-page letter, now lost) in November 1640, shortly before returning to Paris himself. He also wrote a treatise on optics in Latin, containing several criticisms of Descartes; this work may have been substantially completed before his move to Paris in late 1640, though the surviving manuscript is a fair copy made by a Parisian scribe, probably in 1641 or 1642. 
According to his verse autobiography, it was in the period 1637-40 that Hobbes began to organize his ideas in a tripartite scheme, dealing with 'body' (metaphysics and physics), 'man' (epistemology -- including optics -- and psychology), and 'citizen' (politics). The works eventually published under the titles 'De corpore', 'De homine', and 'De cive' would be described as the three 'sections' of his 'elements of philosophy'. How fully worked out this scheme was during the late 1630s is not clear, though it may be significant that the Latin optical treatise contains a reference to the preceding section ('sectione Antecedente'; Harley MS 6796, fol. 193'v'). Some manuscript notes on early chapters of 'De corpore' do survive, but their dating is uncertain. 
In view of the predominantly scientific interests of the people who had stimulated this philosophical awakening (Mersenne, Sir Charles Cavendish, Payne, and Warner), it may seem odd that Hobbes should have included politics as the culminating part of his philosophical programme. The personal interests of the earl of Newcastle -- who was now playing an increasingly important role as a courtier-politician -- were probably important here. But Hobbes's own experience must also have stimulated his interest in political theory. In 1627 he helped to collect money for Charles I's unpopular 'forced loan' in Derbyshire, which may have prompted some thoughts about the relation between political authority and property; and in January 1640 he was put forward by the earl of Devonshire -- unsuccessfully -- as a possible parliamentary candidate. Hobbes had also had some contacts in the 1630s (the precise chronology is again uncertain) with the so-called Great Tew circle, a group of literary men, divines, and lawyers who gathered round Lord Falkland at his country house near Oxford: the topics discussed by members of this circle, such as Edward Hyde and William Chillingworth, included the nature of religious authority and the relation between church and state. 
It was at Newcastle's bidding that Hobbes first put his political theory down on paper, in an English treatise which may have been based, to some extent, on draft materials for his Latin work 'on the citizen'. This treatise, 'The Elements of Law', was completed on 9 May 1640 (just after the dissolution of the Short Parliament), and distributed in manuscript copies produced by a production line of scribes. Starting with an account of human psychology and a powerful analysis of the origins (and the necessity) of the state, it mounted a strong defence of royal authority in such matters as the imposition of taxation. Hobbes's name was now in circulation as a hardline theorist of royal absolutism. When the Long Parliament began to debate these issues in November 1640 such views came under fierce attack. Hobbes, who was staying in London at the time, hurriedly packed his bags and travelled to Paris. 
Hobbes's own account of the reasons for this move (given in a letter from Paris five months later) emphasized the parliamentary debates, but also added that 'I thought if I went not then, there was neverthelesse a disorder comming on that would make it worse being there then here' ('Correspondence', 1.115). His fear of being hauled before parliament may only have hastened a move which he had already planned for other reasons, both political and personal. One sign of such planning is the fact that in September 1640 he had withdrawn a sum of $100 which the steward of Chatsworth had invested for him; he also withdrew the $400 which he had banked with the Cavendish family, and thus had the financial security for a long stay abroad. His tutorial duties had ended in 1637, and the earl of Devonshire (who attained his majority in late 1638) may have used him thereafter only for minor secretarial services. With Newcastle distracted by politics, the prospects of a period of quiet study in Newcastle's household had receded; Mersenne's Paris thus became the most natural and alluring alternative. Hobbes would remain there for eleven years. 
Friendship with Mersenne provided an ideal entree to Parisian intellectual life. The friar held regular meetings of scholars and scientists in his convent; thanks to him Hobbes became acquainted during the early 1640s with the anti-Aristotelian philosopher Pierre Gassendi, the mathematician Gilles Personne de Roberval, and young Huguenot intellectuals such as Thomas de Martel and Samuel Sorbiere. Visitors to Paris who also frequented Mersenne's meetings included Sir Kenelm Digby and the Catholic philosopher Thomas White. Mersenne was a close friend of Descartes; he circulated Descartes's 'Meditationes' to various writers, including Hobbes, soliciting their critical comments, which he published, with Descartes's replies, in 1641. In the case of Hobbes's criticisms, Descartes's responses were acerbic to the point of open contempt -- an attitude expressed also in his correspondence with Hobbes (conducted via Mersenne) during the early months of that year. In November 1642 Mersenne performed another service for Hobbes when he organized the private printing and distribution of 'De cive', the third 'section' of his intended 'elements of philosophy'. This treatise presented (in Latin) the key political arguments of 'The Elements of Law', omitting the earlier text's material on psychology and developing further Hobbes's arguments about religion (which, probably, were the reason for Mersenne's cautious method of publication). 'De cive' established Hobbes's reputation among select intellectual circles; later editions printed in the Netherlands by Elsevier in 1647 (at Sorbiere's behest) spread it among a much wider public. 
It was probably at Mersenne's invitation that, in 1642-3, Hobbes composed a huge manuscript refutation of a recently published work, Thomas White's 'De mundo dialogi tres'. White's philosophical position was an amalgam of scholastic Aristotelianism and elements of the new mechanistic science; Hobbes's criticisms were directed particularly at White's scholasticism, and at the metaphysical and theological assumptions that underlay it. (This manuscript was read by Mersenne, but seems to have become unknown thereafter, being rediscovered only in the twentieth century.) Mersenne also published some short pieces by Hobbes, on physics and optics, in two scientific compilations which he edited in 1644. These pieces (some of them extracted from the critique of White) were evidently intended as samples of Hobbes's work in progress. His own efforts were now mainly directed at composing the first section of his philosophical elements, 'De corpore' -- a huge task, which involved setting out in a proper 'method' all the principles of logic, metaphysics, and physics. Sir Charles Cavendish, who was corresponding with Hobbes, wrote to his friend John Pell in December 1644: 'Mr Hobbes puts me in hope of his Philosophie, which he writes he is nowe putting in order, but I feare that will take a long time' (BL, Add. MS 4278, fol. 190'r'). 
Sir Charles and his brother arrived in Paris in April 1645; from Hobbes's point of view their renewed patronage was a mixed blessing, since they caused several interruptions to his work. In the summer of 1645 Newcastle set up a philosophical disputation between Hobbes and an exiled Anglican bishop, John Bramhall, on free will and necessity; the short text Hobbes wrote on this subject was later published, without his authorization, as 'Of Libertie and Necessitie' (1654). In late 1645 and early 1646 it was also at Newcastle's bidding that Hobbes wrote a treatise on optics in English. (The fair copy was written out by William Petty, who had contacted Hobbes in Paris in 1645 at the behest of the mathematician John Pell, to solicit a demonstration from Hobbes for a work eventually published by Pell in 1647.) And a further diversion came in the summer of 1646: when Hobbes was just about to travel to Montauban in the south of France (home of his friend Martel) to work intensively on 'De corpore', he was required to stay in Paris to give lessons in mathematics to the young Prince Charles, who arrived there in July. While this appointment further delayed the completion of 'De corpore', however, it did give Hobbes a personal acquaintance with the future king which stood him in good stead in Restoration England: the prince adopted an attitude of bemused affection towards his tutor, commenting, reportedly, that he was the oddest fellow he ever met. 
In the second half of 1647 Hobbes's work suffered a much graver interruption, an illness which nearly killed him: according to his later recollections he was in bed for six months, and went for six weeks without eating. Recovering at last, he soldiered on with his work on 'De corpore'. Prince Charles left Paris in the summer of 1648; so too did Newcastle, and his brother, who reported just after their departure that 'Mr: Hobbes hath nowe leasure to studie & I hope wee shall have his [philosophy] within a twelve moneth' (BL, Add. MS 4278, fol. 273'r'). Sure enough, in June 1649 Hobbes informed Sorbiere that he hoped to complete 'De corpore' by the end of that summer. So confident was he that the work was in its final form that he was already having the figures engraved, to facilitate speedy publication. And yet the book was not published for another six long years. 
The main interruption to the completion of 'De corpore' was a self-inflicted one: the writing of Hobbes's major treatise on psychology, politics, and religion, 'Leviathan'. The precise date at which he began it is not known; the evidence of his pattern of work on 'De corpore', described above, suggests that he may have started it only in 1649, but his verse autobiography implies that he had been working on it since 1646. In May 1650 Robert Payne (who was corresponding with Hobbes from England) learned that he had completed thirty-seven chapters; and in April 1651 Edward Hyde, on a visit to Paris, was told that the book 'was then Printing in England, and that he receiv'd every week a Sheet to correct' (E. Hyde, 'A Brief View and Survey of the Dangerous Errors... in... Leviathan', 1676, 7). It was published in the following month, by the London bookseller Andrew Crooke. The fact that this work was written in English and published in England strongly suggests that it was intended as a contribution to the internal political debate in that country. According to Hyde, when Hobbes was asked why he was publishing the work, he replied: 'The truth is, I have a mind to go home' (ibid., 8). Certainly the final section of the book, entitled 'A review and conclusion', contained a strong justification of submission to the new regime in England. It summarized Hobbes's general argument about the rational basis of political authority, pointing out that there was a reciprocal relationship between protection and obedience: Hobbes's point was that since the king (now Charles II) could not protect people in England, they were impelled by the dictates of self-preservation to transfer their obedience to the power that now ruled there. Whether this argument had any direct relevance to someone who, like Hobbes, was no longer living in England, is much less clear. 
There were, nevertheless, some personal reasons why life in Paris may have seemed no longer so attractive to Hobbes. Mersenne had died in 1648; Gassendi had left for the south of France soon thereafter; Sorbiere was permanently away from Paris during these years; Martel was absent for most of the time between 1646 and 1654. Hobbes did have some old friends there, and also acquired some new ones -- notably the Huguenot physician Abraham du Prat and a young amateur mathematician from the Bordeaux region, Francois du Verdus, who became a fervent admirer. But Mersenne had been the linchpin of Hobbes's intellectual life in Paris, and his loss was keenly felt. In August 1651, when Hobbes had another severe illness, he was treated by the famous physician and philosophical sceptic Guy Patin: according to Patin, the pain that he was suffering, combined with his natural melancholy, had inclined Hobbes's thoughts to suicide. Significantly, however, he also recorded that Hobbes was so grateful for his treatment that he promised that he would send Patin a present when he was back in England: the move was definitely planned by this stage. 
During his years in Paris, Hobbes had kept in touch with the earl of Devonshire, who returned to England in 1645 and made his peace with the parliamentary authorities. For most royalists living in England, 'compounding' for their estates was a practical necessity to which, by the end of the 1640s, no stigma applied. Some of the more flamboyant exiled royalists of Hobbes's acquaintance could not return, for reasons of personal safety: Newcastle was in this category, and so was the poet Sir William Davenant, whose epic 'Gondibert' Hobbes praised in a letter published with Davenant's preface to the poem in 1650. But even friends such as these do not seem to have objected to Hobbes's own decision to go back. 
More problematic was the political theory of 'Leviathan', which implied that the submission of former royalists to the new authority in England was not a provisional measure, pending the return of the rightful king, but rather a recognition of a new authority just as valid as the previous, royal, one. Few of the politicians in exile could be happy with this view. Hobbes's arguments about religion also caused offence, though in different ways. The Anglican 'old royalists' in exile, such as Hyde, disliked Hobbes's rejection of the intrinsic authority of the church and his total subordination of religious activity to state power; the other main faction among the exiled courtiers and politicians, the so-called Louvre group, which clustered around the widowed Henrietta Maria, was offended by Hobbes's outspoken attack on Catholicism. One of the most important features of 'Leviathan', indeed, is its constant attention to the role of belief (especially religious doctrine) in subverting political authority. Hobbes's advice here may have been directed, at least implicitly, at the new powers in England, who had the opportunity to create a new, rational settlement of religion there. But it was also directed at the young Charles II, to whom, after his return to Paris in October 1651, Hobbes gave a fair copy manuscript of the work. Within two months Hobbes's enemies at the court-in-exile succeeded in having him banned from the court; there were also rumours that the French clergy intended to arrest him. He left Paris in mid-December, and sailed to England. 
In his verse autobiography Hobbes suggests that on his arrival in England he was fearful that he might be taken for a royalist spy -- he was, he emphasizes, a prominent defender of the rights of the crown -- and says that he therefore presented himself to the council of state to regularize his position. This sounds retrospectively disingenuous. Although some royalists (such as the young Charles Cotton, whose translation of 'De cive' was published in 1651) did see Hobbes as a defender of their cause, the ideologists of the parliamentary regime, such as Marchamont Nedham and John Hall of Durham, were well aware that Hobbes's theories could be used to support the new political settlement. His reconciliation with the council of state seems, unfortunately, to have left no trace in the written records of that body; but it was probably assisted by the young William Brereton (cousin of a parliamentary commander), who had studied mathematics under John Pell and was a friend of Sir Charles Cavendish. 
Hobbes soon returned to the service of the earl of Devonshire, who stayed frequently at Latimers, a country house in Buckinghamshire. But it seems that his duties were slight, and that he spent much of his time during the 1650s in London, pursuing his own studies. 'De corpore' was finally published there in 1655 (an English translation, supervised by Hobbes, appeared in the following year); 'De homine' followed in 1658. Hobbes was able to renew some old friendships -- with, for example, the physician William Harvey -- and make some new ones. John Aubrey, a friend of Harvey's, became personally acquainted with Hobbes at some time in the early 1650s. Having sent John Selden a copy of 'Leviathan' on its publication, Hobbes struck up a somewhat quarrelsome friendship with him; Selden's epigone, the lawyer John Vaughan, became a more unqualified admirer of Hobbes's work. 
Sir Kenelm Digby and Thomas White returned to London in late 1653 or early 1654; Hobbes continued his philosophical disputes with White, but may have been sympathetic to White's main political aim, which was to win a settlement for English Catholicism by renouncing the authority of the pope in temporal affairs. This was a quasi-Erastian version of Catholicism; while Hobbes was not Erastian in the narrowest sense of the term (meaning that each state should have a single state church), Erastianism in its broadest sense (the subordination of religion to state control) was an attitude shared by him and many of his friends at this time. 
Equally, Hobbes's views on religion, and on the relations of church and state, gained him many new enemies. Particularly offended were believers in the jurisdictional powers of the church, whether Laudian, presbyterian, or Catholic. Even the leaders of the Independents, such as John Owen at Oxford, who had least reason to reject Hobbes's ecclesiology, were scandalized by the scoffing, anti-theological tone of the last part of 'Leviathan'. Critical responses to that book began to appear within a year of its publication, and the easiest targets for the critics were Hobbes's views on theological questions -- his materialism, his 'mortalist' doctrine about the soul, and his apparent identification of Moses as the first person of the Trinity. One particularly tenacious critic was the Anglican bishop John Bramhall, who, offended by the publication (albeit unauthorized by Hobbes) of Hobbes's 1645 critique of his views on free will, issued two refutations of Hobbes, eliciting two further responses ('The Questions Concerning Liberty, Necessity and Chance', 1656, and 'An Answer to a Book Published by Dr Bramhall', written in 1668 but not published until 1682). The desire for theological rectitude, however, was not the only motive of Hobbes's critics. Some, such as Seth Ward at Oxford, felt threatened by Hobbes's call for a reform of the universities; others, such as Ward's colleague John Wallis, were keen to discredit such an outspoken opponent of presbyterianism. 
The publication of 'De corpore', with its incompetent geometrical demonstrations, provided an ideal opportunity for Wallis, who was one of the leading mathematicians of the age. His disdainful work of refutation, 'Elenchus geometriae Hobbianae' (1655), set off a long-running dispute, in which Hobbes's philosophically acute remarks about the conceptual basis of mathematics were unfortunately quite overshadowed by his frequent mathematical blunders. Other mathematicians and scientists, such as John Wilkins and Robert Boyle, also joined the anti-Hobbesian campaign, and Hobbes would (to his irritation) never be invited to become a member of the Royal Society. In general intellectual terms, Hobbes was on the same side as these leading scientists -- a proponent of the mechanistic 'new science' against the old scholasticism. But the more widely Hobbes was denounced for his dangerous theological and political errors, the more reason his fellow scientists had to dissociate themselves from him by attacking him as well. He could console himself with the thought that his works were -- as his loyal French correspondents assured him -- highly prized in French philosophical circles: Francois du Verdus even learned English in order to translate 'Leviathan' into French, though his version was never in fact published. In England there were some equally fervent admirers, such as the maverick scholar Henry Stubbe, who began translating 'Leviathan' into Latin; but as Stubbe's correspondence with Hobbes shows, admiration for the philosopher had to be a somewhat covert affair in 1650s Oxford. 
In some ways the Restoration was beneficial to Hobbes: Aubrey cleverly arranged a meeting between him and his former pupil, the king, at the studio of the painter Samuel Cooper, whereupon the king ordered that Hobbes 'should have free access to his majestie' ('Brief Lives', 1.340). Within a few years Hobbes was receiving a royal pension of roughly 100 guineas per annum. But the Restoration settlement also involved the return to power of an Anglican establishment that strongly disapproved of Hobbes's religious views. In 1662 a 'Printing Act' was passed which required books to be licensed by episcopal authority; thereafter, nothing that Hobbes wrote in the controversial fields of politics, law, history, or religion could be published in his lifetime. (The last such contentious work, 'Mr Hobbes Considered', a short apologia replying to Wallis's accusations about his political record, was published in the summer of 1662, having apparently gone to press before the act was passed.) 
Although the publication of 'Leviathan' in 1651 was covered by the 'Act of Oblivion', Hobbes appears to have been genuinely afraid that he might be prosecuted for heresy: there was a rumour in the early 1660s that some of the bishops were planning such a move, and in 1666 a committee of the House of Commons called for an examination of the theological contents of 'Leviathan'. Hobbes responded to the first of these threats by writing a treatise on the law of heresy, arguing that no one could be burnt for that offence; the second may have prompted his composition of a long appendix to the Latin edition of 'Leviathan' (1668), in which he also defended himself from the charge of heresy. His fears seem to have been exaggerated; and he enjoyed, in any case, the protection of the earl of Devonshire, in whose household he remained, spending his summers in Derbyshire and the winter months in the Devonshires' town house in London. 
Hobbes may have been fearful and old (he was aged seventy-two at the Restoration), but he continued to display a remarkable vigour as an author -- all the more remarkable given that since the mid-1650s he had suffered so badly from the 'shaking palsy' (probably Parkinson's disease) that he was obliged to dictate to an amanuensis. In the fields in which publication was permitted he kept up a stream of new works: a treatise on physics in dialogue form, 'Problemata physica' (1662), a sequence of responses to his mathematical critics, 'De principiis et ratiocinatione geometrarum' (1666), 'Rosetum geometricum' (1671) and 'Lux mathematica' (1672), and a scattering of pamphlets on physics and geometry. 
More significant were the things he was unable to publish, at least in England. His Latin translation of 'Leviathan', with its important appendix, was made for an edition of his Latin philosophical works produced by Johan Blaeu in Amsterdam (1668). At some time in the late 1660s Hobbes wrote (in English) a history of the civil war in dialogue form, in which he paid special attention to the interplay of religion and human ambition: this eventually appeared in an unauthorized edition in 1679, and was later reprinted under the title 'Behemoth'. His last reply to Bramhall (mentioned above) was written in 1668. Shortly thereafter (perhaps in 1670, but by 1673 at the latest) he wrote a treatise on law, 'A Dialogue between a Phylosopher and a Student, of the Common-Laws of England', in which he defended his theory of legislative sovereignty against what he regarded as the excessive claims of the common lawyers. Also significant for the study of his political thought is a long Latin poem about the encroachments of priestcraft down the ages, 'Historia ecclesiastica', completed in 1671 and eventually published in 1688. His Latin verse autobiography, written in 1672, was also published posthumously. 
In 1674 Hobbes was permitted one small exception to the ban on his controversial publications: after John Fell, dean of Christ Church, Oxford, had inserted some abusive comments about him into an entry on Hobbes in a work by Anthony Wood, he wrote a letter of complaint and self-defence, and obtained the king's permission to print it, having approached him in person in St James's Park. This was the last year in which Hobbes was in London; thereafter, he resided only at Hardwick Hall and Chatsworth. Though his strength was failing, his intellectual energy was unabated: he published translations of Homer (books 9-12 of the 'Odyssey' in 1673, the rest of that work in 1675, and the whole of the 'Iliad' in 1676), as well as another treatise on physics in dialogue form, 'Decameron physiologicum', in 1678. In March 1678, just before his ninetieth birthday, he commented in a letter to Aubrey: ''Tis a long time since I have been able to write my selfe, and am now so weake that it is a paine to me to dictate'; yet his last dated letter (18 August 1679), addressed to his publisher, William Crooke, contained the tantalizing phrase, 'I am writing somewhat for you to print in English' ('Correspondence', 2.767, 774). 
Hobbes had enjoyed good health for most of his adult life, the only known exceptions being his two bouts of serious illness in France, another in London about 1668, and his 'shaking palsy'. When Aubrey first saw him (in 1634) he was struck by his 'briske' deportment; he would later describe him as a tall man (over 6 feet), with a 'fresh, ruddy complexion' and 'a good eie... which was full of life and spirit, even to the last'. This last observation is confirmed by three of the best portraits of Hobbes: by Samuel Cooper (1660s; Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio), John Baptist Gaspars (1663; Royal Society, London), and John Michael Wright ('c'.1669-1670; NPG). Aubrey also recorded that he was 'temperate, both as to wine and women', and that he kept to a simple daily routine, going for a morning walk to compose his thoughts, taking an early lunch, and writing in the afternoon. His health may also have benefited from his sceptical attitude towards contemporary medical science: he said he preferred 'to take physique from an experienced old woman... then from the learnedst but unexperienced physician' ('Brief Lives', 1.332, 347-51). 
In October 1679 Hobbes suffered from strangury (pain when urinating); on 27 November he had a severe stroke, which left him paralysed and unable to speak. He died on 4 December, at Hardwick Hall. His amanuensis, James Wheldon (the earl of Devonshire's baker), reported that he seemed 'to dye rather for want of the fuell of life... and meer weaknesse and decay' ('Brief Lives', 1.383). He was buried two days later in the local church of Ault Hucknall, Derbyshire. 
Hobbes had made three versions of his will. The earliest, in July 1674, included bequests to two nieces (daughters of his brother), five smaller bequests to members of the Devonshire household, and a legacy of $100 to Elizabeth Alaby, described as 'an Orphan and remitted by me to the Tuition of my Executor'; the residue was to go to his executor, James Wheldon. In the second version (December 1675) the five smaller bequests were omitted, and money left instead to 'the poore' and the minister of the parish where he was buried; Hobbes also stated his wish that Elizabeth Alaby be married off to Wheldon's son Jack, 'provided they liked one another, and that he was not a Spendthrift'. At this stage Wheldon calculated that Hobbes had $787 (Hardwick MS 19, final page). The final version (September 1677) added bequests to his brother's grandchildren, and doubled the legacy to Miss Alaby. Hobbes's estate, in the end, was worth nearly $1000 ('Brief Lives', 1.346). The special attention paid to Elizabeth Alaby in his will seems to have given rise to the popular belief that Hobbes had an illegitimate daughter. In fact she was an orphan child, possibly the daughter of a travelling musician, who had turned up at Rowthorn (Wheldon's village, near Hardwick) in May 1674, 'supposed about 5 yeares old', and whose plight had evidently touched the heart of the elderly philosopher (Hardwick MS 19, final page). 
Hobbes's enemies, of whom there were many, portrayed him as a disagreeable character: bullying, dogmatic, and irascible. Seth Ward's biographer claimed that 'if any one objected to his Dictates, he would leave the Company in a passion, saying, his business was to Teach, not Dispute' (W. Pope, 'The Life of... Seth, Lord Bishop of Salisbury', 1697, 118). His friends, on the other hand, took a different view: Aubrey commented on 'His goodness of nature and willingnes to instruct any one that was willing to be informed and modestly desired it' ('Brief Lives', 1.352), and Sorbiere exclaimed, in a letter to Hobbes, that he admired 'your goodness, your courtesy, and all those fine qualities which make you a perfect gentleman as well as a great philosopher' ('Correspondence', 2.619). The truth may be that Hobbes was affable and generous towards his friends, and intolerant only in company which he felt was predisposed to hostility towards him. 
The negative stereotype of Hobbes which developed during and after his lifetime was based, however, more on his teachings than on his personal character. There were three main charges: that he was an atheist (or, at least, guilty of gross heresies), that his political theory glorified despotism, and that he overturned traditional morality. The third charge connected the first and second: he was accused of deriving morality not from God or reason but from the will of the sovereign. 
Whether, in his heart, Hobbes believed in God is a question no biographer can answer with certainty; the fact that he attended Anglican services and took holy communion does not settle the matter. In his writings he displayed not only a fierce anti-clericalism but also a type of negative theology in which the possibility of human knowledge of God's intentions was virtually eliminated; but neither of these is necessarily the same as atheism. As for despotism, his political theory did propose that sovereignty, to be real, must be absolute, and he observed that 'tyranny' was merely a term used for monarchy by those who disliked it. Yet at the same time he tried to demonstrate that it was in the interests of rulers to promote the well-being of their people, and his entire theory supposed that the authority of the ruler rested on nothing other than the will of the ruled. His moral theory was indeed unorthodox, but neither relativist nor arbitrarist: he believed that certain moral rules (the 'laws of nature') followed necessarily from the human condition, and his position might best be described as a naturalistic adaptation of the natural law tradition. 
The many denunciations of Hobbes by theological writers (including Henry More, Ralph Cudworth, Thomas Tenison, and Richard Cumberland) helped to reinforce a popular notion of 'Hobbism' in Restoration England as a concentrate of libertinism and irreligion. Some of the rare open admirers of Hobbes (such as the early deist Charles Blount) idolized him precisely because they thought he had undermined traditional religion; his name would continue to be invoked in this way by the radical Enlightenment. But his writings also had a more positive influence on some European thinkers, especially in the Netherlands (Velthuysen, de la Court, Spinoza), Germany (Leibniz), and France (Merlat, Bossuet); and the frequent reprintings of 'De cive' on the continent guaranteed that writers such as Rousseau and Kant would give serious consideration to his ideas. In the nineteenth century a more sympathetic view of him emerged among utilitarians (who recognized an affinity with his moral theory) and legal positivists (who admired his theory of sovereignty). Some twentieth-century writers portrayed Hobbes as an ancestor of totalitarianism; but the tendency of modern scholarship has been to see his political theory as both authoritarian and individualist, embodying an unusual and intriguing mixture of illiberal and liberal elements. Increasingly, too, he is recognized as a philosopher whose importance extends far beyond the realm of political theory -- someone whose work in theology, metaphysics, science, history, and psychology entitles him to be described as one of the true founders of modernity in Western culture. 


@@@@@


doc= 13401


Hobday, William Armfield (1771-1831), portrait and miniature painter, was born in St Mary's Square, Birmingham, and baptized there in St Martin's Church, the second son of Samuel Hobday (1745/6-1816), a wealthy manufacturer of spoons, and Elisabeth Armfield. A talented draughtsman, Hobday was sent to London in 1786, and was apprenticed for six years to the engraver W. J. Barney. In 1790 he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools, where he studied alongside Martin Archer Shee, and made rapid progress. Without completing his academic studies, however, he established himself at 9 Charles Street, London, as a painter of portraits in miniature and watercolour. From 1794 he became a regular exhibitor at the Royal Academy, and soon secured a fashionable clientele including Lord Howard de Walden and Lady Wilson of Charlton. His friends included the painters George Morland, Charles Landseer, James Northcote, and George Chinnery. About 1800 Hobday married Elizabeth Dorothy Ivory and moved to 9 Holles Street, where, supported mainly by his father, he lived extravagantly. 
In 1804 Hobday moved to Bristol, where he painted chiefly portraits, including miniatures, of officers embarking for the theatre of war in the Peninsula. His work, in the manner of Sir Joshua Reynolds, included large oil portraits and subject pictures. However, he never achieved Reynolds's skill as a draughtsman, or his eye for colour. Despite the good income he generated by his work, Hobday's lavish lifestyle created increasing financial difficulties. In 1817 he returned to London, where he took Winchester House, Old Broad Street, hoping (but failing) to renew former artistic and social connections, although he painted a small family group portrait, 'The family of W. N. Rothschild, esq., consul general of his Austrian majesty at the British court' (exh. RA, 1821; priv. coll.) for 1000 guineas. His work became increasingly mannered, his oils lacking the delicacy and compositional grace he attained in his small watercolours. In 1821 or 1822 Hobday moved to 54 Pall Mall, to which large galleries were attached. After a disastrous speculation in a panoramic exhibition 'Poecilorama' at the Egyptian Hall, he opened these galleries, which he called Hobday's Gallery of Modern Art, in order to sell pictures on commission. The venture failed, although supported by leading English and French artists including Delacroix and Horace Vernet, and in 1829 Hobday went bankrupt. Following his wife's death that year, on 31 October 1830 he married Maria Ustonson (died 1859), a fishing tackle maker, of 205 Fleet Street. Hobday died of inflammation of the lungs on 17 February 1831 and was buried on 23 February at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London. He was survived by his sons Alfred Hobday (1824-1884), lithographer, and George Smith Armfield Hobday (1811-1893), animal painter, and a daughter, Harriet Eliza. 
At the height of his career Hobday was generally well patronized: at one time he averaged six sitters per day, charging 10 guineas per miniature and 20 guineas for a three-quarter length portrait. From 1794 to 1830 he exhibited seventy works at the Royal Academy; the most acclaimed was his portrait of Charles Evans entitled 'Portrait of Carolus (lately Deceased, Distinguished as the Hermit of Tong Castle, Shropshire)' (1823; exh. RA, 1823, British Institution, 1824, Hobday's Gallery of Modern Art, London, 1829). His full-length portrait 'Miss Biggs in the Character of Cora (a Print, from the Tragedy, 'Pizarro')' (exh. RA, 1801; V&A) was engraved by W. Bond in 1804, and 'The Late R[ichard] Reynolds, Esq., the Bristol Philanthropist' (exh. RA, 1817; Bristol Art Gallery and Museum) was engraved by William Sharp. Hobday died virtually unknown and has since remained in obscurity, although his 'Lady in a White Dress with a White Sash, Pink Cloak Lined with Fur' (sold at Christies in 1911 for 1350 guineas) briefly raised his profile. 


@@@@@


doc= 13402


Hobhouse, Sir Benjamin, first baronet (1757-1831), politician, was born in Bristol on 29 March 1757, the second son of John Hobhouse (1712-1787), a Bristol merchant, of The College, Westbury-on-Trym, Gloucestershire, and his first wife, Mary Smith, 'nee' Medley (died 1759), of Hereford. He was educated at Bristol grammar school where the local MP, Edmund Burke, presented him with a copy of 'Paradise Lost' following his delivery of an oration. He entered Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1774, graduating BA in 1778 and MA in 1781, and in 1776 entered the Middle Temple, from where he was called to the bar in 1781. He practised on the western circuit until 1783, when he travelled to France and Italy for his health; he later published 'Remarks' on his travels (1796). After his return he married on 12 September 1785 Charlotte ('c'.1760-1791), daughter of Samuel Cam of Bradford, Wiltshire, clothier and partner in a Bath bank; they had three sons and two daughters. He married second on 18 April 1793 Amelia (1767-1846), daughter of Dr Joshua Parry (1719-1776), Presbyterian minister of Cirencester, and Sarah Hillier; they had four sons and ten daughters. Both marriages drew the Anglican Hobhouse into dissenting circles. He became interested in unitarianism, wrote several pamphlets, notably against the 'Test Acts', but also on heresy, dogma, unrest, and intentional regicide, and described his creed as humanitarianism. 
Politics also attracted Hobhouse. In 1780 he had canvassed for the ministerial candidates at Bristol, following his father's politics. By 1792, however, his sympathies were whig and reformist, on which platform, also championing peace, he was defeated at Bristol in 1796. On 20 February 1797 he entered parliament for Bletchingley, his seat purchased from Sir Robert Clayton for $4000. In his first session he persistently criticized the bank stoppage of cash payments, and went on to oppose Pitt's administration on most major questions, displaying ethical concerns in advocating abolition of the slave trade and religious toleration. He joined the Whig Club on 5 June 1798. In 1800 he invested $33,000 in Whitbread's brewery. When his college friend Addington succeeded Pitt in 1801 he remained in opposition, but was gradually won over, especially when peace was negotiated. As a committee chairman he was soon neutralized. In 1802 he declined candidature for Bristol or Chippenham in favour of a bought seat for Grampound. Addington converted him to support the resumption of war, and he defended territorial army measures, himself accepting a Wiltshire commission. Addington, who had wished to make him chairman of committees, appointed him secretary to the India Board of Control in November 1803. He followed Addington into opposition in May 1804 and was thought of for office when Addington (now Sidmouth) and Pitt were reconciled, but approved of Sidmouth's rift with government over Melville's conduct at the Admiralty in 1805. 
When Sidmouth regained office in 1806 Hobhouse was appointed first commissioner for settling the Carnatic nawabs' debts (so remaining until 1829), and subsequently chairman of committees, both without salary. From 1806 he sat for Hindon on the Calthorpe interest, paying his expenses. He went into opposition with Sidmouth in 1807, and gave up his chairmanship for health reasons after the first session of that parliament. Ill health and differences from Sidmouth ensured that he abjured office, and he often voted with the opposition until 1812, when Sidmouth rejoined the government. He was appointed a commissioner of inquiry into Lincoln gaol in June, and created a baronet on 22 December 1812. He supported the government when present, albeit seldom vocally, in his last parliament. Retiring in 1818 when his eldest son, John Cam Hobhouse, espoused radical politics, he was disappointed in his wish for a peerage. He was FRS, FSA, a vice-president of the Royal Society of Literature, and president in 1805-17 of the West of England Agricultural Society, which commissioned his bust by Chantrey for their Bath premises. He died on 14 August 1831 at his Berkeley Square house in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 13403


Hobhouse, Henry (1776-1854), archivist, was born at home at Hadspen House, near Castle Cary, on 12 April 1776, only son of Henry Hobhouse (1742-1792), barrister, and Sarah (died 1777), daughter of Richard Jenkyns, canon residentiary of Wells. He went to Eton College in 1791 and matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford, on 10 April 1793. He graduated BA in 1797, proceeded MA in 1799, and was created DCL on 27 June 1827. On 23 January 1801 he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple. He married, on 7 April 1806, Harriett, sixth daughter of John Turton of Sugnall Hall, Staffordshire; she died at Bournemouth on 7 May 1858, aged seventy-three, having had eight children. Their sons included Arthur Hobhouse, lord of appeal, and Edmund Hobhouse, bishop and antiquary. 
Hobhouse was solicitor to HM customs from 1806 to 1812, and then became solicitor to the Treasury. He was appointed permanent under-secretary of state for the Home department on 28 June 1817, and therefore directed the office through the whole period of Peel's reforms. He held that office until July 1827, when he retired on a pension of $1000 per annum. He was sworn of the privy council on 28 June 1828. He was one of the ecclesiastical commissioners for England, and chairman of the Somerset quarter sessions until 1845. 
In the meantime Hobhouse had begun a second career. He advised Sir Robert Peel, then home secretary, on the appointment of a commission to supervise the publication of the state papers, and succeeded John Bruce as keeper of the state papers in 1826. He himself became a commissioner on 10 June 1852. The commission published 'The State Papers of Henry VIII', in eleven volumes, the last appearing in 1852. Hobhouse superintended the editing, and took great pains to produce an accurate text. He also supervised the systematic arrangement and listing of the papers. The office was absorbed by the Public Record Office in 1854, when the publication of the records was continued by the series of 'Calendars of the State Papers', extending to more than 200 volumes. Hobhouse died at home at Hadspen House on 13 April 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 13404


Hobhouse, John Cam, Baron Broughton (1786-1869), politician, was born at Redland, Bristol, on 27 June 1786, the eldest child of Sir Benjamin Hobhouse, first baronet (1757-1831), politician and financier, and his first wife, Charlotte (died 1791), daughter and heir of Samuel Cam of Chantry House, Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire. He had two brothers and two sisters, one of whom died in infancy. His background was one of unenfranchised nonconformity and commercial wealth -- important factors in understanding the way in which his politics developed. His father was a noted Unitarian who campaigned for the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts'; his mother was also a dissenter. He went to Lewin's Mead, John Prior Estlin's Unitarian school at Bristol, then to Westminster School, and then to Trinity College, Cambridge. There he obtained the Hulsean prize in 1808 (for an essay entitled 'On the origin and intention of sacrifices'), graduating BA in 1808 and MA in 1811. His mother died in 1791, and from his father's second marriage, to Amelia Parry, he acquired fourteen half-siblings. 
At Cambridge Hobhouse founded a whig club and became the close friend of Byron, with whom in 1809 he travelled across Portugal and Spain to Gibraltar. From Malta he and Byron were encouraged by English naval and diplomatic intelligence to travel into Albania, where they stayed with Ali Pasha from 19 to 23 October 1809; an English naval force meanwhile took over most of the Ionian Islands, a fact on which Ali congratulated them. They then went into Greece, where they were surprised to discover considerable anti-Turkish feeling among the inhabitants. They based themselves in Athens, visiting Marathon on 24 January, and then went via Smyrna to Constantinople, where they attended an audience with Sultan Mahmoud II on 10 July. On 31 October 1809 Hobhouse recorded in his diary, 'Byron is writing a long poem in the Spenserian stanza' -- the first reference to 'Childe Harold's Pilgrimage' (BL, Add. MS 56527, fol. 65'r'). Prior to its publication Hobhouse had regarded Byron as his poetic equal. Lines 247-62 in the first edition of 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers' (1809) are by him. In their absence from England, Hobhouse's anthology 'Imitations and Translations' was published, containing several poems by Byron. On returning Hobhouse published a comic poem, 'The Wonders of a Week at Bath', and his account of their eastern tour, 'A Journey through Albania, and other Provinces of Turkey', went through two printings. It is notable for its final section, about the aspirations and failures of Sultan Selim III. The book brought him a fellowship of the Royal Society in 1814. 
From May 1813 to February 1814 Hobhouse made a long tour through wartime Europe, visiting Stralsund, Berlin, Vienna, Leipzig, Prague, Fiume, Weimar, and Amsterdam. The suffering he witnessed affected him. When in April 1814 the news broke of the abdication of the greatest of his heroes, Napoleon, he hurried to Paris, accompanied by Henry Grattan -- Byron had at first agreed to go, then changed his mind. On 3 May Hobhouse witnessed Louis XVIII entering the capital. Throughout this period he was a member of the Holland House whig circle, and considered, but rejected, the idea of standing as MP for Cambridge University. He heard of Byron's engagement to Annabella Milbanke via a third party. However, on 2 January 1815 he acted as best man at the wedding, having made an attempt -- probably with Byron's encouragement -- to dissuade the minister from performing the ceremony. Annabella learned about this, and it increased her dislike of him (Lovelace MSS, Bodl. Oxf. 88. 25). 
On Napoleon's escape from Elba, Hobhouse again went to Paris, where he met Benjamin Constant and witnessed Napoleon's attempt to become a constitutional ruler. He saw Bonaparte on several occasions. Waterloo -- the news of which reached him as he was trying to cross the Swiss border with Michael Bruce -- depressed him, and he was disgusted by the second reinstatement of Louis XVIII, 'this king of shreds and patches' (Berg collection, 4.101). In the following year he published an account of the 'hundred days', 'The substance of some letters written by an Englishman resident in Paris during the last reign of the Emperor Napoleon', in which he displayed his hatred of the Bourbon dynasty and his sympathy with Bonaparte -- despite the death of his brother Benjamin at Quatre Bras. The book -- the third edition of which was dedicated to Byron -- was reviewed ironically in 'The Quarterly'. Its French translation was seized by the government, and both printer and translator were fined and imprisoned. He also wrote the prologue to Charles Maturin's play 'Bertram' which opened at Drury Lane on 9 May 1816. 
Hobhouse was loyal to Byron throughout the separation from Annabella, drawing up 'a full and scrupulously accurate account' of the events. This was printed privately in 1870 in the wake of the Beecher Stowe controversy, and reprinted in 'Recollections of a Long Life' (2.191-366). He had seen Byron off at Dover on 25 April, and in the autumn of 1816, with Scrope Davies, visited the poet at the Villa Diodati near Geneva, arriving on the day Shelley left. He and Byron dined often with Madame De Stael at Coppet, and made two alpine tours. Passing the Simplon in October, they visited Milan, where they were entertained by Ludovico di Breme, and met Vincenzo Monti, Stendhal, and Silvio Pellico, whose tragedy 'Francesca da Rimini' Hobhouse translated, assisted at first by Byron. In Austrian-occupied Milan, Byron and Hobhouse found that their politics created an appreciative audience for them such as they had never experienced in England. They then visited Venice and Rome together. During late 1817 and early 1818 Hobhouse wrote some of the notes for canto iv of 'Childe Harold'; the poem was afterwards dedicated to him by Byron. The section on Italian literature in his book 'Historical Illustrations to the Fourth Canto of Childe Harold's Pilgrimage' was written for him, in uneasy collaboration, by Ugo Foscolo. In 1823 he was outraged when Foscolo proposed to his stepsister Matilda. 
Hobhouse became a member of The Rota, a dinner club for the promotion of political reforms. In 1819 he contested the parliamentary seat of Westminster, which had become vacant after the suicide of Sir Samuel Romilly. He stood as a radical, supported by his father and by Sir Francis Burdett, but was defeated on 3 March by the whig George Lamb, Lord Melbourne's brother. Riots followed, and a breach opened between him and the Holland House whigs. About this time he wrote several political pamphlets, and his anonymous reply to a sarcastic speech of Canning's, 'A Letter to the Right Honourable George Canning, M. P.' (1818), attracted much attention. In 1819 he published an anonymous pamphlet entitled 'A Trifling Mistake', in which to the question 'What prevents the people from walking down to the House, and pulling out the members by the ears, locking up their doors, and flinging the key into the Thames?' he answered that 'their true practical protectors... are to be found at the Horse Guards, and the Knightsbridge barracks' (pp. 49-50). The House of Commons analysis of this passage, ignoring the answer, read the question as rhetorical, and found Hobhouse guilty of breach of privilege. Arrested on 14 December 1819, he remained in Newgate (in rooms next to the governor's) until the dissolution of parliament on 29 February 1820. On 5 February 1820 the court of king's bench had refused to interfere with the speaker's warrant, and Hobhouse could only respond with a protest in 'The Times'. Prior to his release he issued his address 'To the Independent Electors of Westminster'. 
While Hobhouse was in Newgate the Cato Street conspiracy occurred. Mrs Arbuthnot records in her diary Wellington's conviction that if it had succeeded, and the conspirators had offered Hobhouse the headship of their provisional government, he would have accepted. (In later years Hobhouse and Wellington were on excellent terms.) With Francis Place as his campaign manager Hobhouse succeeded in beating Lamb at Westminster at the general election of 1820 (25 March), and was returned to parliament as Burdett's colleague. Hobhouse's radicalism was qualified, and his statements of principle were vague. The exact nature of the franchise extension he envisaged was unclear. He never spoke out for universal suffrage, annual parliaments, or even the ballot. He was much clearer when attacking corrupt privilege. When in Newgate he rebuffed overtures made to him by William Cobbett, who thought of him as playing Sancho Panza to Sir Francis Burdett's Quixote. 
Hobhouse was a supporter of Queen Caroline throughout her trial in 1820. He made his maiden speech in the House of Commons on 9 May, and thenceforth was an active debater, supporting many liberal measures, including prison reform and libel law reform. He became the leading parliamentary spokesman for the state regulation of factory labour -- though by the 1840s his ardour against child labour had abated. His 'Select Vestries Bill' of 1831 was an important step towards the establishment of fair and representative local government. He assisted in the foundation of London University. 
Hobhouse had advised against the publication of 'Don Juan' i and ii in 1819 -- but he did correct the poem's proofs, which show, in their margins, his amusing altercations with Byron. Canto i, stanza 15, on Romilly's suicide, was suppressed on his initiative. The circulation of Byron's lampoon on his imprisonment, which he discovered on 16 April 1820, caused him severe disillusionment, which was stoically borne (the poem mocks him from an elitist whig viewpoint). He visited Byron for the last time at Pisa in September 1822, where he met Teresa Guiccioli. When they parted, on 22 September, Byron said, 'Hobhouse, you should never have come, or you should never go' ('Recollections', 3.8). 
On 14 May 1824 Hobhouse received the news of Byron's death. In July, as one of the executors, he proved Byron's will, and superintended the funeral at Hucknall Torkard on 16 July. He went on censoring Byron to the end: had he desired the preservation of the memoirs, which Byron had given to Thomas Moore, to Hobhouse's fury, and which had been sold by Moore to John Murray, they would probably not have been destroyed on 17 May (fearful, perhaps, of their contents, Hobhouse does not seem to have read them). He was one of the most active members of the London Greek Committee and after Byron's death he at first resolved to go to Greece himself in order to manage the Greek loan, although ultimately Henry Lytton Bulwer went in his place. 
An admirer of 'The Corsair' and 'Childe Harold', iv, Hobhouse was out of sympathy with Byron's later works. He loathed 'Cain', and confessed in a diary entry for 1 June 1828 to having just read 'Don Juan' X, XI, and XII for the first time, and to have discovered Byron to have been 'a great humourist' (BL, Add. MS 56552, fol. 105'r'). The possibility that 'Don Juan' contains numerous references and jokes, only detectable to a close friend of Byron such as Hobhouse, is strong. Hobhouse refused to give Moore any help in the writing of his life of Byron. Having campaigned twice without success for the placement of Thorwaldsen's statue of Byron in Westminster Abbey, he saw it in 1844 put in the Wren Library at Trinity, where he admitted it went very well. 
Hobhouse's need for more than casual female company seems to have been in abeyance throughout Byron's life, although in 1821 he did express a fondness for Susannah Burdett. In 1827 he fell in love with another of Burdett's daughters, Sophia, and proposed, but was refused. After an affair with the wife of a Wiltshire friend he married, on 28 July 1828, Lady Julia Tomlinson Hay (died 1835), sister of the eighth marquess of Tweeddale, and niece to both Lord Lauderdale and 'King Tom' Maitland. Not a robust person, she collapsed after the ceremony, but bore him three daughters, Julia, born in 1829, Charlotte in 1831, and Sophia in 1832, before dying of tuberculosis on 3 April 1835. The well-connected marriage gave Hobhouse entry to Almack's. His daughters survived a smallpox attack in 1840, but Julia died of cholera on 5 September 1849. Hobhouse's friend Peacock composed a moving elegy. 
The 1832 'Reform Bill' brought forward by Grey's whig-led ministry corrected, in Hobhouse's view, the inequities of the old system, and his radicalism cooled. He thought the Chartists foolish dupes, and the Tolpuddle martyrs misguided. By 1836 Francis Place was describing him as 'live lumber' (Joyce, 283). He succeeded his father as second baronet on Sir Benjamin's death on 14 August 1831, and on 1 February 1832 was appointed secretary-at-war, being sworn of the privy council on 6 February. He tried to reform his chaotic department, and in the teeth of much opposition succeeded in abolishing several sinecures, and in restricting flogging in the army to certain defined misdemeanours -- although he was regarded by many as having failed in not having abolished it completely. His attempt at reducing the size of the army was not successful and, discouraged, he exchanged the post for that of chief secretary for Ireland on 28 March 1833. His tenure of this office, one more difficult even than the previous, was short-lived. 
In April 1833 Hobhouse refused to vote with the government against the abolition of the house and window tax, on the grounds that he had urged its abolition while independent. He resigned both his office and -- to the incomprehension of many -- his seat for Westminster. However, though he offered himself for re-election, he found that his conservatism had lost him popularity. He was pelted on the hustings, and on 10 May was defeated by the radical Colonel George de Lacy Evans, though tory collusion was suspected. 
On Melbourne's coming to power in July 1834 Hobhouse accepted the post of first commissioner of woods and forests. Melbourne's confidence in Hobhouse's loyalty may have been strengthened by his knowledge of the part he had played in discouraging Byron's elopement with Melbourne's late wife, Lady Caroline Lamb, on 29 July 1812. Melbourne and Hobhouse were often the sole guests at Buckingham Palace dinners. Hobhouse was returned for Nottingham at a by-election, also in July 1834. In 1841 he was accused of having won the by-election by bribery and intimidation (traditional approaches, without which campaigning in Nottingham would have been difficult) but was exonerated twice by select committee. He stood again for Nottingham in 1847, bribed no one, and lost to a Chartist -- the economic depression in the town was an important contributory factor in his defeat. However, he was returned as member for Harwich (one of the country's most corrupt constituencies) at a by-election in April 1848, without even making a personal canvass. 
On the dismissal of Melbourne in November 1834, Hobhouse resigned with the rest of his colleagues. When Melbourne formed his second administration he was pressed to resume his old post at the War Office, but refused, and was appointed president of the Board of Control for India, with a seat in the cabinet, on 29 April 1835. He was present at Queen Victoria's first council at Kensington Palace on 20 June 1837. He was one of Palmerston's strongest supporters on the question of the Russian threat in central Asia, and was in part responsible for the English occupation of Afghanistan in 1838, the installation of the unpopular puppet ruler Shah Shuja, and the subsequent death-march from Kabul of January 1842 -- in which his nephew John Byron Hobhouse was killed. The retreat, plus his acquiescence (at least) in what looked like Foreign Office editing of certain dispatches from India, represented a low-water mark in his reputation. He had resigned, with Melbourne, in September 1841. 
On 10 July 1846 Hobhouse resumed the India post, with a seat in Lord John Russell's first cabinet -- of which, it was noted, he seemed one of the most conservative members. An unabashed imperialist, he promoted railway development in India, and approved of Dalhousie's annexation of the Punjab in 1849. Though he was delighted by the fall of Metternich, the 1848 continental revolutions worried him, and he anticipated a Chartist equivalent in England. He was created Baron Broughton of Broughton de Gyfford on 26 February 1851 and, on his final retirement from office, on the resignation of Russell on 21 February 1852, was made KCB (22 April 1852). From this time he withdrew from public life. He debated for the last time during the discussion of the 'Government of India Bill' in July 1858. He spent his retirement at Tedworth House, Wiltshire, and at his London house, 42 Berkeley Square, revising his books and enjoying the society of his friends. 
Hobhouse died after a short illness at 42 Berkeley Square on 3 June 1869, aged eighty-two, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. He had been a vigorous debater, an excellent classical scholar, a competent versifier, an entertaining companion (though he was shy at unfamiliar social gatherings), and a staunch friend. On 10 April 1826, while speaking in the Commons, he invented the phrase 'His Majesty's Opposition', a phrase which gained instant currency. The barony became extinct on his death, but the baronetcy descended to his nephew Sir Charles Parry Hobhouse. 
Hobhouse was short and of pugnacious appearance, having inherited a hooked nose from his mother. He was fond of shooting and fishing. A sceptic when young, he became a comfortable churchgoer when older. His writings are best approached as useful but only partial repositories of information. A collection of his diaries and correspondence is mostly in the British Library, although four volumes of his diary are in the Berg collection in New York. His privately printed 'Some Account of a Long Life' (1865) was augmented by his daughter Lady Dorchester with edited entries from his diary and extracts from his other books, and published by Murray as 'Recollections of a Long Life' between 1909 and 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 13405


Hoblyn, Richard Dennis (1803-1886), educational writer, was the eldest son of Richard Hoblyn (1771-1827), rector of All Saints, Colchester, and his wife, who was the daughter of James Blatch. He was born at Colchester on 9 April 1803, and educated in his native town, and at Blundell's School, Tiverton. Thence he went as a scholar to Balliol College, Oxford, where he took second-class honours in classics and graduated BA in 1824, proceeding MA in 1828. He took orders four years later, but he resigned the clerical life, and devoted himself to teaching and educational writing in London. His chief work was 'A Dictionary of Terms used in Medicine and the Collateral Sciences' (1832; rev. 14th edn, 1909). In conjunction with an American writer, John Lee Comstock (1789-1858), he produced a number of elementary science textbooks, including 'A Manual of Chemistry' (1841), 'A Manual of the Steam Engine' (1842), and 'First Book of Natural Philosophy' (1846). He married, on 4 April 1843, Fanny, daughter of the Revd W. A. Armstrong. They had a son, Richard Armstrong Hoblyn. Hoblyn was well-known in the borough of Marylebone, where he lived for fifty-nine years at 2 Sussex Place, Regent's Park. He died there on 22 August 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 13406


Hoblyn, Robert (bap. 1710, d. 1756), politician and book collector, was born at Nanswhyden House, St Columb Major, and baptized at St Columb Major in Cornwall on 5 May 1710. He was the only son of Francis Hoblyn (1687-1711), a justice of the peace for Cornwall and a member of the stannary parliament, and Penelope, daughter of Colonel Sidney Godolphin of Shropshire. Following his father's death, his mother married secondly, on 5 September 1714, Sir William Pendarves of Pendarves. 
Robert Hoblyn attended Eton College. He matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 18 December 1727, took a BCL degree in 1734, and in the same year contributed verses to the 'Epithalamia Oxoniensia'. His translation of the first book of 'The Georgics' of Virgil was published, posthumously, in 1825. He sat as one of the members of parliament for the city of Bristol from 24 November 1742 to 8 April 1754, voting generally with the opposition, and was appointed speaker of two convocations of the stannary parliament in Cornwall. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 13 June 1745, and admitted on 24 October. He married Jane Coster, the only daughter of Thomas Coster, a Bristol merchant. 
Early in life Hoblyn had travelled in Italy, where he collected many scarce books. He inherited an ample fortune, which was greatly increased by the profits from his successful investment in the Cornish tin mining industry. With his wealth he restored his ancestral home, Nanswhyden House, about 1740, employing Thomas Edwards and John Potter as his architects. This building is described in William Borlase's 'Natural History of Cornwall' (1758), with a plate engraved at the expense of Jane Hoblyn. Hoblyn also delighted in collecting books, and he destroyed all the documents relating to their cost. His library was divided into the classes of natural and moral philosophy, and he made a manuscript catalogue in which he marked with an asterisk those works which were not in the Bodleian Library. All clergymen and persons of literary tastes had free access to the library. 
Hoblyn died at Nanswhyden House on 17 November 1756. His monument in St Columb church, where he was buried on 29 November, bears a very long inscription which is printed by Polwhele. His widow married John Quicke of Exeter in 1759. Hoblyn's estates went to the male descendants of Thomas Hoblyn of Tresaddern, while his library remained with his widow. 
In 1768 John Quicke printed Hoblyn's catalogue in two volumes, entitled 'Bibliotheca Hobliniana, sive, Catalogus librorum juxta exemplar quod manu sua maxima ex parte descriptum reliquit Robertus Hoblyn, armiger de Nanswhyden in comitatu Cornubiae'. An edition in one volume was published by J. Murray in 1769. Dibdin says in referring to it: 'I know not who was the author of the arrangement of this collection, but the judicious observer will find it greatly superior to everything of its kind, with hardly even the exception of the 'Bibliotheca Croftsiana'' (Dibdin, 374). Hoblyn's books were sold in London in 1778, and produced about $2500. Nanswhyden House was destroyed by fire on 30 November 1803, with its collections of ancient documents, the records relating to the stannary parliament, and a valuable cabinet of minerals. 


@@@@@


doc= 13407


Hobson, Edward (1782-1830), botanist and weaver, was born on 23 May 1782 in Ancoats Lane, Manchester. When he was three he was taken in by an uncle in Ashton under Lyne following his father's death and the subsequent alcoholism of his mother, while a younger brother remained in Manchester with his grandfather. Hobson attended schools in Ashton and Manchester, having swapped guardians with his brother after a few years. In 1794 he began to weave, producing muslins until some time after 1812 when, despite engaging in political activity to protect hand-loom weavers, he left the craft. By 1815 he was a warehouseman in Manchester. 
Hobson's early enthusiasm for astrological herbalism may have inspired his interest in botany. About 1809 he began to attend botanical meetings held by working men in various pubs in and around Manchester at which participants would bring freshly gathered plants to be named aloud by the most expert botanist present, who acted as president of the meeting. Hobson established a strong friendship with John Dewhurst, who was president of Sunday pub meetings attended by working-men botanists from a wider region. Soon Hobson was assisting Dewhurst as namer of plants, eventually becoming president in the 1820s, as well as encouraging John Horsefield, who would later succeed Hobson as president. James Crowther was a good friend who possibly introduced Hobson to George Caley, who returned to Lancashire for the period 1811-16. During this time Hobson and Caley were extremely close and they maintained a correspondence after Caley's departure for St Vincent. 
From 1811 Hobson took up the difficult study of mosses and liverworts, soon becoming expert in this area. By 1815 his discoveries led William Jackson Hooker to seek a meeting with him in Manchester. Impressed by Hobson's abilities in finding and distinguishing these little-studied cryptogamic plants, Hooker gave him a microscope and began a correspondence with him in order to receive further information and specimens. With Hooker's encouragement, Hobson produced and sold about twenty-five sets of 'A Collection of Specimens of British Mosses and Hepaticae', known as 'Musci Britannici' (2 vols., 1818-22). These dried specimens were designed to accompany Hooker and Thomas Taylor's 'Muscologia Britannica: Containing the Mosses of Great Britain and Ireland' (1818), in which they were advertised. In preparing 'Musci Britannici', Hobson exchanged letters and specimens with a wide range of naturalists from different social classes. 
Hobson longed to travel like Caley as a botanical collector but, despite interest from Hooker and Robert Brown in 1819, was unable to do so because of responsibilities to his wife, Bridget (died 1848), two sons, and seven daughters. Instead he was active in various scientific circles in 1820s Manchester, ranging from working-men's botanical meetings in pubs to involvement with the museum of the elite and exclusive Natural History Society. By this time Hobson was primarily interested in entomology; the beetle 'Chrysomela hobsoni', discovered by Hobson, is described in James Francis Stephens's 'Illustrations of British Entomology' (4, 1831, 343). Despite an offer of well-paid curatorial work of $100 a year from the Manchester Natural History Society in 1829, Hobson remained a warehouseman. 
In 1829, together with other artisans, Hobson founded and presided over the Banksian Society for the study of natural history, in which he encouraged a socially mixed membership. This society did not meet in a pub and, in contrast to the oral nature of pub meetings, deliberately emphasized a more literate culture in its organizational structure. One of the committee members, the radical Rowland Detrosier, gave the opening address, which was published under the title of 'The Benefits of General Knowledge: more especially, the sciences of mineralogy, geology, botany, and entomology', in which he stressed the right of all to enter the 'temple of science'. 
Possibly because of his mother's alcoholism, Hobson was extremely abstemious. He possessed an immense capacity for fieldwork, disregarding bad weather and climbing trees and onto roofs searching for mosses. When his health began to fail in the summer of 1830, well-to-do friends moved him to Bowdon, Cheshire, away from the smoky air of Manchester. Aware of the potential value of his specimens, Hobson wrote a will requesting they be sold for the support of his family. Over 11,000 dried plants were purchased by the Manchester Horticultural and Botanical Society for $90 and his insect cabinet was sold to the Banksian Society (eventually passing to the Manchester Mechanics' Institution) for $65. 
Hobson died of consumption at Bowdon on 7 September 1830 and was buried at St George's Church, Hulme, Manchester. A memorial tablet inside the church commemorates his scientific achievements as well as his 'natural simplicity of manners'. Hobson was a source of inspiration not only to artisan naturalists but also to gentlemen. James Aspinall Turner, Liberal MP for Manchester from 1857, began his extensive collection of coleopterous insects following the gift of two beetles from Hobson; Joseph Dalton Hooker maintained that his love of bryology was stimulated by Hobson's 'Musci Britannici' in his father's library; and William Jackson Hooker himself declared to Dawson Turner in a letter of 14 October 1815, just after his only meeting with Hobson: 'I hardly ever saw a man possessed of more enthusiasm than this poor fellow'. 


@@@@@


doc= 13408


Hobson, Richard (1795-1868), physician, was born at Whitehaven, Cumberland, the second son of Christopher Hobson, a barrister, of Bootle, Cumberland, and Anna Dixon. After school at St Bees and at Wakefield, he was sent to study medicine at St George's Hospital, London. He became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, and having finally decided to become a physician, went to Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1820, before migrating to Sidney Sussex College, and finally to Queens' College, where he graduated MB in 1825 and MD in 1830. 
In 1826 Hobson settled in Leeds, where he rapidly acquired a large practice, and on 30 September 1833 he was elected physician to the infirmary there, a post which he resigned in June 1843. During this period he published in the 'Medical Gazette' some notes on diabetes and on the external use of croton oil. He was consulting physician to the Hospital for Women and Children from 1853 to his death. 
Hobson was devoted to field sports from his youth, and while in Leeds he belonged to the Harewood coursing club, bred racehorses, and hunted with the Bramham hunt. For a short time he kept a pack of harriers. He had some knowledge of natural history, and built up excellent collections of stuffed birds, mosses, and lichens. In 1836 he became acquainted with the naturalist Charles Waterton, who lived at Walton Hall, about 12 miles from Leeds. Hobson became physician to the family and a frequent visitor, and Waterton often wrote to him. Their friendship ended a few years before Waterton's death. Hobson had written a memoir of Waterton and claimed he had received the naturalist's approval for the work, 'Charles Waterton: his Home, Habits, and Handiwork', which was published in 1866. However, abundant internal evidence shows that the statement about Waterton's approval of the manuscript is untrue. Many of the stories in the book appear to be false, and the letters given were altered. 
After being injured in a fall from his carriage, Hobson was confined to his house, where he broke his thigh bone, and died unexpectedly on 29 November 1868 at 10 Park Place, Leeds. His wife, a daughter of Peter Rhodes of Leeds, had died some years before. There were no children. Hobson was accounted 'one of the oldest and most respected medical men in Leeds' by his contemporaries (Mayhall, 3.224). 


@@@@@


doc= 13409


Hobson, Thomas (1545-1631), carrier, was the elder son of Thomas Hobson and his wife, Elinor. His birthplace has been stated as Buntingford, Hertfordshire, on the strength of his father's having been born there, but a note on the back of a contemporary petition relating to Hobson states that he was born at Holbeach, Lincolnshire, near which (at Moulton, and elsewhere) Hobson owned land in 1630, and at which his brother resided. 
His father, also a carrier, had settled in Cambridge by 1561, and was at the time of his death, in 1568, one of the treasurers of the corporation. He devised his copyhold lands in Grantchester to his son Thomas, to whom he bequeathed 'the teame wayre that he now goeth with that is to say the carte & eighte horses & all the harneyes and other things thereunto belonginge with the nagge' (Cooper, 231). After his father's death Thomas continued the business with great success. The business was conducted by carts, and later by wagons drawn by teams of six or seven horses; there is no evidence that Hobson ever used packhorses. Both goods and passengers were carried, as well as 'a certayne greate tunn or vessell' containing live fish for the royal household. All the extant references show that the actual driving was done by servants, rather than by Hobson himself. Hobson was also active in hiring out horses, and his refusal to allow any horse to be taken except in its proper turn is said to have given rise to the saying, 'Hobson's choice', that is 'this or none'. Hobson used to tell the Cambridge scholars that they would get to London early enough 'if they did not ride too fast' (Clarke, 111). His fame extended far beyond the university, as in 1617 a tract appeared entitled 'Hobson's Horse Load of Letters, or, Precedents for Epistles of Business'. 
Hobson married his first wife, Agnes Humbrestone, at Ware on 2 December 1577. They had three sons (none of whom survived him) and five daughters. His will refers to the large portions provided on the marriage of two of his daughters, one to a baronet and the other to a gentleman, 'whereby my estate is much lesse then heretofore it was' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/159, q. 17). Agnes died in 1615. His second wife was named Mary; she also predeceased him. 
In 1626 Hobson presented a large 'Bible' to the church of St Benedict, in which parish he resided. In 1627 he acquired the site of the priory of Anglesey, with the manor of Anglesey-cum-Bottisham, Cambridgeshire. He was also owner of the manors of Crowlands, Lisles, and Sames in Cottenham, and, as lessee of the crown, held the Denny Abbey estate, with the manors of Waterbeach and Denny. His will mentions other property in Cambridge, Chesterton, Tidd St Giles, and Moulton. On 30 July 1628 he conveyed to the university and town of Cambridge the ground on which was erected the structure commonly known as the Spinning House, but more correctly called 'Hobson's Workhouse'. In spite of his advanced age he continued his journeys to London until 1630, when they were suspended on account of the plague. During this cessation of business he died at Cambridge on 1 January 1631. He was buried in the church of St Benedict on 12 January. Milton wrote two humorous epitaphs on Hobson. 
A street in Cambridge is named after Hobson. In his will he provided for the maintenance of the existing conduit on Market Hill, and for making it 'halfe a yard higher or more (if with conveniencye it may be done)'; on the strength of this it became known as Hobson's Conduit, and it still survives (in the late twentieth century) on a different site (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/159, q. 17). 


@@@@@


doc= 13410


Hoby, Sir Edward (1560-1617), politician and diplomat, was born at Bisham, Berkshire, on 20 March 1560, the eldest son of Sir Thomas Hoby (1530-1566) and his wife, Elizabeth (1528-1609), third daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke of Gidea Hall, Essex, and later wife of John, Lord Russell ['see 'Russell, Elizabeth, Lady Russell]. The puritan magistrate and MP Sir Thomas Posthumous Hoby was a younger brother. From 1571 Edward attended Eton College, where he struck up a lasting friendship with Sir John Harington, the courtier and translator. He matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, as a gentleman-commoner on 11 November 1574, aged fourteen. He was allowed to graduate BA on 19 February 1576, after only eight terms, and proceeded MA on 3 July of the same year. Thomas Lodge the dramatist was a 'scholar' under him at Trinity. In June 1576 Hoby obtained a dispensation to travel on the continent, which he did until 1579. Subsequently, as he stated in his 'Counter-Snarle' (pp. 61, 72), he entered the Middle Temple, but he does not appear in its surviving records. 
Hoby had the means to provide for an independent lifestyle. He succeeded his father upon the latter's death in 1566, and when his mother purchased his wardship, his lands in Berkshire and Worcestershire were valued at $220 a year. One of the most highly educated women of her time, Hoby's mother prepared him for his career at the royal court. Through her he was related to the Cecils and Cookes, and his access to the court was increased by his marriage to Margaret (died 1605), daughter of Henry Carey, first Baron Hunsdon, on 21 May 1582. He was knighted by the queen at Somerset House on the day after the wedding. Local offices came quickly afterwards. He was appointed JP for Berkshire, Kent, and Worcestershire from 1583, Middlesex from 1593, and Surrey from 1601. 
Under the auspices of his uncle, William Cecil, Lord Burghley, Hoby rose into high favour at court, and was frequently employed on confidential missions. In August 1584 he accompanied his father-in-law on a special mission to Scotland. His affability and learning greatly impressed James VI. After attending the Scottish ambassador as far as Durham, Hoby received from James a flattering letter in which the king intimated his longing for his company, and how he had 'commanded his ambassador to sue for it'. James Hamilton, third earl of Arran, also wrote to the same effect, enclosing a 'small token' which he begged Hoby 'to wear in testimony of their brotherhood' ('CSP Scot. ser.', '1509-89', 489). The queen disliked these signs of favour, and Hoby found it convenient for a time to plead the ague as an excuse for not attending the court. Domestic troubles also harassed him. 
Hoby was returned MP for Queenborough, Kent, in 1584 and 1586, gaining distinction as a spokesman in the Commons. On 31 October 1586 he complained that he had been 'not only bitten but overpassed by the hard hand of' Sir Francis Walsingham, and appealed to Secretary William Davison to use his influence with the queen on his behalf ('CSP dom.', '1581-90', 365). Argumentative, he quarrelled with Lord Burghley, Sir John Conway, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, and Sir Thomas Heneage. Ultimately restored to favour through his mother's interventions, in July 1588 Hoby was chosen to report to the queen on the progress of preparations against the Spanish Armada in the Isle of Sheppey, where he also served as grain commissioner. 
Elected MP for Berkshire in 1589, Hoby introduced a bill on 14 February against the extortions of exchequer officials, and spoke out against royal purveyance. He was reproached by Burghley but the house cleared his name of breaching its privileges, although his plan for reforming the exchequer was defeated by the queen, who regarded him as one of those 'busy' against her prerogative; none the less in 1592 she visited him at Bisham. In the parliaments of 1589 and 1593 Hoby was an active member of committees for harbour repairs, parliamentary privilege, purveyance, poor relief, and subsidies. In 1593 he was publicly rebuked by the queen and briefly placed under house arrest for insulting a fellow committee member, the privy councillor Sir Thomas Heneage. 
Hoby's career moved more fully to Kent when he was chosen MP for the county in February 1593. Having served as vice-admiral of Milton hundred since 1585, he was appointed 'custos rotulorum' of the county in 1594. He took an active role as judge in the Milton hundredal court. Royal favours included in 1594 letters patent for buying and providing wool for sale in England for ten years, which were ratified in the succeeding reign. Hoby's only military endeavour was accompanying the expedition to Cadiz in 1596. Appointed constable of Queenborough Castle on the Isle of Sheppey, on 9 July 1597, he kept detailed records of his work there. On the following 28 October he received a commission to search out and prosecute all offences against the statute prohibiting the export of iron from England, his reward being half the forfeitures. He continued to serve the queen in diplomatic ventures, and had established a correspondence with the Russian diplomat Grigory Ivanovich Mikulin by 1602. 
Elected MP for Rochester in 1597 and 1601, Hoby was particularly active in those parliaments. He sat on at least fourteen committees and most of his work was on economic, legal, and religious issues. In 1601 he chaired the privileges and returns committee, and distinguished himself in urging the house to protect its privileges in individual cases, and to make precedents in issuing election writs. He had several confrontations with Sir Robert Cecil, but in the debate on monopolies he stood for not challenging the royal prerogative no matter how 'foul' its practices (Henderson and Philips, 2.322). Hoby's favour at court enabled him to act as a knight of the canopy at the queen's funeral in 1603. He continued to be elected for Rochester in the succeeding parliaments of 1604-10 and 1614. 
Hoby's career at court was solidified at the accession of James I. The king made him a gentleman of the privy chamber in 1605, and forgave him by warrant the arrears of rent of the royal manor of Shirland, Derbyshire, amounting to over $500. Earlier Hoby had defaulted on the rent of properties in Kent leased from Brasenose College, Oxford, and was sued successfully in 1593 for $500 in arrears. Hoby, blessed with wealth, had little acumen to preserve it. He turned again to the royal court and James granted him an exclusive licence on 21 August 1607 to buy wool in Warwickshire and Staffordshire. Hoby frequently entertained the king at Bisham, but his social relationship did not include the king's political agenda. 
While most is known about his career as a parliamentarian in the later parliaments of Elizabeth I, Hoby was perhaps a more important figure in the early parliaments of James I. According to contemporary MPs in the parliaments of 1604-14, his appearances were impressive, his manner affable, his head clear, and his knowledge of parliamentary history and usage unparalleled (Notestein, 61). An independent figure, often at odds with court policies, he was listened to attentively. A candidate for speaker in 1604, he was quite effective in promoting the house's position on privileges, precedents, and impositions, and using delaying tactics to stymie Anglo-Scottish union. Sitting as a commissioner for the bill on union, he refused to subscribe his name to the engrossed document (Inner Temple MS 537, 8.123). He was often appointed as the Commons' representative on joint committees of the Lords, and the record shows that he stood up to the Lords strongly and effectively, pushing the independence of his house. When his own personal interests were at issue in attacks on the wool monopoly, accusations of his 'jobbing and brogging' were quietly dismissed in the Commons ('Parliamentary Diary of Robert Bowyer', 141). 
Hoby was a keen theologian, collector, and scholar. He spoke out for tough laws against recusants in Elizabeth's reign. In James's reign he contested with the Catholic convert Theophilus Higgons and the Jesuit John Floyd, publishing his exchanges with them between 1609 and 1615 in such works as 'A Counter-Snarle for Ishmael Rabshacheh, a Cecropidan Lycaonite' (1613) and 'A curry-combe for a coxe-combe... in answer to a lewd libell lately fornicated by Jabal Rachil against Sir Edward Hobies 'Counter-Snarle'' (1615). His religious views were of a moderate Calvinist conformist to the Church of England. He was an inveterate collector, and manuscripts that he is known to have owned include medieval English poetry, fifteenth-century herbal and medicinal remedies, and Dutch medical treatises (BL, Add. MSS 8151, 4897-4899). He collected and placed in Queenborough Castle portraits of many of its constables. Hoby was also a copious letter-writer, copyist, and -- like his father -- translator. His published works included a translation from Latin of Matthieu Coignet as 'Politique Discourse upon Trueth and Lying' (1586), and from the Castilian of Bernardino de Mendoza as 'Theorique and Practise of Warr' (1597). Hoby cultivated the friendship of learned men, especially William Camden, who eulogized his bounty and accomplishments in 'Britannia' (under 'Bisham' and 'Queenborough'). Camden also dedicated his 'Hibernia' (1587) to him. In 1612 Hoby presented to the library of Trinity College, Oxford, Sir Henry Savile's sumptuous edition of 'St Chrysostom'. 
Hoby's first wife died in 1605; about 1613 he married Cecily, daughter of Sir Edward Unton and widow of Sir John Wentworth of Gosfield Hall, Essex, who survived him. Hoby died in Queenborough Castle on 1 March 1617 and was buried at All Saints' Church, Bisham: his will asked that he be buried without pomp or ceremony in the family chapel there. 
Hoby had no children from his marriages. He was succeeded by his illegitimate son with Katharine Pinckney, 


@@@@@


doc= 13411


Russell, Elizabeth, Lady Russell (1528-1609), linguist and courtier, was the third of five learned daughters of Sir Anthony Cooke (1505/6-1576) of Gidea Hall, Essex, tutor to Edward VI, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir William Fitzwilliam. Through her father's influence she became skilled in languages. On 27 June 1558 she married Sir Thomas Hoby (1530-1566) of Bisham Abbey, Berkshire, translator of Castiglione's 'Il Cortegiano' into English as 'The Courtier'. A son, Edward, and two daughters, who died young, were born between 1560 and 1564. She accompanied her husband to France on his appointment as ambassador in March 1566, where he died on 13 July. Shortly afterwards she gave birth to a second son, Thomas Posthumous. In Bisham church she created the Hoby Chapel, where she interred the bodies of her husband and his elder brother, Philip, in a joint monument with effigies and epitaphs in Greek, Latin, and English. 
On 23 December 1574 Elizabeth married John, Lord Russell (died 1584), heir to Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford. Two daughters were born, Anne and Elizabeth, and one authority records a son who died in 1580. The tradition at Bisham that her ill treatment caused a son's death (and the appearance of her repentant ghost) cannot be verified. Lord Russell predeceased his father, dying on 24 July 1584, so denying her the title of countess of Bedford. She erected a monument to him in Westminster Abbey, again revealing her linguistic skills in the accompanying inscriptions. 
Through access to those in power, Elizabeth could offer patronage to others. She gave support to the composer John Dowland (but opposed Richard Burbage's proposal in 1596 to convert property near her Blackfriars home into a playhouse). From the 1560s to the 1590s her patronage was frequently sought in matters ranging from the shrievalty of Buckinghamshire to a knighthood for the duke of Somerset's son-in-law. She, in turn, relied on the support of her brother-in-law William Cecil, Lord Burghley, and her nephew Robert Cecil. When her despised son Thomas Posthumous fled in 1586 to avoid having to study law, she begged Burghley to take him into his service. (In 1588 Thomas was admitted to Gray's Inn as Burghley's protege.) Apart from her alleged poverty, her concern in 1593 was that her daughters had been cheated of their Russell birthright by their aunt, Lady Warwick -- a view with which Burghley sympathized. She also sought his help in a dispute with one Lovelace, lieutenant of Windsor Forest and Castle, which had erupted into violence. In 1595 Burghley was unsympathetic, causing her to note his 'mutterings, which stick fast by me' ('CSP dom.', '1595-7', 147). Occasionally the process was reversed. On Burghley's behalf in 1596 she tackled Anthony Bacon, nephew to both, questioning his loyalty and his associates' religion. 
In 1599, after numerous disputes, Lady Russell complained to Robert Cecil of being 'beggared by law' ('Salisbury MSS', 9.339) and was angered by her daughter Elizabeth's 'presumptious disobedience' in supporting a plan to be rid of Russell House -- a link with her second husband. She wrote repeatedly to Cecil in 1601 about Justice Warburton's revoking of a judgment against a former servant, metaphorically refusing to be 'bearded by a girl's tearing out of my teeth' ('Salisbury MSS', 11.563-4). From 1603 she disputed the earl of Nottingham's right to the lease of Donnington Castle, Berkshire, requiring Cecil's presence when the Star Chamber hearing began in 1606. Constantly interrupting the court, she lost the case. 
For much of her life Elizabeth enjoyed royal patronage. The queen was reputedly godmother to two of her children, and after Lord Russell's death she paid debts and provided for both daughters, eventually granting them posts at court. In 1592 the queen, court, and privy council were entertained at Bisham Abbey, but in 1595 Lady Russell found she could only see the queen when 'going to God's house' ('CSP dom.', '1595-7', 147-8). She was back in favour in June 1600, when the queen attended the marriage of her daughter Anne to Henry, Lord Herbert, son of the earl of Worcester, at Blackfriars. Her younger daughter died a few days later, allegedly from a needleprick in her left forefinger. She wrote to Robert Cecil in 1601 that the girl had not been given as honourable a burial as 'meaner maids' ('Salisbury MSS', 11.562) in the queen's service, while her own uncomfortable farewell from court had 'killed a courtier' in her. 
Lady Russell retained her linguistic skills over the years, adding Latin verses and quotations to letters, and translating from the French 'A way of reconciliation touching the true nature and substance of the body and blood of Christ in the sacrament' (printed in 1605). She dedicated this to her surviving daughter. In her will she claimed to eschew 'vain ostentation or pomp' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/113, fol. 435'r') for her funeral, but wrote to Sir William Dethick, Garter king of arms, about the number of mourners and appropriate display for her status. She also left money for seventy poor widows to be provided with funeral clothes. Her will reveals that apart from her Berkshire and London holdings (inherited by her son Edward) she had tithes from eight Worcestershire parishes and property in Gloucestershire. The latter went to Thomas Posthumous, whose wife was Margaret Hoby ('nee' Dakins), the diarist. She died in May or June 1609, and was buried at Bisham church on 2 June. Her memorial in Bisham church depicts her kneeling at a priedieu and wearing a coronet, with the figures of children from both marriages around her. 


@@@@@


doc= 13412


Peregrine Hoby (1602-1679), politician, born on 1 September 1602. Hoby recognized the boy as his heir, brought him up, and at his death committed him to the care of Archbishop George Abbot. Peregrine attended Eton College between 1612 and 1616. He may have served on the expeditions to Cadiz in 1625 and to La Rochelle in 1627. He initially resisted compounding for knighthood in 1630 but eventually promised to pay $30. On 14 April 1631 he married Katherine (died 1687), daughter of Sir William Doddington of Breamore, Hampshire. In 1640 Hoby was elected to the Long Parliament as MP for Great Marlow, Buckinghamshire (which lay just across the Thames from Bisham), in a pair of controversial elections on 21 October, and, after the Commons ordered a new election, on 23 November. Hoby was elected by the corporation in the first election, though the householders who challenged such a restricted franchise apparently would also have voted for him but not the other MP then elected. His second election, on a broader franchise, was challenged in the committee of privileges on the grounds that the franchise, which included the bargemen and almsmen of the town, was now too wide: 'Mr Maynard mooved that the poore should not have a voice' (Hirst, 78). His election was confirmed, but the situation was further complicated because just before the second election he had been pricked as sheriff, which precluded him from leaving the county and sitting as MP. Indeed, though Hoby's election was confirmed in January 1641, he was apparently required to serve out his term as sheriff and was absent from the Commons for most of the year. He was present by June 1642 and was an active member from 1643 to 1648. In the same period he sat on the parliamentarian county committee for Berkshire. He was secluded from the Commons at Pride's Purge, returning to the Commons in 1659 when the representation of Great Marlow was restored. He sat for the borough in the Convention Parliament (1660) and in the Cavalier Parliaments (1661-78), where he was very much a second- or third-rank figure. He was moderately active on committees and showed some concern with the danger of popery: in 1667 he brought before the Commons a complaint (unfounded, as it turned out) about the Jesuits seducing a young heir. The earl of Shaftesbury in 1677 considered Hoby politically sympathetic, noting him as 'worthy'. Peregrine Hoby was buried at Bisham on 6 May 1679. 


@@@@@


doc= 13413


Hoby, Sir Philip (1504/5-1558), diplomat and administrator, was the first son of William Hoby (died after 1532), landowner, of Leominster, Herefordshire, and his first wife, Katherine Foster. Sir Thomas Hoby (1530-1566), the courtier and translator, was his half-brother. He came from a Welsh family that settled in Leominster during his father's time. Nothing is known of his education but he was proficient in several foreign languages and was clearly well educated, having probably travelled through Europe as a young man. 
Hoby was by 1538 identified as one of the grooms of the privy chamber and probably had a strong connection with Sir Thomas Cromwell, who identified him as a friend sharing the same interest in religious reform. His career was advanced through service to Cromwell, probably going back to the early 1530s. He served Dr Nicholas Hawkins, resident ambassador to Charles V, between 1532 and 1534, learning his craft as a diplomat. His first formal overseas assignment came as a special mission for Cromwell. Between about 28 February and about 1 April 1538 he accompanied Hans Holbein the younger to obtain portraits of potential marriage partners for Henry VIII. He seems to have received a total diet of $46 13's'. 4died Hoby was instructed by Cromwell to visit the household of Claude de Lorraine, first duc de Guise, to examine his two daughters. Before this Hoby and Holbein went to the Low Countries, where they had an audience with the regent about 11 March, the artist making the drawing for his famous portrait of Christina of Denmark the following day. While not a diplomatic mission, it certainly added to Hoby's qualifications to undertake royal business abroad. 
Hoby had experience in a working embassy, had the advantage of skill in languages and foreign travel, and enjoyed Henry VIII's confidence and Cromwell's patronage. He was the quintessential Tudor lay diplomatic representative, when his first formal assignment came on 10 October. His instructions were to join the resident ambassador, Sir Thomas Wyatt the elder, to advise Charles V, with whom he had an audience on 1 November, on various foreign policy matters as Henry saw them, all intended to promote peace in Europe. His mission, one of no great consequence, was concluded by 17 December. He was appointed woodward of Ashwood, Leominster, from 25 March 1538 to 28 April 1546 in reward. 
Hoby continued as a leading courtier, who was often entrusted with military duties, until the end of the reign. He was part of the reception for Anne of Cleves in 1540, an understandable assignment since he had been special ambassador to the Cleves court in a poorly documented mission between about 8 and 25 November 1539, when he probably negotiated her marriage to Henry and apparently obtained a painting of her. No disadvantage seemed to attach to him in the Cleves divorce and the fall of Cromwell. Instead, he was given a more prominent role in government. By 1540 he had married well, to Elizabeth ('c'.1500-1560), daughter of Sir Walter Stoner of Stoner, Oxfordshire. Holbein probably produced the drawings of the couple about this time. They had no children. Elizabeth Hoby was part of the protestant court circle surrounding Katherine Parr and this connection reinforced her husband's position. On 4 February 1542 Philip Hoby submitted to the privy council the books containing examinations and inventories of the goods of Jews who had been arrested under his commission. He was in trouble himself over his own religious beliefs, being committed to the Fleet prison on 18 March 1543 for having maintained the cleric Thomas Parson, whose 'evill opinions' regarding the sacrament of the altar were well known ('APC', '1542-7', 101). Hoby was released six days later and appointed gentleman usher of the black rod and to the Order of the Garter on 3 November, as well as being a member of Katherine's council between 1543 and 1548. It took military service at Boulogne to secure his knighthood on 30 September 1544. He subsequently served in the invasion of Scotland led by Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, in September 1545, in which he was master of the ordnance northward. He was appointed on 12 May Katherine's steward for foreign receipts and steward for her husband, Thomas Seymour, Lord Seymour, in 1548. Hoby was remembered in Henry VIII's will with a bequest of $133 6's'. 8died and benefited from royal land grants, acquiring former monastic property in Worcestershire in 1541 and in Lincolnshire in 1544. 
Edward VI's reign was the high point of Hoby's diplomatic career. He served in the parliament of 1547 as an MP for Cardiff Boroughs, having probably been advanced by Sir William Herbert, Katherine's brother-in-law, but seemingly missed the majority of the sessions due to service abroad. He was also appointed JP for Middlesex and for Worcestershire in May 1547 (of the quorum from 1554). He was resident ambassador to the emperor from about 15 April 1548, with specific instructions to secure military assistance in countering a presumably impending French invasion. His secretary was John Bernardino. Charles's peripatetic court moved between the Low Countries and parts of Germany, with Hoby dutifully following. His residency was punctuated with a brief return home in autumn 1549 to pursue private patronage objectives, during which Hoby earned some notoriety. He apparently played a key role in the capitulation of Hertford, now duke of Somerset, to the privy council and John Dudley, earl of Warwick. Hoby, trusted by both sides, and previously a strong supporter of Somerset, served as a skilled negotiator between 6 and 13 October as both factions manoeuvred to avoid civil war. He was well aware that the London councillors intended to strip Somerset of his power. It is notable that Hoby guaranteed the duke's life, being instrumental in gaining his surrender on 11 October through his careful diplomacy, and his thoughts at the ultimate denouement may be imagined. Hoby's resumption of resident responsibilities in Brussels, this time accompanied by Sir Thomas Cheyne, included an explanation to the emperor of recent events in London and a repeated request for imperial troops to assist the English at Boulogne. This residency formally ended on 20 November 1550. Charles praised his diplomatic skills upon Hoby's return. 
Hoby was a member of the entourage of William Parr, marquess of Northampton, when he was sent to France from 25 April to 12 August 1551. This was a major embassy that was designed to impress and even overawe the French court, leaving England with a large train that included Thomas Goodrich, the bishop of Ely, Henry Manners, second earl of Rutland, William Somerset, third earl of Worcester, Thomas Butler, eleventh earl of Ormond, and several barons, among a great many others. Hoby alone provided for thirty retainers and servants in his retinue, with a diet of $3 6's'. 8died per day to support this. The purpose of the embassy was to convey the Garter to Henri II, to negotiate the marriage of Edward to a French princess, and to cement the Anglo-French amity. In this mission Hoby was presumably a strategic negotiator, for he carried unusual status -- the third-ranking envoy among a group of luminaries -- but his specific role remains obscure. He was rewarded with appointment to the privy council on 16 August. His importance as a privy councillor and master of the ordnance (26 March 1547 to 11 May 1554) was such that, when the court departed London for the country in autumn 1552, he was required to remain at the Tower of London with half the privy council to continue the business of royal government. Shortly thereafter he secured the former abbey at Bisham, Berkshire. This site is closely identified with him, his half-brother Thomas Hoby, and his highly literate sister-in-law, Elizabeth Russell, nee Cooke (1528-1609), who constructed a magnificent monument there to both Philip and Thomas Hoby. 
Yet another diplomatic assignment came between 13 February and about 5 March 1552. Sent to the regent in the Low Countries in company with Sir Thomas Gresham, it was Hoby's responsibility to secure a renegotiation of English loans from the Fuggers, and also to protest various imperial infringements on English naval and commercial rights in the area. A final, formal diplomatic duty was carried out from 2 April 1553, when Thomas Thirlby, bishop of Norwich, and he went to the emperor. Thirlby remained as the resident ambassador, while Hoby assumed a similar role with the regent in the Low Countries, receiving an audience on 18 May. He remained until 1 September, when he was recalled by Mary I. Hoby's sojourn in the Low Countries allowed him to avoid more direct involvement in the attempt to alter the succession, although he continued to comply with orders from the privy council after being informed of Edward's death. The source of Professor A. F. Pollard's speculation about whether Lord Guildford Dudley would receive the crown matrimonial or not is a letter from Hoby and Sir Richard Morison to the privy council of 15 July in which they informed them that rumours to that effect were current in the Low Countries. Although he supported Mary's marriage to Philip of Spain and was named capital burgess of Leominster on 28 March 1554, Hoby's importance diminished sharply, especially in the paranoid atmosphere in the wake of the rebellion of Sir Thomas Wyatt the younger. 
Simon Renard, the imperial ambassador, identified Hoby as one of the craftiest heretics in England but no other indictment is known. Philip and Thomas Hoby nevertheless felt it prudent to go into exile, although the queen was willing to appoint the elder brother as resident ambassador to the regent in the Low Countries at the outset of his travels. Sir Philip Hoby's announced specific purpose for going abroad was to take the waters at Liege and Aix-la-Chapelle in order to try to gain some relief from recurrent illness. He visited the regent in July 1554, and then continued on to Italy. There he consorted with various exiles, some of whose activities were actually treasonous. In fact, Renard voiced the suspicion that Hoby was abroad only to plot against the regime with various dissidents. Both Hobys are noted as spending considerable time with Sir John Cheke at Padua in 1555. It may also be at this time that Hoby began a friendship with the artists Titian and Pietro Aretino. 
The Hobys made their way back to England in January 1556, but not before securing assurances of safety from Philip in the Low Countries. Philip pursued a policy of currying favour with important Englishmen whose future usefulness might prove valuable. Sir Philip Hoby's next two years at Bisham were ones of declining health, culminating in his death at his London home in Blackfriars on 9 May 1558, aged fifty-three. His will was written on 1 May and proved on 2 July. In it, his ties to Sir William Cecil, Sir John Mason, and Sir Henry Paget are clear. The bulk of his property went to his half-brother. His body was later moved to Bisham, where a magnificent monument is still to be found, the inscription on which gives his date of death as 31 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 13414


Hoby, Sir Thomas (1530-1566), courtier and translator, was born at Leominster, Herefordshire, the second son of William Hoby, of Radnor, and his second wife, Katherine, daughter of John Forden. He matriculated pensioner from St John's College, Cambridge, on 20 May 1545 and studied for the next two years under John Cheke. In August 1547 he left without taking a degree, spending almost a year in Strasbourg as a guest of Martin Bucer, studying classics and theology. His first translation was 'The Gratulation of M. Martin Bucer unto the Church of England' (1549). After returning to Britain he was introduced at court at Christmas 1550. The following May he went to France in the train of William Parr, marquess of Northampton, who invested the French king with the Order of the Garter. A convinced protestant, Hoby remained overseas for much of Queen Mary's reign. His 'Travels and Life' (1551-64) shows him to be an interested and perceptive participant in aristocratic life abroad. Out of that experience came his translation of Castiglione's 'Il cortegiano', done in Paris in 1552-3 and published in 1561. Besides setting the standards of social behaviour for the English cultivated public, 'The Courtier' left a profound mark on Elizabethan literary and stylistic practice, and Hoby's elegantly sober style was to influence Royal Society prose. 
On the death of his half-brother, Sir Philip Hoby, in May 1558 Hoby inherited Bisham Abbey, Berkshire, and on 27 June married Elizabeth (1528-1609) ['see 'Russell, Elizabeth], daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke (1505/6-1576). They took up residence at Bisham on 8 July 1559, and spent the next six years extending the buildings. His first son, Edward Hoby, was born on 20 March 1560, and on 27 May 1562, 'was my wief delivered of a wenche (Elizabeth)' ('Travels', 129). Their second daughter, Anne, was born on 16 November 1564. Both girls died in February 1571. Hoby was knighted at Greenwich on 9 March 1566, and was appointed ambassador to France at the end of the month. When he landed at Calais on 9 April, a soldier at the town gate put two shots through the English flag. Hoby demanded an apology, which was grudgingly given, but he was not permitted to inspect the fortifications built after the French had recaptured the town in 1558. He died in Paris on 13 July 1566, and was buried on 2 September in Bisham parish church, where a monument was erected to his memory. His second son, Thomas Posthumous Hoby, was born after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 13415


Hoccleve, Thomas (c.1367-1426), poet and clerk, may have derived his name from Hockliffe, Bedfordshire, but nothing is known of his family. The date of his birth can be inferred from his 'Dialogue with a Friend' ('c'.1420), where he speaks of himself as then aged 'fifty wyntir and three' (Hoccleve, 'Dialogue', 1.246). Hoccleve's early years are unrecorded, but his education evidently included instruction in French and Latin, then the official languages used at the privy seal. He joined that office at the age of about twenty, probably at Easter 1387, since he says in the 'Regiment of Princes' ('c'.1411) that he has been writing for the seal 'xxti year and iiij, come Estren' ('for twenty-four years, come Easter'; Hoccleve, 'Regiment', 11.804-5). His career there continued until shortly before his death, for some thirty-eight years. He started as an under-clerk: in a will of 1392 Guy Rouclif left 5 marks and a 'book called the 'War of Troy'' to Thomas Hoccleve 'my clerk'. Later he became one of the five or six senior clerks of the office, and his career there can be traced in a long series of chancery and exchequer records of grants and payments. On 12 November 1399 the new king, Henry IV, granted him an annuity of $10 for life, a grant raised to 20 marks ($13 6's'. 8died) in 1409; and half-yearly payments continued until the last on 11 February 1426. He also enjoyed other benefits, among them board and lodging in the privy seal hostel, money for robes at Christmas, two corrodies, and occasional bonuses, as well as fees and favours from privy seal clients. Towards the end of his career he compiled a volume of more than a thousand model privy seal documents, in French and Latin, for the benefit of other clerks. This formulary is now BL, Add. MS 24062. 
Further information about Hoccleve's life is to be found in his poems, which contain an unusual amount of autobiographical material. 'La male regle de T. Hoccleve' (1405-6) describes his early years in London and Westminster as a period of youthful dissipation, of eating and drinking to excess and staying up too late. It must have been during this period, however, that he made the acquaintance of Geoffrey Chaucer (died 1400), whom he celebrates in the 'Regiment of Princes' as his master in the art of English poetry, and whose portrait he caused to be preserved there. Hoccleve's earliest datable poem is the 'Letter of Cupid' (1402), a rendering into very Chaucerian rhyme-royal stanzas of a poem by the French poetess Christine de Pisan, then fashionable at the court of Henry IV. This 'Letter' and the 'Male regle' are chief among his poems surviving from before the 'Regiment'. Other short petitionary pieces throw light on his financial difficulties, complaining, as he commonly does, of 'coynes scarsetee'. It was at some time during this period that he abandoned thought of taking holy orders and married a wife, as he says, 'only for love' (Hoccleve, 'Regiment', 1.1561); he was married by 1410. 

'The Regiment of Princes', addressed to the future Henry V, was by far the most successful of Hoccleve's writings. It survives in no fewer than forty-three manuscripts. In a long prologue, the poet describes how, after a sleepless night in his privy seal hostel 'at Chestre Ynne, right fast be the Stronde' (Hoccleve, 'Regiment', 1.5), he walks out in the fields and meets an old beadsman, from whom he receives words of consolation for his worries about poverty and advancing age. The old man advises that he should seek the good lordship of Prince Henry by addressing a poem to him. The second half of the 'Regiment' accordingly offers the prince advice on the virtues necessary in a good ruler, drawing on such sources as the 'De regimine principum' of Giles of Rome and the pseudo-Aristotelian 'Secreta secretorum'. An early copy of the 'Regiment' made for John Mowbray (BL, Arundel MS 38) preserves a picture, probably from the workshop of Hermann Scheerre, which shows the poet as a somewhat idealized 45-year-old in the act of presenting his book to Henry. Once Henry became king in 1413, Hoccleve continued to write for and about him, celebrating public occasions such as a gathering of the Garter knights and the king's triumphal return from France in 1421. He lays stress upon Henry's role as champion of religious orthodoxy against Lollard heretics, notably in a poem addressing the Lollard insurrection under Sir John Oldcastle in January 1414. The poet had no time for: '
Th'errour which sones of iniquitee 

Han sowe ageyn the feith. 
('Works: Minor Poems', 40)' Hoccleve's major work during the reign of Henry V, however, was a sequence of linked poems now known as the 'Series'. This consists of a 'Complaint' and 'Dialogue with a Friend', which together form a prologue to two stories translated from the 'Gesta Romanorum' and a piece on the art of dying from the 'Horologium sapientiae' of Heinrich Suso. The 'Complaint' and 'Dialogue' were written, for the most part, in 1420. In them the poet recalls an earlier 'wylde infirmitee' when he temporarily lost his 'wit' and 'memorie' (Hoccleve, 'Complaint', 11.40ff.). He recovered from this illness, he says, 'five years ago last All Saints', that is, on 1 November 1414 (ibid., 11.55-6); but people have continued ever since to doubt his mental stability. This suspicion is shared even by the poet's friend, who advises him in the ensuing 'Dialogue' against risking his precarious health by undertaking further literary labours; but by the end of the 'Dialogue', having convinced the friend of his full recovery, Hoccleve stands ready to embark on the first of the 'Gesta' stories. The 'Series' claims a part in the poet's personal rehabilitation after his illness; but it also addresses itself, like much of Hoccleve's verse, to a great man from whom patronage may be expected -- in this case, Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, whose praises are sung in the 'Dialogue'. Of the six surviving manuscripts, one was written by Hoccleve himself (Durham University Library, Cosin MS V.iii.9); but this copy is directed in a final stanza, not to Humphrey, but to Humphrey's aunt, Joan Neville, countess of Westmorland. 
Hoccleve's annuity was confirmed under the new king, Henry VI, on 24 January 1423, and the poet continued to work in the privy seal, probably until some time in 1425. None of his datable poems can be assigned to these last years; but it was during this period that he produced not only his formulary, but also the three holograph manuscripts which between them contain all his surviving poetic output apart from the 'Regiment'. These are the Durham 'Series' and two manuscripts now in the Huntington Library, California (MSS HM 111 and HM 744). On 4 March 1426 the exchequer issue rolls recorded the last of a series of payments to Hoccleve reimbursing him for red wax and ink bought earlier for office use; but he died soon after. On 8 May 1426 his corrody in Southwick Priory was granted to Alice Penfold to be held 'in manner and form like Thomas Hoccleve now deceased' (Brown, 270 n.1). 


@@@@@


doc= 13416


Hodder, James (fl. 1659-1673), arithmetician, also taught writing, shorthand, and accounting at his school 'next dore to the Sunne' in Tokenhouse Yard, Lothbury, City of London. He is first known as author of 'The Penman's Recreation', published about 1660 (2nd edn, 1673), which has a preface by him dated 1659. It was 'invented and written' by Hodder, and the thirty plates, each bearing his name, were 'engraven' by Edward Cocker. The dedication is to Sir Walter Earle. 
In 1661 Hodder issued his more successful work, 'Arithmetick, or, That Necessary Art Made most Easie'. The publisher was Thomas Rooks, who published for Cocker also, and it seems likely that the two teachers were friends. In the ninth edition (1671) Rooks inserted a preface, saying 'in this bad time of trade in Books, in less than ten months, I sold of them 1550'. After the tenth edition, of 1672, the next known is the twelfth (1678), edited by Henry Mose (or Moss), described as 'late servant and successor to' Hodder. A page of verse signed 'S. Hodder', presumably a close relation, heaps praise on Mose, concluding remarkably 'Posterity shall make Account, It owes to Hodder's Memory, but Much more, to Mose'. Mose's editions ended with the twenty-sixth, of 1720, followed by a final one edited by W. Hume (1739). 
The 'Arithmetick' has been described as 'the most general book of the kind ever published' (Granger, 377). Cocker's more famous 'Arithmetick' (1678) was very similar; De Morgan suggested that if Hodder's work 'had given the new mode of division [without crossings-out], it must have stood in the place of Cocker' (De Morgan, 46). 
The great fire of 1666 forced Hodder to move to Bromley by Bow, where he set up a boarding-school. While there, in 1668, he published 'Hodder's Decimal Arithmetick', with a third and final edition in 1672. In 1671 he was able to return to Lothbury, apparently to the same address, and was still there in 1673. S. Hodder's verse demonstrates that Hodder was dead by 1678. Another apprentice of his, besides Mose, might have been the penman and arithmetician Eleazar Wigan, whom Samuel Pepys described as 'pupil to Mr. Hodder' (Heal, 115). 


@@@@@


doc= 13417


Hoddesdon, Sir Christopher (1533/4-1611), merchant, was the second son of Simon Hoddesdon ('c'.1500- 'c'.1560), a landowner of Edgware, Middlesex, and his second wife, Joan ('c'.1505- 'c'.1560), the daughter of John Etheridge. The spur to his future career came in 1544, when, at the age of only ten, he 'came from Dantzic by land, through all the marine towns except Stade and Emden, and found no Englishman trading nor cloth to be sold but by the stillyard men' (namely the Hanse; 'CSP dom.', '1601-8', 160). His most active years were spent developing English trade in north-eastern Europe, especially Russia. 
Hoddesdon was apprenticed to Sir George Barne, a merchant and haberdasher, and in 1552 lord mayor of London. In 1553 Chancellor's curtailed China expedition revealed the trade potential in Muscovy. Interested merchants, Barne among them, began forming a new joint-stock enterprise, the Russia Company, and Hoddesdon entered its service, initially in London. Having joined Chancellor's second voyage to Russia, Hoddesdon was at Vologda in September 1555 and Yaroslavl in November, and afterwards in Moscow and Nizhniy Novgorod, where he struck good bargains. After a five-month spell in temporary charge of company affairs in Moscow he spent two further years at Nizhniy Novgorod, and finally headed the English factory at Moscow, where he was in September 1559. The Russia trade proved very profitable for the company: Hoddesdon claimed that in Moscow he obtained $13,644 for English goods which cost only $6608. 
Eight years 'in Russeland' did not, however, make Hoddesdon's own fortune. Unsettled after the deaths of his patron Barne in 1558 and both his parents about 1560, he returned home in 'meane estate' in 1562. After raising capital from inherited land he set about establishing a 'good trade' of his own. In 1565 he sued his brother Nicholas (who plainly had not expected him to return from Muscovy) for further land in Edgware -- early evidence of a lifelong taste for litigation. Although he was nominally a haberdasher, his merchant activities in fact ranged widely. By 1568 he was married to his master's granddaughter, Alice ('c'.1535-1602); she was the daughter of Alexander Carleill, the sister of Christopher Carleill, and the stepdaughter of Francis Walsingham. Hoddesdon's new relatives included several important members of the Russia Company -- 'a useful background in an age of kinship and patronage' (Willan, 34). 
Having been recalled by the company in 1567, Hoddesdon was posted to Narva to build English commerce in the Baltic; Queen Elizabeth wrote recommending him to the protection of the kings of Denmark and Sweden. Seven ships carried $11,000 worth of cloth, kerseys, and salt, on which he realized a 40 per cent profit. In 1568 Hoddesdon was accused of having traded on his own account at Narva instead of looking exclusively after the company's interest. He petitioned Leicester and Cecil, and, with his reputation intact, returned to Narva, where he remained for some years as chief of the English factory. In 1570 he asked the company to send out armed ships, which in July defeated six Polish privateers off Tuter in the Gulf of Finland. Hoddesdon himself wrote announcing this victory to Ivan IV. 
Since he was rising in stature in the Company of Merchant Adventurers, Hoddesdon began to be employed by Elizabeth as a financial agent in Germany: in July 1575 he was to receive at Heidelberg 50,000 crowns due to the queen from Conde, and in June 1576 he was again in Germany, to raise a loan of $200,000. In 1577 he went to Hamburg with $20,000 for Duke John Casimir, to pay for cavalry destined for France and then the Low Countries. By 1578 he was master of the Merchant Adventurers at Hamburg, where he was free to trade for himself: in August 1579 he was licensed to bring saltpetre and gunpowder from Hamburg. He also had a venture in Frobisher's search for a north-west passage, and in 1580 he was one of the commissioners who assayed Frobisher's supposed gold ore. In the same year he invested in a voyage to Brazil. From 1580 to 1582, representing the Adventurers but also receiving some official allowance, he sent regular political intelligence from Emden and Antwerp to Walsingham and Leicester. Hoddesdon was now wealthy: he had a house in Bishopsgate, London, and in 1582 he acquired a country property, when he bought from the Barne family the manor of Leighton Buzzard in Bedfordshire. Like other new proprietors, he sought to improve his estates by enclosures. This and his stance on customary rights brought lengthy disputes with his tenants, but he had the respect of his peers, and in 1591-2 he served as sheriff of Bedfordshire. The suggestion in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' that he was an alderman and MP for Cambridge in 1593 rests on a mistaken identity. 
By 1600 Hoddesdon had become master of the Company of Merchant Adventurers. He staunchly defended their privileges -- to the point of fearing he would 'bring his grey hairs untimely to the ground' ('CSP dom.', '1601-8', 164) -- against licences and monopolies granted to courtiers. This was his last position of note; he was knighted by James I at Whitehall on 23 July 1603, just before the coronation. In semi-retirement at Leighton Buzzard, he maintained interests in merchant affairs, and in 1605 became a charter member of the revived Spanish Company. He also occupied himself with further lawsuits (against debtors of his wife; against his late daughter's relatives by marriage; against a factor in Muscovy). He died at Leighton Buzzard on 8 February 1611; armigerous, he was buried there with full heraldic ceremony on 14 February. In the parish church is a crude tablet, perhaps a vault cover, to 'Sur Chritover Hodsdin', and outside are two stone cists, now empty, said to be those of Hoddesdon and his first wife, Alice. 
Hoddesdon's sole child, Ursula, born about 1572-3, married in 1588 Sir John Leigh of Stoneleigh, Warwickshire. She died about 1597. Their son, Sir Thomas Leigh, married Mary, the granddaughter of Lord Chancellor Ellesmere. Hoddesdon's first wife died in 1602, and about 1604 he married Elizabeth (died 1638), the daughter of William Blount of Osbaston, Leicestershire, and the widow of Richard Saunders of Dinton, Buckinghamshire. She was his sole executor. In a letter of 1577, written on his departure for Hamburg, Hoddesdon commended a 'son', Francis, to Walsingham's care; this seemingly refers to a ward or apprentice, there being no other evidence of his having had any children besides Ursula. The suggestion in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' of another son, Christopher, a Roman Catholic, is entirely undocumented. 


@@@@@


doc= 13418


Hoddesdon, John (c.1632-1659), writer, was the second son of John Hoddesdon ('bap'. 1594) and Isabel Rymell, daughter of Anthony Rymell. Probably born in London, he was descended from Nicholas, elder brother of Sir Christopher Hoddesdon, merchant adventurer. His father died young and a lawyer great-uncle, Christopher Hoddesdon of the Inner Temple, befriended him and was the dedicatee of his first two books. Hoddesdon's first publication, religious epigrams entitled 'Sion and Parnassus' (1650), contains as frontispiece a lively engraved portrait, once keenly collected, of Hoddesdon aged eighteen, but is now mainly noteworthy for the young Dryden's prefatory verses commending the author. The future poet laureate here credited 'my friend' Hoddesdon with having 'inspired' in him some poetic proficiency. Dryden had then only recently left Westminster School for Cambridge, and it is reasonably inferred that Hoddesdon too had attended Westminster (his father had certainly been there, and at Oxford in 1612 had contributed to verses lamenting the death of Prince Henry). No later association between Hoddesdon and Dryden is known. Hoddesdon's own verse sits within a broadly puritan tradition but is infected by a relentless punning, even on sacred subjects, that grated on successive commentators. In 1652 he compiled a life of Thomas More. It was later compared unfavourably with other early lives -- typically, Hoddesdon devotes a section to More's 'Wit and Wisdome' -- and a previous owner has annotated the copy in the London Guildhall Library 'a ridiculous author'. His last literary endeavour, the rare 'Holy Lives of God's Prophets' (1654), attracted little notice. 
Hoddesdon turned to trade, becoming in 1658 the East India Company's third-ranking factor in Persia, with an annual salary of $30. He soon moved to the company's base at Surat, north of Bombay, and explored trading opportunities along the coast southwards to Ceylon. He died suddenly at Surat on 28 January 1659, leaving privately contracted debts of 62,775 mahmudis. A year later contention persisted between creditors in India and consignees of his goods in England. Letters of administration were granted to his elder brother, Christopher, on 28 March 1660. The 1662 reissue of Hoddesdon's life of More (essentially unaltered, though the dedicatee had died in 1660) was perhaps to help clear remaining debt. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 13419


Hodge, Arthur (d. 1811), planter in the West Indies and murderer, is of unknown parentage. About 1792 he inherited the Belle Vue estate in Tortola, one of the Virgin Islands then within the British colony of the Leeward Islands. He married Ann (died 'c'.1805), further details of whom are unknown. A prominent figure and a member of the island's council (with the title Honourable), he was also notoriously brutal to his slaves. In 1811, after quarrelling with another council member, he was accused of having murdered at least twelve of them four or five years earlier. Affidavits were sworn by a 'free woman of colour' (black people were not allowed to give evidence), Pereen Georges, who had worked in Hodge's household, and by one of his former overseers, Stephen McKeogh; these testified to the murders, mostly by floggings inflicted at Hodge's orders and including two women slaves, one of whom had had boiling water poured down her throat. Hodge was charged with murder and arrested. 
The case aroused great public interest in the island. A Leeward Islands statute, the so-called 'Melioration Act' of 1798, declared the killing of a slave to be murder, and one Tortola planter had already been tried for murdering a slave, but acquitted. It was believed that Hodge's enemies had brought the charges maliciously for personal reasons, particularly as they were all cases that had happened several years earlier and had not been brought up before. Governor Hugh Elliot, a former diplomat who had disgraced his diplomatic career in Europe and had been sent out to govern the Leeward Islands, constituted a special commission to hear the case promptly (the regular sessions being over) and hastened to Tortola himself for the trial. Hodge was charged with the murder of his slave Prosper by flogging. Eight more indictments were drawn up to charge him with other murders, should this charge fail, and the manacled skeleton of one of the victims was dug up to be used in evidence, if necessary. The case for the defence consisted chiefly of attempts to defame the two chief witnesses. The case began at 10 a.m. and went on until 8 a.m. the following morning, when, after an hour and a half of deliberation, the jury found Hodge guilty. Seven of the twelve jurors recommended him for mercy but he was sentenced to death. 
During the week that followed Elliot, fearing public disturbance, declared martial law, called out the militia, and asked the captain of the naval ship that had brought him to Tortola to have sailors and marines ready to land and restore order if need be, since he feared that the members of the militia, composed of white men and 'free persons of colour', once they had arms in their hands, might be provoked by this controversial case to turn them against one another. Hodge was hanged on 8 May 1811 and buried the same day at Road Town, Tortola. There was no public disturbance, martial law was ended, and the militia disbanded. Hodge's execution, the first of its kind in the British West Indies, was a public warning to slave owners that murdering a slave could be a capital crime. 


@@@@@


doc= 13420


Hodges, Charles Howard (1764-1837), portrait painter and mezzotint engraver, was born in London on 23 July 1764, the son of the miniature painter of the same name. He learned the rudiments of drawing from his father and at the age of fifteen he went to work in the studio of a family friend, the engraver, art dealer, and printseller William Humphrey. Hodges enrolled in the Royal Academy Schools as a student of etching and engraving in 1782. Later he worked in the studios of Sir Joshua Reynolds and John Raphael Smith. On 12 August 1784 Hodges married Margaret Harmar (1759-1819) at St George's Church, Hanover Square, London. They had three children, James Newman, Mary, and Emma Jane. James Newman later worked in his father's studio, but few prints by him are now known. 
Hodges published his first mezzotint -- a portrait of Lady Dashwood with a child, after Reynolds -- in 1784. He rapidly gained renown for his skill in the mezzotint medium and was much in demand to make prints after portraits of important personages of the time by painters including Reynolds, George Romney, and John Hoppner. Among his pupils was Samuel William Reynolds (1773-1835), who served a seven-year apprenticeship with him. 
After a business visit to the Netherlands with William Humphrey, Hodges decided to settle there and in 1792 moved his family to The Hague. In the Netherlands, Hodges worked initially as a mezzotint printmaker, although he also began to produce portraits in pastel. From about 1790 these pastel portraits were very successful, and he carried out numerous commissions for portraits from persons of standing at court and in the magistracy and the church. Hodges's family moved to Amsterdam in 1797 and eventually settled at 206 Prinsengracht, where the artist remained until his death. 
Hodges also painted portraits in oil, receiving his first commissions from about 1800. His reputation in the Netherlands continued to grow, and he portrayed vast numbers of bankers, merchants, shipowners, and members of the aristocracy. Among his sitters were such eminent political figures as Louis Napoleon (1809; Frans Halsmuseum, Haarlem), William I (1816; Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam) and Rutger Jan Schimmelpenninck (1806; priv. coll.). Hodges also continued to engrave in mezzotint from the portraits painted by himself. 
While in the Netherlands, Hodges worked as an art dealer in association with William Humphrey, chiefly in selling prints, many to English collectors. When the kingdom of the Netherlands was formed, Hodges was appointed one of the commissioners sent to Paris in 1815 to identify and recover the pictures looted by Napoleon in 1795 (now in the Mauritshuis, The Hague). He died in Amsterdam on 24 July 1837 and was buried at the English church in the Begijnhof. His works are frequently found in collections in the Netherlands. 


@@@@@


doc= 13421


Hodges, Edward (1796-1867), organist and composer, was born at Bristol on 20 July 1796. He became organist at Clifton church, Bristol, and then of St James's Church (1819) and St Nicholas's Church (1821), both also at Bristol. Around this time he began composing services and anthems. In 1825 he took the degree of doctor of music from Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge. His academic interests were reflected in his literary essays and writings on music, such as 'An Apology for Church Music and Music Festivals' (1834) and contributions to the 'Quarterly Musical Magazine' and 'Musical World', some of which were reprinted in 'Essays on the Objects of Musical Study' (1838). 
In 1838 Hodges went with his family to America. In New York he was appointed organist to St John's Episcopal Chapel, and in 1846 to the newly opened Trinity Church, whose organ was built from his specifications. Besides composing psalms, hymn tunes, and several more services, some of which were published in New York between 1858 and 1865, notably as part of 'The Trinity Collection of Church Music' (1864), Hodges continued with his literary endeavours, publishing 'An Essay on the Cultivation of Church Music' (1841). 
In 1863, prostrated by illness, Hodges resigned his appointments and returned to England. He died at Beaufort Buildings, Clifton, Bristol, on 1 September 1867. He was survived by his daughter Faustina Hasse Hodges ('b'. near Malmesbury, 7 August 1823, died Philadelphia, 4 February 1895) and his son John Sebastian Bach Hodges ('b'. Bristol, 1830, died Baltimore, 1 May 1915), both of whom became organists and composers. Faustina Hodges edited much of her father's music and published a memoir of him, 'Edward Hodges, Doctor in Music of Sydney Sussex College' (1896). 


@@@@@


doc= 13422


Hodges, Edward Richmond (1825?-1881), orientalist, was probably the person of that name baptized on 2 October 1825 at St Mary Magdalen, Bermondsey, London, the son of Edward and Ann Hodges. While a London apprentice, he became a student of Hebrew, and, after being for a short time a scripture reader, was sent as a missionary by the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews, first to Palestine, and afterwards to Algeria (until 1856). A few years later he left the society, and for some time he acted as a minister of the Reformed Episcopal church. 
Hodges was best-known as a scholar and teacher of oriental languages, and assisted George Smith (1840-1876) in his cuneiform researches. He wrote numerous magazine articles, and ten entries on Middle Eastern and Indian languages in the 1873 supplement to the arts and sciences division of Charles Knight's 'English Cyclopaedia'. He was also a competent editor; he thoroughly revised, annotated, and updated Henry Craik's 'Principia Hebraica' (2nd edn, 1863) and Isaac Cory's 'Ancient Fragments of Phoenician... and other Authors' (new [3rd] edn, 1876), as well as W. J. Mickle's translation, 'The Lusiad', of Camoes's Portuguese epic poem for Bohn's 'Standard Library' (5th edn, 1877). At the time of his death he was preparing a translation of the Armenian history by Moses of Khorene and a study of the cult of Mithras. 
Hodges died of chronic bronchitis and asthma at his home, 43 Regina Road, Finsbury Park, Middlesex, on 9 May 1881, aged fifty-five, leaving a widow and six children. 


@@@@@


doc= 13423


Hodges, Nathaniel (1629-1688), physician, was born on 14 September 1629 in Kensington, the son of Thomas Hodges, dean of Hereford. He was a king's scholar at Westminster School, and in 1646 was awarded a scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge. He transferred to Oxford in 1648, and was appointed by the parliamentary visitors to a studentship at Christ Church (BA 1651, MA 1654, MD 1659). In 1654 Hodges contributed to the Oxford volume of verse issued to celebrate the peace with the Dutch. He practised medicine from his house in Walbrook, London, where he was admitted as a candidate for fellowship of the College of Physicians in 1659; he was not admitted to fellowship until 1672, an unusually long delay. 
When the plague broke out in London in 1665, Hodges remained in the City. The College of Physicians and the Society of Chemical Physicians disagreed on the causes and best treatment of the plague; while at Christ Church, Hodges had belonged to the Oxford Experimental Philosophy Club, and his own understanding of the plague set it within a largely Galenic framework of humoral medicine, but also showed the influence of Paracelsian ideas. It is significant that in 1656 he and either his father or his brother, also Thomas, translated from the Latin Michael Maier's 'Themis aurea' (1618), dedicating it to Elias Ashmole. This work recommends the prudent use of chemical methods in drug preparation, so that the 'occult property' of a substance may be extracted in its pure form. In 1666 Hodges published 'Vindiciae medicinae et medicorum: an Apology for the Profession and Professors of Physic', where he attacked both those who rejected all of chemistry and those who embraced chemical ideas at the expense of Galenism; a good physician, Hodges argued, was one who did not 'stiffly adhere to one or the other party'. By 1666, having seen the lack of success of chemical remedies for the plague, Hodges reviled Paracelsians as 'these scandalous opposers of the college'. A contagionist, he believed that the plague was spread by 'pestilential effluxes' from person to person, but he considered that the availability of very cheap cherries and grapes had contributed to making bodies more open to such effluxes. 
As medical adviser to the City, directing a group of physicians serving London during the outbreak, Hodges recommended the isolation of the sick and also, in separate accommodation, of those who had been in contact with them. He did not consider there was any benefit in shutting up the sick with the well, while isolation in one's own home could be fatal, as the healthy would shun the sick and normal neighbourly help would be withdrawn. Hodges believed that collective action by the City should be supported by personal responsibility for the maintenance of health. To prevent the plague, he recommended drinking sack, on the basis that it encouraged breathing through the pores and thus drew out any early infection. Twice during the epidemic Hodges felt as if he had been infected, despite his precautions of taking an anti-pestilential electuary before seeing patients in the morning, and burning a disinfectant on hot coals when entering a house where there was a plague sufferer, but after increasing his intake of sack he felt better. Drugs to bring on sweating were also prescribed for sufferers, as were open blisters and 'issues' in the left arm and right leg, through which impurities could pass out of the body. Hodges criticized the prophylactic and curative use of amulets and tobacco, and also attacked old nurses who used human excrement as an antidote to plague. In 1671 he completed his account of the plague, which was published in 1672 as 'Loimologia, sive, Pestis nuperae apud populum Londinensem grassantis narratio historica'. This was translated into English in 1720, but was edited by John Quincy to remove 'the most affected peculiarities and luxuriances' from the prose style. There also survives, in a collection of pieces on the plague published in 1721, 'An account of the first rise, progress, symptoms and cure of the plague: being the substance of a letter from Dr Hodges to a person of quality' (it is dated 6 May 1666). 
Hodges was elected a fellow of the College of Physicians on 2 April 1672; he was censor in 1682 and delivered the Harveian oration in 1683. As censor he presented the college with a fire engine, for which he received a $15 deduction in his subscription. This is the first hint of the financial difficulties which led to Hodges's imprisonment in Ludgate for debt; he died there on 10 June 1688. He was buried at St Stephen Walbrook, where his bust and inscription are still to be seen. Hodges's medical commonplace book survives in the British Library (Sloane MS 810); it contains over 1000 pages, most of them blank, apart from the headings. In addition to organizing material under such headings according to the pattern definition, signs, prognosis, and treatment, and including recipes and case histories from his practice dating from the 1650s, Hodges pasted in letters, including one from Thomas Willis. The book includes a chart of diseases (fol. 434). 
Hodges's insistence on staying in London during the plague is an action for which he has been all but canonized by medical historians; his account of his practice in this period, cautiously used, remains one of the best sources of information on the medical and social effects of this disease. 


@@@@@


doc= 13424


Hodges, Sir William, first baronet (c.1645-1714), merchant and politician, was born about 1645, the son of John Hodges of Cotherstock, or Cotterstock, in Northamptonshire. Little is known of his family background beyond the information supplied when he received a grant of arms in 1698, and it seems likely that his origins were humble. He married in 1681 (by licence granted on 25 April) Sarah (died 1717), the daughter and coheir of Joseph Hall, a merchant of London and Balasore in India. He may have begun his career in the service of the East India Company -- his wife was the daughter of a Bengal factor, and he himself was to act as the company's agent in Spain -- but by 1683 he was established in Cadiz, where the hospitality he afforded the visiting Samuel Pepys formed the basis of an enduring friendship. 
Hodges first came to prominence in the mid-1690s, when his firm provided cash advances for the victualling of Admiral Edward Russell's Mediterranean Fleet. For this and other important services in support of the war effort, and also to compensate him for the Treasury's slowness in settling his account, he was granted a baronetcy in 1697. Three years later he decided to return to England, perhaps because his only child, a twelve-year-old son, who had hitherto been educated privately at home (as Hodges himself told Pepys, 'for reasons you may imagine'), was fast approaching adolescence. Hodges's great wealth and his close associations with prominent City of London families, such as the Houblons (his own close friends) and the Hernes (his wife's relations), made him a natural recruit to the board of the Bank of England, to which he was chosen a director in 1703. At the general election of 1705 he took a further step towards eminence in public life when his money bought a parliamentary seat for the corrupt Cornish borough of Mitchell. Like many another representative of the 'moneyed interest', which to its critics was growing fat on the profits of continental warfare, he took his place in the ranks of the whig party in the House of Commons, but he was always a pragmatist in politics and displayed moderation rather than party zeal. He was also, it would appear, a staunch churchman and no particular friend to protestant dissenters. After standing down at the 1710 election he maintained good relations with the predominantly tory administration established by Robert Harley. Each needed the other: Hodges's many commercial interests could derive considerable benefit from the favour of government, while Harley, for his part, was looking to recruit moderate whigs in the bank and East India Company (to which Hodges was elected as a director, for one year, in 1712) to help him construct his own 'party' in the City and maintain public credit. Thus Hodges' son Joseph was given employment in the lottery office in 1712, while Sir William himself advised the ministry on the settlement of the Spanish trade after the treaty of Utrecht. 
Hodges died in London between 14 and 29 July 1714, and was buried in his parish church of St Stephen, Coleman Street, on 31 July, after a funeral of unusual magnificence, even for one of the great merchant princes of London. His son, Joseph Hodges, after inheriting a great fortune in money and stocks, went to live abroad, first in France and then in Spain, where he entirely wasted his inheritance and died, unmarried, in 1722. The baronetcy was thereby extinguished. 
Hodges has been identified erroneously with the 'William Hodges, mariner', who between 1693 and 1699 published at least five pamphlets as part of a one-man campaign to improve the methods of paying naval wages and thus ameliorate the miserable conditions suffered by English sailors. However, Sir William's prolonged residence in Spain at this time, and the failure of the last pamphlet in the series to reflect the acquisition of his title, renders this identification impossible. 


@@@@@


doc= 13425


Hodges, William (1744-1797), painter, was born in London on 28 October 1744, the only child of Charles Hodges, a blacksmith who owned a shop in St James's Market, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Richards, sister of the curate of St Sepulchre at Newgate. His parents placed him in William Shipley's school in 1755, where he learned to draw. While there he was brought to the attention of Richard Wilson, the landscape painter, and at the age of fourteen was articled to him for seven years as an assistant, making rapid progress. 
Leaving Wilson's studio in 1765, Hodges joined the Incorporated Society of Artists of Great Britain where he exhibited his work including in 1766 'A View of London Bridge from Botolph Wharf' and 'A View of Speldhurst, Kent'. He lived for a while in Derby where he worked as a scene-painter, returning to London in 1771. In 1772, through the intervention of Lord Palmerston, he obtained the post of draughtsman on Captain James Cook's second voyage to the south Pacific (1772-5), during which he made sketches and paintings of the islands and native people. On his return he supervised the engraving (by William Woollet and others) of plates from his work as illustrations for Cook's official account, 'A voyage towards the south pole, and round the world: performed in his majesty's ships the Resolution and Adventure in the years 1772, 1773, 1774 and 1775', 2 vols. (1779). The Admiralty employed him for a further two years to make large finished oil paintings, several of which he exhibited at the Royal Academy, including 'The War Boats of Otaheite' (National Maritime Museum, London) in 1777. On 11 May 1776 Hodges married Martha Nesbit at St George's, Hanover Square, London, and settled in Pimlico. However, within a year his wife died in childbirth. In 1779 Hodges travelled to India where he came under the patronage of Warren Hastings. He remained in India some six years, recording scenes of interest and architectural landmarks. Between 1785 and 1788 he published 'Select Views in India in the Years 1780-1783', which included a series of forty-eight aquatints adapted from sketches drawn on the spot and engraved by him. In 1793 his 'Travels in India, 1780-1783' was published and illustrated with fifteen plates from his drawings. In addition Indian scenes engraved by Thomas Morris were published in the 'European Magazine' and 'London Review'. In his 'Cosmos: a Sketch of a Physical Description of the Universe', Alexander von Humboldt says that the sight of Hodges' Indian views was one of the inducements which led him to travel (A. von Humboldt, trans. E. C. Otte, 1849, 2.371-2). Through his work Hodges made a substantial contribution to the British perception of India's past. 
Having made a considerable fortune abroad, in 1784 Hodges settled in London at Queen Street, Mayfair, where he built himself a studio. On 16 October in the same year he married Lydia Wright, who died soon afterwards. In December 1785 he married Ann Mary Carr (died 1797), a talented pianist; they had five children who survived. Hodges also had a natural son born in India who had been brought to England. His family, lifestyle, and ambitious publications soon led to a drain on his resources. In his 'Diary' Farington noted on 27 September 1806 that 'he had many good qualities' but was prone to 'extravagant notions caused by pride and ostentatious liberality' (Farington, 'Diary', 8.2863). 
Hodges was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1786 and Royal Academician in 1789, continuing to exhibit at the Royal Academy until 1794, including in 1788 his Diploma work, 'The Ghats at Benares' (RA). He is included in a group portrait of Royal Academicians (1793) by Henry Singleton. Hodges' ability was highly regarded among his fellow artists. However, during the Cook voyage he developed an individual response to the problems of representing light and meteorological conditions which brought criticism from a society not yet ready for a departure from recognized traditions. 
In his later work Hodges showed an interest in painting in the 'grand manner' literary subjects, including Shakespeare, in landscape settings, some inspired by the work of Salvatore Rosa, into which figures were introduced by George Romney and William Gilpin. 'Jaques and the Wounded Stag in the Forest of Arden' (1789; Yale U. CBA, Paul Mellon collection), from Shakespeare's 'As You Like It', was exhibited at Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery, as was 'Portia's Garden' (1790) from 'The Merchant of Venice', said in a contemporary review to be 'eminently brilliant' (Press Cuttings, 1790, 2.558, V&A.). This was engraved together with other work from the period including 'The Belisarius' (1794), dedicated to Warren Hastings (now known only from the engraving by J. Ogborne). About 1790 he travelled on the continent and visited St Petersburg, of which he painted a view. Hodges' attempt to elevate landscape painting as a method of expressing moral values resulted in two large canvases entitled 'The Effects of Peace' and 'The Consequences of War' exhibited in Daniel Orme's room, 14 Old Bond Street, London in December 1794. The political nature of the paintings brought condemnation from the duke of York, who felt they showed 'sentiments not suited to the public tranquillity' and ordered the exhibition closed (Edwards, 251). Discouraged, Hodges gave up his profession and left London with his family in July 1795 to settle in Brixham, near Dartmouth, Devon, where he opened a bank. Contemporary financial problems proved the ruin of his small firm, however. His sudden death in Brixham on 6 March 1797 was precipitated by a fever and gout in the stomach. His wife survived him by a few months. Examples of his drawings are in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the National Archives of Canada, Ottawa; the Mitchell Library, Sydney, and the Commonwealth National Library, Canberra, Australia. His paintings are in many collections in the USA, India, and Great Britain including the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut, the National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi, and the India Office and the Tate collections. All of the known paintings from his voyage with Cook, officially undertaken for the Admiralty during it and on his return, are in the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, which in 2004 also acquired a copy of the prints made from Hodges's contentious 'Peace' and 'War' canvases of 1794. A second pair of the prints subsequently passed through the London art market in 2007. 


@@@@@


doc= 13426


Hodges, Sir William (1808-1868), legal writer and judge, eldest son of William Hodges of Weymouth, and Sarah, second daughter of William Isaac of Weymouth, was born at Melcombe Regis, Dorset, on 29 September 1808, and educated at a private school at Salisbury and at the University of London. Lectured by John Austin (1790-1859) and Andrew Amos (1791-1860) on jurisprudence and law, he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple on 3 May 1833. He married in 1835 Mary Schollar, daughter of James Sanders of Weymouth, and they had four sons and four daughters. 
Hodges went the western circuit, and in 1835 he began to report cases in the court of common pleas (published 1835-7), presided over by Sir Nicholas Tindal, who in 1837 appointed him revising barrister for Devon and Cornwall. In 1838 he began to report in the queen's bench. In 1839 he published 'Report of the case of the Queen v. Lumsdaine, with observations on the Parochial Assessment Act' and, in 1840, jointly with Graham Willmore and F. L. Wollaston, 'Reports of Cases Argued and Determined in the Court of Queen's Bench... Hilary Term to Michaelmas Term, 1838'. In 1842 he published a small treatise entitled 'The Law Relating to the Assessment of Railways' and, in 1845, 'The Statute Law Relating to Railways in England and Ireland'. In 1846 he was appointed recorder of Poole, Dorset. 'The Law Relating to Railways and Railway Companies', which he published in 1847, reached a seventh edition, edited by J. M. Lely, in 1888, and became a standard work on the subject. He also drafted the 'Public Health Act' of 1848, and acquired some parliamentary and general practice at Westminster. 
In 1857 Hodges was appointed to the chief justiceship of the supreme court of the Cape of Good Hope, and to the presidency of the legislative council and of the court of admiralty. He was made KCMG in 1858. He discharged his official duties with energy and efficiency until his death at his residence, Sea Point House, Cape Town, on 17 August 1868. He was honoured with a public funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 13427


Hodgkin, John (1766-1845), grammarian and calligrapher, was born at Shipston-on-Stour, Worcestershire, on 11 February 1766, the son of John Hodgkin, shopkeeper and wool stapler, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Gibbs. He was educated partly at a Quakers' school at Worcester, and partly by his uncle, Thomas Hodgkin, a successful private tutor in London, who invited his nephew to enter his own profession. In 1787 he joined the physicist and Egyptologist Thomas Young in superintending the education of the antiquary Hudson Gurney. The two tutors seem to have given each other mutual instruction for four years, and all remained warm friends. He was briefly a master at Ackworth Friends' school, Yorkshire, before leaving for France. 
In 1792 Hodgkin spent some months at Vincennes in order to improve his knowledge of French. His recollections of the royal family are recorded in his manuscript autobiography (Wellcome Institute, London). When Louis XVI took the oath to the constitution, Hodgkin, as a Quaker, had a conscientious objection to raise his hand with the multitude swearing fidelity to the compact between king and people, while his plain dress caused him to be continually taken for a priest. He managed, however, to escape real danger. He describes in graphic language the consternation at Vincennes on 10 August 1792, the day of the massacre of the Swiss guard. 
Upon his return to England Hodgkin married on 1 May 1793 at Lewes, Sussex, Elizabeth Rickman, a cousin of Thomas Rickman the architect. Their sons Thomas Hodgkin (1798-1866) and John Hodgkin (1800-1875) are noticed separately. Hodgkin soon became well known as a private tutor, chiefly to ladies belonging to the families of wealthy citizens in the environs of London. He resided for some years at Pentonville, London, and then moved to Tottenham. He instructed his pupils in the classics and mathematics, but especially in the art of handwriting, in which he greatly excelled. 
Hodgkin has left a remarkable record of his skill in handwriting in his 'Calligraphia Graeca' (1794), dedicated to Hodgkin's friend Thomas Young, at whose suggestion it was composed. Young also furnished the gnomic sentences from various authors, which Hodgkin wrote in beautiful Greek characters, and his friend Henry Ashby engraved. A translation by Young of Lear's curse into Greek iambics, undertaken 'rogatu viri omnium disertissimi Edmundi Burke', was also added. The work was not published until 1807, when it appeared together with 'Poecilographia Graeca', in which nineteen Greek alphabets of various periods are figured, and some seven hundred contractions used in Greek manuscripts are given. Some of the latter were brought to Hodgkin's notice by the Greek scholar Richard Porson, with whom he had a slight acquaintance. Hodgkin also published, besides school and exercise books: 'Definitions of some of the Terms Made Use of in Geography and Astronomy' (1804; 2nd edn, 1812); 'Specimens of Greek Penmanship' (1804); 'An Introduction to Writing' (4th edn, 1811); and 'A Sketch of the Greek Accidence' (1812). He contributed to 'Excerpta ex J. F. Bastii commentatione cum tabulis lithographicis a J. Hodgkin transcripta' (1835). He died in August 1845 at Tottenham, Middlesex, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 13428


Hodgkin, John (1800-1875), barrister and Quaker minister, was born on 11 March 1800 in Penton Street, Pentonville, London, and grew up in Pentonville and in Tottenham. He was the youngest child of John Hodgkin (1766-1845), tutor and calligrapher, and Elizabeth Hodgkin, 'nee' Rickman (1768-1833). Both parents belonged to long-standing Quaker families. Their only other child to survive infancy was the medical writer Thomas Hodgkin (1798-1866). Both boys (who were close friends all their lives) were educated at home, chiefly by their father. They received a thorough classical training and some knowledge of science. It was a sheltered upbringing, which John Hodgkin felt was responsible for his painful sensitivity as a young man. In his childhood and for the rest of his life periods of intense intellectual work alternated with ill health. 
Advised by his family and by Joseph John Gurney (1788-1847), Hodgkin chose to become a barrister rather than follow his father into teaching. In 1819 he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn (where his Quaker principles made it necessary to ensure that his dues would not subsidize the chaplain and thus the established church) and from 1821 to 1824 he trained in the chambers of George Harrison, the first Quaker to be called to the bar. Hodgkin rarely appeared in court but had a large practice and was in considerable demand as a teacher. His specialism was conveyancing, and his chief concerns were clarity and concision: in an 1829 pamphlet he proposed simplifying the conveyancing process by setting up a general register of titles to property. 
In 1829 Hodgkin married Elizabeth Howard (1803-1836), daughter of Luke Howard (1772-1864), Quaker chemical manufacturer and meteorologist. Hodgkin credited her with vivifying his previously austere life, bringing him a conception of religion based on love rather than law. They lived in Tottenham and had four surviving children, including the historian Thomas Hodgkin (1831-1913). In 1836 Elizabeth Hodgkin died in childbirth. 
The 1830s brought the Beaconite controversy: the Society of Friends divided over the perceived aridity of Quaker orthodoxy. Dissidents called for greater appeal to the emotions and less stress upon law. Hodgkin's marriage had connected him with Friends who left the society, but he remained a member and sought to synthesize the two approaches. Shortly after his first wife's death he urged reconciliation at his local meeting -- his first 'offering' -- and in 1840 he was officially recorded as a minister. 
The 1840s were a pivotal period for Hodgkin. In 1843 he married Anne Backhouse (1815-1845); they had one child before her death of Bright's disease. Also in 1843 he retired from legal practice after a breakdown in his health, although he continued to advise Friends on legal matters and retained an interest in legal reform. Conversely, he poured energy into his activities as a minister, travelling frequently in this capacity. In 1850 and 1851 he was clerk to the yearly meeting in London. By the end of his life he had visited almost all the Friends' meetings of the United Kingdom and many abroad, always preaching strictly extempore and being noted for his empathy with the particular circumstances of his listeners. 
In 1847 and 1849 Hodgkin visited the Friends' meetings in Ireland and in 1850 married Elizabeth Haughton (1818-1904), an Irish Quaker. They had six children. Participation in Irish famine relief efforts (he took a particular interest in the fishing settlement of the Claddagh, near Galway) involved him in drafting the 'Encumbered Estates Act' (1849) which aimed to encourage Irish landlords to invest in their properties, but he turned down a position administering the act. 
In 1857 Hodgkin left Tottenham for Lewes in Sussex, his mother's home town. He remained energetic in the Friends' cause. A visit to the United States in 1861 coincided with the outbreak of civil war, in which Friends found themselves caught between the conflicting principles of anti-slavery and pacifism. In 1863 he went to Spain as one of a delegation to plead for imprisoned protestants. In November 1874 he suffered a stroke which left him paralysed. He died at Durley Dean in Bournemouth on 3 July 1875 and was buried at Winchmore Hill, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 13429


Hodgkin, Thomas (1798-1866), physician and social reformer, was born on 17 August 1798 in Pentonville, London, the third of the four sons (two died young) of John Hodgkin (1766-1845), calligrapher and teacher, and his wife, Elizabeth (1768-1833), daughter of Richard Peters Rickman and his wife, Mary (Verrall) and a cousin of the architect Thomas Rickman. Both families had been Quakers since the mid-seventeenth century. Hodgkin was educated at home along with his younger brother, John Hodgkin (1800-1875), until 1816, when he became private secretary to William Allen, apothecary, scientist, and social activist. Allen introduced him to medicine and also reinforced his Quaker concerns for social reform. When an apprenticeship with Allen could not be arranged, Hodgkin was articled to an apothecary firm in Brighton. 
Hodgkin quickly recognized that medicine better suited his interests, and spent a year walking the wards at Guy's Hospital, London. In 1820 he enrolled at the University of Edinburgh, where he received the MD in 1823. His thesis, 'De absorbendi functione', received praise for the excellence of the Latin prose. Hodgkin interrupted his Edinburgh studies with a year in Paris, where he gave particular attention to morbid anatomy (pathology) and learned to use the stethoscope from R. T. H. Laennec. On his return from Paris, he introduced the stethoscope to the Physical Society of Guy's Hospital. 
Following his graduation, Hodgkin spent two more years on the continent, initially as physician and travelling companion to Abraham Montefiore, afterwards in additional medical studies in Paris. Returning to London in 1825, he became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians and was appointed lecturer in morbid anatomy and curator of the anatomical museum of Guy's Hospital medical school. There he gave the first systematic lectures on morbid anatomy in England, conducted numerous autopsies, prepared many exhibits, and published a catalogue for the museum (1829). His significant medical papers included those on the discovery of the striated appearance of voluntary muscles, and a description of the shape of erythrocytes (1827); studies of carcinoma (1829); a description, before Sir Dominic Corrigan, of retroversion of aortic valves (1829); and discussion of the 1832 cholera epidemic. The paper that gained him eponymous fame, 'On some morbid appearances of the absorbent glands and spleen' ('Medico-Chirurgical Transactions', 17, 1832, 68-114), described seven cases with an unusual appearance of the lymph glands and spleen. Sir Samuel Wilks made similar observations more than thirty years later, and recalling Hodgkin's earlier paper, it was he who named the disorder Hodgkin's disease. Two of Hodgkin's cases, and possibly one other, have since been verified as meeting histological criteria for Hodgkin's disease. Hodgkin's books included 'Lectures on the Means of Promoting and Preserving Health' (1835), based on lectures delivered at the Spitalfields Mechanics' Institute, and 'Lectures on the Morbid Anatomy of the Serous and Mucous Membranes' (vol. 1, 1836; vol. 2, 1840). 
Simultaneously, Hodgkin was active in reform, publishing 'An Essay on Medical Education' in 1828, and serving on the general committee of the British and Foreign School Society. He advocated the colonization of Africa by freed American black people as a solution to slavery, supported the American Colonization Society, and created the British African Colonization Society for the further promotion of colonization in Liberia. His youthful concern for the plight of North American Indians became a lifelong defence of all indigenous groups threatened by the advance of Western civilization. He was one of the founders of the Aborigines' Protection Society, and its foremost spokesman. In 1836 he was appointed to the senate of the newly organized University of London and remained active in its oversight of medical education. 
Hodgkin expected to be promoted assistant physician at Guy's in 1837 and was bitterly disappointed when he did not receive the post. The rejection was due to the animosity of Benjamin Harrison, treasurer of the hospital, who disliked Hodgkin's Quaker practices and his reformist activities, particularly those relating to the treatment of Indians by the Hudson's Bay Company, of which Harrison was deputy chairman. None the less, Hodgkin is remembered as one of the 'great triumvirate of Guy's' (Cameron, 127). 
Following his rejection, Hodgkin resigned from Guy's and developed a small private practice. He often treated poor patients gratis and was known to undercharge rather than take advantage of anyone's pocket. He spent 1842-3 teaching at St Thomas's Hospital medical school. 
Hodgkin wanted to marry his first cousin, Sarah Godlee, but Quaker practice forbade it. He remained a bachelor until 3 January 1850, when at the age of fifty-one he married Sarah Frances Callow Scaife (1804-1875), a widow, whose husband had been Hodgkin's patient. The couple lived at 35 Bedford Square, London. Hodgkin had no children of his own but was devoted to his brother, John, and to his eleven children, from whom the distinguished Hodgkin family is descended. This includes the historian Thomas Hodgkin (1831-1913), Sir Alan Hodgkin, winner of the Nobel prize for medicine, and Robin Hodgkin, mountaineer. 
Hodgkin adhered loyally to Quaker tenets. He dressed in Quaker garb and used Quaker speech patterns. In 1837 he refused fellowship in the Royal Society of Physicians: non-Anglicans were not customarily admitted to the fellowship, and Hodgkin, who regarded his nomination as something which would place him in an invidious position, did not want exemption from a discriminatory rule. 
Hodgkin increasingly devoted his time to non-professional activities. He continued to support Liberia and other schemes for African colonization. He was a founder of the Ethnological Society of London and active in the British Association for the Advancement of Science, especially the section dealing with ethnology. He was honorary secretary of the Royal Geographical Society for fourteen years and then honorary foreign secretary. He also worked for the Syrian Medical Aid Society which sent physicians to Beirut and Damascus. Hodgkin's persistence, often in the face of public indifference to or disapproval of some of the causes he espoused, was one of his more remarkable characteristics. 
As a result of his travels with Abraham Montefiore, Hodgkin became a good friend of Sir Moses Montefiore, the Anglo-Jewish leader and philanthropist. He accompanied Montefiore as personal physician on five overseas missions for the relief of oppressed Jews, to places including the Holy Land, Morocco, and Constantinople. Hodgkin died of dysentery, or possibly cholera, in Jaffa, Palestine, on 4 April 1866, while travelling with Montefiore, and was buried there on 5 April in the protestant cemetery. Montefiore, heart-stricken at the loss of his friend, had a granite obelisk placed over the grave, to mark their friendship and commemorate Hodgkin as 'a man distinguished alike for scientific attainments, medical skill, and self-sacrificing philanthropy'. 


@@@@@


doc= 13430


Hodgkinson, Eaton (1789-1861), structural engineer, was born on 26 February 1789 at Anderton, near Northwich, Cheshire, the son of James Hodgkinson (1756-1794), a farmer, and his wife, Mary (1767-1835). He had two sisters. Originally intended for the church, he was enrolled at John Dean's Grammar School at Witton, near Northwich, but it proved uncongenial so he was transferred to a Mr Shaw's private school, which also better suited his growing interest in mathematics. In 1811 the family gave up their farm and his mother bought a pawnbroker's shop in Salford. Little is known about Hodgkinson's activities during the next ten years, but it is known that he was tutored by John Dalton. In 1820 he joined the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. He read his first paper, 'On the transverse strain and strength of materials', to a meeting of that society in 1822. It was of major importance for a new technology. 
The construction of the huge textile mills that were features of the industrial revolution raised serious design problems for builders using cast iron, which was then a new material. A beam, loaded in the middle, will undergo compression in the upper part and tension in the lower part, the forces of compression and of tension being equal; in between there will be a neutral line. This had been shown by Parent, Coulomb, and, later, the elder John Robison. However, the builders of the first iron-framed mills overlooked their works and evaded the complications by using comparative method, or scaling up, from a small sample that could be broken under load, to full size. In his first paper Hodgkinson, following Robison, showed how to locate the neutral line and how to estimate the transverse strain in a beam. With Dalton's help, he experimentally determined the neutral line in different beams. 
In this paper Hodgkinson had used old-fashioned mathematics -- proportions and fluxions; in his next papers to the society, on the catenary in suspension bridges and on the strength of iron beams, he used, probably thanks to Dalton, modern mathematics. More importantly these papers set the strength of materials on a firm basis. He showed in the last paper that cast iron was much stronger in compression than in tension, so that the top flange of a beam could be thinner than the bottom flange. In this way the most economical beam for a given strength could be designed. At the same time, through the good offices of Peter Ewart, he began a long scientific partnership with William Fairbairn, who possessed facilities for testing large beams at his works. 
Hodgkinson's studies of materials under tension or compression below the breaking point led him to consider what was called the set, or the permanent deformation left after the load is removed. Thomas Tredgold had argued that set takes place at one-third breaking load. Hodgkinson, in his report to the British Association in 1843, showed that permanent deformation takes place under the smallest load. No material, he said, is perfectly elastic. He also studied the behaviour of pillars under load. Euler's theory of struts was too abstract to be of use, and he resolved to repair the deficiency. The result was his paper in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of 1840 that earned him fellowship of the Royal Society and its royal medal in 1841. On 2 June of that year, at Cross Street Chapel, Manchester, Hodgkinson married Catherine Sparke Johns, daughter of the Revd William Johns (with whom John Dalton had lodged). The witnesses included Dalton and Fairbairn. Catherine died a year later. On 15 October 1853 he married Eliza Holditch (died 1882), daughter of Captain Henry Holditch, at the parish church, Kensington. One of the witnesses was Robert Stephenson. There were no children of either marriage. 
By the 1840s Hodgkinson was much concerned with the British Association for the Advancement of Science, of whose council he was a member three times, and as railway engineering became increasingly important his interest changed from mills to railways. He was a member of the royal commission on the use of iron in railway structures (1847-9) and he collaborated with Robert Stephenson and William Fairbairn in the design and construction of the revolutionary Conwy and Britannia tubular bridges (1850). 
Hodgkinson occasionally engaged in researches outside his chosen field of the strength of materials. On behalf of the British Association he investigated the increase in temperature with the depth of deep mines (1837-8), and he also measured the air resistance to moving objects (1842). In 1832 he was appointed a director of the Manchester Mechanics' Institute. In 1847 he was appointed to the chair of the mechanical principles of engineering at University College, London. From 1848 to 1850 he was president of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society and he was an honorary member of the Institution of Civil Engineers. 
Hodgkinson suffered from a nervous affliction and was a retiring man. He died on 18 June 1861 at his home, Eaglesfield House, Higher Broughton, Manchester, and was buried in the family plot at Anderton. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 13431


Hodgkinson, George Christopher (1816-1880), schoolmaster and meteorologist, was born at Newark, the son of George Hodgkinson, attorney, and his wife, Julia Beevor. From King Edward VI School, Louth, he went in 1833 as a pensioner to Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA (fourteenth wrangler) in 1837 and MA in 1842. His first posts were as master at the King Edward VI Free School, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, then as principal of Hull College. He was ordained deacon in 1842, and priest in 1843. About 1845 he married Isabella Lydia Spencer, niece of Sir James Clark Ross; of the twelve children born to them, not all survived infancy. In January 1846 he was appointed principal of the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester, an unlikely choice, for despite having glowing references as a teacher Hodgkinson knew nothing of agriculture. His emphasis on theory caused friction and his demands for more staff took the college to the brink of financial ruin. He was dismissed in June 1847, after which he became principal of the Diocesan Training College, York, and, from 1864 to 1876, headmaster of his former school at Louth. Besides sermons and tracts Hodgkinson published in 1854, in reply to the archbishop of York and bishop of Ripon, his defence of the teaching of the diocesan college, and some pamphlets on the examinations for the Indian Civil Service, approving open competition. 
An enthusiastic alpine climber, Hodgkinson was among those seeking to improve the mountain aneroid barometer so that it would function as an altimeter, but although he offered a reward through the Alpine Club, none of the London makers took this up. The Royal Society contributed towards the cost of apparatus with which Hodgkinson made a series of actinometrical observations on the summit of Mont Blanc in 1866. Using a lighter, less costly version of the Herschel actinometer, he corresponded with the astronomer royal as to the most effective mode of registering the amount and intensity of sunshine. He died at his home at Car Colston, Nottinghamshire, on 25 April 1880. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 13432


Hodgson, Bernard (bap. 1743, d. 1805), college head, was baptized on 5 November 1743 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, the third son of Mark and Eleanor Hodgson of that parish. He was educated at Westminster School from 1754, where in May 1759 he was elected a king's scholar. In May 1764, as captain of the school, he was elected to a studentship of Christ Church, Oxford, whence he matriculated on 20 June 1765 and graduated BA (1768) and MA (1771). On 30 October 1775 he became principal of Hertford College, and proceeded DCL on 24 January 1776. He was presented by the dean and chapter of Christ Church to the vicarage of Tolpuddle, Dorset, in December 1775. On 1 May 1783 at Chippenham, Wiltshire, he married Harriet Sainsbury; they had one son. 
Hodgson's published works comprise 'Solomon's Song Translated from the Hebrew' (1786), 'The Proverbs of Solomon Translated from the Hebrew' (1788), and 'Ecclesiastes: a New Translation from the Original Hebrew' (1790). In addition, he probably wrote the blank verse 'The Monastery: a Poem on the Building of a Monastery in Dorsetshire' (1795). The author, alarmed by the success of a recent Trappist foundation at Lulworth, aimed 'to discourage indulgence to the papists, till they have renounced the supremacy of the pope' ('GM', 1796). 
Hodgson died on 28 May 1805 after a painful illness. On his death the college was dissolved, and was not refounded until 1874. His wife had predeceased him; his son, Charles (died 1846), was also educated at Christ Church, Oxford, and became vicar of St Tudye in Cornwall in 1817. 


@@@@@


doc= 13433


Hodgson, Brian Houghton (1801?-1894), diplomatist and Nepalese scholar, was born on 1 February 1801, or (less probably) 1800, at Lower Beech, Prestbury, Cheshire, the second of the seven children of Brian Hodgson (1766-1858), country gentleman, and his wife, Catherine (1775/6-1851), daughter of William Houghton of Manchester and Newton Park, Lancashire. The name Brian had also been borne by his grandfather and great-grandfather, landowners in the midlands and north-west England. Following failure in a banking venture, his father sold their home at Lower Beech but family connections, including a great-aunt married to Beilby Porteus, bishop of London, helped to offset financial difficulties. He remained in Cheshire until 1814 when he moved to Clacton, Essex, on appointment as warden of the Martello towers. In 1820 he became barrack-master at Canterbury. 
Hodgson was educated at Macclesfield grammar school until 1814 and from 1814 to 1816 under Daniel Delafosse at Richmond, Surrey. In 1816 he was nominated for the Bengal civil service by James Pattison, a director of the East India Company. From February 1816 to December 1817 he attended the company's training college at Haileybury, where the influence of Thomas R. Malthus, professor of history and political economy, turned him into 'an advanced liberal' (Hunter, 23). He excelled in economics, classics, and Bengali and graduated head of his year. 
After arriving in Calcutta early in 1818, Hodgson led a full social life while continuing the study of Sanskrit and Persian at Fort William College. He was particularly successful with Persian, then still an official language within British India and the medium of formal communication with independent Indian states; but a near-fatal attack of fever interrupted his course, making an immediate hill posting essential. In late 1819 he was appointed assistant commissioner of Kumaon, a territory annexed from Nepal in 1815 during the war which ended the country's expansion and deprived it of a third of its pre-war territory. Hodgson worked on the revenue settlement under the commissioner, George Traill, a strong believer in a paternalist administrative style and in detailed study of the land and its people. In 1820 he was promoted to the assistant residentship at the Nepalese capital, Katmandu, but he moved to Calcutta in 1822 as acting deputy secretary in the Persian department of the Foreign Office. Renewed ill health necessitated his return to Katmandu in early 1824 as residency postmaster until his reappointment as assistant resident in 1825. He was to be plagued by illness throughout his time in Nepal and India. He gave up meat and alcohol after recurrence of a liver complaint in 1837. 
Continuing studies begun in 1820-21, he investigated Nepalese institutions and commerce and became proficient in Nepali and Newari, the language of the Katmandu valley's indigenous inhabitants. Despite family obligations which kept him in debt until 1837, he retained at his own expense a group of local research assistants, training himself and some of his staff as naturalists, specializing particularly in ornithology. He described 39 new mammalian and 150 bird species and published 127 zoological papers. He was also an avid collector of Buddhist scriptures in Sanskrit and Tibetan and was the first to reveal to the West the Sanskrit literature of northern, or Mahayana, Buddhism, which had been preserved only in Nepal. Texts he sent to Paris enabled the Sanskritist Eugene Burnouf to produce his seminal studies. In his own interpretation of his Buddhist Sanskrit materials, guided by his Nepalese friend and pandit Amritananda, Hodgson adopted a misconceived division of Buddhist doctrine into four 'schools' and, as he later admitted, wrongly argued that his Sanskrit texts were older than the Pali scriptures of Hinyana Buddhism. Nevertheless, much of his analysis still holds good. 
Hodgson finally became resident in his own right on 21 January 1833, having been acting resident between 1829 and 1831. He was already convinced that Nepal's continuing resentment of defeat, her isolationist policy, and the maintenance of a large standing army were a threat to peace which could be removed by encouraging the growth of commerce with British India and Tibet and by employing the country's military manpower in the East India Company's forces. Like previous residents he initially favoured co-operation with Bhimsen Thapa, the minister who had long dominated Nepalese politics but relied heavily on the support of the army. However, he soon decided that relations with the British would improve if managed directly by the young King Rajendra. He began pressing for direct access to the king and for concessions on trade but was restrained by the Indian government. 
Hodgson sympathized with Bhimsen's prominent opponent, Ranjang Pande, and was particularly influenced by Ranjang's Brahman ally, Krishna Ram Mishra. When Bhimsen sought British support for his weakening position, Hodgson strengthened the opposition by ensuring no substantive negotiations took place during a visit to Calcutta in 1835-6 by Bhimsen's nephew. In July 1837 Bhimsen was arrested on suspicion of involvement in the death of King Rajendra's infant son, and when the king asked for his advice Hodgson recommended that Bhimsen be kept in custody during investigations. The following summer, finding that both the king and Ranjang's faction were in fact ready to capitalize on anti-British feeling both at home and among other independent Indian states, Hodgson transferred his sympathies to the Poudyal brothers. This Brahman family had long been rivals with the Mishras for influence with the royal family. He formed a particularly close relationship with the second brother, Krishna Ram Poudyal, frequently reporting and seconding his opinions in letters to the governor-general. 
During 1839 much of the nobility felt threatened by Ranjang's faction and began looking to the residency for political support. In July Bhimsen Thapa committed suicide in prison. According to the Nepalese officials who brought Hodgson the news, he wept on hearing it; he had at first refused Bhimsen's smuggled plea to intervene on his behalf and his later request to the governor-general for permission to speak out was sent too late. Instability continued into 1840 with an armed Nepalese incursion into British territory and a brief army mutiny that seemed at one point to threaten the residency itself. As well as successfully demanding a Nepalese withdrawal, the governor-general, Lord Auckland, now authorized Hodgson to press the king to appoint new advisers friendly to the British. With an army embroiled in Afghanistan, Auckland was not ready for a full-scale campaign against Nepal, but Hodgson's negotiations and the movement of troops closer to the border secured the appointment at the beginning of 1841 of a 'British ministry' including both Krishna Ram Poudyal and his more prominent brother, Ranganath. 
In April 1842 Hodgson was involved in a public clash with King Rajendra over an Indian merchant who had taken refuge at the residency. He subsequently decided not to deliver to the king a letter concerning the incident from the new governor-general, Lord Ellenborough, believing it would weaken the position of the pro-British ministers. Ellenborough ordered his instant dismissal but subsequently relented and left him in post with instructions to disengage gradually from internal politics. He complied, but still sought to influence events through policy advice. Hodgson wanted to remain in Nepal until 1844, ostensibly to complete a general study of the country but, according to oral tradition in Katmandu, also because of the birth of a third child to his Nepalese Muslim lover, Begum Meharunnisha. Despite an appeal from King Rajendra for his retention, Ellenborough insisted on his departure from Katmandu in December 1843. Offered only a minor post at Simla, he resigned from the civil service and returned to England in 1844. 
The portrait of Hodgson as the complete master of events in Katmandu presented by his friend and biographer, William Hunter, is no longer accepted, and even Lord Auckland, who allowed him a free hand in late 1840, sensed that his sudden enthusiasms could leave him open to manipulation. Nevertheless, Hodgson did succeed in keeping the peace, and the war with Nepal which Auckland had thought likely to come was avoided. The regret expressed in Katmandu at his departure reflected a belief that he had prevented a clash with British India which would have ended Nepalese independence. 
After time with his parents in Canterbury and with his sister Fanny, who was educating his two elder children in Holland, Hodgson returned to India in 1845. Barred by the British authorities from returning in a private capacity to Katmandu, he settled at Darjeeling, a hill station just east of the Nepal border. He kept somewhat aloof from the local European community and his correspondence shows unhappiness at his countrymen's increasing racism towards Indians. The botanist Joseph Hooker stayed with him from 1848 to 1850 and he was also joined by his own son Henry, who died at Darjeeling in 1856. He was for a time entrusted with the education of a son-in-law of Jang Bahadur Rana, who had become master of Nepal in 1846. In October 1857 he helped persuade the governor-general, Lord Canning, to accept Jang Bahadur's offer of Nepalese help in suppressing the mutiny. 
Hodgson continued work on zoology and the physical geology of the Himalayas, but concentrated in particular on the ethnology of the peoples of northern India, relying extensively on linguistic comparisons. Though taking the part of aboriginal peoples against later, Hindu settlers, he also advocated mass European settlement in the hills. His belief that all the 'non-Aryan' peoples of India belonged to one great 'Tamulian' family was misconceived, but he successfully demonstrated the relationship of many languages of Nepal and north-east India to Tibetan and Chinese. He had opposed William Bentinck's 1835 decision to accept Macaulay's arguments and make English the medium of both education and administration in India. He now continued his advocacy of mother-tongue education, arguing from analogy with the replacement of Latin for scholarly purposes by the modern languages of Europe. In 1854 he saw the principle of mass vernacular education accepted by the Indian government. 
During a visit to Europe in 1853 Hodgson met and married Anne Scott (1815/16-1868), daughter of General Henry Alexander Scott, probably shortly after the death of his Nepalese partner, who had remained throughout in Katmandu. His wife returned with him to Darjeeling, but because of her ill health and that of his father, Hodgson left India in 1858. He retired to Gloucestershire, living first at Dursley and then at Alderley Grange, near Wotton under Edge, and, after 1883, wintering at Menton on the French riviera. His wife died in January 1868 and in 1869 he married Susan Townshend, daughter of the Revd Chambre Townshend of Derry, co. Cork. His children born in Nepal all died early and there were none from either of his marriages. He himself enjoyed a vigorous old age, riding to hounds until the age of sixty-eight, keeping up his academic interests, and holding a candle for Gladstone and Irish home rule among the largely tory local gentry. He died peacefully at 48 Dover Street, London, on 23 May 1894 and was buried in Alderley churchyard; his second wife survived him. 
The most important of Hodgson's non-zoological writings were reissued as 'Essays on the languages, literature and religion of Nepal and Tibet together with further papers on the geography, ethnology and commerce of those countries' (1874) and 'Miscellaneous Essays Relating to Indian Subjects' (2 vols., 1880), which are regularly reprinted in India and Nepal. He donated some 400 Sanskrit manuscripts, two sets of the Tibetan Kahgyur and Stangyur encyclopaedias (the Tibetan Buddhist canon, and commentaries on the scriptures and other treatises, respectively), 10,000 zoological specimens, and 1800 drawings to libraries and museums. Materials that he gave to the India Office Library in 1864 remain a key source for Nepalese history. Recognition in his lifetime included his being made a member of the Royal Asiatic Society (1828), elected a fellow of the Linnean Society (1835) and of the Royal Society (1877), made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur (1838), and awarded the honorary degree of DCL at Oxford University (1889). 
Surviving photographs and the bust by T. E. Thornycroft confirm references to Hodgson's finely cut features and dignified bearing. Brought up in the Church of England he remained a theist but was unwilling to discuss his religious beliefs. He could show rash judgement and over-sensitivity to affronts. To a modern reader his writings sometimes show signs of pomposity and, less frequently, of a patronizing attitude towards Indians and Nepalese. His virtues included a marked ability to inspire affection and loyalty, prodigious intellectual energy and enthusiasm, and a strong belief in the human potential of all races. 


@@@@@


doc= 13434


Hodgson, Christopher Pemberton (1821-1865), traveller, was the son of the Revd Edward Hodgson (1793-1853), vicar of Rickmansworth, and Charlotte, his third wife, daughter of Francis William Pemberton of Trumpington Hall, Cambridge. He is known to have had a stepbrother and two brothers. Unlike many male members of his family, he was not educated at Cambridge but emigrated to New South Wales in 1840, remained in Australia (where his elder brother Arthur had earlier settled) for five years, and accompanied several expeditions into the interior. On his return to England he published 'Reminiscences of Australia, with Hints on the Squatters' Life' (1846). After a short stay in England he travelled through Egypt and Abyssinia, made two journeys to Arabia, and visited Ceylon. He described these travels in 'El Ydaivur' (1849). From 15 October 1851 to 17 March 1855 Hodgson was honorary vice-consul at Pau, where he was popular, and interested himself in local history and antiquities. In 1855 he published 'Pyrenaica; a history of the viscounts of Bearn to the death of Henry IV, with a life of that monarch'. He subsequently was appointed vice-consul at Caen, where he remained for two years, and on 18 June 1859 became officiating consul at Nagasaki, Japan. In October 1860 he moved to Hakodate, to take charge of French as well as English interests. He remained in Japan until March 1861, and on his return to England published 'A Residence at Nagasaki and Hakodate' (1861) to which his wife, of whom no more is known, contributed a series of letters on Japan. Hodgson thenceforth lived chiefly at Pau, but had a London address at 53 Pall Mall. He died at Lescar, near Pau on 11 October 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 13435


Hodgson, Edward (b. c.1719), flower painter, was born in Dublin. Of his parents, nothing is known. He practised as a drawing-master in Ireland before 1765, when he was living in Mitre Court, London, and contributed chalk and watercolour drawings to an exhibition in Maiden Lane for the relief of distressed artists and their families. By 1767 he had moved to Oxenden Street, possibly as a drawing-master. He moved out within two years. He exhibited two flower paintings at the Royal Academy in both 1780 and 1781, and one piece in 1782, and one piece again in 1787 and 1788; he also exhibited at the Free Society of Artists in 1782 and 1783. During this time he lived at 123 Jermyn Street, London. He became treasurer of the Associated Artists in Water Colours. Earlier biographers record that Hodgson died in Great Newport Street in 1794, but he is not recorded as owning a house there. It is possible that Hodgson was the same Edward Hodgson who married Anne Oates in Chelsea on 25 September 1744. Mallalieu noted that his daughter exhibited flower pieces with the Free Society from 1770 to 1775. 


@@@@@


doc= 13436


Hodgson, Francis (1781-1852), college head and poet, second son of James Hodgson, rector of Humber, Herefordshire, and Jane, daughter of the Revd Richard Coke, was born at Croydon, Surrey, on 16 November 1781. In 1794 he entered Eton College as a pupil of John Keate, and in 1799 he was elected scholar of King's College, Cambridge, where he became acquainted with Thomas Denman, J. H. Merivale, and Henry Drury. He graduated BA in 1804, MA in 1807, and BD in 1840. He obtained a fellowship at King's College in 1802, was private tutor for three years to the sons of Lady Ann Lambton, and in 1806 held a mastership for one year at Eton. He then contemplated the bar as a profession, but, being dissuaded by Denman, turned his attention to literature. During the next ten years he wrote many reviews, verses, translations, and rhyming letters, of which the most important was his translation of Juvenal (1807). He was a frequent contributor in 1811 to the 'Critical Review' and 'Monthly Review' on classical and literary subjects. In 1807 he was appointed to a resident tutorship at King's, which he held until his marriage. 
Hodgson became best known for his literary friendship with Byron, dating from 1806, when he contributed to the 'Anthologia Graeca', which Byron later eulogized. Byron mediated after Hodgson had seduced the mistress of the Revd Robert Bland, who was one of the editors of the 'Anthologia' and a master at Harrow School. For his part, Hodgson, alarmed at Byron's religious scepticism, strove to impress upon the poet the truth of Christian teaching during a long correspondence in 1810-11 when Byron was abroad. The death of Hodgson's father in 1810 left him encumbered with debts, which Byron helped him to meet. A gift of $1000 by Byron in 1813 enabled him to marry, on 5 August 1815, Matilda, the daughter of Archdale Wilson Tayler, her mother having at first objected to his suit on the grounds of his lack of means. Frederick and William Tayler were his brothers-in-law. During the separation of Lord and Lady Byron in 1816 Hodgson corresponded with Byron and Mrs Leigh, and made an unsuccessful appeal to Lady Byron. His poetic works in this period included 'Lady Jane Grey' (1809) and 'Leaves of Laurel' (1812), and a translation, undertaken with the classical scholar Samuel Butler, of Lucien Bonaparte's poem 'Charlemagne' (1815). 
Hodgson was ordained in 1814, serving a curacy at Bradden, Northamptonshire, in 1815 before being presented in 1816 to the living of Bakewell, Derbyshire. There he enhanced his reputation as an accomplished classical scholar by producing a number of works on Latin versification, specially adapted for use at Eton. He contributed Latin verses to 'Arundines Cami' (ed. H. Drury, 1841), an influential early anthology. His first wife died, childless, in 1833 and he married, on 3 May 1838, Elizabeth, second daughter of Lord Denman, his Cambridge friend. His whig connections brought him further ecclesiastical preferment: Melbourne had appointed him to the archdeaconry of Derby, in succession to Samuel Butler in 1836, and in 1838 the duke of Devonshire presented him to the living of Edensor, Derbyshire. 
Hodgson was nominated by the queen, on Melbourne's recommendation, provost of Eton College in April 1840, the fellows having shown a preference first for Dr Keate and then for John Lonsdale of King's College, London. He graduated BD at Cambridge to qualify himself for the office, which he held in conjunction with the rectory of Cottesford, Oxfordshire. The reputation he had gained in Derbyshire as a conscientious and efficient administrator was maintained at Eton, where it was said that no provost had 'more thoroughly realized the duties and responsibilities' attaching to that office (Lyte, 476). He encouraged the headmaster, E. C. Hawtrey, in carrying through a number of reforms, taking a particular interest in improving the accommodation of the collegers and in the restoration of the chapel. Much of his effectiveness was due to a combination of energy with tact and courtesy. After suffering from influenza, he died at The Lodge, Eton College, on 29 December 1852, leaving a widow and five children. He was buried on 4 January 1853 in the college chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 13437


Hodgson, James (bap. 1678?, d. 1755), mathematician, is probably identifiable with the son of James Hodgson (or Hodson) and his wife, Elizabeth, who was baptized at St James's, Clerkenwell, on 25 February 1678. From 1 April 1695 he was assistant to John Flamsteed, the first astronomer royal, at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich; he later claimed that this was the main source of his education. Flamsteed states that he arrived because 'Sir Christopher Wren would needs put a relation of his, an ingenious youth,... into my service' (Baily, 64); the relationship is confirmed by letters in which Wren's son addressed Hodgson as cousin. 
Hodgson was evidently employed by Flamsteed under a seven-year indenture, as on 6 February 1702 he was 'nearly out of his time' (RS, MS 798.1). His handwriting appears frequently among Flamsteed's surviving papers from the intervening period, in observation notes, calculations, tables, copies of letters, and other documents. In 1701 Flamsteed evaluated him in the following words: 'a Sober Young man about 22 Years of Age. A very good Geometrician and Algebraist [who] Understands the Series and fluxions tho I have not Suffered him to Spend much time in them because I could not Spare him from the calculation work he understands the Latin Tongue indifferently, haveing got [it] since he became my Servant he knows my method and is acquainted with all my Labors and will easily finish and print them If God should call me hence before I shall have perfected them my Self. (Royal Greenwich Observatory papers, RGO 1/33, fol. 173)' On 31 October 1702 Hodgson married Ann Heming, Flamsteed's niece (in effect adopted daughter), without first seeking Flamsteed's approval; she continued to live at the observatory (after her husband had left Flamsteed's employment) until October 1706, then moved to London to join her husband. Among their children were Katharine ('b'. 1706), John ('b'. 1708), and James ('b'. 1710), who were baptized at St Peter-le-Poer, St Botolph (Aldersgate) and Christ Church Greyfriars respectively, all in the City of London. On 20 February 1703 Flamsteed wrote of Hodgson 'my Elder servant has left me about 4 moneths agone to teach Mathematicks in London' (BL, Add. MS 36452, fol. 134'r'); the following August Hodgson could be contacted at Jones's Coffee House in Finch Lane, Cornhill. He was elected as a fellow of the Royal Society on 30 November 1703 and admitted on 15 December following, leading Flamsteed to comment: 'they have a limbe of me... but he is honest and discreet and... will not serve some mens small designs as they expect he should' (RS, MS 798.14). 
Hodgson not only taught privately but also participated in the growing fashion for coffee-house lecturing. In October 1704 he launched a course 'For the Advancement of Natural Philosophy and Astronomy', held at the Hand and Pen, formerly Ayers' Writing School, in St Paul's Churchyard. A printed advertisement at the end of the first edition of Halley's 'Miscellanea curiosa' (1705) gives details and states that much of the necessary apparatus was supplied by the elder Francis Hauksbee. The venture seems to have been a success: by December 1705 Flamsteed said Hodgson was 'full of business with a book of Navigation in the press. Pretty store of pupills and some business in my Concernes' (RS, MS 798.40). The book was 'The Theory of Navigation Demonstrated' (1706), dedicated to Prince George of Denmark. In the following year Hodgson succeeded John Harris as lecturer on mechanics at the Marine Coffee House, near the Royal Exchange. 
On 12 January 1709 Hodgson was appointed to run the Royal Mathematical School at Christ's Hospital, at an annual salary of $100. As one of the most competent of the school's early masters, he had no difficulty retaining the post until his death, and from 1748 he was permitted to employ a deputy on the grounds of old age. He published material designed for his pupils' use as 'A System of the Mathematics' (1723). 
Hodgson's other mathematical publications include 'The Doctrine of Fluxions' (1736) and several shorter treatises on practical subjects. He also produced 'A Theory of Jupiter's Satellites' (1750) and papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions' on astronomical topics. He remained in close touch with Flamsteed, who relied on him as an intermediary in his dealings with the Royal Society and with the 'referees' overseeing publication of the 'Historia coelestis' (1712); he later acted jointly with Flamsteed's widow to ensure that the 'authorized' version of this work (1725) and the 'Atlas coelestis' (1729) were completed. After Mrs Flamsteed's death, Hodgson had custody of Flamsteed's papers and relics from the Royal Observatory; in 1736 and 1737 he gave the Royal Society a clock and object-glass from this source. He died on 25 June 1755, probably at Christ's Hospital, London. His place of burial is likely to have been Christ Church Greyfriars, London, but this has not been confirmed. 


@@@@@


doc= 13438


Hodgson, John (1617/18-1684?), army officer and autobiographer, was a native of Yorkshire. He took up arms for parliament in late 1642 and began his military service as ensign in the regiment of Colonel Forbes. He fought under Sir Thomas Fairfax and was badly wounded in the defeat at Sancroft Moor. When the marquess of Newcastle captured Bradford (July 1643) he was made prisoner and stripped, but, being released, made his way to Rochdale, where he suffered a fever. He rejoined Fairfax at Knutsford Heath, to undertake the attack on Lord Byron at Nantwich (January 1644). His company then entered Colonel John Bright's regiment, and he took part in the 1645 siege of Pontefract. 
On 17 April 1646 he married a woman surnamed Stancliffe; they had two sons, Timothy and Eleazer, and three daughters, Sarah, Martha, and Lydia. In the summer of 1647, as tension mounted between parliament and its armies, Hodgson was prominent in securing the alignment of the northern association army with the New Model. With Major Henry Lilburne he led troops through Leeds to a rendezvous on the moors. Papers were read concerning the New Model's desire to co-operate with their northern comrades, agitators were chosen, including Hodgson, a general rendezvous was demanded, and Poyntz, the commander of the northern forces, was arrested. Hodgson feared dismissal because of his actions, and appears to have remained in the army due to the protection of John Lambert, the future major-general. 
Hodgson fought in the battle of Preston (August 1648) as a lieutenant in Captain Spencer's company, leading the 'forlorn of foot' with Major Pownall. When Cromwell invaded Scotland in 1650, Hodgson, whose regiment was now commanded by Lambert, took part in the campaign. His description of the battle of Dunbar is perhaps the most valuable part of his autobiography. After Dunbar he was given command of a company in Cromwell's regiment of foot, sent into Lancashire to assist Colonel Lilburne against the earl of Derby. Though he did not arrive until after Derby's defeat, his regiment helped to intercept the Scots after Worcester, and took part in the capture of the Isle of Man (1651). 
When Lambert was appointed lord deputy of Ireland, Hodgson wrote of his desire to follow his commander. After Cromwell became protector, Hodgson wished to leave the army 'to live quietly in the practice of my calling' (BL, Add. MS 21422, fol. 374) but was appointed lieutenant in Lambert's regiment of horse, quartered in Yorkshire, to enable him to be near his family. On 11 April 1657 he acquired Coley Hall, near Halifax, by lease for fifteen years. He acted as an army surgeon, although he lacked official medical qualifications; he would later be indicted for practising medicine without a medical degree despite his eleven years as an army doctor. 
On Saturday 28 May 1659, when the restored Rump Parliament agreed the officer list for Lambert's regiment, Hodgson was 'excepted' and appears to have lost his place until he received a new commission from the speaker on 3 August. In October 1659, following the army coup, he was assigned to the regiment of Colonel Saunders, and ordered to join George Monck's army in Scotland. Monck declared against the army regime, but Hodgson would not fight against Lambert and with Captain Roger Coates sought to raise money for his old commander. By now he had given evidence of Quaker opinions. In response to the crisis of 1659 he appears to have written two Quaker pamphlets, 'A Letter from a Member of the Army' and 'Love, Kindness, and due Respect', warning of men turning away from the Lord and serving themselves. A John Hodgson also signed 'A Declaration of the People of God in Scorn called Quakers' (1659) protesting against the expulsion of Friends from civil and military positions. He was on close terms with the Quaker officers captains William Siddall, Amor Stoddard, and John Leavens. 
When Monck marched into England, Hodgson's prospects of further employment ended and, after the Restoration, he was the object of government suspicion. He was listed among those from the West Riding imprisoned in 1660 for not taking the oath of allegiance, and a meeting of 'a hundred fanatics, ministers, and others' was reported as held on 3 July 1660 at Coley Hall. Hodgson, referred to as a 'great Phanatique', spent five months in York Castle for treasonable words spoken against Charles II. In July 1661 he narrowly escaped arrest at Adderton fair, but suffered arrest again, being suspected of involvement in radical plots. In 1663 he was found guilty of misprision of treason, for not revealing knowledge of the northern rising, but seems to have eventually secured a pardon by bribery. He was rearrested, on suspicion of continued involvement in planned disturbances, in August 1665. 
By now Hodgson had moved from Coley Hall to Cromwell Bottom, moving thence to Ripon in 1680. He is probably the John Hodgson mentioned by Oliver Heywood as dying impoverished at Ripon on 24 January 1684 aged sixty-six. The last date in his diary is 11 January 1684. His 'Memoirs', first published with Sir Henry Slingsby's 'Original memoirs' in 1806, appear in part to have been written in response to the persecution he received after the Restoration, although they contain much of interest with regard to his military experiences. He avoids commenting on his political and religious views, though it seems clear that he was not as innocent after 1660 as he makes out. 


@@@@@


doc= 13439


Hodgson, John (1779-1845), antiquary, son of Isaac Hodgson, stonemason and slater, and Elizabeth ('bap'. 1755), daughter of William Rawes, was born at Swindale, in the parish of Shap, Westmorland, on 4 November 1779. He studied at Bampton grammar school from the age of seven to nineteen. As his parents were too poor to make a university education possible, from the age of twenty he had to earn his own livelihood, first as the master of the village school at Matterdale, near Ullswater, then at Stainton, near Penrith. Early in 1801 he was appointed to the school of Sedgefield, co. Durham. The rector of Sedgefield, George Barrington, a nephew of the bishop of Durham, and his curates showed much kindness to Hodgson, and helped him by the loan of books. He was offered an appointment as director of Lemmington ironworks near Newcastle, with a salary of $300 a year; but he refused this tempting offer on the ground that he wished 'to pursue a literary rather than a mercantile life'. In 1802 he failed in an examination for holy orders, which disappointment, combined with ill health, led him to leave Sedgefield in 1803 for the mastership of the school at Lanchester, near Durham. There in 1804 he succeeded in passing his ordination examination, and became curate of the chapelries of Esh and Satley, two hamlets in the parish of Lanchester, where he still kept his school. 
The vestiges of a fine Roman camp at Lanchester attracted Hodgson's attention, and led him to study Roman antiquities. In 1807 he published a little volume, 'Poems Written at Lanchester', including 'Langovicum, a Vision', a poetical account of the Roman camp. In 1806 he left Lanchester for the curacy of Gateshead, then in 1808 he was presented by the patron, Cuthbert Ellison, with the living of Jarrow-with-Heworth. The income barely amounted to $100 a year, but it was very congenial to a man of Hodgson's tastes to serve the church where Bede had been a monk. On 11 January 1810 he married Jane Bridget (1786-1853), daughter of Richard Kell, a local stone merchant, and in the same year was commissioned to write the account of Northumberland for Brayley and Britton's 'Beauties of England and Wales'. This gave him an opportunity for exploring the county, where he made many friends. The following year he did the same for Westmorland. Of this series Hodgson's volumes were widely regarded as the best. In 1812 he rewrote for a Newcastle publisher 'The Picture of Newcastle-on-Tyne', a guidebook to the town, incorporating much research about the Roman wall and the early history of the coal trade. That May a colliery explosion at the Felling pit in Hodgson's parish caused the death of ninety-two people. Hodgson appealed for help for the widows and orphans, and published his funeral sermon, to which he prefixed an account of the accident. This book, 'An Account of the Explosion at Felling' (1813), is valuable for its accurate account of the colliery, accompanied by a plan of the workings, and is one of the very few trustworthy records of the old system of coalmining. For the next few years Hodgson was employed in making experiments and attending meetings of the Society for the Prevention of Accidents in Coal Mines. In 1815 he visited the Dudley coalfield, to examine means of preventing colliery accidents, and later that year Sir Humphry Davy met Hodgson on his visit to Newcastle, so beginning an acquaintance acknowledged as enabling him to complete his invention of the safety lamp ('New researches on flame', 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', 1817). Meanwhile Hodgson was instrumental in the foundation of a society of antiquaries in Newcastle, which came into existence in 1813, and served with John Adamson as co-secretary (1813-34). The first three volumes of the society's 'Transactions' contain many papers by him. 
In 1817 Hodgson began work on his 'History of Northumberland'. In 1819 he visited London to work in the various archive repositories, and on his return announced his book to appear in six volumes, published by subscription, limited to 300 copies. The first to appear, in 1820, was the fifth volume, which contained records and papers relating to border history. In 1821 Hodgson again visited London, with an expedition to Oxford for the purposes of his researches. He was also engaged in raising money for a new church at Heworth, which he designed himself. This simple building did much to revive a taste for ecclesiastical architecture in the north of England. It was consecrated in May 1822. 
In 1823 Bishop Barrington presented Hodgson to the vicarage of Kirkwhelpington, a country parish in the centre of Northumberland. His obligations in regard to the new church at Heworth, which was not yet paid for, made it desirable that he should continue to hold the living of Jarrow until the parish of Heworth had been separated from it. This he continued to do until 1833, appointing two curates, and had many financial troubles in consequence. Two gentleman antiquarians, Sir John Edward Swinburne of Capheaton and Walter C. Trevelyan of Wallington, resident near Kirkwhelpington, gave him much help and encouragement. It was not until 1827 that he was able to publish the first volume of his parochial history of Northumberland, dealing with Redesdale, largely helped by a subscription of $200 from Bishop Barrington. In 1828 the sixth volume was published, containing fresh documents and records, and in 1832 followed the second volume of the parochial history. But in spite of its remarkable thoroughness the book met with little immediate success, and Hodgson suffered considerable loss on each volume. His health was failing, and the loss of three children gave Kirkwhelpington melancholy associations. In 1833 he was appointed to the vicarage of the neighbouring parish of Hartburn, where he enjoyed a larger income. This enabled him in 1835 to publish an extra volume of his history, containing the pipe rolls for Northumberland. In 1839 the third volume of the parochial history appeared, containing an account of the Roman wall; in it Hodgson first clearly established the claim of Hadrian to be considered as its builder. His health, however, gave way while this volume was passing through the press, and he was unable to carry his work any further. After much suffering from many infirmities, including a stroke, he died at Hartburn vicarage on 12 June 1845, and was buried in Hartburn churchyard on 17 June. 
Besides the works already mentioned Hodgson contributed papers to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' from 1821 onwards, under the pseudonym Archaeus. His great work, however, was his 'History of Northumberland', which for excellence of design and completeness of execution is still a model of what a county history might be. The 100 volumes of manuscript collectanea for the completion of his work are now preserved in the Northumberland Record Office. Because of the thoroughness of his research for the date of publication, Hodgson's 'History' has effectively prevented publication of a comprehensive modern history of the county. The 'History of the County of Northumberland' in fifteen volumes, published between 1893 and 1940, covers areas omitted from his work. Raine, his biographer, recalled Hodgson as 'thin and spare, of a thoughtful countenance and a composed garb', but blessed with a 'singularly captivating' smile. 


@@@@@


doc= 13440


Hodgson, John (1757-1846), army officer, was the son and heir of Studholme Hodgson (1707/8-1798), an army officer, and his wife, Catherine (1734-1798), the second daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Howard. He was educated at Harrow School and in 1779 obtained an ensigncy in his father's regiment, the 4th King's Own; he served very many years with it in North America and was wounded in command of it in the Netherlands in 1799. He was later governor of Bermuda and of Curacao, which latter appointment he held until the settlement was restored to the Dutch in 1815. His handling of the governorship earned Hodgson repeated thanks from the British government. In addition he served as colonel in succession of the 3rd garrison battalion, the 83rd, and his old corps, the 4th King's Own, and became a full general in 1830. He married Catherine Krempion of St Petersburg, a sister of the countess of Terrol, and had a large family, including John Studholme Hodgson, the eldest son, and Studholme John Hodgson ['see below']. Like his father, John Hodgson attained a great age, and died at his home in Welbeck Street, London, on 14 January 1846 from the effects of a cold caught while out shooting. 
Hodgson's second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 13441


Hodgson, John Evan (1831-1895), genre painter, was born in London on 1 March 1831, the eldest son of John Hodgson (died 1856), a merchant trading with Russia. In 1835 his father and mother emigrated to St Petersburg. Initially he lived with them there, but about 1843 he returned to England to live with his uncle James Hodgson, the editor of the 'Newcastle Chronicle', in Newcastle upon Tyne. He was enrolled at Rugby School in 1846, and on completing his education there he went to work in his father's counting-house at St Petersburg. His study of old masters in the Hermitage collection and of Ruskin's 'Modern Painters' persuaded him to abandon commerce for art, and in 1853 he returned to London and enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools. During the next few years he combined study there with extensive travel on the continent. Hodgson exhibited his first painting at the Royal Academy in 1856, the year his father died, and this was followed over the next ten years by further historical pictures. On 29 December 1857 he married Helen Elizabeth Todd, the daughter of another merchant. 
Hodgson's early works were of two sorts: scenes of contemporary British and continental European life and depictions of colourful episodes from history. 'The Arrest of the Poacher' (exh. RA, 1857) is an example of his contemporary genre painting, and 'The Return of Francis Drake [from Cadiz], 1587' (exh. RA, 1862; Wolverhampton Art Gallery) is one of his historical scenes. In 1858 Hodgson and his wife settled at 5 Hill Road, St John's Wood, where they remained for the next thirty years. His depiction of scenes from Tudor and Stuart times, combined with residence in St John's Wood, led him to join the St John's Wood Clique, a group of young artists, of whom David Wynfield and W. F. Yeames were the early leaders, who shared an interest in historical genre painting. They met regularly both for recreation and to criticize each other's works. One winter, members of the clique decorated the walls of the painting-room at Hodgson's house with frescoes. The figures included portraits by P. H. Calderon of Hodgson and his wife in Elizabethan costume. Hodgson is also depicted in Elizabethan dress in Frederick Walker's cartoon 'A Vision of the Clique' (1865; reproduced Marks, 1.90), indicating that he was then best known for his Elizabethan scenes. 
Following his visit to north Africa in 1868, most of Hodgson's paintings in the following decade comprised scenes of north African life. J. F. Lewis had not, he argued, exhausted this subject. 'The Arab Story-Teller' (exh. RA, 1869) and 'The Snake Charmer' (exh. RA, 1872) are two of a long series of oriental pictures of life in Morocco, Algeria, and Tunis. Sometimes he depicted encounters between Europeans and north Africans: 'East and West' (1883; Aberdeen Art Gallery and Museums) shows a meeting between Arabs and British sailors. 
In the early 1870s Hodgson experimented with marine painting and in 1873 was elected an associate of the Royal Academy. On his election as Royal Academician in 1879 he submitted as his diploma work to the academy 'A Shipwrecked Sailor Waiting for a Sail' (RA). After 1880 he returned to painting domestic scenes and also produced a number of portraits. 'The Queen, God Bless her' (exh. RA, 1885; reproduced Wood, 245) depicts two soldiers drinking Queen Victoria's health in the middle of a desert landscape, combining the unswerving patriotism of Hodgson's early historical works with an exotic setting. A good scholar and linguist, Hodgson was appointed librarian and professor of painting at the Royal Academy in 1882. He gave the library a more varied character by purchasing for it the works of prominent poets and men of letters. With Fred Eaton, secretary of the Royal Academy, Hodgson wrote a history of the first sixty years of the academy, contributing biographies of its early members. This work first appeared in article form in the 'Art Journal' and was published as a book after his death. His 'Fifty Years of British Art' was published to coincide with the Manchester exhibition in 1887. 
Unlike his history of the Royal Academy, Hodgson's paintings were little valued during his later years. In particular critics regarded his north African scenes as well executed but lacking in originality. In 1890 he moved to the village of Coleshill, near Amersham, Buckinghamshire, where he died at his home, The Larches, on 19 June 1895; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13442


Hodgson, John Studholme (1805-1870), army officer, was born at Blake Street, York, on 24 April 1805, the second son of General John Hodgson (1757-1846) and his wife, Catherine Krempion of St Petersburg. Hodgson entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1821, was commissioned ensign in the 23rd Bengal native infantry on 3 February 1822, and arrived in India on 12 July the same year. On 1 May 1824 he became lieutenant in the 12th regiment, and was promoted captain on 21 June 1834. 
Hodgson was on sick leave from the effects of numerous tiger wounds when the First Anglo-Sikh War broke out in December 1845, but he was determined to join his regiment. Finding the communications interrupted, he walked 30 miles, narrowly escaping attack from the enemy. He served throughout the campaign of 1845-6, and was present at the battle of Sobraon, where he was wounded. He was made brevet major on 9 November 1846, and was selected to raise the first Sikh regiment embodied in the British service. On 14 December 1846 he was made commandant of the 1st Sikh infantry, and commanded it in the Second Anglo-Sikh War (1848-9), a task of peculiar difficulty, which he performed with notable success. Among other conspicuous services he led the attack upon the raja of Juswan Dun on the night of 2 December 1848, and took and destroyed the fort of Ukrot. For this action he was specially commended, and received the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel on 7 June 1849. 
On 29 October 1850 Hodgson was selected as commandant of the Punjab irregular force, in which post he served until July 1854. In 1853 he successfully directed military operations against the hill peoples west of the Derajat. While in command of the Derajat frontier he was chosen to succeed Sir Colin Campbell in command of the Peshawar frontier. He was promoted major on 28 August 1853, brevet colonel on 28 November 1854, lieutenant-colonel on 25 April 1858, colonel of the 12th native infantry on 24 July 1858, and major-general on 23 July 1861. He published his 'Musing on Military Matters' in 1851 and his 'Opinions on the Indian Army' in 1857. In 1865 Hodgson retired from active service, and settled in London. He died at his home, 10 Stanhope Terrace, Hyde Park, London, on 14 January 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 13443


Hodgson, Joseph (1756-1821), Roman Catholic priest, son of George Hodgson and his wife, Mary Hurd, of London, was born on 14 August 1756. He was educated at Sedgley Park School, Staffordshire, from 1766 to 1769 and at the English College of Douai, which he entered on 18 December 1769. He was retained in the college as professor, first of philosophy, and then of divinity. He was appointed vice-president to John Daniel in 1792. French revolutionary forces seized the college in February 1793 and he was imprisoned, later in the year, with the rest of the professors and students, first at Arras and afterwards at Doullens. 
On their liberation in 1795 Hodgson went to London, and was appointed one of the priests at St George-in-the-Fields, Southwark. In 1803 he was appointed vicar-general to Bishop Douglass, and moved to the bishop's residence at 4 Castle Street, Holborn. He was later vicar-general to Bishop Poynter and secretary to the chapter. He also had the spiritual care of the ladies' school at Brook Green, Hammersmith, where he died on 30 November 1821. He was buried in Hammersmith parish churchyard. 
Hodgson's account of the last days of Douai, 'Narrative of the seizure of Douay College, and of the deportation of the seniors, professors, and students to Doullens', was printed in volumes one and two of the 'Catholic Magazine and Review' (1831-2); a later edited version was printed in the 'Ushaw Magazine' (1929-32). The original manuscript is in the archives of the archbishop of Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 13444


Hodgson, Joseph (1788-1869), surgeon, son of a Birmingham merchant, was born at Penrith, Cumberland, and was educated at King Edward VI Grammar School, Birmingham. After serving an apprenticeship to George Freer, a surgeon at Birmingham General Hospital, Hodgson, whose father had lost money heavily, was enabled by an uncle's generosity to commence study at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. He obtained the diploma of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1811, and gained in the same year the Jacksonian prize for his essay, 'On wounds and diseases of the arteries and veins'. He began practice in London at King Street, Cheapside, and also served for a short time at the York Military Hospital, Chelsea. He eked out his income by taking pupils and by writing for, and acting for some years as editor of, the 'London Medical Review'; he also produced other works, including helping with the pioneering book on congenital heart disease by John Richard Farre, and his 'Treatise on the Diseases of Arteries and Veins' (1815) was translated into French and German and won him an international reputation. 
In 1818 Hodgson moved to Birmingham, and on 23 January married Mary Ann Marston Ledsam, daughter of a wealthy clergyman. Hodgson was quickly elected surgeon to the General Dispensary and, in 1822, to Birmingham General Hospital. He held the latter appointment until 1848. He took a prominent part in founding the Birmingham Eye Infirmary in 1824, and was at first the only surgeon there. He had a large practice in Birmingham, numbering among his patients, and friends, Sir Robert Peel and several members of his family. Hodgson was particularly successful at lithotomy, for which his mortality rate was strikingly low. In 1831 he was elected to the fellowship of the Royal Society, and in 1843 he became one of the original fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons. In 1832 he was present at the meeting at Worcester at which the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association, later the British Medical Association, was founded. In 1842 he performed the post-mortem examination on Thomas Arnold, the reforming headmaster of Rugby, whose premature death from coronary artery disease has been much discussed by medical historians. Such was Hodgson's reputation that, at different times, he was invited to London to join the staff of the Middlesex Hospital or to accept the chair of surgery at King's College Hospital. He declined these invitations. 
Hodgson had lost the sight of an eye in 1841, and in 1849, because of deteriorating health, he retired to London with a considerable fortune. He was elected a member of the council of the Royal College of Surgeons, and examiner in surgery to the college and to London University. In 1851 he was president of the Medico-Chirurgical Society, and in 1864 he was president of the Royal College of Surgeons. He died at his home, 60 Westbourne Terrace, London, on 7 February 1869, aged eighty-one. His wife had died twenty-four hours earlier. He was buried in Highgate cemetery on 13 February. 
Hodgson was an able surgeon and an accurate diagnostician but he was cautious in treatment and pessimistic in prognosis. He is said to have been a born conservative, averse to innovations, and he certainly opposed the foundation of the Birmingham medical school in 1828. Nevertheless, while declining to lecture there, he wrote wishing the school success. He also included a plea for the furtherance of physiological research in his Hunterian lecture at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1855. In later years he was remarkable for his suavity and kindness of manner. 


@@@@@


doc= 13445


Hodgson, Studholme (1707/8-1798), army officer, was the son of John Hodgson, a Carlisle merchant whose family originated from Wormanby, Burgh by Sands. After attending Carlisle grammar school and, in 1727, being made free of his father's guild by patrimony, he entered the army as an ensign in the 1st foot guards on 22 January 1728. He became lieutenant and captain in the same regiment on 25 April 1740 and captain and lieutenant-colonel on 22 February 1747. A shooting companion of General Oglethorpe, he was aide-de-camp to the earl of Albemarle at Dettingen and Fontenoy and to the duke of Cumberland at Culloden. Henry Conway and others of the staff nicknamed him the Old Boy, on account of his long-standing seniority; the Dutch, however, complained of his rudeness towards them at Laffelt. 
Hodgson married Catherine Howard (1734-1798), the sister of Field Marshal Sir George Howard, on 22 July 1756. The same year he was appointed colonel of the recently raised 52nd, later 50th foot. In 1757 he commanded a brigade in the Rochefort expedition and was among those who voted for withdrawal before a landing had been attempted. Two years later he was promoted major-general and transferred to the colonelcy of the 5th foot. In 1761, with the return to favour of the duke of Cumberland at court, Hodgson was given command of the expedition against Belle Ile. The calibre of many of his troops left him unimpressed and the first attempt to effect a landing on the island failed. With the arrival of reinforcements, however, a lodgement was secured, the French were driven back to the citadel of Palais, and, after a siege of six weeks, on 7 June 1761 the fortress surrendered. Throughout the siege Hodgson was critical of the quantity and quality of the stores provided for him by the Board of Ordnance. In response, Lord Ligonier, master-general of the ordnance, wrote and accused Hodgson of wasting ammunition. Hodgson took umbrage at the letter: 'Surely Lady Betty Germain is at the head of the Army and has the impertinence to sign herself Ligonier' (Albemarle MSS, HA 67, 894/B/B10). None the less, Hodgson received high compliments from the king and Pitt for a service which had a decided influence upon the peace negotiations. 
Hodgson was master of the horse to the duke of Cumberland, and he remained his trusted friend until the duke's death in 1765. The same year Hodgson was appointed governor of Fort George and Fort Augustus. He became colonel of the 4th King's Own foot in 1768, was promoted general in 1778, and was in succession colonel of the 4th Irish horse and the 11th dragoons. On 30 July 1796 he was created field marshal. Hodgson died, aged ninety, at his home in Old Burlington Street, London, on 20 October 1798 and was buried six days later within the parish of St James's, Piccadilly. His heir was John Hodgson (1757-1846), the only one of three sons and two daughters to survive him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13446


Studholme John Hodgson (b. after 1805, d. 1890), army officer, entered the army in 1819 as an ensign in the 50th foot and served for many years in Ceylon, India, and Burma in the 45th, 39th, and 19th regiments. For some time he commanded the forces in Ceylon and the Straits Settlements, and in Ceylon also administered the civil government. In 1856 he became colonel of the 54th, and in 1876, like his father and grandfather, colonel of the Royal Lancaster regiment. He died at Torquay on 31 August 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 13447


Hodgson, William (1763/4?-1851), politician and author, was descended from an 'ancient border family' ('GM'), and in early life studied medicine in the Netherlands, where he developed an interest in botany. On his return to England he attended with success, through a severe illness, a member of Lord Holland's family, but he declined Lord Holland's offer of an appointment. He adopted extreme political views, chiefly derived from the French philosophers, and Benjamin Franklin and Simon Bolivar were among his warmest friends. Hodgson was a member of the London Corresponding Society. On 9 December 1793 he was tried at the Old Bailey on charges of having proposed as a toast 'the French republic', and of having 'compared the king to a German hog butcher'. He was found guilty and was sentenced to be confined in Newgate for two years, to pay a fine of $200, and to find securities of $400 for a further two years. In the Newgate criminal register, dated 1 September 1794, his age was given as thirty. While incarcerated he wrote his best-known work, 'The Commonwealth of Reason' (1795). After regaining his liberty Hodgson relinquished politics for literature and science, becoming an independent printer-publisher and publishing numerous works on topics such as French and English grammar, chemistry, and the life of Napoleon Bonaparte, in addition to a pamphlet on his own conviction for sedition, 'The Case of W. Hodgson' (1796). He appears to have been a member of the Freethinking Christian congregation in 1810. He wrote for William Sherwin's 'Political Register' in 1817. Hodgson died of bronchitis in Hemmington Terrace, Islington, London, on 2 March 1851, when according to his obituary he was said to be not 87 but 106. He had been married three times and was 'survived but by one son' ('GM'). 


@@@@@


doc= 13448


Hodgson, William Ballantyne (1815-1880), educationist and economist, the elder son of William Hodgson, printer, friend, and works manager of James Ballantyne (1772-1833), was born at 23 Gardner's Crescent, Edinburgh, on 6 October 1815. He had a brother and a half-sister on his mother's side. His father intended him for the law and, after attending Edinburgh high school from 1823, he worked for a short time in a lawyer's office. But he loathed legal study, preferring to pursue the literary interests he had developed as an omnivorous reader since early childhood. In 1829, when just turned fourteen, he entered Edinburgh University, but did not graduate. Breaking away from the strict Calvinism of his upbringing, he became strongly influenced by the phrenological writings of George Combe, which offered a more hopeful message of human perfectibility and opened up possibilities of rational progress. With Combe and others he helped to found, in 1832, the Edinburgh Ethical Society for the Practical Application of Phrenology, which later became the Edinburgh Philosophical Association, and published articles in the 'Phrenological Journal' between 1836 and 1841. He lectured in literature, education, and phrenology in the towns of Fife, publishing in 1837 an address on education delivered to the Edinburgh Association of the Working Classes. 
On 1 June 1839 Hodgson was appointed secretary to the mechanics' institute in Liverpool. As well as providing popular evening lectures, the Liverpool institute had a library, sculpture gallery, and two non-sectarian schools (catering mainly for middle-class pupils), to which Hodgson added a third, for girls, in 1844. Under him the institute, which was one of the most innovative educational institutions of its time, flourished. On 11 March 1846 he received the degree of LLD from Glasgow University. From 1847 to 1851 he was principal of Chorlton high school. In 1849 (and again in 1864-6) he was a vice-president of the College of Preceptors. Shortly after his appointment at Liverpool he met and married (1841) Jane, third daughter of George Lissant Cox, of Liverpool, who lapsed into invalidity within a month of their marriage. 
Hodgson was a strong Liberal in politics. He declined the editorship of two newspapers in Liverpool and Manchester, not wishing to abandon teaching, but was an active supporter of the Anti-Corn Law League and became associated with Cobden and Bright. He later belonged to the Financial Reform Association and the Liberation Society (which advocated church disestablishment). He mixed in Unitarian circles, admiring in particular the views of William Johnson Fox, whose works he edited (1865), and making the acquaintance of George Eliot, upon whom he practised mesmerism when she visited James Martineau's home in the Lake District in 1844. She found him a congenial companion on subsequent meetings at the home of John Chapman, the owner of the 'Westminster Review', to which he contributed an article on languages in the school curriculum (October 1853). In 1854 he was party to James Martineau's unsuccessful move to wrest control of the 'Review' from Chapman, which led to the establishment of the rival 'National Review'. 
In 1851 Hodgson travelled abroad, partly for the sake of his wife's health, remaining in Paris from October 1851 to July 1852 before moving on to Germany and Italy. After returning to Edinburgh in 1853, he attended classes at the College of Surgeons to qualify himself for teaching physiology. He strongly believed that the laws of health, 'sanitary science', should be taught as part of the school curriculum; emphasizing their importance to women, he included ladies' classes in his popular lectures on the subject. Like his friend William Ellis, the promoter of secular schools, he also stressed the importance of teaching political economy, 'social science', insisting that all classes (and both genders) should understand the laws regulating the production and distribution of wealth. His lecture at the Royal Institution, London, was published as 'On the Importance of the Study of Economic Science as a Branch of Education for All Classes' (1855) and went through three editions. He also prompted the establishment of the Edinburgh Phrenological Association in 1855. In 1858 he was appointed an assistant commissioner of inquiry into popular education, for the commission chaired by the duke of Newcastle, and produced a report on elementary schools in the south and west of London. 
Hodgson's wife died, childless, on 1 July 1860, and he married, on 14 January 1863, Emily, second daughter of Sir Joshua Walmsley, the radical MP, with whom he had two sons and two daughters. From 1863 to 1868 he was examiner in political economy to London University, and was a member of the council of University College, resigning on 19 January 1867 in support of James Martineau, who had been rejected for the vacant chair of mental philosophy. Believing in the educability of the whole population, he was a strong supporter of the campaign for the higher education of women, publishing his views in 'The Education of Girls and the Employment of Women and the Upper Classes: Two Lectures' (2nd edn, 1869). As early as 1848 he had pressed for the Royal Institution of Manchester to admit women to its classes. He backed Emily Davies's campaign to admit girls to Cambridge local examinations (1864), and subsequently he delivered lectures on economics to the North London Collegiate School for Ladies (whose headmistress, Frances Mary Buss, was a close associate), the Ladies' Institute at Belfast, and to ladies' classes at the Birmingham and Midland Institute. He gave evidence on women's education to the schools' inquiry commission in November 1865. He looked forward to a time when men and women students would be taught together in the same classes, and was not enthusiastic about Emily Davies's proposed college for women at Hitchin. Hodgson and his wife were members of the Married Women's Property Committee, and he belonged to the Women's Suffrage Association and the National Anti-Contagious Diseases Acts Association. 
During the 1860s the Social Science Association provided a platform for Hodgson's views on the importance of teaching economics to schoolchildren. His 1867 critique of the narrowness of the elementary school curriculum laid down by the revised code, 'Exaggerated Estimates of Reading and Writing as Means of Education', continues to interest historians of literacy (see 'History of Education Quarterly', 26, 1986, 377-93). Under the auspices of the Social Science Association he published papers under the title 'The True Scope of Economic Science and Competition' (1870). By then his reproofs against strikers and trade unions rather overshadowed his original, equally important objective, to warn capitalists against the folly of speculation and 'panics'. Although a popularizer of orthodox economics, he was not a rigid Ricardian, and his lectures were enlivened by numerous and sometimes humorous examples drawn from his vast reading. His influence was largely the result of his wide circle of friends: he produced no significant work of economic theory. In politics he remained a Liberal, though he had broken with John Bright over the American Civil War -- Hodgson, who feared the Americanization of British institutions, supported the Confederates -- and was alarmed by the 1867 'Reform Act'. 
On 17 July 1871 the Merchant Company of Edinburgh elected him as the first holder of the newly founded chair of commercial and political economy and mercantile law at Edinburgh University. Though his lecture delivery was somewhat monotonous, he was regarded with affection by his students: they recalled his 'long dark hair, slight figure, and face indicating keen intellect, sensibility and humour', and his habit of wearing a black silk skull cap in classes ('Life and Letters', 244). On returning to Edinburgh he bought Bonaly Tower, Midlothian, a fortified tower partly rebuilt by Henry Cockburn, Lord Cockburn (1779-1854), in 1838, where he liberally entertained his students (see J. Small, 'The Castles and Mansions of the Lothians', 1883). At his death his friend Professor John Stuart Blackie (1809-1895) wrote 'The Burn o'Bonaly'. 
Hodgson's strong opposition to vivisection led him into controversy when a new medical school was established in the university in 1875. Education was his life's work, and much of his later activity was directed to improving the standing of teachers. He belonged to several educational associations, favoured teacher training, and advocated the founding of professorships of education. In 1875 he was made president of the Educational Institute of Scotland, and in 1880 president of the Edinburgh chamber of commerce. Hodgson, who had suffered from heart disease for many years, died of angina pectoris on 24 August 1880 while attending an educational congress in Belgium. He was buried at the Grange cemetery, Edinburgh, survived by his wife. A posthumous work, 'Errors in the Use of English' (1881) arose from the project of his later years to compile an English dictionary. 


@@@@@


doc= 13449


Hodson, Frodsham (1770-1822), college head and Church of England clergyman, the son of the Revd George Hodson, was born at Liverpool on 7 June 1770. He entered Manchester grammar school in January 1784, and left it in 1787 to proceed to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1791, MA in 1793, BD in 1808, and DD in 1809. In 1791 he succeeded to a Hulmean exhibition, and in 1794 was elected a fellow of his college. In 1793 he gained the university prize for an essay in English prose on 'The influence of education and government on national character' ('Oxford English Prize Essays', 1836, 1). In 1795 he was chosen lecturer at St George's Church, Liverpool, and subsequently became chaplain of the same church. His persistence in holding the chaplaincy, although he rarely in later years visited Liverpool, gave offence in the town. In 1803-4, and again in 1808-10, he filled the office of public examiner at Oxford. In 1808 he was appointed rector of St Mary's, Stratford-le-Bow, London, and vacated his fellowship. He married, on 30 June 1808, Anne (died 23 April 1848), daughter of John Dawson, of Mossley Hill, Liverpool. They had four daughters and one son. 
In 1809 Hodson was elected principal of Brasenose College. He presided over the college with great distinction for thirteen years, during which admissions to the college markedly increased. He took a leading part in the affairs of the university. He was one of the most energetic managers of Lord Grenville's election in 1809 as chancellor. The Revd W. Agutter retracted a libel on his character in the 'Anti-Jacobin Review' (1811). He served the office of vice-chancellor in 1818, and was appointed regius professor of divinity, with the appurtenant canonry of Christ Church and rectory of Ewelme, in 1820. It was believed that Lord Liverpool intended him for a bishopric, but he died in Oxford, after a short illness, on 18 January 1822, aged fifty-one. He was buried in the ante-chapel of his college, where he is commemorated in a Latin inscription by Dr E. Cardwell. 
In the university Hodson was long remembered for his success as a college tutor and administrator, and for the dignity of his personal appearance and address. He edited Thomas Falconer's 'Chronological Tables' (1796). His probationary exercise as a fellow of Brasenose was published in the same year, entitled 'The Eternal Filiation of the Son of God Asserted on the Evidence of the Sacred Scriptures'. His only other works were three occasional sermons preached at Liverpool, and printed in 1797, 1799, and 1804. 


@@@@@


doc= 13450


Holford, Margaret (bap. 1778, d. 1852), poet and translator, was baptized on 1 June 1778 at St John the Baptist, Chester, Cheshire, the eldest of four daughters of Allen Holford of Davenham, Cheshire, and of Margaret, daughter of William Wrench, of Chester. Her father, who died while she was still a child, was the last male descendant of the ancient family of Holford of Davenham, a branch of the Holfords of Holford and Vale Royal. Her mother was a poet, Minerva Press novelist, and playwright, sufficiently prolific for the works of mother and daughter (both Margaret Holford) often to be confused in catalogues and dictionary entries. At the age of eight Margaret was taking volumes of Shakespeare to bed, reading early and late, writing poetry, and displaying an 'insatiable' 'appetite for all kinds of literature' ('N&Q', 411). Her first published work, an anonymous and lengthy metrical romance, 'Wallace, or, The Fight of Falkirk' (1809), was a contemporary success in the wake of Walter Scott's 'Marmion' (1808), which it blatantly imitates. She produced about the same time 'Lines Occasioned by Reading the Poetical Works of Walter Scott' (NL Scot.), the receipt of which Scott failed to acknowledge, causing resentment and the intervention of his friend Joanna Baillie on the side of the injured female poet, whom she described to Scott as a good 'military antiquarian' in his own style ('Letters of Sir Walter Scott', 2.301 and n.). Scott's unchivalrous excuse for the slight was his horror of attaching to himself sentimental female poets. 
Like Scott, other readers were less charitable than Baillie. 'Poems' (1811), published under Holford's name and including an ode to Anna Seward, her mother's friend, and her second metrical romance, 'Margaret of Anjou' (1816), were not favourably received. The latter, dedicated to her mother, from whom 'I have imbibed and inherited the taste which has devoted me to the service of the Muse', the 'Monthly Review' declared to be 'tame and insipid... essentially deteriorated and deadened in spirit', when compared with 'Wallace', and unlikely to 'obtain a place of distinction in any but the 'curious' and 'rare' libraries of the twentieth century' ('Monthly Review', 81, 1816, 354-5). A slim volume, 'The Past, etc.' (1819) is a collection of overblown, indulgent pieces; the popular annuals, to which she was a regular contributor, continued to provide an outlet for such extravagant effusions. In 1820 she published 'Warbeck of Wolfstein', a novel with a medieval setting, and in 1823 she translated 'Italian Stories'. On 16 October 1826, at South Kirkby, Yorkshire, she married the Revd Septimus Hodson ['see below']. The only substantial work published after her marriage was a translation from the Spanish, 'The Lives of Vasco Nunez de Balboa and Francisco Pizarro' (1832), which she dedicated to Robert Southey. She seems to have made up her quarrel with Scott, with whom she was corresponding in 1825, and her literary circle extended to S. T. Coleridge, Wordsworth, William Sotheby, and Savage Landor, who in 1845 was pressing her to reissue her one real success, 'Wallace'. Margaret Hodson died at Plantation Terrace, Dawlish, Devon, on 11 September 1852. 
Her husband, 
Hodson was married a second time, to Frances, the daughter of G. Burden, before his marriage to Margaret Holford in 1826. He settled with his third wife at Sharow Lodge, Ripon, where he died on 12 December 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 13451


Septimus Hodson (1768-1833), Church of England clergyman and author, was born in Huntingdon, the seventh son of the Revd Robert Hodson (1725/6-1803). As a boy he attended St Ives School and Stilton School, and was admitted on 4 March 1779 as a pensioner to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he was a scholar from 1779 to 1784. He was ordained deacon on 25 April 1787 and priest on 3 June 1787. Hodson became perpetual curate of Little Raveley, Huntingdon, a post he held until his death. By his first marriage, on 15 March 1786, to Charlotte, the daughter of the Revd W. Affleck, a relative of Admiral Affleck, Hodson obtained, through the influence of Lord Sandwich, the rectory of Thrapstone, Northamptonshire, which he held from 1789 to 1828. He also became chaplain-in-ordinary to the prince of Wales and prebendary of Ripon Cathedral. In the 1790s he preached to the Asylum for Female Orphans at Lambeth, and several of his sermons as well as other religio-political addresses ('On the Scarcity and High Price of Provisions', 1795, and 'The Great Sin of Withholding Corn', 1795) were published. The claim made in 'A Biographical Dictionary of the Living Authors of Great Britain and Ireland' that he was forced to give up his preferments and flee to America 'in consequence of a discovery particularly disgraceful', seems to be unsubstantiated, although in 1789 he did publish 'A Refutation of the Charges of Plagiarism Brought Against the Rev. Septimus Hodson'. 


@@@@@


doc= 13452


Hodson, William (fl. 1617-1640), poet and religious writer, was born in London, the son of John Hodson (died 1628), citizen. He followed his lawyer brother John up to Peterhouse, Cambridge, as a pensioner, matriculating a decade after his elder sibling on 3 May 1617. He graduated BA in 1621 and MA in 1624. Thereafter he seems to have lived at Tottenham in Middlesex; he was resident there in 1628 when he acted as executor for his father's will. The only known portrait of Hodson is an engraving by the royalist William Marshall (published as the frontispiece to his 'Credo resurrectionem carnis' of 1636), in which he appears as a blond-haired cavalier gentleman in a fine satin suit with a wide lace collar. Marshall illustrated all three of Hodson's theological tracts. 
At the death of James VI and I, when 'each poetaster blubbers forth a verse', Hodson joined them, producing a ninety-five-line poem, printed between heavy mourning bands, entitled 'The plurisie of sorrow, let blood in the eye-veine, or, The muses teares for the death of our late soveraigne' (1625; quotation at sig. A*3'r', line 50). In this unlikely classical poem he drew on Pliny's 'Natural History' for a conceit based on the death of the queen bee. To this poem the young graduate appended twelve lines commending the late king's scholarship and a thirty-six-line verse welcoming Charles as monarch, 'Illustrissimo regi'. The little volume closes with three pages of distichs on the mottoes engraved on the new coinage. 
As a gentleman scholar Hodson wrote a tract on the eleventh article of the Nicene creed, 'Credo resurrectionem carnis', which ran to a second, expanded, edition in 1636, after the first, which had been entered for publication on 20 April 1633, was destroyed 'by some deficiencie, suffred in the printer's stocks' ('Credo', sig. A3'v'). Two other theological tracts from his pen -- 'The Holy Sinner' (1639), based on 'Luke' 7, and 'The Divine Cosmographer' (1640), a tract on 'Psalm 8' -- are the serious writing of a pious layman living in the environs of London, grounded in the theology of James VI and I whom he saluted as 'of our nobles the most skilful in Divinitie' ('Divine Cosmographer', 9), who kept some contact with his Cambridge contemporaries; John Cosin, Thomas Bainbridge, and Ralph Brownrigg are among those who licensed both works for publication. 
It is not known when after 1640 Hodson died. 


@@@@@


doc= 13453


Hodson, William Stephen Raikes (1821-1858), army officer in the East India Company, was born on 19 March 1821 at Maisemore Court, near Gloucester, third son of the Revd George Hodson, chaplain to the bishop of Gloucester and later archdeacon of Stafford and canon of Lichfield, and his wife, Mary, daughter of John Stephen, a master of chancery. Hodson was educated at home, and from 1834 to 1840 at Rugby School, where he was head of his house. According to his former fag, 'Hodson was never really an Arnold man' (Cork, 11). He entered Trinity College, Cambridge in 1840, gaining his BA in 1844. 
Hodson began his military career in Guernsey with a militia commission, but in 1845 entered the East India Company's service. He landed at Calcutta on 13 September 1845, went to Agra, and joined the 2nd Bengal grenadiers, then part of the governor-general's escort. He served in the First Anglo-Sikh War, at the battles of Mudki, Ferozeshahr, and Sobraon. He formed a poor opinion of the Bengal sepoy but was to develop a remarkable empathy with the Sikhs. He was soon after transferred to the 1st Bengal European fusiliers. In 1847 he was appointed adjutant of the corps of guides, and with them he gained the experience and displayed the powers which afterwards made him an outstanding leader of irregular cavalry and exceptional intelligence officer. For his services he received the thanks of the governor-general. When in 1849 the Punjab was annexed, he was transferred to the civil department as assistant commissioner, and was stationed for some time at Amritsar. After a spell in the hills establishing a school at Sanawar, Kasauli, for the children of British private soldiers, for which task he had been specially selected by Henry Lawrence, Hodson accompanied Lawrence on an expedition to Kashmir, newly taken from the Sikhs. 
On 5 January 1852 at Calcutta, Hodson married Susan, widow of John Mitford of Exbury, Hampshire; their daughter, Olivia, was born in 1853 but died in infancy. Susan died in 1884. By the first week in March 1852 Hodson had resumed his duties at Kasauli as assistant commissioner; in September 1852 he was delighted to be given command of the guides. It was his success in dealing with incursions along the north-west frontier that brought Hodson to such prominent notice. 
Hodson's career to this time had been successful; but his rapid rise, apparent arrogance, and outspoken criticism of others had made him enemies. There was confusion in the regimental accounts, and charges of dishonesty as well as of harsh treatment of his Indian soldiers were brought against him. An inquiry was held by a special military court, which ended its sittings in January 1855. Its report was unfavourable, and he was removed from command. Hodson appealed, and a second inquiry, under Major Reynell Taylor, after a long investigation, reported on 13 February 1856 exonerating Hodson. The second report was only sent in May 1857 to Sir Henry Daly, commandant of the guides, with a minute from Lord Canning expressing dissatisfaction and directing explanations. Daly was soon afterwards wounded, and Hodson, who temporarily took over command, obtained the report, which was found in his trunk after his death. Hodson also allegedly embezzled the funds of the Lawrence Asylum at Kasauli and the pay of another officer. Sir George Lawrence, Lord Lawrence, and apparently Lord Canning believed him guilty of embezzlement. 
Hodson had rejoined the 1st fusiliers at Dagshai, practically beginning his military career again, but gaining the favourable attention of the commander-in-chief, General Anson. On 10 May 1857 occurred the outbreak of mutiny at Meerut, followed by the massacre of Delhi. Hodson rose to the opportunity, and, after going with the 1st fusiliers to Ambala and then to Karnal, the commander-in-chief ordered him to raise and command a new regiment of irregular horse, which became known as Hodson's Horse. He was also put in charge of the intelligence department, and operated a network of spies among the mutineers. In June 1857 he was at Delhi, and there met his old corps of guides, who received him with great enthusiasm. Hodson was one of the junior officers who unsuccessfully urged an early assault on the city. He killed an Indian officer, Bisharat Ali, allegedly because he owed Ali money. Delhi was captured on 20 September 1857, and on the following day Hodson obtained, with some difficulty, General Archdale Wilson's permission to capture the king of Delhi, Bahadur Shah. He went with only fifty of his own men to Humayun's tomb, where the king had taken refuge. The king surrendered and Hodson brought him to the commander-in-chief, in spite of the thousands following them, any one of whom could have shot Hodson. This seizure of the king was considered to be perhaps the most striking blow the rebellion had received. 
Next day, 22 September, with a hundred picked men, Hodson again went to Humayun's tomb, where the three 'shahzadahs', princes of Delhi, had taken refuge. Hodson demanded their surrender; they came out and were sent away towards the city under a guard, travelling in 'tufhs' (covered bullock carts). The tomb was crowded with thousands of the servants and hangers-on of the palace and city. Hodson demanded instant surrender of their arms. Despite the paucity of his force, they obeyed, and, after leaving the arms with a guard, he followed after the prisoners. A large mob had collected, and were threatening the guard. After appealing to the crowd, saying that these were the butchers who had murdered helpless women and children, Hodson took a carbine from one of his men and shot the princes. He afterwards wrote that he had destroyed 'the villains who ordered the massacre of our women and children, and stood by and witnessed the foul barbarity' (Hodson, 297). The critical situation in India, the belief that the princes had been involved in the massacre of Europeans at Delhi, and the need for immediate action for his and his soldiers' safety gained for Hodson's action the approval of most Europeans then in India, but he was criticized, then and long after. 
After the fall of Delhi, Hodson's Horse went towards Cawnpore with a convoy of supplies for the commander-in-chief's army, and had much hard fighting. One of Hodson's most brilliant exploits was his ride from Mainpuri to the commander-in-chief's camp at Miran-ki-sarai to open communications between the two forces: he rode 94 miles on one horse in a day, through a country swarming with enemies. 
On 6 March Hodson was before Lucknow. On 11 March he went as a volunteer with his friend Brigadier Napier, who was directing an attack on the begum's palace in the 'kaisarbagh'. British soldiers were clearing the buildings of rebels. Though warned to await the arrival of gunpowder bags, impulsively Hodson alone entered a room in which were rebels, and was shot through the liver. He died next day, 12 March 1858, at Banks' House, and was buried at La Martiniere College, Lucknow, on the same day. Sir Colin Campbell and others praised his military brilliance and his bravery. Yet, apparently indicative of his reputation, it was soon said that he died while looting. This was untrue, though he may have intended looting. While looting -- by British, Sikhs, and Gurkhas, officers and other ranks -- was widespread, Hodson was allegedly 'the most notorious looter in the whole army' (Hibbert, 361). General Pelham Burn, Sir Henry Daly, and Sir Henry Norman all alleged his looting. That loot was not officially found among his possessions after his death and that his wife left under $400 in 1884 were hardly conclusive evidence of his innocence. The case against him was apparently strong, if unproven. Long after his death the controversy over his moral character, including his alleged looting, continued, with accusers, notably R. Bosworth Smith in his 'Life of Lord Lawrence' (1885 edn), and defenders, notably Hodson's brother, the Revd G. H. Hodson, in his 'Hodson of Hodson's Horse' (1883 and later editions), presenting Hodson as an English Christian hero. 
Hodson was described as 'A tallish man with yellow hair, a pale, smooth face, heavy moustache, and large, restless, rather unforgiving eyes' (Hibbert, 289). His favoured weapon was a hog-spear. Apparently more the barbarian warrior than the Arnoldian ideal of the Victorian gentleman, he was an exceptional soldier, horseman, swordsman, and leader of Indian irregular cavalry. Lord Roberts called him 'a brilliant soldier' (Roberts, 137). He was brave, hard, reckless, impatient, and impulsive, and he enjoyed battle. He despised most other officers, including many of his seniors. He was also ruthless, and may have been unscrupulous and dishonest. 


@@@@@


doc= 13454


Hody, Humphrey (1659-1707), Church of England clergyman and classical scholar, was born on 1 January 1659 at Odcombe, Somerset, the son of Richard Hody ('b'. 1621/2), rector of Odcombe, and his wife, Jane. He matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, on 10 March 1676, at the same time as two elder brothers, and was admitted scholar on 28 September 1677. He graduated BA in 1679, proceeded MA in 1682, BD in 1689, and DD in 1693. He was admitted fellow of Wadham College in July 1685, and was elected subdean of Wadham in 1682, humanity lecturer in 1685, catechist in 1686, dean in 1688, sub-warden in 1689, and bursar in 1691 and 1692. In 1690 Edward Stillingfleet, bishop of Worcester, made him his chaplain. John Tillotson, archbishop of Canterbury, appointed him his chaplain in May 1694, and he continued in this office under Tillotson's successor, Thomas Tenison. Tenison presented Hody to the living of Chartham, Kent, in 1695, which he quickly exchanged for the united parishes of St Michael Royal and St Martin Vintry, London (from which he resigned in 1702). On 15 March 1698 Hody was appointed regius professor of Greek at the University of Oxford. In November 1701 he became rector of Monks Risborough, Buckinghamshire, and on 1 August 1704 was made archdeacon of Oxford. He married Edith Daniel (died 1736), but they had no children. 
Hody was praised, even by critics such as Thomas Hearne, for his industry, memory, and zeal for learning. These characteristics are apparent in his writings. In his earliest publication, 'Contra historiam Aristeae de LXX interpretibus dissertatio' (Oxford, 1684), Hody demonstrates that the letter of Aristeas containing an account of the production of the 'Septuagint' was a late forgery. Subsequently, along with Henry Aldrich and Edward Bernard, he issued an edition of Aristeas's 'History' (Oxford, 1692). He also wrote the 'Prolegomena' to the Greek chronicle of John Malada (Oxford, 1691). 
Following the revolution of 1688 Hody became engaged in the controversy surrounding the oath of allegiance to William and Mary imposed by parliament in 1689 upon all beneficed clergy. Six bishops and about 400 lower clergy refused to swear the oaths and were deprived of their livings in early 1690. These nonjurors refused to accept the validity of the new bishops. About April 1691, the time that the first appointments to the vacant sees were made by King William, Hody and Richard Bentley found in the Bodleian Library at Oxford a Greek manuscript of the late thirteenth century which could be used to bolster the case of the new bishops. Ascribed to the Constantinopolitan historian Nicepherus Callistus, this treatise contained a list of patriarchs of Constantinople who had been unjustly deposed and replaced by uncanonical appointees, and yet neither the people nor the ejected patriarchs refused communion with them unless they were heretics. To Hody the parallel seemed obvious, and he and Bentley proceeded to translate the treatise into English and publish it, with a dedication to Tillotson, under the title 'The Unreasonableness of a Separation from the New Bishops' (London, 1691). Hody also published a Latin version at Oxford in 1691. 
Hody's friend, the nonjuror Henry Dodwell, replied with 'A Vindication of the Deprived Bishops' (London, 1692), in which he demonstrates that the manuscript was not by Nicepherus and had been inaccurately translated. Furthermore, he argues that the treatise was written to explain a special case, and that in nearly all the instances in the manuscript the deprived bishops had either been pressured to resign or some synodical proceedings had been taken against them. Attached to the 'Vindication' is a page entitled 'The canons in the Baroccian manuscript, omitted by Mr. Hody'. These canons, clearly belonging to the manuscript, show that only synodical deprivations are valid. 
Hody answered with two works. In 'A Letter... to a Friend Concerning a Collection of Canons Said to be Deceitfully Omitted' (Oxford, 1692) he lamely argues from circumstantial and textual evidence that the canons are unconnected with the treatise. In 'The Case of Sees Vacant by an Unjust or Uncanonical Deprivation Stated' (London, 1693), he concedes in the preface that 'all Lay Deprivations are invalid', but insists that the civil power is irresistible, and challenges his opponents to produce historical examples to the contrary. Dodwell retorted with 'A Defence of the Vindication' (London, 1697) in which he sets forth an argument for the complete independence of the church from the state. This remained unanswered until 1699. 
In the meantime Hody published two more works. The first was 'The Resurrection of the (same) Body Asserted' (London, 1694) in which he sets out to prove that the resurrection of the corporeal body is the doctrine of the gospel. In addition, 'and designed only for the more Curious', he attempts to demonstrate that this was also the belief of 'the heathens and the Jews' (H. Hody, 'Resurrection Asserted', 1694, preface). The second was 'Animadversions on Two Pamphlets Lately Published by Mr. Collier' (London, 1696). Tenison had asked Hody to respond to Jeremy Collier, who had written two pamphlets in defence of himself and two other nonjuring ministers who had pronounced absolution on the Jacobite conspirator Sir William Parkyns on the scaffold prior to his execution for treason for his part in the assassination plot. Such an act, says Hody, was an offence to both the church and the state. 
In 1699 Hody returned to his feud with Dodwell over authority in the church. This time the issue was the rights of the convocation of Canterbury. In his 'Some Thoughts on a Convocation, and the Notion of its Divine Right' (London, 1699) Hody produces his answer both to Dodwell's 'Defence' and Samuel Hill's 'Municipium Ecclesiasticum' (London, 1697). Quoting copiously from 'that Great Man' (H. Hody, 'Some Thoughts', 1699, 30) Richard Hooker and 'the great [Hugo] Grotius' (ibid., 19) Hody argues that, according to the English constitution, English kings have the power to summon convocations and that such convocations cannot make any canon or constitution without the king's approval. Furthermore, there is nothing in scripture, natural law, or early church history, after the emperor was Christian, which suggests that the clergy have a divine right to independence that would override the constitution. Hody followed this up two years later with a more substantial study of the English constitution entitled 'A History of English Councils and Convocations' (London, 1701). 
In 1705 Hody published his last work, 'De bibliorum textibus originalibus' (Oxford, 1705), in which he revisits his earlier studies on the 'Septuagint'. 
Hody died on 20 January 1707 while travelling to Bath, and was buried in Wadham College chapel. In his will, made in November 1706, he wished that all copies of his last book unsold at the time of his death should be 'disposed of beyond Sea and let none be sold in England besides those perhaps of the larger paper' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/493, sig. 85). He gave first choice of his library to the university, and what it did not want was to go to the fellows' library at Wadham (under conditions for their security which suggest that Hody did not entirely trust the fellows). He left $100 each to his parish of birth and to his old London and present Buckinghamshire livings for binding out poor children as apprentices on condition that they had attended catechism. But the bulk of his property -- in Somerset and Oxford -- was to go to the maintenance of his wife during her life (unless she remarried), and then to pass to Wadham College for the establishment of six exhibitions in Greek and four in Hebrew. Edith Hody died on 28 November 1736 and the first Hody exhibitioners were elected in June 1738. Among the papers Hody left behind at his death was a manuscript entitled 'An account of those learned Grecians, who retired into Italy', which was published posthumously by Samuel Jebb as 'De Graecis illustribus' (London, 1742). Prefixed to this is a short biography of Hody in Latin. His portrait by Thomas Forster was presented to Wadham College by his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 13455


Hody, Sir John (d. 1441/2), justice, was the son of Thomas Hody, lord of the manor of Kington Magna in Dorset, and of Margaret, daughter of John Cole of Nethway in Devon. His grandfather was Adam Hody, who may have been born a serf. John Hody held estates at Stowell in Somerset (purchased in the 1420s) and at Pilsdon in Dorset, the latter through his wife, Elizabeth (died 1473), daughter of John Jewe of Whitfield, near Wiveliscombe, Somerset. They had several daughters and five sons, one of whom, William Hody, became attorney-general in 1485 and chief baron of the exchequer in 1486. 
Hody was a member of parliament for Shaftesbury (1421-7), Devon (1431), and Somerset (1433-7). Retained by the dean and chapter of Wells, 1414-17, he appears in the year-books from 1425. He argued in the exchequer chamber in 1426, was described as an apprentice in 1429, and became a serjeant-at-law in 1438, acting as serjeant of the avenary and clerk of the market of the royal household in 1441. From 1428 onwards he held commissions in the west country and the home counties, mainly of inquiry (the inquiries included concealed crown income and piracy), gaol delivery, and oyer and terminer (Cornwall and Devon in 1440, Oxfordshire and Berkshire in 1441), and was also a justice of assize on the western circuit (1439) and on the eastern circuit (1440). At the same time he was an escheator in Somerset and Dorset (1431-2), recorder of Bristol ('c'.1438), and a justice of the peace in Somerset (1430), Berkshire (1439), Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Gloucestershire (1439-40), Kent, Surrey, and Sussex (1440), and Essex (1441). 
Although never a puisne justice of the king's bench, Hody became its chief justice in 1440, the year in which he was knighted. In 1441 he was appointed umpire in arbitration involving Joan Dogge, later a celebrated litigant in 'Shipton v. Dogge' (1442), an action debated by all the judges in the exchequer chamber and a landmark in the development of contract law. Retained by Peterborough Abbey (1433/4), by the earl of Stafford (1437), and by the duchy of Lancaster (1438/9), he was by Henry VI's order summoned to Sheen in August 1440 to discuss threatened riots. In 1441 he condemned to execution Roger Bolingbroke, the priest implicated in the witchcraft trials involving Eleanor Cobham, duchess of Gloucester. In December 1441 he was summoned to parliament, but was prevented by death from attending. His will, stating his wish to be buried in Woolavington church, Somerset, is dated 17 December 1441, and the keepers of goods for the church of Tintinhull in Somerset recorded thereafter as an expenditure of 6's'. 8died 'a legacy from Sir John Hody, Kt.' His widow, Elizabeth, afterwards married Robert Cappes, who was sheriff of Somerset and Dorset in 1444/5. 


@@@@@


doc= 13456


Hody, Sir William (d. 1524), judge, was the second son of Sir John Hody (d. 1441/2), lord chief justice, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1473), daughter and heir of John Jewe of Pilsdon, Dorset. He was almost certainly a member of the Middle Temple by the later years of Henry VI, and is mentioned as counsel in the year books for 1475. He was seated at Gothelney in Somerset at the time when he became a justice of the peace for that county in 1470. He also had property at West Bower in the same county, and part of his mother's inheritance at Pilsdon. He married Eleanor, daughter of Baldwin Malet of Corypool, Somerset. 
In 1472-5 Hody served as member of parliament for Totnes, and in 1483 for Bridgwater. At the beginning of Henry VII's reign Hody was appointed attorney-general, but served only until 29 October 1486, when he was made chief baron of the exchequer. He was knighted in January 1487. Though not a serjeant-at-law he was qualified as chief baron to act as an assize judge, and went on the Oxford circuit until 1507. After a very long tenure of the office of chief baron, and at what must have been a considerable age, he retired on 10 February 1522. He died on 18 June 1524. Although he had two sons, his heirs were his two granddaughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 13457


Hofland, Barbara (bap. 1770, d. 1844), children's writer and novelist, was probably born in Sheffield, Yorkshire, the daughter of Robert Wreaks (died 1773), ironmonger. She was baptized in Sheffield on 16 February 1770. After her father's death and her mother's remarriage, Barbara was brought up by a maiden aunt. From July 1794 she began contributing poems to the Sheffield newspaper 'The Iris', edited by Robert Montgomery. She married a local businessman, Thomas Bradshawe Hoole (1766-1799), in June 1796, but he died three years later and his business collapsed, leaving her virtually penniless and with a baby son, Frederic, to raise. She continued writing verse and her 'Poems' of 1805 sold over 2000 copies. She also began writing children's stories, 'The History of an Officer's Widow' being published in 1809, the year she opened a girls' school in Harrogate. Running the school proved difficult, but consolation was at hand, and on 28 January 1810 Barbara married Thomas Christopher Hofland (1777-1843), a talented landscape artist. 
The couple moved to London in 1811 and Hofland exhibited at the Royal Academy. Barbara Hofland's literary career developed. Her tale 'The Daughter-in-Law' (1812) so impressed Queen Charlotte that she gave permission for the author to dedicate a later book to her. In 1812 Barbara Hofland also published an adult novel, 'Says she to her Neighbour what?', as well as her most popular children's book, 'The Son of a Genius', the story of an impulsive artist whose erratic behaviour brings poverty to his wife and son, a tale which may contain autobiographical elements. 'The Son of a Genius' was frequently reprinted in England, reaching a fourteenth edition by 1841, and was reprinted at least nine times in America, as well as being translated into French and other European languages. Barbara Hofland made friends with many celebrities, including the architect John Soane and the writers Maria Edgeworth and Mary Russell Mitford. 
But her literary efforts did not make Barbara Hofland rich. She was paid only $10 for 'The Son of a Genius', and though her husband exhibited six pictures at the Royal Academy in 1815, his earnings were erratic, often affected by lack of self-discipline and poor health. In 1816, for example, he produced an illegitimate son, Thomas Richard Hofland, whom his wife took in and treated as her own. Financial difficulties continued. In 1819 the Hoflands finished a book commissioned by the marquess of Blandford about his estate at Whiteknights, Reading, but were paid nothing for their labours. In 1822 an exhibition of Hofland's paintings failed. But children's books, novels, textbooks, and verse continued to flow from Barbara Hofland's pen. By the 1830s, however, she found writing painful because of a shoulder injury, and in 1833 she suffered a severe blow with the death of her son Frederic, a much-loved parish priest. After her husband's death in 1843, Barbara Hofland finished her last children's book, 'Emily's Reward, or, The Holiday Trip to Paris' in August 1844. She died of erysipelas at her home, The Hollies, Richmond-on-Thames, on 4 November 1844, and was buried in the parish churchyard, Richmond-on-Thames, Surrey. Barbara Hofland was a prolific author whose bibliography lists sixty-six titles, not including contributions to periodicals, such as the 'Letters to kinfolk', articles of literary gossip printed in regional papers. Her most popular books, however, were her didactic moral tales for children, often depicting the struggles of a Christian family in adverse circumstances. Though characteristic of the period, these often contain realistic details about hardship, work, and ordinary family life, seen particularly in such books as 'Ellen, the Teacher' (1814) and 'Elizabeth and her Three Beggar Boys' (1833), which some scholars think may have influenced Charlotte Bronte's 'Jane Eyre' and Dickens's 'Oliver Twist'. Although Barbara Hofland's adult novels were not successful, some of her adventure stories, such as 'The Young Crusoe' (1829), achieved popularity. Her portraits of brave and resourceful heroines in such tales as 'Decision' (1824) are also noteworthy. Her books were frequently reprinted in Britain and America throughout the nineteenth century and often translated. She seems to have been a loving and attractive person -- an engraving of 1818 reveals a friendly, humorous face with dark eyes and amused mouth -- and it is the strength and resource behind her arduous and ultimately heroic life that her books best convey. 


@@@@@


doc= 13458


Hofland, Thomas Christopher (1777-1843), landscape painter, was born on 25 December 1777 in Worksop, Nottinghamshire, the only child of a wealthy manufacturer of cotton-mill machinery. Hofland was brought up in the expectation of leading a life of leisure and his youth was spent indulging a passion for field sports, especially angling. The family moved to London in 1790 but in 1796-7 his father was ruined by imprudent speculation. Hofland, already practised as an amateur painter, took lessons for a short period from the landscape painter John Rathbone. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1798, and made a living by teaching in Kew, supporting both himself and his parents. Through his position as captain in the local volunteers he attracted the attention of George III, who commissioned some botanical drawings and offered to send him as draughtsman on a naval survey, but this was declined. Hofland moved to Derby in 1805, where he was a popular teacher, then in 1808 to Leeds. There he was one of the most prolific exhibitors in what were Britain's first regular provincial exhibitions, showing sixteen works in the inaugural exhibition of the Northern Society at Leeds, 1809, twenty-four the following year from a Harrogate address, and sixteen in the third exhibition in 1811. He married the writer Barbara Hoole, 'nee' Wreaks, ('bap'. 1770. died 1844) at Knaresborough ['see 'Hofland, Barbara] on 28 January 1810. 
In 1811 Hofland returned to London and in 1814 carried off the first prize for landscape at the British Institution with 'A Storm off the Coast of Scarborough', which was purchased by the marquess of Stafford. Other landscapes were bought by Sir George Beaumont and Lord Coventry. In 1816, according to Farington, Hofland was employed to copy works by Claude for Hart Davies, though Hofland reserved his greatest personal admiration for Wilson. 
In 1816 Hofland was commissioned by the marquess of Blandford to make paintings of his house at Whiteknights near Reading. They were engraved by T. Medland and L. Byrne and published in 'A descriptive account of the mansion and gardens of Whiteknights a seat of his grace the duke of Marlborough' with text by Mrs Hofland in 1819. Hofland was never paid for this work, his only recompense being the profits from the sale of the twenty-three engravings, a fact which still rankled nearly ten years later, after the marquess had succeeded to the title of duke of Marlborough. 
When his most ambitious landscape, a view on the Thames at Richmond, was rejected by the Royal Academy in 1821, Hofland held his own exhibition at 106 New Bond Street (the work was probably the canvas measuring approximately 1.5 x 2.5 m sold at Christies on 10 December 1971, of which there is a photograph at the Paul Mellon Centre for British Art, London). The praise heaped on his work by certain sections of the press attracted accusations of favouritism and failed to help his efforts to secure election to the Royal Academy. As a candidate at the election for associates in 1822 he excited a vitriolic attack from Constable: 'Hofland has sold his shadow of Gaspar Poussin -- for 80 gns -- it is nothing more like Gaspar than the shadow of the man like himself on a muddy road. It is a beastly [thing]' ('Constable's Correspondence', 101). Hofland's lack of official recognition must have been one of his reasons for taking a leading role in the creation of the Society of British Artists in 1823 and serving both as trustee and its first vice-president. From the first exhibition in 1824 until his death Hofland showed no fewer than 119 works there. Despite adverse comment on the quality of the work, the society succeeded in finding a market among the middle classes, though Hofland's own reputation was left exposed. In the following year, 1825, C. W. Westmacott made a point of supporting Hofland in his review of the Royal Academy exhibition, but suggested that the artist had not helped his own cause: '[Hofland] ought long ago to have been honoured with some academical distinction; but 'kissing goes by favour' and this artist, we hear, is not of a very compromising spirit' (Westmacott, 237). His income remained so low that he was reputedly reliant on his wife's writing of school textbooks and children's fiction. 

'Jerusalem at the Time of the Crucifixion' commissioned by Lord de Tabley in 1823-4 was a rare excursion by Hofland into historic landscape, perhaps in emulation of the huge success of John Martin. Hofland could not finish it in time for the opening show of the Society of British Artists but exhibited an earlier version (first shown in 1821) in 1827. In 1829 he exhibited with the newly founded Hull and East Riding Institution for the Promotion of the Fine Arts. Otherwise, Hofland's subjects were exclusively British, with a preponderance of Lake District views and a number of country house portraits, the Whiteknights incident notwithstanding. In 1839 Hofland published 'The British Angler's Manual', a work he illustrated himself; some of the original paintings of scenes in England, Scotland, and Wales were exhibited at the Society of British Artists in 1838. Only in 1840 did Hofland make his first -- and only -- journey to the continent, with a commission from Lord Egremont for a series of views of Italy. He spent nine months in the vicinity of Rome and Naples. On his return he completed five of an anticipated series of twelve subjects but illness prevented further progress. He went in 1842 to Leamington Spa in search of medical assistance, and it was there that he died of stomach cancer on 3 January 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 13459


Hog, James (d. 1736?), Church of Scotland minister and religious controversialist, was the son of Thomas Hog (1625-1680/81), minister of Larbert, Stirlingshire, and Marjory Murray of Philiphaugh (died in or before 1693). Distinguished as a pious and thoughtful youth, with a particular gift for languages, philosophy, and theology, he graduated MA from Edinburgh University in 1677. However, the persecution suffered by his father (deprived in 1662 and outlawed in 1675), and by other covenanter ministers who refused to accept the declarations of indulgence, compelled him to cut short his studies and to seek refuge in the Netherlands. Once there he enrolled in Utrecht University to study divinity, and supported himself by offering private tuition to two young noblemen from The Hague. Although pressed by his friends to take up a ministry in the Reformed church there he declined on account of his inability to accept the doctrines of that church in their entirety. At the request of his mother he returned to Scotland after the revolution of 1688-9, and was licensed by the presbytery of Edinburgh before being ordained as the minister of Dalserf, Lanarkshire, on 20 January 1691. 
Hog soon became disillusioned with the course charted by the Scottish church, particularly in its willing acceptance of interference from temporal powers, and came to believe passionately that it had squandered the golden opportunities offered to it by the revolution. Consequently, even though he continued to support the person and the political legitimacy of William III, his conscience would not permit him to take the oath of allegiance in 1693. Elected as a member of the assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1695 he again refused to take the necessary oaths and returned home, having secured a certificate of attendance from that body even though he had never actually been permitted to take his seat. His criticisms of Erastian encroachments, the role of curates, and the failure of the church sufficiently to acknowledge the centrality of the covenant led to a rapid deterioration in his relationship with his parishioners and the elders of the presbytery of Hamilton. As a result he pleaded ill health and chose to demit his office on 30 March 1697. 
Hog did, however, respond to a timely call from Carnock parish, in Dunfermline, and was admitted as minister there on 23 August 1699. In 1711 he stood as an unsuccessful candidate for the chair of divinity at Marischal College, Aberdeen. The rest of his career was devoted to writing and publishing tracts in order to defend and propagate his personal vision of a church loyal to the covenanter traditions of the previous generation. In particular he attacked the terms of the 'Act of Union', the implementation of the abjuration oath, and the attempts to restore lay patronage to the church during the reign of Queen Anne. However, it was his discovery -- 'by a merciful and most unexpected disclosure of providence' -- of Edward Fisher's 'Marrow of Modern Divinity' (1645) that reignited doctrinal controversy within the kirk and sparked fresh calls for separation from it (Fisher, 1789, xii). In 1718 Hog played an instrumental role in the republication of the work, which had 'been traversing the World since the Days of Oliver Cromwell', and contributed a fresh preface to it ('Snake in the Grass', iii; Fisher, 1789, xii-xiii). This new edition of the 'Marrow' was intended to refute the general assembly's decision, in 1717, that it was no longer sound 'to teach that men must forsake sin in order to come to Christ' ('Correspondence of the Rev. Robert Wodrow', 1.24), and also in order to combat the perceived growth of Arminian practices within the Church of Scotland. Its impact was immediate and its growing popularity, among the laity, came to be seen as a threat to the authority of the hierarchy of the church. As a consequence, the 'Marrow' was condemned, on 20 May 1720, by an act of the assembly of the Church of Scotland, which ordered ministers to forbid members of their congregations from reading it, on account of its reputed antinomian errors. Enraged, Hog was one of the twelve clergymen -- subsequently dubbed the 'Marrow men' by their detractors -- who launched a vigorous protest against the decision. As an extremely prolific writer and polemicist he poured forth a stream of books and pamphlets that sought to explain passages in that work and to vindicate its leading tenets ('A Letter to a Gentleman', 1719; 'Cromwellian Ghost Conjur'd', 1720; 'A letter wherein the scriptural grounds... for the reformation of the churches... are succinctly considered', 1717; 'Twelve Queries', 1812). As a result he not only rendered himself 'most obnoxious to the ecclesiastical leaders of the day', but also contributed indirectly to the secession of several ministers from the church in 1733 (Fraser, 125). His health failed in 1729, and he probably died in Edinburgh in 1736. He had married, and had two daughters, Alison and Janet, both of whom married ministers in the Church of Scotland. Powerful and solemn in his manner of speech and preaching, his Scottish accent was roughly overlaid with Dutch as the result of his early years spent in exile. He was eulogized in verse by his friend the Revd Ralph Erskine as a '
venerable sage 

the humble witness 'gainst the haughty age 

' -- on account of his thorough opposition to deism. 


@@@@@


doc= 13460


Hog, Sir Roger, of Harcarse, Lord Harcarse (1634/5-1700), judge, was born in Berwickshire, the eldest son and heir of William Hog of Bogend, advocate. He was admitted advocate on 25 June 1661, and was knighted and appointed an ordinary lord of session as Lord Harcarse on 16 November 1677. He represented Berwickshire in the convention of estates held at Edinburgh in June and July 1678, and succeeded Sir John Lockhart of Castlehill as a lord of justiciary in November of that year. On 13 February 1688 he was removed from the bench by James VII and II, having voted against the wishes of the ministry regarding the tutors of the young marquess of Montrose. Following the revolution of 1688 Harcarse was appointed a commissioner of supply for Berwick on 7 June 1690, but subsequently lived the remainder of his life in retirement. 
Harcarse left a work entitled 'Decisions of the court of session collected by Sir Roger Hog of Harcarse, one of the senators of the college of justice from 1681 to 1691', published in 1757. This volume also contains a brief account of the life of Harcarse, who is described as 'in high esteem with all the great lawyers of his time, for his judgement and industry... Both in his public and private capacity' (Walker, 178). However, Robert Pittilloch, solicitor-general in 1655, published a pamphlet in 1689 entitled 'Oppression under the Colour of Law', attacking Harcarse for improper judicial interference in favour of his son-in-law Aytoun of Inchdairnie. 
Harcarse married, first, Catherine, daughter of John Paterson, parson of Oldhamstocks; she died before September 1681. On 13 June 1682 he married Barbara, daughter of Laurence Scott of Bavelaw and widow of Laurence Charteris, advocate; his third wife, whom he married on 24 February 1685, was Jean Don, Lady Greenhead. He died in March 1700, aged sixty-five, and was succeeded by his eldest son, William Hog of Harcarse. 


@@@@@


doc= 13461


Hog, Thomas (1628-1692), Church of Scotland minister, was born at Tain, Ross-shire. His parents are unknown, though his biographer describes them as 'honest... native Highlanders, somewhat above the vulgar rank' (Stevenson, 9). He was educated at Tain grammar school and Marischal College, Aberdeen, from where he graduated MA in 1650. He was licensed in 1654 and became chaplain to John Gordon, earl of Sutherland. On 24 October that year he was ordained minister of Kiltearn, a parish 6 miles from Dingwall, on the shore of the Cromarty Firth, and soon gained a reputation for his ministerial abilities. Some time after 12 April 1656 he married a sister of John Hay of Inshock and Park. 
Hog sided with the more extreme protesters during the 1650s religious controversy with the resolutioners, and on refusing to disown the protestation, was deposed in 1661 by the synod of Ross. He was forced to leave his charge in 1662 and retired to Knockoudie in Auldearn, Nairnshire, at the invitation of his brother-in-law John Hay. In July 1668 he was delated by the bishop of Moray for preaching in his own house and keeping conventicles. For these offences he was imprisoned in Forres, but was eventually released on the intercession of the earl of Tweeddale, upon giving bail to appear when called on. Nevertheless, Hog continued to preach: in 1674 he was delated again for seditious practices, and in August 1675 letters of intercommuning were issued against him, forbidding all persons to harbour or help him in any way. He was arrested in January 1677, and the following month was committed to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, from where he was taken to the Bass Rock. 
Hog's health deteriorated while he was in prison and a petition was made to the privy council to have him released. Archbishop James Sharp refused this plea, and is said to have removed Hog instead to a worse dungeon on the Bass. In October 1677, owing to some influence asserted on his behalf, he was brought back to the Edinburgh Tolbooth, and shortly afterwards the privy council ordered his release, provided he confined himself to Kintyre. It is unclear whether he was in fact released, for he was on the Bass in July 1679, when he was freed with other ministers under caution of 10,000 merks. 
Hog seems to have continued in his former ways, and in November 1683 he was charged before the Scottish privy council with keeping house conventicles. As he refused to answer the charge it was held that he had confessed, and he was fined. In January 1684 he was banished from Scotland and given one month to leave; however, the redoubtable minister refused to bind himself not to preach during that month, and was in consequence given forty-eight hours to pack his bags. He travelled first to Berwick and then to London, perhaps intending to join those Scots who planned to emigrate to Carolina. However, he arrived in the capital at an inopportune moment and was arrested on suspicion of complicity with the duke of Monmouth's plot. He was subsequently released and in November 1685 fled to the Netherlands, where he met the prince of Orange and preached in The Hague. 
Hog was one of the ministers who, on the announcement of James VII's indulgence to presbyterians, returned to Scotland in 1688, though he does not seem to have preached at this time. He was a member of the Church of Scotland general assembly in 1690, and in 1691 was appointed domestic chaplain to King William, though by then he was too ill to take up the appointment. The same year saw him restored to the parish of Kiltearn, as he is said to have predicted thirty years before would be the case. He died on 4 January 1692 and at his own request was buried beneath the threshold of his church door, with this inscription over the remains: 'This stone shall bear witness against the parishioners of Kiltearn if they bring an ungodly minister here' ('Fasti Scot.', 7.42). Memoirs of his life were published by Andrew Stevenson in 1756, and transcripts of his sermons survive (NL Scot.). A memorial church in his name was erected in Evanton village, Ross-shire. 


@@@@@


doc= 13462


Hogan, John (1800-1858), sculptor, was born on 14 October 1800 in Tallow, co. Waterford, the son of John Hogan, a building contractor, and his wife, Frances Cox (died 1823), who came from a landowning gentry family in Cork. When he was a child his family moved to Cork. He was apprenticed to Michael Foote, a Cork solicitor, and in 1818 joined the architectural firm of Thomas Deane where his father was foreman. At the Academy of Casts in Cork, which he attended from 1820 to 1822, he drew from casts of the Vatican marbles, made under the supervision of Canova and presented by Pope Pius VII to the prince regent who sent them in 1818 to the Cork Society for the Promotion of the Fine Arts. He began to exhibit in Cork in 1821 and was commissioned by the Roman Catholic bishop of Cork, John Murphy, to carve twenty-seven small wooden figures of saints for St Mary's Cathedral. His work was seen by William Paulet Carey, an engraver and publicist, who successfully induced Sir John Fleming-Leicester, Lord De Tabley, and others, to subscribe to send Hogan to Rome. He thus left Cork in January 1824, stopping in London where he met Francis Chantrey and Sir Thomas Lawrence, and arrived in Rome at Easter. There he studied at the English Academy and at the Vatican and Capitoline museums. In 1825 he set up his studio at vicolo degli Incurabili 8, near the Corso, and in 1827 he visited Naples. During the late 1820s he established himself in the wake of Canova and Bertel Thorvaldsen with a series of ideal subjects: 'The Italian Shepherd Boy' (1825, formerly Powerscourt, co. Wicklow), 'The Dancing Faun' (1826, Crawford Municipal Art Gallery, Cork), 'Eve Startled at the Sight of Death' (1827, formerly Lord De Tabley collection), and 'The Dead Christ' (1829, St Teresa, Dublin), which was shown at the Royal Academy in London in 1832. He married Cornelia Bevignani on 11 November 1837. They had seven daughters and four sons, of whom one, John Valentine Hogan, became a sculptor in Rome. 
Hogan revisited Ireland in 1829, 1833, 1840, 1842, 1843, and 1846 to deal with clients and receive commissions. Most of his work was commissioned by Irish middle-class patrons who had need for commemorative and religious sculpture following Catholic emancipation in 1829. He produced a series of religious works, one of which was a 'pieta' (1843) for Loreto Abbey at Rathfarnham, south of Dublin. In 1837 he won the competition for a memorial to Bishop James Doyle (1840) for Carlow Cathedral, which led to commissions for statues of Irish national heroes -- notably Daniel O'Connell (1846, City Hall, Dublin; 1856, Limerick) and Thomas Davis (1852, City Hall, Dublin). The finest of these was the marble group 'Hibernia with a Bust of Lord Cloncurry' (1844, National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin). He made a large number of funerary reliefs, notably those for Jeanette Farrell (1843, St Andrew's, Dublin), Bishop John Brinkley (1845, Trinity College, Dublin), and Bishop Fleming (1853, St John's, Newfoundland), and received commissions for busts of numerous Roman Catholic clergy such as Bishop Murphy (1834, Cork), Father Theobald Matthew (1844, Capuchin friary, Church Street, Dublin), and Archbishop Daniel Murray (1844, National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin). 
Hogan was recognized in Rome, where a reproduction of his 'pieta' was published in 'L'Ape italiana' (1837) and praised by Thorvaldsen. He was honoured by being made a member of the Virtuosi of the Pantheon in 1839 and from 1840 he began to receive critical notices in Ireland. After the Roman revolution of 1848-9 he returned to Ireland and settled at 14 Wentworth Place, Dublin. His final work, completed by Giovanni Benzoni after his death, was the gigantic bronze relief of 'Civil and Religious Liberty' (Wellington Testimonial, Dublin). 
Hogan's style was based on Roman neo-classicism, which he used for Irish national and religious imagery, reflecting the political and social changes of the period. He died at his home in Wentworth Place on 27 March 1858; his funeral took place on 30 March, followed by burial at Glasnevin cemetery in Dublin. A civil-list pension was granted to his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 13463


Hogarth, George (1783-1870), music critic, was born at Carfrae Mill, near Oxton, Berwickshire, on 6 September 1783, the son of Robert Hogarth, a farmer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Scott. He studied law in Edinburgh, becoming a writer to the signet, and practising between 1810 and 1830. He also studied the cello and composition, and acted as joint secretary to the Edinburgh music festival in 1815. His literary friends included Walter Scott and John Lockhart, and he was himself one of the most brilliant writers on the 'Edinburgh Courant'. In 1817, with Scott and his own brother-in-law James Ballantyne, he bought the 'Edinburgh Weekly Journal'. 
On 30 May 1814 Hogarth married Georgina (1793-1863), daughter of the Edinburgh music publisher and editor George Thomson (1757-1851); they had ten children. Giving up the law and moving to London in 1830 (at least partly for financial reasons), he wrote for 'The Harmonicon', but was disappointed of the editorship of 'The Courier'. In 1831 he went to Exeter to edit the tory 'Western Luminary', and in the following year he moved to Halifax as the first editor of the 'Halifax Guardian'; the pressures of his growing family led him to offer his services as a teacher in this town. In 1834 he returned to London and was engaged by the 'Morning Chronicle' as a writer on political and musical subjects. A large share of the management of this paper devolved onto him, and it was here that he first encountered Charles Dickens, who was writing for the paper under the pseudonym 'Boz'. In 1835 Hogarth, as co-editor, commissioned Dickens to write a series of 'Sketches' for the 'Evening Chronicle', an offshoot of the 'Morning Chronicle'. In 1836 Dickens married Hogarth's daughter Catherine, and Hogarth actively promoted his son-in-law's career. The cordial relationship between the two men deteriorated with Dickens's marriage, and by 1854 the author was remarking, 'I think my constitution is already undermined by the sight of Hogarth at breakfast' (cited in Carlton, 87). The eventual breakup of the marriage caused a further rift with the Hogarths, not least because Catherine's sister Georgina Hogarth chose to remain with Dickens. 
Hogarth was editor of the 'Musical Herald' in 1846-7, and on the foundation of the 'Daily News' in 1846 (with Dickens as editor) he was appointed music critic, a post he held until 1866 when ill health caused his resignation. Between 1850 and 1864 he acted as secretary of the Philharmonic Society. He was also for many years music critic at the 'Illustrated London News', and contributed to many periodicals and edited various musical and literary works. A man of liberal sympathies and considerable learning, Hogarth was a just, outspoken, and generous critic. His most important publications are 'Musical History, Biography and Criticism' (1835) and 'Memoirs of the Musical Drama' (1838, rev. 1851 as 'Memoirs of the Opera'). 'The Philharmonic Society of London, 1813-1862' (1862) was valuable for introducing music to a wide public, and Hogarth's writings remain interesting for their frank and lively account of Victorian music-making. He also composed songs and piano pieces. In January 1870 he fell down the stairs at the office of the 'Illustrated London News', breaking an arm and a leg; he never recovered from the effect of these injuries, and died at the house of his daughter Helen Roney, 10 Gloucester Crescent, Regent's Park, on 12 February 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 13464


Hogarth, William (1697-1764), painter and engraver, was born in Bartholomew Close, Smithfield, London, on 10 November 1697 and baptized in St Bartholomew-the-Great on 28 November 1697, though his birth and baptism were entered in the nonconformist register. He was the eldest of the three children of a schoolmaster and author, Richard Hogarth (died 1718), and his wife, whose maiden name was Anne Gibbons (died 1735). The two other children were Mary, born on 23 November 1699 and baptized on 10 December at St Bartholomew's, and Ann, born in October 1701 and baptized at St Sepulchre on 6 November 1701. Richard, by tradition the son of a farmer or shepherd from the Vale of Bampton, Westmorland, became a schoolmaster, and went to London in the late 1680s. Richard, also by tradition, had a brother Thomas, known as Ald Hogart, who was, according to the Cumberland historian Adam Walker, celebrated as a ploughman playwright and poet, organizing villagers in dramatic performances (Nichols, 1-4). Despite the importance attached to him by John Nichols and John Ireland, his connection to Hogarth is shadowy, and his known poems are not especially rustic. 
Richard Hogarth's main enterprise in London was to publish Latin and Greek textbooks, the first appearing in May 1689, but he also ran a Latin-speaking coffee house in Clerkenwell from 1703 to 1707/8, and on its failure was confined for debt in the Fleet prison and then allowed to live nearby within the rules of the Fleet, from which he was freed in 1712. He managed to publish another Latin textbook in the same year, but his great aim was to compile a Latin dictionary, for which he failed to find a publisher, and his son remembered until late in life 'the cruel treatment he [Richard] met with from Bookseller and Printers particularly in the affairs of a lattin Dictionary' (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 204-5). Richard died on 11 May 1718 and was buried at St Bartholomew's. This sad career effectively denied his son all hopes of university or professional training, 'putting him in a way to shift for himself' (ibid., 201), and obliging him to take the route of a modest apprenticeship. He ended up in the undistinguished silver workshop of Ellis Gamble in Cranbourne Street, Leicester Fields, London, where he remained from February 1714 probably until early 1720. Hogarth's determination to rise in the world and his later cantankerousness may have had their origins in the family's early misfortunes. 
The passion for collecting rare Hogarth prints in the late eighteenth century led to the attribution to him of numerous silver designs from the period of his apprenticeship. In fact, only the 'Walpole Salver' (Bindman, 'Hogarth and his Times', no. 87; V&A), made long after in 1728, is at all convincing. He was able to set up as a copper-engraver soon after his apprenticeship, producing his own shop-card dated 23 April 1720 (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 3), and over the next five or six years establishing himself as a jobbing engraver. He took on shop-cards, funeral tickets, and book illustrations, but it was elaborate satires on contemporary themes that brought him to wider notice. 'The South Sea Scheme' of 'c'.1721 (ibid., no. 43), attacked the familiar target of the South Sea Bubble, and 'Masquerades and Operas' of 1723-4 (ibid., no. 44), the taste of the 'Town'. Each employs numerous figures and a minute handling in the Dutch manner to present, in the former, crowds in the pursuit of greed, and, in the latter, the popularity of meretricious foreign entertainment, like masquerades, harlequin plays, and Italian operas, while English classics are carted away as waste paper. His small illustrations to Samuel Butler's mock-heroic 'Hudibras', published in 1726 but executed earlier (ibid., nos. 5-21), led to an ambitious project to publish by subscription, through the publisher Philip Overton, twelve large plates, also in illustration of 'Hudibras' (ibid., nos. 82-93), unequivocally of his own invention, with monumental figures and learned allusions to Italian art. 
The large 'Hudibras' series was a work of high ambition, and it reflects an awareness of the wider artistic world. Hogarth claimed later that even as an apprentice 'the painting of St Pauls and gree[n]wich hospital... were during this time runing in my head' (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 205), referring here to the enormous schemes for the decoration of the dome of St Paul's and for the Greenwich Hospital by the English-born painter Sir James Thornhill, who held the office of sergeant-painter to the king. Hogarth had enrolled at the St Martin's Lane Academy, London, in 1720, and at the drawing school run by Thornhill in Covent Garden probably shortly after its opening in November 1724. It is possible that 'Masquerades and Operas' was already an attempt to side with Thornhill in his struggles with the leaders of the new taste for Palladian architecture, the earl of Burlington and the painter William Kent, for the latter is lampooned by being placed on top of a pediment with figures of Michelangelo and Raphael in adoration beneath. 
Hogarth must have received some kind of instruction from Thornhill in the mechanics of painting; his broad handling of the brush and use of colour make his debt clear. Very few works can be attributed confidently to Hogarth before 1728, when he made the first versions of his painting of John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera', first performed that year. The first three versions, probably all finished before the end of 1729 (Birmingham City Art Gallery; priv. coll.; National Gallery of Art, Washington), reveal him as a painter of much ingenuity, but the final two, of 1729-31 (Yale U. CBA; Tate collection) are of real accomplishment. They exhibit a satirical resonance and topicality beyond Gay's opera by incorporating into the composition recognizable members of the fashionable audience. On the basis of this success he moved into the demanding genre of the conversation piece, which required delicacy of touch, a mastery of elegant gesture, and an ability to set figures in a convincing space. It is scarcely credible that an artist could have mastered such a specialized field so quickly, but Hogarth's ability was immediately noted by the astute chronicler George Vertue, who remarked on the painting of the Wollaston family (1730; priv. coll., on loan to Leicester Art Gallery) that 'this is really a most excellent work containing the true likeness of the persons, shape, aire & dress -- well disposd, genteel, agreeable -- & freely painted & the composition great variety & Nature' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.46). Hogarth added to his skills an entree into a wider world by marrying Thornhill's daughter, Jane ('c'.1709-1789), on 23 March 1729, reputedly after an elopement. Thornhill as well as a painter was member of parliament for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis, and a supporter of the Walpole government. 
Hogarth quickly exploited his new family connections, and it was probably through Thornhill that he obtained a commission in 1729 for a painting of the parliamentary inquiry, led by James Oglethorpe, into conditions in the Fleet and other prisons (NPG). Hogarth and Thornhill were friendly with John Huggins, who had sold the patent of the Fleet as late as August 1728 to his deputy, Thomas Bambridge. It is possible that the bestial characterization of Bambridge, also evident in the oil sketch in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, is evidence of an attempt by Hogarth to exonerate Huggins. Several of those depicted in the painting became patrons of Hogarth; Viscount Malpas, later earl of Cholmondeley, Sir Robert Walpole's son-in-law, commissioned a family conversation (1732; Houghton Hall, Norfolk), and the large painting of a performance of Dryden's 'The Indian Emperor, or, The Conquest of Mexico' (priv. coll.) is evidence of the artist's connections, for it takes place in the house of John Conduitt, the master of the Royal Mint in succession to Isaac Newton, in the presence of younger members of the royal family. Hogarth's circle of patrons was largely, though not exclusively, within the court or government; he was conspicuously ignored by landowning families influenced by the Burlington circle. Vertue reports that the earl of Burlington used his influence to deprive Thornhill of commissions, and his son-in-law of the privilege of painting the royal family: 'he had some time ago begun a picture of all the Royal family in one peice by order the Sketch being made. & the P. William the Duke had sat to him for one. This also has been stopt. So that he can't proceed. (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.68)' 

By the early 1730s Hogarth had none the less achieved a solid position in the world. In addition to a thriving practice as a painter of portrait groups he had some success with humorous satirical paintings, such as 'The Denunciation' (National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin) and 'The Christening' (priv. coll.), both 'c'.1729, and amorous scenes, such as the two versions of 'Before and After' (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, and Getty Museum, Malibu). His studio was in Covent Garden before he moved to Leicester Fields in 1733; it was something of a meeting-place for men about town, and he clearly used them as an audience to try out different kinds of painting. He was tiring of conversation pictures, for 'that manner of Painting was not sufficiently paid to do every thing my family requird' (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 216). Vertue tells us that he 'began a small picture of a common harlot, supposd to dwell in drewry lane. Just riseing about noon out of bed... this whore's desabille careless and a pretty Countenance & air' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.58). In discussion with visitors to the studio 'some advisd him to make another. to it as a pair. which he did. then other thoughts encreas'd, & multiplyd by his fruitfull invention. till he made six. different subjects which he painted so naturally... that it drew every body to see them. (ibid.)' Hogarth's high-minded version in retrospect of this momentous change in direction was that he 'turn[ed] my thoughts to still a more new way of proceeding, viz painting and Engraving moder[n] moral Subject[s] a Field unbroke up in any Country or any age' (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 216). 
By 'modern moral subjects' Hogarth meant pictorial narratives of contemporary-life subjects in series. The first, 'A Harlot's Progress', was made up of six paintings (des. in a fire at Fonthill Abbey in 1755), and the engravings (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', nos. 121-6) were published initially by subscription in April 1732. 'A Harlot's Progress' tells the sordid story of a country girl, M. (for Mary or Moll) Hackabout, who arrives in Cheapside in London on the York stage and is procured for the notorious Colonel Charteris (scene 1), becomes the mistress of a Jew (scene 2), then a Drury Lane prostitute (scene 3), and after a spell in Bridewell (scene 4), dies of syphilis in a miserable hovel (scene 5), and is mourned insincerely by her fellow harlots (scene 6). The horror and squalor of the story are mitigated by a fascinating profusion of incident, topical references, and satirical humour directed towards clergymen, moral crusaders like Sir John Gonson, doctors, and prostitutes themselves, heedless of their fate. The story is told as if each painting or engraving is the act of a play or chapter in a novel. No verbal narrative is given even on the engravings, though verbal signs in the form of notices and discarded letters and wrappers clarify the action in most scenes. Almost every scene has a precise location so that one could plot the episodes of the harlot's rise and fall on a map of London. The success of the engravings was extraordinary, and it can be measured as much in the piracies and adaptations, in the form of plays, pamphlets, fans, and china, as in the number of impressions sold. According to Vertue: 'daily Subscriptions came in, in fifty or a hundred pounds in a Week -- there being no day but persons of fashion and Artists came to see these pictures... before a twelve month came about whilst these plates were engraving he had in his Subscription. between '14 or fifteen hundred'. (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.58)' Hogarth, now a celebrity, published in March 1733 an engraving that was imitated more than any other of his prints: 'Midnight Modern Conversation' (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 128), a rowdy drinking scene whose moralizing caption did nothing to discourage its use on tankards and punchbowls as a celebration of male conviviality. At the same time he was working on a second series, 'A Rake's Progress' (ibid., nos. 132-9), that surpassed even the success of its predecessor. The series of eight paintings (Sir John Soane's Museum, London) was probably completed by the middle of 1734, but the artist delayed publication of the engravings, for which he was assisted by the French engraver Louis Gerard Scotin, to allow for an act of parliament to protect his copyright, that he had initiated through well-placed friends, to become law on 25 June 1735. This was the 'Act for the Encouragement of the Arts of Designing, Engraving, Etching &c.', usually known as 'Hogarth's Act', which vested the copyright of engravings in their artists rather than their publishers, forbidding unauthorized copies for a period of fourteen years. Because of the delay piracies actually came out before the publication of 'A Rake's Progress', and the effect of the act was to deter slavish copies, but not in the end to prevent imitations, of which there were a great many. 
The rake, Tom Rakewell, is a male counterpart of the harlot, but as the son of a miserly financier he is a member of the middling orders, pursuing social advancement with as much vigour as he pursues sensual pleasure. His career is a vehicle for satirizing the mores of the 'great' he seeks to emulate. These are not the men of virtue who live up to the ideals of their station in life, but those who use wealth and social position for selfish ends. In the first scene, on the basis of the fortune he inherits, he repudiates his pregnant fiancee, Sarah Young, to set himself up in a grand house in the West End of London. He then receives petitioners at a levee, ranging from an opera composer and a dancing-master to a jockey and bodyguard, as a line of others queue for an audience (scene 2). He spends a riotous evening in a sordid brothel in Drury Lane, where he is deftly deprived of his watch by a prostitute (scene 3). While being carried in a sedan chair towards a royal reception at St James's Palace he is arrested for debt, only saved by the fortuitous arrival of Sarah Young, who offers her savings (scene 4). The remaining four scenes show the rake's downward descent. He attempts vainly to regain his fortune by marrying a rich, deformed heiress (scene 5), and by gambling at table (scene 6), but he is confined to the Fleet prison, now losing his sanity (scene 7), ending his days in Bedlam among richly characterized lunatics, lamented only by Sarah Young (scene 8). 
The richness of content and wit of 'A Rake's Progress' surpassed even 'A Harlot's Progress', confirming Hogarth's fame, and increasing his fortune. He was now virtually independent of the market place he had so astutely exploited, in a position to take on other challenges. His first concern seems to have been to take on the mantle of Sir James Thornhill, who had died on 4 May 1734. By a masterly stroke he was granted a large-scale wall-painting commission at St Bartholomew's Hospital, becoming a governor, by offering to paint free of charge two walls in the entrance hall. These had already been assigned to the gifted Venetian painter Jacopo Amigoni, a painter who had taken away a major commission from Thornhill at Moor Park, Hertfordshire. Hogarth thus gained a major public place for his first attempt at history painting, avenged his late father-in-law, and established himself as a gentleman of public spirit. This manoeuvre gave rise to Vertue's famous remark of Hogarth, 'a good Front and a Scheemist' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.78), but it also left him with having to paint two immense surfaces with biblical scenes, 'The Good Samaritan' and 'The Pool of Bethesda' (still 'in situ'), in a genre in which he was virtually untrained. The result is wonderful and absurd in equal measure; the figure of Christ in 'The Pool of Bethesda' is inept, but the painting is redeemed by the varied group of the sick and the lame waiting to be cured. Though Vertue tells us that 'as to this great work of painting it is by every one judged to be more than coud be expected of him' (ibid.), it left him exposed to ridicule in later life, providing evidence that he was ignorant of painting's capacity to elevate the mind. 
Two projects of the late 1730s built as much on the painting 'Southwark Fair' (1733; priv. coll.) and its engraving (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 131) as on the 'modern moral subjects'. 'Southwark Fair' presents a dense panorama of London street life, contrasting the insubstantial, precarious, and idealized life of the theatre with the equally theatrical life of the streets. This concern with illusion and reality led towards two projects, both published at the same time in May 1738: the 'Times of Day' series of four paintings ('Morning' and 'Night', Upton House, Warwickshire; and 'Noon' and 'Evening', priv. coll.) and engravings (ibid., nos. 146-9), for which Hogarth had the help of the French engraver Bernard Baron, and the painting (des. in a fire, 1874) and engraving 'Strolling Actresses Dressing in a Barn' (ibid., no. 150). As a meditation on the street life of London, 'The Times of Day' can be related to such precedents as John Gay's 'Trivia, or, The Art of Walking the Streets of London' (1716). The four scenes 'Morning', 'Noon', 'Evening', and 'Night' are governed neither by a narrative nor common characters; nor are they set in one part of London. The action takes place respectively in Covent Garden, the vicinity of St Giles-in-the-Fields, Sadler's Wells, and Charing Cross. Nor are they confined to one season; 'Morning' takes place on a winter's day, 'Evening' on a warm summer's evening. They are unified by the contrast of order and disorder in urban life, carefully staged by the artist through visual anecdotes. Each scene is animated by accidental conjunctions, some setting off a change of consequences, comic and pathetic. 'Strolling Actresses Dressing in a Barn' plays humorously upon the discomforts of a group of female players forced to prepare for a rural performance in a barn strewn with stage machinery and props. It offers a profound meditation upon the disjunction between the mundanity of real life and the mythological subject of the play, 'The Devil to Pay in Heaven', which requires the actresses to play Olympian gods and goddesses. 
Hogarth entered the field of individual portraiture in the late 1730s and early 1740s. His portraits of this period deliberately challenge the French grand-manner portrait and those of Thomas Hudson, but he never became a professional in the sense of developing a large studio and using drapery painters. Hogarth's decision to take up grand-manner portraiture was provoked by the success of the French painter J. B. Van Loo, who arrived in London in late 1737. According to Vertue 'the English painters have great uneasines[s] it has much blemishd their reputation -- and business' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.84). Hogarth's reply in effect was the magnificent portrait of Captain Coram, painted in 1740 for the Foundling Hospital (Foundling Hospital, London). Though often seen as essentially English, it derives from French examples, combining a composition derived from Hyacinthe Rigaud's portrait of Samuel Bernard (Bindman, 'Hogarth', fig. 102) which Hogarth would have known from the 1729 engraving, with the surface vitality of Van Loo. The success of the portrait seems to have inspired Hogarth to take on more such commissions, mainly from friends. He applied the grand manner unusually to a female sitter, in the three-quarter length of Mary Edwards (1742; Frick collection, New York). She is shown as a great chatelaine, the speech at her right elbow by Queen Elizabeth I, the busts of the latter and King Alfred in the background, the faithful dog and her direct gaze emphasizing her regal stout-heartedness. Other portraits of this period combine the monumental with the genial, and some have a distinctively demotic rather than aristocratic character, as if Hogarth were developing an alternative mode from Van Dyck and French portrait painters. The portraits of George Arnold ('c'.1740; Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge) and, curiously, the portrait of William Cavendish, fourth duke of Devonshire (1741; Yale U. CBA), among a number of others, are notable for their direct gaze and vivid expression. He was also capable of bestowing a papal dignity on two prominent ecclesiastics: Benjamin Hoadly, bishop of Winchester (1741), and Thomas Herring, archbishop of Canterbury (1744-7) (both Tate collection). Hogarth made a number of portraits of children in this period, most notably the large group of the Graham children (1742; National Gallery, London). It is a conversation piece on a grand scale, the fleetingness of childhood suggested by the precarious stability of the composition, the distinctive behaviour of each child according to age, and the rich fabric of allusion to the passing of time. 
Other portraits of note are the very large 'David Garrick as Richard III' (1745; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), a history painting with the actor in a famous role, and the later portrait of Frank Matthew Schutz ('c'.1755-1760; Castle Museum, Norwich), in which the sitter is shown in bed vomiting into a chamber pot, a sign of the life he has given up for marriage. This portrait belongs to a period of return to portraiture, announced in February 1757, as a relief from the rigours of the 'Election' series and dealing with engravers. Though some portraits of this period, like 'David Garrick and his Wife' (1757; Royal Collection), are highly finished, Hogarth aimed also to produce a simplified type of portrait, based on few sittings and minimal trappings, like those of such friends and associates as Samuel Martin ('c'.1759; Koriyama City Museum of Art, Japan), James Caulfeild, first earl of Charlemont ('c'.1759; Smith College Museum of Art, Northampton, Massachusetts), and Henry Fox (1761; priv. coll.). Also probably of this period is the densely painted and firmly characterized group of six heads known, on early but not conclusive authority, as 'Hogarth's Servants' ('c'.1750-1755; Tate collection). They are 'character heads' made from observation, illustrating different ages, probably intended as studies, of a similar date and purpose to the brilliantly free sketch 'The Shrimp Girl' (National Gallery, London). 
In the late 1730s and early 1740s Hogarth began to present himself as the leader of a national school of painting, speaking out for British artists against the assumption of connoisseurs whose taste had been formed on the grand tour that only paintings by the great Italian masters were worthy of serious consideration. Under the name Britophil, Hogarth wrote to the 'St James's Evening Post' of 7-9 June 1737 defending Thornhill and attacking the importing of 'shiploads of dead Christs, Holy Families, Madona's, and other dismal dark subjects, neither entertaining nor ornamental'. His claims to a national role were indirectly bolstered by the playwright and novelist Henry Fielding, who in the preface to 'Joseph Andrews' of 1742 paid Hogarth the singular compliment of claiming his art to be the basis of his own theory of the novel and its purposes, arguing that his moral engravings were 'calculated more to serve the Cause of Virtue, and for the preservation of Mankind, than all the Folios of Morality which have ever been written'. This endorsement was important in providing a theoretical underpinning for Hogarth's enterprise. Fielding's further claim that Hogarth was a 'Comic History Painter', rather than a practitioner of 'Caricatura' or burlesque, defined his art as socially useful, distinctively English, and with a wide popular appeal. 
In 1743 Hogarth completed a new and more accomplished series of 'modern moral subjects', 'Marriage a-la-mode', consisting of six paintings (National Gallery, London), engraved entirely by French engravers, whom Hogarth had recruited after his first visit to Paris in 1743, and published on 1 April 1745 (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', nos. 158-63). Hogarth claimed in a newspaper advertisement that the theme was 'a Variety of Modern Occurrences in High-Life', and that he had taken pains to avoid 'the least Objection to the Decency or elegancy of the whole work' (ibid., 114). The paintings are indeed elegant in composition, painterly in handling and in the interaction of the figures, but this elegance is rendered superficial by the moral hypocrisy of those who pursue the high life for its own sake, and their heedlessness towards those who fall victim to it, like the earl's son and merchant's daughter, the subject of the original marriage agreement. This takes place in the old master-bedecked house in the West End of the elderly earl of Squander, himself the very picture of aristocratic arrogance and fecklessness, in debt from building a preposterous double-porticoed Palladian town house (probably a stroke at the earl of Burlington) (scene 1). The merchant is equally culpable, seeking to gain social advancement by buying it rather than earning it by admirable conduct. Their children, the young viscount and the merchant's daughter, studiously ignore each other, the former an overdressed, self-admiring fop, the latter, weeping and weak-willed, open to the covert courtship of the lawyer Silvertongue. The story is of the mutual alienation of the couple, predetermined by the circumstances of their marriage, and their separate paths to destruction, as they each pursue the characteristic vices of their social class. The young viscount, who becomes an earl on the death of his father, pursues sexual dissipation (scenes 2 and 3), while the new countess acts out the role of a great lady, holding a levee in the French manner (scene 4), entertaining an even more grotesque company of hangers-on than the rake, and arranging an assignation with Silvertongue. The earl dies in a duel after surprising the lovers in a private room in a 'bagnio' in Covent Garden, but the countess, surprisingly but movingly, stays with her dying husband rather than fleeing with her lover out of the window (scene 5). Her own end is depicted in the last scene (scene 6), where she dies in her father's house in the City, within sight of London Bridge. This house, by contrast with the opulence of the earl's West End mansion, is a bare, miserly dwelling with vulgar Dutch paintings on the wall, of the kind Hogarth despised as much as the earl's Italian pictures. 
It is perhaps not surprising that the posthumous revival of interest in Hogarth as a painter rather than an engraver should date from William Hazlitt's first opportunity to study the 'Marriage a-la-mode' paintings at the British Institution exhibition in 1814. They are astonishing in the fluid confidence of their brushwork; they were clearly intended to stand in their own right as paintings, and not just act as vehicles for engraving. A similarly confident handling of paint can be found in 'Moses Brought before Pharaoh's Daughter' (1746; Foundling Hospital), one of a set of four paintings for the Council Room of the Foundling Hospital, the others being by Francis Hayman, Joseph Highmore, and James Wills. The Foundling Hospital was founded by Captain Thomas Coram to rescue and train for military and domestic service, and manufacturing, children abandoned on the streets of London. Hogarth was involved in the hospital from the beginning, painting Captain Coram (see above), and, realizing the hospital's potential as a public exhibiting space, he involved other artists in the venture. By the end of the decade it was filled with portraits, landscape paintings, and sculpture by most of the best artists of the time: Thomas Gainsborough, Thomas Hudson, Allan Ramsay, Joshua Reynolds, John Michael Rysbrack, and Richard Wilson. 
The success of 'Moses Brought before Pharaoh's Daughter' may have emboldened Hogarth to take on a more ambitious biblical subject in 'Paul before Felix' (1748), for Lincoln's Inn. Such a subject invited comparison not with Thornhill or visiting Italian painters but with Raphael, whose cartoons, then at Hampton Court, especially 'St Paul Preaching at Athens', provided the ultimate challenge to Hogarth's prowess in the elevated style. In the event the monumental forms of Hogarth's painting are laboured and the faces approach caricature, but the drama and the overall colour harmony make it a convincing performance. Unfortunately Hogarth left himself open to ridicule by issuing in May 1751 a ticket for the engraving illustrated by a coarse and amusing etched parody of the subject, entitled 'Paul before Felix Burlesqued' (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 191), with the caption 'Design'd and scratch'd in the true Dutch taste', and in the third state, 'in the rediculous manner of Rembrandt'. His intention was to contrast the nobility of his own painting with what a Dutch artist might have made of the subject, but it left satirists an opening to suggest that the parody represented the 'real' Hogarth. 
In 1747 Hogarth published a series of twelve engravings, 'Industry and Idleness' (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', nos. 168-79), based not on paintings but on drawings (all are in the British Museum), in a deliberately simplified style to appeal to apprentices and the poor in general. The series tells the parallel stories of two apprentices, one insufferably virtuous and ambitious called Francis Goodchild, who works hard, marries his master's daughter, and rises to be lord mayor of London. The other, the dissolute Tom Idle, gambles, blasphemes, and steals his way to the hangman's noose at Tyburn. 'Industry and Idleness' was the first set of prints directed not primarily towards amateur collectors (to whom he also made them available), but towards the direct improvement of those contemplating them. In February 1751 Hogarth issued 'Beer Street' and 'Gin Lane' (ibid., nos. 185-6) and 'The Four Stages of Cruelty' (ibid., nos. 187-90), his ambitions for which are clearly stated in the 'General Advertiser': 'As the Subjects of those Prints are calculated to reform some reigning Vices peculiar to the lower Class of People in hopes to render them of more extensive Use, the Author has published them in the cheapest Manner possible.' 'Beer Street' and 'Gin Lane' were a response to Henry Fielding's 'An Enquiry into the Causes of the Late Increase of Robbers', published in January 1751, and were probably issued in support of the campaign for the imposition of the 'Gin Act', which came into force in the summer of 1751. 'The Four Stages of Cruelty' were, in Hogarth's words, 'done in hopes of preventing in some degree that cruel treatment of poor Animals which makes the streets of London more disagreable to the human mind, than any thing what ever' (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 226). The earnestness of his desire that this series should reach a public beyond even the engravings, which in any case cost 1's'., and an extra 6died if they were on fine paper, is confirmed by his attempt to produce larger woodcut versions, cut by J. Bell. In the end only the final two of the series, 'Cruelty in Perfection' and 'The Reward of Cruelty' appeared in that form, and it is probable that the scheme was abandoned perhaps because of technical difficulties. 
In 1750 Hogarth arranged for the Foundling Hospital to receive his painting 'The March to Finchley' (Foundling Hospital, London), by giving it the unsold tickets from a lottery he had set up with the painting as a prize, probably to stimulate interest in the engraving, published in December 1750 (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 184). 'The March to Finchley', probably painted 1749-50, is a historical picture looking back to the events of the Scottish invasion of 1745-6, when the Pretender's (James Stuart's) army was feared to be in danger of threatening London, probably stimulated by debates on proposals to reform the army at the end of the decade. The relentlessly dissolute behaviour of the soldiery in the foreground, by contrast with a disciplined troop in the middle distance, suggests a degraded and directionless population beyond rational control. The central figure, perhaps meant to represent the nation, is the hapless grenadier in the foreground, beset by two women each demanding his commitment, as has often been pointed out, like Hercules between Vice and Virtue. The woman on the viewer's left, in both painting and engraving, represents nature (she is pregnant), patriotism (she holds a broadside, 'God save our king'), and support for the duke of Cumberland's reforms (she holds a print of him). The older woman to the right threatens him with newspapers, mainly of the opposition; she represents faction or 'party'. The sordidness of much of the activity, and the underlying political message, sit oddly with the sensuousness of the painterly handling, first evident in 'Marriage a-la-mode', but here applied to the uniforms of the grenadiers, and to the wittily variegated group of prostitutes leaning out of the windows of the brothel on the right. Hogarth's painting 'O the Roast Beef of Old England' ('The Gate of Calais', 1748; Tate collection) and the engraving from it published in March 1749 (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 180) also reconstruct a recent event, but this time one in Hogarth's own life. In 1748 Hogarth had visited France for a second time and was arrested as a spy while drawing the famous English Gate. He was brought before the commandant but soon released; in the words of his autobiography 'it was Judged necessary only to confine me to my lodging till the wind changed for our coming away to England where I no sooner arrived but set about the Picture' (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 228). The painting dramatizes the event by playing with gross humour on contemptuous English assumptions about the French and Jacobites, from the ignorant 'poissardes' on the left, the starving soldiers on either side, the corpulent monk tasting the fat on the enormous joint being carried to the English hostelry by a skinny servant, the priests through the gate carrying out superstitious rites, to the miserable Scottish soldier freezing in his kilt. Hogarth is seen before the gate drawing, as a disembodied hand appears on his shoulder. He later summed up his perception of France as 'A farcical pomp of war, parade of riligion and Bustle with little with very little bussiness in short poverty slavery and Insolence with an affectation of politeness' (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 227). 
Despite references to the notorious Oxfordshire election of 1754, Hogarth's paintings are more than a conventional exposure of current corruption. The 'Election' series of four paintings (Sir John Soane's Museum), begun in 1753-4 and engraved in 1754-8 (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', nos. 198-201), like 'The March to Finchley', also comments on the state of the nation. The first scene, 'An Election Entertainment', the most traditional in content, shows the two candidates involved in bribing the rapacious and violent electorate. Again the brilliant handling of paint and the radiant colour effects sit oddly with the rumbustious goings-on. The second scene, 'Canvassing for Votes', is set in a village with a tory inn, the Royal Oak, in the foreground, and a whig tavern, The Crown, in the background. In front of the Royal Oak a bemused farmer is faced with a choice between two offers of money for his vote by the hosts of the two rival taverns, while two old seamen, true patriots, relive the naval victory of Portobello in 1739. The third scene, 'The Polling', centres on the vote itself, with a varied collection of derelicts, led by an old soldier taking the oath with his hook, waiting to cast their doubtful votes. The fourth scene, 'Chairing the Member', shows the successful candidate carried aloft, a goose flying over his head, but far from being a real triumph, the human edifice supporting him is about to topple over, as a family of pigs runs through the procession. The series betrays a deep cynicism about the electoral process, and the choices available to the voters, but not about government itself; three of the engravings are dedicated to leading 'old corps' whigs, associated with the late prime minister Sir Robert Walpole: Henry Fox, Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, and Sir Edward Walpole, and the fourth to George Hay, a commissioner of the Admiralty, the last a close friend. 
While working on the 'Election' prints Hogarth received in May 1755 his largest commission for a religious painting, the altarpiece for the church of St Mary Redcliffe in Bristol, for which he was paid a fee of $525. The final work, painted in 1756, is an astonishing feat, consisting of a triptych 17 feet in height, with a central panel, 'The Ascension', and side panels, 'The Sealing of the Sepulchre' and 'The Three Marys Visiting the Sepulchre'. The grandeur of the figures matches the scale, and there are brilliant and surprising light effects in the central panel that suggest that Hogarth had learned much from Venetian artists resident in England. 
Fielding's characterization in 1742 of Hogarth as a comic history painter had encouraged the artist to reflect on the nature of his own art and art in general. These reflections, aided by discussion with philosophical friends like Dr Thomas Morell, were to culminate in the treatise 'The Analysis of Beauty', published in 1753, but in gestation at least from the mid-1740s. The print 'Characters and Caricaturas', published in April 1743 (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 156), claimed, with reference to Fielding's preface to 'Joseph Andrews', that the figures in his paintings and engravings represented human character in its fullness, rather than the comic exaggeration of a single feature in caricature, now a fashionable pursuit among those who had travelled in Italy. The self-portrait painting 'The Painter and his Pug' (1745; Tate collection), engraved in 1749 as 'Gulielmus Hogarth' (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 181), attempts to create an air of paradox and mystery around Hogarth's increasingly complex ambitions. He presents himself with pugnacious directness, his own pug reinforcing his challenge to French elegance and artificiality. But the directness is undermined by the fact that the portrait is itself a painting within the painting. As a still life the canvas forms part of an allegory of Hogarth's own intellectual ancestry, for the portrait rests (in the painting not in the engraving where the books are not identified) on three books, by Shakespeare, Milton, and Swift. On the left-hand side the palette labelled 'The Line of Beauty and of Grace' has a curved line that is given physical substance by a shadow. According to the preface to 'The Analysis of Beauty' this line was there to excite curiosity: 'The bait soon took; and no Egyptian hierogliphic ever amused more than it did for a time, painters and sculptors came to me to know the meaning of it, being as much puzzled with it as other people, till it came to have some explanation. (p. x)' The explanation was finally given in 'The Analysis of Beauty', a volume of 153 pages, published in 1753, accompanied by two large engraved plates of illustrations (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', nos. 195-6), that Hogarth wrote with the help of Dr Morell and other friends. The book deliberately eschews the 'more beaten path of moral beauty' (p. iv), concerning itself with what the eye sees and how this can be reduced to methodical principles. It applies empirical study to issues that have been 'over-born by pompous terms of art' (p. 3), and is best understood as an investigation into what 'seem[s] most to 'please and entertain the eye'' (p. 12). It is a deliberate challenge to the idealism of academic theory, opposing nature against art as the true standard of beauty, present experience against antiquity, and variety against symmetry. Much of the criticism that the volume attracted, along with much admiration, centred on Hogarth's claim at the beginning that the 'Line of Beauty' was an underlying and invariable form that defined beauty, but it can be argued in his defence that it is essentially an exemplification of the qualities of visual beauty: fitness, variety, intricacy, and quantity. Though claiming philosophical and scientific authority, the volume none the less manages to retain, especially in the two plates of illustrations, the droll humour and unexpected observations of Hogarth's visual work. The 'Line of Beauty' is illustrated by the forms of chair legs, corsets, the figure of Antinous contrasted with a stiff-backed dancing-master, and, in its absence, in the inelegant dancers at a country ball. 
The quality of Hogarth's argument, recognized by Edmund Burke and others, did not prevent scurrilous attacks on 'The Analysis'. There was no organized campaign, but Hogarth and 'The Analysis' became the target of a series of eight little-known but brilliant and intricate caricatures by the young landscape painter Paul Sandby, produced between December 1753 and April 1754 (Bindman, 'Hogarth and his Times', nos. 103-9). Sandby's vehemence was focused on Hogarth's rejection of the idea of an artists' academy, the alleged pretentiousness and absurdity of 'The Analysis', and the artist's hubris in attempting the grand manner in such paintings as 'Paul before Felix'. Despite Hogarth's persistent attempts to dissociate his art from 'low' Dutch painting, Sandby makes claims of Hogarth's essential Dutchness, exemplified by the unfortunate subscription ticket for 'Paul before Felix', which appears, itself parodied, in more than one of the satires. Though a household name whose images were frequently cited approvingly by novelists and poets, Hogarth now found himself increasingly in a world in which satire was no longer a dominant literary form, yet he himself was frequently the object of satire. With the return of Joshua Reynolds from Italy in 1748 a new generation of artists was emerging who looked forward to an academy on continental lines, saw Italy as an English artist's true university, and England itself as artistically provincial, though few artists were without some admiration and gratitude for Hogarth's achievement. Reynolds's three articles in Samuel Johnson's 'The Idler' for the months of September to November 1759 reasserted 'the invariable, the great and general ideas which are fixed and inherent in universal nature' against 'a servile attention to minute exactness' (Reynolds, 'The Idler', 79, 20 Oct 1759). The latter phrase was hardly a fair account of Hogarth's style, but Reynolds was no more inclined than Sandby to absolve Hogarth from 'Dutchness'. 
If Hogarth's critical position was under threat in the later 1750s, his standing at court was consolidated by his appointment on 6 July 1757, shortly before the death of his brother-in-law John Thornhill, to the post of sergeant-painter to the king. Hogarth received this office through the favour of the lord chamberlain, the duke of Devonshire, whose portrait he had painted (see above), and it was worth about $200 per annum. He commemorated this event by an engraving, captioned 'Wm. Hogarth Serjeant Painter to his Majesty' (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 204), taken from a small painting (NPG). This shows him painting the comic muse on a canvas, a copy of 'The Analysis of Beauty' leaning casually against a leg of the easel. The apparent self-satisfaction of the portrait is belied by the X-ray of the painting, which has in the foreground a pug cocking his leg over a pile of framed old master paintings. Hogarth painted this out, but it is indicative of his sensitivity in the face of criticism. By the late 1750s he appeared to be associated with an older political and religious order; the governmental oligarchy rather than the emergent populism of the City, and latitudinarian bishops rather than the Methodist-inspired clergy, whom he satirized with ferocity in what is perhaps his most elaborate satire, 'Credulity, Superstition, and Fanaticism', published in April 1762 (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 210 2), a reworking of 'Enthusiasm Delineated' of 'c'.1760 (ibid., no. 210 1), known in only two impressions (BM and Achenbach Foundation, San Francisco). 
Hogarth's last years from the late 1750s until his death in 1764 were dominated by a series of self-generated mishaps, followed by painful self-justification, in which he rehearsed his sense of frustration at the ascendancy of his opponents. Yet his increasing paranoia did not affect adversely the quality of imagination and execution in his paintings. Perhaps the defining incident of his last years was the affair of the paintings of 'The Lady's Last Stake' (Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo) and 'Sigismunda Mourning over the Heart of Guiscardo' (Tate collection). James Caulfeild, first earl of Charlemont, commissioned from him in 1758-9 a painting in the comic history mode, the subject being, in Hogarth's words, 'a virtuous married lady that had lost all at cards to a young officer, wavering at his suit whether she should part with her Honr. or no to regain the Loss which was offerd to her' (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 219). The painting shows the officer's moment of triumph, but leaves her choice unresolved, though she appears to lean slightly in the direction of the eager young officer. It is painted with all the solidity and warmth of colouring of Hogarth's late manner, and its sophisticated wit understandably delighted its patron. Charlemont then showed it proudly to Sir Richard Grosvenor, who asked Hogarth for a similar work. Hogarth, though reluctant, agreed because Grosvenor being 'infinitely Rich Prest me with more vehimence to do what subject I would, upon the same terms much against my inclination' (ibid., 220). However, Hogarth perversely produced not a comic but a tragic history painting, 'Sigismunda Mourning over the Heart of Guiscardo', based upon a story in Boccaccio, translated by Dryden, of a king's daughter who falls in love with a family retainer. The king showed his disapproval by having the retainer killed and his heart sent to his daughter, who is seen in the painting holding the object in a goblet. The subject referred to a painting, then attributed to Correggio but now to Francesco Furini (Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery), that had sold at the Sir Luke Schaub sale on 26 April 1758, for what Hogarth believed to be an absurdly high price of $404. 'Sigismunda' was rejected by Grosvenor, and the picture, partly because of Hogarth's fierce defensiveness, was subjected to much ridicule at the time. Horace Walpole described it as 'a maudlin whore tearing off the trinkets that her keeper had given her, to fling at his head' (Paulson, 'Hogarth', 3.325). It remained notorious long after Hogarth's death, but, despite elements of bathos and the unfortunate presence of the heart, it is a serious attempt to stimulate the spectator's empathetic response; the artist claimed that on seeing it 'Peoples heart[s] were as easily touchd as I have seen them at a Tragedy' (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 220). 
For Hogarth 'the anxiety... which attended this affair coming at a time when perhaps nature rather wants a more quiet life... brought on an Illness which continued a year' (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 220-21). Horace Walpole visited the artist in his studio in May 1761 and finding him 'too wild', cast doubts on his sanity. Hogarth was particularly worried that Walpole, working on 'Anecdotes of Painting in England', might 'say anything against' Sir James Thornhill. Hogarth revealed to Walpole that he was working on a book himself, which he describes as 'a critical work... an apology for painters', intended as 'a Supplement to my Analysis' (Paulson, 'Hogarth', 3.326). The text of the 'apology for painters' has been pieced together from Hogarth's manuscripts in the British Library (Kitson), but it was in a far from publishable state when Hogarth left it. Among other things it states the case against the idea of an academy, on the grounds that it would inevitably base its teaching on sterile copying. The neglect of contemporary artists is now blamed more on trading interests than aristocratic connoisseurs, but he continues to assert the authority of the artist over the amateur as a judge of art. 
The opposition to trading interests was probably connected with Hogarth's association with the Society of Artists, in opposition to the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce (the Society of Arts), which hosted art exhibitions in April 1760 and 1761. The latter exhibition was followed by the Society of Artists exhibition on 9 May, the catalogue of which was adorned by two designs by Hogarth, engraved by Grignion (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', nos. 236-7). One shows a monkey dressed as a connoisseur watering the stumps of dead trees, signifying the old masters; the other shows healthy plants watered by Britannia from a fountain presided over by the new king, George III. Hogarth's vigorous defence of English art had brought him allies as well as opponents, and he could count on the support at this time of the actor David Garrick, the playwright George Colman, and the journalist Bonnell Thornton. Thornton's efforts in particular, and his interest in popular culture as a distinctive manifestation of English culture, led to the opening on 22 April 1762 of the Sign Painters' Exhibition, partly 'designed as a ridicule on the Exhibitions of the Society for the Encouragement of the Arts, &c. and of other Artists' (Paulson, 'Hogarth', 3.353). Hogarth was assumed by satirists to have been a prime mover, and many works in the exhibition make specific reference to motifs in his prints, but it is not certain that he was directly involved, or that any of his own work was exhibited. 
Hogarth, unlike many of his peers, was unmoved by the 'new politics' of William Pitt and later of John Wilkes, which were expansionist, warlike, populist, and anti-court. Instead he drew closer to the court and to the king's unpopular adviser, the earl of Bute, even making an unexpected return to party political satire by issuing ''The Times', pl. I' (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 211) in September 1762, followed by ''The Times', pl. 2', which was not issued in Hogarth's lifetime (ibid., no. 212). Hogarth had made a number of overtly political satires in the 1720s, but he seems pointedly to avoid them in the next decade, refusing, for example, to produce a 'Robin's progress' to satirize Sir Robert Walpole. There are undeniable political and national allusions in 'The March to Finchley' and the 'Election' series, but ''The Times', pl. I' adopts specific party positions and alludes to immediate events and personalities. Hogarth claimed that he made the print to 'stop a gap in my income this produce[d] the Print call the Times the subject of which tended to Peace and unanimity and so put the opposers of this humane purpose in a light which gave offence to the Fomenters of distruction in the minds of the people. (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 221)' It was an answer to an anonymous print, 'John Bull's House Sett in Flames' (impression in the British Museum), and it shows Pitt fanning the flames of the war, and the government trying to put out the fire. Pitt is shown as a figure on stilts with bellows, in the first two states as Henry VIII, adored by the aldermen and mob of the City of London. Revealing his political colours in that way was extremely rash; it led to a breach with John Wilkes, who had been a friend, as well as with the poet Charles Churchill. Wilkes had established the anti-government periodical, the ironically titled 'North Briton', with the particular intention of targeting Bute. On hearing of Hogarth's intention to publish ''The Times', pl. I', he remonstrated unsuccessfully with the artist, whose allegiance to the court evidently surprised him. 
Taking on Wilkes and Churchill was bound to invite retaliation, and David Garrick pleaded with Churchill not to reply for fear of Hogarth's fragile state of mind (Paulson, 'Hogarth', 3.384). Wilkes's retaliation took the form of a long essay, published on 25 December 1762, which took up the whole of no. 17 of the 'North Briton'. It was a devastating attack, all the more effective for its cool tone and pretended air of solicitude. It makes the point, by then commonplace, that Hogarth's gifts were only in treating of vice, or what Wilkes calls 'gibbeting in colours', because he is incapable of depicting virtue. Wilkes sneers at his vanity, and his acceptance of a place at court, dwelling at length on the pretentiousness of 'Sigismunda' and his dismissal of the old masters. Hogarth is above all self-centred and greedy: 'Gain and vanity have steered his light bark quite thro' life. He has never been consistent, but to those two principles.' He has behaved disgracefully to his fellow artists, claiming that 'There is at this hour scarcely a single man of any degree of merit in his own profession, with whom he does not hold a professed enmity.' Hogarth was by now seriously ill, indeed widely believed to be dying, and his account of the affair in his 'Autobiographical notes', written shortly afterwards, could not be more poignant: 'being at that time at my worst in a kind of slow feaver, it could not but hurt... a feeling mind' (p. 221). However, he recovered sufficiently to take revenge. After Wilkes published no. 45 of the 'North Briton' in April 1763, he was arrested for attacking the king's speech. Hogarth went to Westminster Hall and drew him during the hearing that culminated in acquittal; in Wilkes's words 'the painter was wholly employed in 'caricaturing' the 'person' of the man, while all the rest of his fellow citizens were animated in his cause' (Paulson, 'Hogarth', 3.395). Hogarth's drawing, indented for transfer to the plate, still survives (BM), and the etching he made from it (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 214) is a masterpiece of restrained caricature, 'as like as I could as to feature at the same time some indication of his mind' (Hogarth, 'Autobiographical notes', 221), suggesting by slight exaggeration Wilkes's leering cynicism. It is also deliberately paired with Hogarth's portrait etching of Lord Lovat, the Jacobite beheaded for treason in 1747 (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 166). 
Hogarth's quarrel with Wilkes provoked a flood of hostile caricatures playing on the painter's supposed closeness to the earl of Bute (Bindman, 'Hogarth and his Times', nos. 119-21). A further blow was the publication at the end of June 1763 of Charles Churchill's 'Epistle to William Hogarth', though it had nothing like the effect on the artist of Wilkes's attack, and its description of Hogarth's decrepitude excited more sympathy than contempt. Hogarth responded to it by producing a satire of Churchill as a bear, published in August 1763 (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 215), captioned 'The Bruiser, C. Churchill (once the Rev.d!) In the Character of a Modern Hercules, Regaling himself after having Kill'd the Monster Caricatura that so Sorely Gall'd his Virtuos friend the Heaven born Wilkes'. Hogarth made the print by rubbing down the portrait image of the self-portrait plate of 1748, 'Gulielmus Hogarth' (see above), a literal self-effacement that anticipates the alterations he made in 1764 to the other self-portrait print of 1758, 'Wm. Hogarth Serjeant Painter to his Majesty'. He removed the title, replacing it with 'William Hogarth, 1764', and altered the face, replacing the smile with a grave expression. 
Hogarth's last print, 'The bathos, or, Manner of sinking in sublime paintings, inscribed to the dealers in dark pictures' (Paulson, 'Graphic Works', no. 216), designed to 'serve as a Tail-Piece to all the Author's Engraved Works', is a bleak and apocalyptic summation of his sense of personal failure and the failure of human aspirations. In a parody of the language of elevated paintings and grandiose church monuments, an expiring Father Time lies among broken symbols of nature, church, and state, every element referring, often punningly, to the end of all things. A collapsing inn sign for the World's End is adorned with the world in flames, and even Apollo in his chariot falls from the sky. Hogarth's principal concern in his last months was to refresh his copperplates, to bolster his posthumous reputation and produce a continuing income for his widow, and he continued to work on his autobiography. He died in his house in Leicester Fields, during the night of 25-6 October 1764, and was buried in Chiswick churchyard on 2 November. According to Horace Walpole he died of 'a dropsy of his breast' (Walpole, 4.80), but Nichols claimed in later editions of 'Biographical Anecdotes' that he died of 'an aneurism' (Paulson, 'Hogarth', 3.532). He left his copperplates and properties to his widow, Jane, and she made her living by reprinting from them until her own death in 1789. 
Hogarth has often been described as the father of British painting, but he was not the first English-born painter of note; William Dobson and his own father-in-law, Sir James Thornhill, could also claim that honour. But his impact on his own time and upon subsequent generations has been overwhelming. His 'modern moral subjects', especially 'A Rake's Progress', have seen numerous adaptations over the last two centuries, in the form of plays, operas, novels, and painted and printed series. He has been frequently celebrated, rightly or wrongly, as archetypally English in the literariness of his imagination, and the coarseness and directness of his imagery. His paintings have been, since the early nineteenth century, among the most admired of the British school, but his wider fame before recent times was based on the ubiquity of his engravings, usually in late printings and other debased forms. Even so, from his own lifetime his reputation was international. He was an important figure in later eighteenth-century Germany, largely through the brilliant commentaries on the prints by Georg Christoph Lichtenberg (1742-1799), which first appeared between 1784 and 1796 in the 'Gottinger Taschenkalender'. It is noteworthy that 'The Analysis of Beauty' appeared in two German editions in 1754: in Hanover, published by J. W. Schmidt, and in Berlin and Potsdam, published by C. F. Voss; an Italian edition was published in Leghorn in 1761, and a French edition was published in Paris in 1805. 
Hogarth was a posthumous victim, even in his wife's lifetime, of what Edmond Malone called in 1781 'Hogarthomania', the fanatical desire to collect rare impressions and states of his prints (Bindman, 'Hogarth and his Times', 58). This was stimulated by the publication of Walpole's 'Anecdotes of Painting in England' and John Nichols's 'Biographical Anecdotes of William Hogarth', also in 1781. Several collectors, most notably George Steevens, sought complete collections in the best impressions, and competed furiously against other collectors for rarities (Steevens's collection is in the Lewis Walpole Library, Farmington, Connecticut). The result was to add a large number of dubious prints to Hogarth's 'oeuvre', especially juvenilia, and Samuel Ireland, though he bought a number of genuine works from Mrs Hogarth, had a great many doubtful works and some outright forgeries. The other early collection to remain intact is the Royal Collection started by George III, with many rarities added by George IV. Meanwhile the copperplates inherited by Mrs Hogarth continued to be printed off on demand, and were then bought after her death by John and Josiah Boydell and printed in an edition of 103 plates. In 1818 they were acquired by Baldwin, Cradock, and Joy, and restored by James Heath; in 1835 they passed to Henry G. Bohn, in 1864 to Chatto and Windus, and some time later to Bernard Quaritch. They were printed from almost incessantly until the end of the nineteenth century, and those that have survived are completely worn out. 
Many commentators on Hogarth's work from his own time to the present, including Horace Walpole, Charles Lamb, and William Hazlitt, all of whom wrote extended accounts of Hogarth's engravings, have remarked upon their contradictory nature; pathos coexists with ribald humour and subtlety with coarseness. In the years after his death two barely reconcilable versions of Hogarth emerged, championed by opposing parties. For Horace Walpole, in the fourth volume of 'Anecdotes of Painting in England', printed privately in 1771 and published in October 1780, Hogarth was a highly sophisticated practitioner of social comedy like Moliere, catching 'the manners and follies of an age 'living as they rise'' (p. 357); for John Ireland, in 'Hogarth Illustrated' (1785), on the other hand, he is an outsider, a countryman in touch with his north country background, 'the pupil, -- the disciple, -- the worshipper of nature!' appalled at the corruptions of the 'town' (1884 edn, 53). Hazlitt countered this view by pointing out: 'I know no one who had a less pastoral imagination than Hogarth. He delights in the thick of St Giles's or St James's. His pictures breathe a certain close, greasy, tavern air' (W. Hazlitt, 'Lectures on the English Comic Writers', 3rd edn, 1841, 292). Though both versions of Hogarth have had passionate supporters, the notion of Hogarth as an unsophisticated man of the people, implacably opposed to those in power, has tended to remain alive, though there is little basis for it in his life. It can be seen in George Augustus Sala's 'William Hogarth: Painter, Engraver, and Philosopher' (1866), where his rural ancestry as 'descendent of a long line of north country yeomen' with 'Saxon' forebears, made him a 'healthy' example to modern urban youth. Marxist authors, like Francis David Klingender in 'Hogarth and English Caricature' (1944), have seen him as part of a popular stream, alienated from power, while Frederick Antal in 'Hogarth and his Place in European Art' (1962) identified him plausibly as a member of the progressive bourgeoisie of his time. 
For subsequent artists Hogarth has been the touchstone for a morally inflected realist art, an art of social utility. Wherever such art has emerged in strength, in the Victorian period, in the aftermath of the First World War, in the United States in the 1930s, and in recent years in the aftermath of modernism, Hogarth has always been strongly invoked. Yet even self-proclaimed modernists have found merit in Hogarth's vigorous independence and apparent alienation from conventional society. Perhaps his greatest single contribution has been through the idea of the 'Progress' as a narrative life-history in a series of satirical episodes, allowing for pathos, indignation, and wit. Of the many artists who have made explicitly Hogarthian series the following may be noted: in the eighteenth century, Thomas Rowlandson, James Gillray, John Collet, James Northcote, and Daniel Chodowiecki; in the nineteenth century, Johann Heinrich Ramberg, George Cruikshank, Augustus Egg, and William Powell Frith; in the twentieth century, Otto Dix, George Grosz, Peter Howson, Jorg Immendorf, David Low, and Ronald Searle. The two best-known twentieth-century interpretations are associated with the painter David Hockney ('b'. 1937): the series of sixteen etchings (1961-3) entitled 'A Rake's Progress' (Bindman, 'Hogarth and his Times', no. 1), in which the story of the rake is used as a frame for a narrative of the artist's first visit to New York, and the opera by Igor Stravinsky, with libretto by W. H. Auden and Chester Kallman, 'The Rake's Progress' of 1951, for which Hockney designed sets for Glyndebourne in 1975, using Hogarth's designs and a cross-hatching technique based on his engravings. There will be many more Hogarthian progresses in the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 13465


Hogarth, William (1786-1866), vicar apostolic of the northern district and Roman Catholic bishop of Hexham and Newcastle, was born on 25 March 1786 at Dodding Green, near Kendal, Westmorland, where his family had retained their faith and their lands through penal times. William and his elder brother Robert (1785-1868) were educated from 1796 as church students at Crook Hall, co. Durham, where students from the English secular college at Douai had settled in 1794 and which was removed to Ushaw in 1808. They both survived an outbreak of typhus at the college in the winter of 1808-9 (during which five fellow students died) and were among the first to be ordained priests at Ushaw -- Robert in March 1809 and William in the following December. 
Robert was engaged in pastoral work for most of his life but William remained at Ushaw as professor, prefect-general, and procurator from 1811 to 1816, during which time Charles Newsham and Nicholas Wiseman were among his pupils. In 1816 he was appointed chaplain to the Lawson family at Cliffe Hall, and when the Cliffe and Darlington missions were united in 1824 he transferred to Darlington, where he passed the rest of his life. From 1838 he was vicar general successively to bishops Briggs, Mostyn, and Riddell, vicars apostolic of the northern district. In 1848 he succeeded Riddell as vicar apostolic and was consecrated bishop of Samosata 'in partibus infidelium' at Ushaw on 24 August. When the hierarchy was restored by Pius IX, he was translated, on 29 September 1850, to the new see of Hexham, renamed Hexham and Newcastle in 1861. 
Throughout his life Hogarth retained a close interest in the affairs of Ushaw College. He supported his friend Charles Newsham, fifth president, in his plans for its major expansion between 1848 and 1858 and advocated its independence from episcopal control. He was older than most of his episcopal colleagues and, while not aloof from ecclesiastical politics, he preferred to concentrate his energies on promoting the interests of his diocese, rather in the spirit of the former vicars apostolic. It is said that every church or chapel was either built or enlarged under his management. He was well respected by his fellow bishops, and was a friend and confidant of Nicholas Wiseman. Although somewhat rough in manner, he was well known for his personal kindness, and he generously supported all good causes in Darlington, irrespective of religious denomination. He built St Augustine's Church in 1827 and was popular with his own congregation, which he increased from 200 in 1824 to 3000 in 1866. He was, above all, an energetic and capable administrator who established his new diocese on a sound footing. He died at Darlington on 29 January 1866, aged seventy-nine years, and was buried at Ushaw College. 


@@@@@


doc= 13466


Hogenberg, Frans (c.1540-c.1590), engraver, and his brother 
Frans Hogenberg may have trained as an engraver in Mechelen but was from the 1550s in Antwerp, where he worked with Abraham Ortelius. It has been suggested that he moved to England from Antwerp. Such suggestions rest on his engraved portraits of William Cecil, Robert Dudley, and Elizabeth (all published in Matthew Parker's 'Bishops' Bible' of 1568) and on his engraving of two views of London. By 1570, however, he is known to have been in Cologne. 
Hogenberg is best-known for his close involvement in two of the most important cartographic enterprises of his day. The first was 'Theatrum orbis terrarum', compiled by Abraham Ortelius and first printed in Antwerp in 1570. This is considered the first atlas -- that is the first collection of maps which aimed uniformly and systematically to depict the world. Its fifty-three maps were engraved by Hogenberg with the assistance of Johannes van Doetecum and later of Ambrosius and Ferdinand Arsenius. Hogenberg may also have engraved the title-page. Ortelius was a friend and travelling companion as well as a collaborator, and he took a keen interest in Hogenberg's later work on the 'Civitates orbis terrarum'. This latter work was edited by Georg Braun and largely engraved by Hogenberg, being published in six volumes between 1572 and 1617 in Cologne. Hogenberg may indeed have initiated the project, which Braun referred to as 'Master Frans's Book of Cities' (Elliot, 26), and he was certainly responsible for engraving the majority of its 546 prospects, bird's-eye views, and map views of cities throughout the world and for shaping its content -- for example by including place names in native tongues rather than Latin alone, to increase the work's popular appeal. 
Hogenberg died in Cologne about 1590, and was survived by his two sons. 
Remigius Hogenberg is less well known than his brother but had stronger ties to Britain. His first known work is his large view of the city of Munster in Westphalia (1570, now in the British Library), after a drawing by Hermann tom Ring, Munster's most distinguished sixteenth-century artist. He moved to England and by 1573 was in the service of the archbishop of Canterbury, Matthew Parker, and was living in Lambeth Palace. For Parker, Hogenberg and another artist and engraver, Richard Lyne, constructed genealogies. Hogenberg also engraved portraits. Between 1575 and 1578 he engraved several county maps and the famous title-page showing Elizabeth as patron of geography and astronomy for Christopher Saxton's 'Atlas of England and Wales' (1579). The last view on which his name appears is the bird's-eye view of Exeter of 1587 (BL, maps C5.a.3), surveyed by John Hooker, chamberlain of the city of Exeter, which was copied by John Speed for his 'Theatre of the Empire of Great Britain' (1611-12). Hogenberg painted and engraved portraits of several French sitters, and this has led to suggestions that he may have visited that country, but he was probably in England about 1588 when he died, probably unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 13467


Remigius Hogenberg (c.1536-c.1588), also an engraver, were born in Mechelen, just south of Antwerp, the sons of Nicolas Hogenberg (also Nikolaus, and sometimes called Hans, Johann, or Johannes in apparent confusion with his nephew of that name; 'b'. 'c'.1500, died in or before 1539), an engraver, etcher, and woodcutter who was probably born in Germany but worked for most of his life in the Netherlands. The two brothers, their father, and Frans's sons Abraham and Johannes formed a notable Netherlandish family of artists who moved between Germany, France, England, and the Netherlands and, though not among the first artists and engravers of their day, were industrious, capable, and adaptable. 


@@@@@


doc= 13468


Hogg, Henry (bap. 1831, d. 1874), poet, was baptized on 6 November 1831 in Radford, Nottingham, the son of Joseph Hogg, who was in the hosiery trade, and his wife, Elizabeth. Hogg was raised and educated in Nottingham, and practised as a solicitor there. In addition to his legal work, however, he also composed much poetry; his first poem, 'Mournful Recollections', was in blank verse, and appeared in 1849. In 1852 he published a collection of poetry, described by a contemporary critic as 'an unpretending... volume of poems... inheriting many of the blemishes, as well as beauties, of his model Tennyson' (Wylie, 247). Hogg also contributed a number of short poems to the 'Christian Miscellany', and wrote hymns and carols, which were popular in the district; he himself set some of them to music. A later volume of poems was issued, but was subsequently withdrawn from publication. Hogg died of lung disease on 19 June 1874 at his Elm Avenue home in Nottingham. He was survived by his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Anderson, and at least one son, Joseph T. Hogg, who was present at his father's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 13469


Hogg, Jabez (1817-1899), ophthalmic surgeon, the youngest son of John Hogg and Martha, his wife, was born on 4 April 1817 at Chatham, where his father was employed in the royal dockyard. He was educated at Rochester grammar school, and in 1832 was apprenticed for five years to a medical practitioner. On 25 August 1841 he married Mary Ann, a daughter of Captain Robert Davis of the Indian navy. After her death he married Jessie Terraneau, youngest daughter of Captain James Read, of the Indian army on 16 June 1859; she survived him. 
In 1843 Hogg published 'A Manual of Photography', which brought him to the notice of the proprietors of the 'Illustrated London News'. He joined the staff of this periodical, and from 1850 to 1866 he acted as editor of a series of illustrated educational works published by Herbert Ingram. In 1846 he was sub-editor of the 'Illuminated Magazine', to which the illustrators Hablot Knight Browne and John Leech contributed, and he edited the 'Illustrated London Almanack' from 1845 to 1895. 
Hogg entered as a student in London at the Great Windmill Street school of medicine and at Charing Cross Hospital in 1845, though he was not admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons until 1850. From 1855 he was the personal assistant to George James Guthrie, founder of the Royal Westminster Ophthalmic Hospital, and he was appointed surgeon there from 1871 to 1877. He was also ophthalmic surgeon to the Hospital for Women and Children, Waterloo Bridge Road, London, and to the masonic charities. 
Hogg devoted himself to the study of diseases of the eye, and he soon became proficient in the use of the ophthalmoscope, then newly introduced. He was a vice-president of the Medical Society of London in 1851-2, and he was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1866. He served as honorary secretary of the Royal Microscopical Society from 1867 to 1872, and retired in order to become president of the new Medical Microscopical Society, inaugurated in January 1873. He was a prominent freemason, in both the craft and arch degrees. Hogg died at his home, 102 Palace Gardens Terrace, Kensington, London, on 23 April 1899, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Hogg was an extremely prolific writer; besides works on ophthalmology he authored treatises on the microscope, the elements of physics, and pathology. His book in 1858 on the ophthalmoscope, the first in English, was, however, mediocre. The third edition of 1863 was devastatingly criticized as loaded with dedications to excessively illustrious personages, and 'so utterly and unutterably bad... from beginning to end such an incoherent mass of errors and mis-statements about every subject with which it deals' ('Ophthalmic Review', 1, 1865, 96-109). Hogg's own comments at this time admit to his uncertainty about the difference between direct and indirect ophthalmoscopy. 


@@@@@


doc= 13470


Hogg, James (bap. 1770, d. 1835), poet and novelist, was the second among the four children of Robert Hogg ('c'.1729-1820), shepherd and farmer, and Margaret Laidlaw (1730-1813). He was born in Selkirkshire at the farm of Ettrick Hall (also known as Ettrickhill). The farm lay in the valley of the River Ettrick, at the heart of Ettrick Forest, one of the ancient Scottish royal hunting grounds. By Hogg's time, however, the Scottish court had long since departed to London and the royal forest had dwindled to a remote, backward sheep-farming district. Nevertheless Ettrick remained a rich storehouse of oral tradition in story and song, and Hogg's mother's family were noted tradition-bearers. 
For much of his life Hogg believed that he was born on 25 January 1772. He took great pride in sharing the birthday of Robert Burns; indeed there is much evidence that he saw his life's work in terms of being Burns's successor. However, the parish register of Ettrick records Hogg's baptism at Ettrick church on 9 December 1770, a fact that he discovered with disappointment during his later years. 
In his 'Memoir of the Author's Life' Hogg gives an account of his childhood and family background. His father 'was bred to the occupation of a shepherd' but by the time of his marriage in May 1765 he had saved enough money to take the lease of the farms at Ettrick House and Ettrick Hall. He began to deal in sheep, buying large numbers and driving them to English and Scottish markets. However: 'owing to a great fall in the price of sheep, and the absconding of his principal debtor, he was ruined, became bankrupt, every thing was sold by auction, and my parents were turned out of doors without a farthing in the world.' Hogg was six at the time, and the 'distressed and destitute condition' of his parents remained vivid in his memory. The 'late worthy Mr. Brydon, of Crosslee', came to the family's rescue, temporarily at least, when he took 'a short lease of the farm of Ettrick House' and employed Robert Hogg as his shepherd there ('Memoir of the Author's Life', 4-5). A monument dating from 1898 now marks the site of Hogg's birthplace at Ettrick Hall. 
Robert Hogg's bankruptcy cut short the formal schooling of his children, and the young James for the remainder of his childhood had to earn his keep by doing menial work (herding cows and the like) on various local farms. The 'Memoir of the Author's Life' gives a brief and understated account of the hardships involved. Being 'exceedingly bare of shirts' Hogg after a time gave up 'wearing them altogether'. He recalled that he 'certainly made a very grotesque figure', particularly as he 'could never induce my trews, or lower vestments, to keep up to their proper sphere, there being no braces in those days' ('Memoir of the Author's Life', 7). At fourteen he bought a violin with money he had saved from his wages. In the evenings, after work, he would spend 'an hour or two... sawing over my favourite old Scottish tunes' (ibid.). When he reached his late teens he graduated to the responsible work of shepherding; this increase in his status ensured that he had the time to begin to master once again the long-neglected skill of reading. 
In 1790 Hogg found work as a shepherd at Blackhouse Farm in the Yarrow valley in Ettrick Forest. He remained there for ten years, during which time he began a lifelong friendship with his employer's son William Laidlaw (later the manager of Sir Walter Scott's Abbotsford estate). At Blackhouse, Hogg had free access to a wide selection of books, and he read voraciously. He also began to write poems, plays, and songs. These found a ready audience in Ettrick, earning him the local nickname Jamie the Poeter. Hogg became a published writer in 1794, when 'The Mistakes of a Night', a vigorous, hilarious, and uninhibited poem of rural courtship, appeared in the October number of the 'Scots Magazine'. 
The happy years at Blackhouse came to an end in 1800, when, following his brother's marriage, Hogg moved to Ettrick House to assist his father, who was now just over seventy. About the beginning of the nineteenth century sheep-farming was expanding rapidly in the Scottish highlands in the wake of the clearances. With a view to turning his sheep-farming skills to good account Hogg gave serious consideration to moving to the highlands with his elderly parents, and about this time he made a series of summer journeys to the area. In 1804 he made arrangements for a move to Harris, to take over a large sheep farm. His plans reached an advanced stage but did not come to fruition, and involved him in considerable financial loss. However, Hogg published accounts of his various highland journeys of the early 1800s, and he retained a lively and well-informed interest in highland culture throughout the remainder of his life. 
Hogg's first book, 'Scottish Pastorals' (a short collection of poems), was published in Edinburgh in 1801 but attracted little attention. Nevertheless from this time onwards Hogg regularly had material accepted for publication in magazines. Through William Laidlaw he was also helping to provide assistance in collecting traditional ballads for the third volume of Walter Scott's 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border' (1803), and in 1802 Laidlaw was instrumental in setting up a meeting in Ettrick between Hogg and Scott. A friendship developed that was to last until Scott's death in 1832. 
After the failure of the projected move to Harris in 1804, Hogg obtained work as a shepherd in Dumfriesshire, in south-west Scotland, an area in which Burns had spent the final years of his life. Indeed, while living in Dumfriesshire, Hogg made the acquaintance of Jean Armour, Burns's widow. With Scott's encouragement two books by Hogg appeared in 1807. One was 'The Mountain Bard', a collection of poems in the manner of the ballads of 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border', and the other was 'The Shepherd's Guide: being a Practical Treatise on the Diseases of Sheep'. Both were well received, and Hogg used the substantial proceeds to set himself up as a sheep-farmer in Dumfriesshire. 
Hogg's letters indicate that he fathered at least one illegitimate child at this stage in his life. His Dumfriesshire years were spent in an area that had been part of the heartland of the covenanters in the religious wars of the seventeenth century, and as a result Dumfriesshire scenes often surface in his stories of the covenanters and of the supernatural. This period of his life produced lasting friendships, for example, with the poet Allan Cunningham, but his Dumfriesshire farming ventures did not prosper. Bankruptcy followed, and in 1810 he set out for Edinburgh in an attempt to establish himself as a professional writer. He was by then forty years old. 
Having arrived in Edinburgh with no writings to hand but some of his old songs, Hogg duly prepared 'The Forest Minstrel' (a collection of songs) for publication. This book appeared in 1810, but sold badly. The aspiring professional writer found that while periodicals were perfectly willing to publish his writings payment was sparse. Profits seemed to go to the proprietors of the periodicals rather than the authors, so Hogg took the bold but logical step of setting up his own weekly paper. Named 'The Spy', it was produced on a shoestring and was largely written by Hogg himself. A variety of material, including essays, prose fiction, and poetry, was published during its run, from 1 September 1810 to 24 August 1811. 'The Spy' foundered, however, because of a perception among its readers that it lacked what was called 'delicacy'; that is to say it did not exhibit enough discretion and restraint in dealing with subjects such as extra-marital sex. 

'The Spy' nevertheless had various supporters, including James Gray of the Edinburgh high school, with whom Hogg shared Dumfriesshire links. Through Gray, Hogg established contacts with radical whig political circles in Edinburgh. In the early 1810s he also became actively involved in 'the Forum', a public debating club that attracted large paying audiences, often several hundred strong; indeed, Hogg for a time received a small salary as secretary of the Forum. He also got to know Dr Andrew Duncan, who was active at this period in improving the treatment of the mentally ill in Edinburgh. Shocked by conditions in Edinburgh's city bedlam, after the death of his patient the poet Robert Fergusson in 1774, Duncan managed to ensure that it was replaced by a new Edinburgh lunatic asylum, which opened in 1813. From the 1810s onwards penetrating studies of madness begin to feature in Hogg's writings, and it seems likely that his friendship with Duncan helped to deepen his insights into such matters. 

'The Forest Minstrel', 'The Spy', and the Forum were not enough to sustain Hogg financially in his early Edinburgh years; his situation would have been dire indeed had it not been for the financial assistance of John Grieve, an old Ettrick friend who was now a prosperous hatter in Edinburgh. Hogg's situation changed radically for the better, however, with the publication in January 1813 of 'The Queen's Wake'. This book-length narrative poem tells of the return of Mary, queen of Scots, to Scotland after her long sojourn in France. To welcome the young queen a poetic competition -- described by Hogg as a 'wake' -- is held at Holyrood Palace among the minstrels of Scotland. The poem tells the story of this event, interspersed with the songs sung by the minstrels. 'The Queen's Wake' was immediately recognized as a major achievement, with spice added by the circumstances of Hogg's background and upbringing. Indeed, George Goldie, the publisher of the poem, assured readers in the second edition (1813) that the work was 'really and truly the production of 'James Hogg', a common shepherd, bred among the mountains of Ettrick Forest, who went to service when only seven years of age; and since that period has never received any education whatever' (p. vi). 
Hogg's reputation as one of the leading poets of his generation was now established. As a rival of Scott and Byron among the fashionable poets of the 1810s he produced a formidable output in the years following the publication of 'The Queen's Wake'. The third edition of that poem (1814) contains important revisions and was followed in 1815 by 'Pilgrims of the Sun', dedicated to Byron. Two new volumes followed in 1816: 'Mador of the Moor', which echoes and interrogates Scott's 'Lady of the Lake'; and 'The Poetic Mirror', a volume of Hogg's brilliant and well-received poetic parodies (of Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron, Scott, Hogg, and others). 'Dramatic Tales', a two-volume collection that reflects Hogg's long-standing interest in the theatre, followed in 1817. His status was confirmed with the publication by Archibald Constable in 1822 of his four-volume 'Poetical Works'. 
Hogg's new-found fame was accompanied by other improvements in his fortunes. For example, in 1815 the duke of Buccleuch gave him the farm of Altrive Lake, in Yarrow, rent-free, for life. This provided Hogg with a much-valued base in his native Ettrick Forest, and for the remainder of his life he divided his time between Ettrick and Edinburgh. Likewise his new acceptance as an established literary figure helped him to play a significant part in the founding of 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' in 1817. The new magazine's fortunes were secured by the publication of the notorious 'Chaldee manuscript' in the number for October 1817. This satirical article was drafted by Hogg and revised and expanded by John Wilson and John Gibson Lockhart. Hogg already had contacts with tory circles through his friendship with Scott, and from 1817 onwards the tory group of writers associated with 'Blackwood's' were to play an important part in his life. Hogg's dealings with the tory wits were never comfortable or easy (although he shared their interest in the traditions and customs of the old Scottish peasantry). Nevertheless 'Blackwood's' was liberal in its payment of authors, and Hogg's frequent contributions to its pages provided him with a useful source of income. 
Hogg's poems of 1815-17 did not emulate the great popular success of 'The Queen's Wake'. As people got used to the idea that 'a common shepherd' could 'really and truly' be the author of first-rate poems the delightful sense of novelty began to wear off. Furthermore Hogg's middle-class audience began to feel increasingly uncomfortable about a subversive strand discernible in the writings of this uncouth farmworker. Hogg, like Burns before him, really believed that: '
The rank is but the guinea's stamp, 

The Man's the gowd for a' that 
(R. Burns, 'For a' that and a' that')' and his middle-class audience came to have reservations about the way in which this uppity peasant demanded that his social superiors treat him as an equal. Hogg's raw talent was recognized, but increasingly his talent was felt to be deeply flawed by vanity, by lack of discretion, by 'indelicacy', and by a lack of knowledge of cultivated society and cultivated manners. In short for many middle-class readers of the late 1810s and the 1820s the fellow simply did not know his place, and showed himself to be incapable of properly recognizing and paying due deference to the many virtues of his social superiors. For example, the heroine of Hogg's 'Mador of the Moor' is a peasant girl. This was bad enough, but she becomes pregnant out of wedlock, which was worse; worst of all she is not only presented as a character worthy of the reader's admiring sympathy but she eventually marries her seducer, who turns out to be no less a person than the king of Scots. Middle-class readers of the late 1810s could and did recognize that 'Mador of the Moor' is a highly readable and skilfully written poem but many of them found it hard to accept a story that was willing to take seriously and reward a peasant girl who indulges in pre-marital sex. 
At all events the comparative lack of success of the poems that followed 'The Queen's Wake' seems to have generated, about 1817, something of a crisis in Hogg's self-confidence. In that year he abandoned an epic poem, 'Queen Hynde', of which he had already written more than two books, and for the next few years his creative energy was mainly directed towards the writing of prose fiction. 
Hogg had already published prose fiction in 'The Spy', and from the early 1810s he had planned a collection of 'rural and traditionary tales' of the kind told round the cottage fire during the long dark evenings of a Scottish winter. His first book of prose fiction, however, was 'The Brownie of Bodsbeck and other Tales' (2 vols., 1818), which consists of three tales by Hogg, each dealing with Ettrick society at a different stage of its development. Thus 'The Hunt of Eildon' is a tale of the supernatural set in the time when Ettrick was a royal hunting forest; 'The Brownie of Bodsbeck' focuses on the experiences of the people of Ettrick during the terrible civil wars of the late seventeenth century; and 'The Wool-Gatherer' is a love story set in the Ettrick of Hogg's own lifetime. 
For his next major literary project Hogg set out to collect the songs of the Jacobite risings of the eighteenth century. In this he was encouraged by the Highland Society of London, and the project, which is akin to Scott's ballad-collecting for 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border' and Burns's efforts to collect and preserve traditional Scottish songs, bore fruit in the two volumes that make up Hogg's 'Jacobite Relics' (1819; 'second series', 1821). In these volumes Hogg prints the music as well as the lyrics and provides extensive notes. 
Hogg's comparative prosperity in the years after 'The Queen's Wake' enabled him to marry Margaret Phillips (1790-1870), daughter of a prosperous Dumfriesshire farmer, in April 1820. Margaret was the younger sister of the first wife of Hogg's friend James Gray, of the Edinburgh high school. Hogg got to know her at Gray's house in Edinburgh during the 1810s, when she was in her twenties. Though there was an age gap of some twenty years the marriage proved to be a very happy one, and the couple had four daughters and a son. 
Other events of 1820 included the death of Hogg's father, at Altrive in October, at the age of ninety-one and the publication in Altrive of Hogg's well-received 'Winter Evening Tales' (2 vols.). Encouraged by the fact that his financial position had been further improved by his marriage settlement, Hogg in 1821 took on a nine-year lease of Mount Benger, a farm adjacent to Altrive Lake. He was still far from affluent, however, and it was necessary for him to gather together as much capital as possible in order to stock the farm. This was the context in which he made arrangements for the publication of a new and revised edition of 'The Mountain Bard' (1821) and for the publication of his four-volume 'Poetical Works' (1822). 
In 1822 a tight financial situation was transformed into a potentially disastrous one when a relative of Margaret's mother absconded to America, leaving the Phillips family responsible for his debts. Instead of receiving the expected help from his parents-in-law with regard to the stocking of Mount Benger, Hogg had to provide them with support and a home for their few remaining years. The 1820s proved a period of agricultural recession, in the aftermath of the Napoleonic wars, and Hogg had to cope with the high rent of Mount Benger without having the capital to run the farm to best advantage. 
Nevertheless the early 1820s were a particularly fruitful time for Hogg the writer. His three-volume novel 'The Three Perils of Man' appeared in 1822. This 'Border romance' set in the middle ages is in effect what Hollywood would call a 'prequel' to Scott's narrative poem 'The Lay of the Last Minstrel' (1805); in it Hogg both celebrates and questions the account of medieval chivalry in Scott's recent novel 'Ivanhoe' (1820). 'The Three Perils of Man' tells the story of a siege in the manner of a 'Waverley' novel, but it is also a tale of the supernatural, typical of what late twentieth-century critics would call Hogg's magic realism. 
Hogg's next novel, 'The Three Perils of Woman' (1823), also employs a dual narrative; here a tale of lowland Scotland set in Hogg's own period mirrors and interacts with a tale of highland Scotland set around the time of the battle of Culloden, in 1746. Yet another dual narrative, 'The Private Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner', followed in June 1824. It offers competing attempts to tell the story of the life of Robert Wringhim; first a fictional 'Editor' produces a narrative constructed after the manner of one of Scott's 'Waverley' novels, then the 'Editor' prints Robert's own private memoirs and confessions. Later in 1824 Hogg completed 'Queen Hynde', which he had laid aside in 1817; this idiosyncratic alternative version of the Ossianic epics of James Macpherson was published in December 1824. These major works of the early 1820s have come to be much admired but they were not particularly well received at the time of their first publication. 
From the early 1820s onwards Hogg's considerable fame derived not only from his own writings but also from his portrayal as 'the Ettrick Shepherd' in the 'Noctes Ambrosianae' of 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine'. The 'Noctes' articles were chiefly written by John Wilson and John Gibson Lockhart, and they purport to record the table talk of the 'Blackwood's' group of writers as they dine in Ambrose's Tavern. Much of the popularity of 'Blackwood's' derived from the 'Noctes' -- and much of the attraction of the 'Noctes' derived from the figure of the Ettrick Shepherd. From the 'Noctes' the shepherd emerges as a vain, boastful, and bibulous oaf who nevertheless has the poetic inspiration of a genuine child of nature; the Noctean shepherd may be a boor but his unsophisticated simplicity can often enable him to get to the heart of the matter. Hogg's attitude to the 'Noctes' fluctuated; sometimes he was infuriated and sometimes he enjoyed the joke. Partly as a result serious quarrels between Hogg and William Blackwood occurred from time to time. 

'Blackwood's' was also an important outlet for Hogg's own shorter writings. 'The Shepherd's Calendar' (2 vols., 1829) consists in the main of short stories that he had contributed to the magazine during the 1820s. Likewise 'A Queer Book' (1832) consists of poems by Hogg, most of which had already appeared in 'Blackwood's'. Other volumes from his later years include 'Songs, by the Ettrick Shepherd' (1831), 'Familiar Anecdotes of Sir Walter Scott' (1834), and 'A Series of Lay Sermons' (1834). The three-volume 'Tales of the Wars of Montrose' (1835), a collection of interconnecting short stories and novellas, is one of Hogg's most daring and most innovative works. 
By the 1820s periodicals had become much more generous in paying authors than when Hogg founded 'The Spy' in 1810. In his later years Hogg often contributed to various periodicals (including, from 1830, 'Fraser's Magazine' in London), and this source of income helped him to struggle on with Mount Benger until the end of his lease, in 1830. At that point he became bankrupt. The rent-free farm of Altrive Lake remained to him, and on returning there with his family he was able to regain financial stability. However, he was by then sixty, and he was anxious to provide if possible for his young wife and younger family. Hogg therefore began to hatch plans for a collected edition of his writings along the lines of Sir Walter Scott's hugely successful 'Magnum opus' collected edition, publication of which had commenced in 1829. 
Plans for the collected edition took Hogg to London in the early months of 1832. He was rapturously received there, not only as the author of 'The Queen's Wake' but also as the famous shepherd of the 'Noctes Ambrosianae'. The collected edition promised well, and the first volume ('Altrive Tales') appeared in 1832, after Hogg's return to Scotland. His hopes for it were destroyed, however, when its publisher, James Cochrane, became bankrupt shortly afterwards. 
In the autumn of 1835 Hogg fell ill. Jaundice was diagnosed, and as the illness progressed it became clear that there was little hope of his recovery. Friends came to Altrive to try to help: Hogg was a much liked man. One lifelong Ettrick friend was Alexander Laidlaw, of Bowerhope farm, who in a letter describes how: 'I visited him on the 22nd October, and almost daily till the 19th November. After this I was in the room in which he died, never took off my clothes, but rested occasionally on a sofa -- never got home till the Saturday after the funeral. (Garden, 326)' In its way Laidlaw's account is as moving as William Wordsworth's well-known 'Extempore Effusion on the Death of James Hogg'. 
Hogg died at his home, Altrive Lake farm, on 21 November 1835. He was buried in Ettrick churchyard, a stone's throw from his birthplace at Ettrick Hall. 
James Hogg's status as a major writer was not fully recognized in his own lifetime because his social origins led to his being smothered in genteel condescension. The collected editions of his works published after his death did further damage; some major texts (for example, 'The Three Perils of Woman') are omitted entirely, while others (such as 'The Private Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner') are heavily bowdlerized. In short the nineteenth-century collected editions offer a bland and lifeless version of Hogg's writings. It was in this version that he was read by the Victorians, and unsurprisingly he came to be regarded as a minor figure, of no great importance or interest. However, the second half of the twentieth century saw a spectacular revival in Hogg's reputation as reliable texts of his writings increasingly became available. In 1995 Edinburgh University Press began to publish the multi-volume Stirling-South Carolina research edition of the collected works. 
Like Burns, Hogg questioned and subverted aspects of the Scottish Enlightenment, and created a space in which the allegedly 'marginal' and 'primitive' culture of the old Scottish peasantry could speak with eloquence and power. Like Burns, Macpherson, and Scott, Hogg made a distinctive Scottish contribution to European Romanticism. 


@@@@@


doc= 13471


Hogg, James (1806-1888), publisher, was born near Edinburgh on 26 March 1806, the son of James Hogg. He was educated by the Revd Thomas Sheriff (died 1836). On 24 August 1818 he was apprenticed to James Muirhead, printer, in Edinburgh. He subsequently entered the printing house attached to the 'Caledonian Mercury', where the printing of the seventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' had commenced in 1827, and became reader on the 'Caledonian Mercury'. On 13 November 1832 he married Helen Hutchison (1803-1890), of Hutchiestown Farm, near Dunblane. 
In 1837 Hogg set up business on his own account as a printer and publisher in Edinburgh. The first publication which bears his imprint is 'The Honest Waterman', a small tract brought out in 1837. On 1 March 1845 the first number of 'Hogg's Weekly Instructor' appeared, a non-sectarian periodical. In 1849 the title was changed to 'The Instructor' and later to 'Titan'. The last number is dated December 1859, and the entire work comprises twenty-nine volumes. Hogg did his own editing, latterly with the assistance of his eldest son, James. He also published the principal works of George Gilfillan. 
In 1849 he made the acquaintance of Thomas De Quincey, who contributed his 'Autobiographic Sketches' and other papers to the 'Weekly Instructor'. He then agreed with Hogg to bring out his 'Collected Works', and Hogg later contributed his reminiscences of De Quincey to H. A. Page's (A. H. Japp) 'Thomas de Quincey: his Life and Writings' (1877). In 1858 Hogg's printing office was discontinued, and in the autumn of that year his sons John and James, who had been taken into partnership, set up a branch publishing office in London, where Hogg later re-established the whole business. Besides the 'Churchman's Family Magazine', the firm then published several series of successful books for young people. The periodical entitled 'London Society', which was projected by James Hogg jun. in February 1862, attained at one time a circulation of twenty-five thousand monthly. The firm of James Hogg & Sons was dissolved in July 1867. Hogg died at The Acacia, 7 Crescent Road, St John's, Kent, the home of his son John, where he had been living, on 14 March 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 13472


Hogg, James Macnaghten McGarel, first Baron Magheramorne (1823-1890), civic administrator, eldest son of Sir James Weir Hogg, first baronet (1790-1876), chairman of the East India Company, and his wife, Mary Claudine Swinton (died 1874), was born at Calcutta on 3 May 1823. The merchant and philanthropist Quintin Hogg was his younger brother. He was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in May 1842. Considered 'a very good boy, if not a particularly brilliant scholar' (Owen, 158), he left Oxford in 1843 to join the 1st Life Guards. He became major and lieutenant-colonel in 1855, retiring from the army in August 1859. On 31 August 1857 he married Caroline Elizabeth Emma (1834-1924), eldest daughter of Edward Gordon Douglas-Pennant, later first Lord Penrhyn. The couple had five sons and one daughter. 
Son of a Peelite Conservative, Hogg remained loyal to the Conservative Party after the corn-law split, representing Bath as MP from 1865 to 1868 and Truro from 1871 to 1885. From 1885 until his accession to the peerage in 1887 he sat for the Hornsey division of Middlesex. In May 1876 he succeeded his father as second baronet, and in February 1877 he assumed the additional surname of McGarel by royal licence on succeeding to the estates of his brother-in-law, Charles McGarel of Magheramorne, Antrim. McGarel Hogg was raised to the peerage as Baron Magheramorne in July 1887. 
In 1867 Hogg became a member of the Metropolitan Board of Works, the authority elected by members of the capital's secondary authorities to handle London-wide functions such as main drainage and street improvements, representing St George's, Hanover Square. In November 1870 he was elected chairman of the board. He expected to serve only one year as chairman, the Home Office having indicated that reform of metropolitan government was imminent; in the event he remained chairman until the board's eventual abolition in 1889. The chairmanship brought him the KCB on the completion of the Chelsea Embankment in 1874, but it also ensured that his reputation was permanently stained by the scandals which engulfed the board in its final years. Speculation by board members and officers in land acquired for street improvements prompted the appointment of a royal commission into the board in 1888. Though the commission heard that the board's balances were kept at a bank of which he was a director (Davis, 109), Magheramorne (as Hogg had by then become) was not under suspicion for the failings of his subordinates, but his appearance before the commission, when his explanation of the board's functions required frequent prompting from the board's counsel, was unimpressive. If the board was divided, as W. T. Stead claimed, into 'clever knaves who jobbed and virtuous nobodies who winked' (Owen, 207), Magheramorne belonged to the second group, but the commission's report was unquestionably a condemnation of his light-handed chairmanship. Deteriorating health during the 1880s, his duties as an MP, and his frequent trips to Ireland left him dangerously unaware of the board's day-to-day operations, and made his tenaciously protective defence of the board from valid criticism hard to excuse. 
Though described in 1887 as a 'fine-looking, soldierly man, with clear-cut features, and snow-white hair' (Owen, 159), Magheramorne's final years were darkened by ill health, intensified by the Metropolitan Board of Works scandal, and he died on 27 June 1890 at his home in 17 Grosvenor Gardens, London. He was buried at Brompton cemetery. Only the first of his five sons married, producing no heir, and his Irish barony passed to his first three sons in succession, becoming extinct with the death of Ronald, the fourth Baron Magheramorne, in 1957. 


