@@@@@


doc= 13473


Hogg, Sir James Weir, first baronet (1790-1876), director and chairman of the East India Company, was born at Stoneyford, near Lisburn, co. Antrim, on 7 September 1790, the elder son of William Hogg (1754-1824), of Belmont, co. Antrim, and his wife, Mary, daughter of James Dickey of Dunmore, co. Antrim. He received his early education at Dr Bruce's academy in Belfast and in 1808 was elected a scholar of Trinity College, Dublin. There he gained the gold medal for oratory and graduated BA in 1810. In 1811 he entered Gray's Inn, London, in order to qualify for the Irish bar. 
In 1814, upon being admitted as a barrister at the King's Inns in Dublin, Hogg sailed for Calcutta and over the next eight years built up an exceptionally lucrative law practice. On 26 July 1822 he married Mary Claudine (died 1874), second daughter of Samuel Swinton of Swinton, Berwickshire, a Bengal civil servant. Also in 1822 he accepted the office of registrar of the supreme court of Calcutta, which post he held until 1833, when he returned to Britain with a large fortune. 
In 1835 Hogg was elected for Beverley as a Conservative. He continued to represent Beverley until 1847, when he was returned unopposed for Honiton, a seat which he held until narrowly defeated in the general election of March 1857. Throughout his parliamentary career Hogg resolutely supported Sir Robert Peel and his free-trade policies and in June 1846, shortly before leaving office, Peel repaid his loyalty with a baronetcy. 
In September 1839 Hogg was elected a director of the East India Company and thereafter functioned as the 'de facto' representative of Leadenhall Street in the House of Commons. Indeed, although he enjoyed a reputation as an excellent orator, he rarely spoke in the house except on Indian matters. He so valued his connection with the company that in 1845 he turned down Peel's offer of the post of judge-advocate-general rather than surrender his position as deputy chairman. In all he was deputy chairman of the company in 1845-6, 1850-51, and 1851-2, and chairman in 1846-7 and 1852-3. In these roles he robustly defended the much criticized system of the dual government of India and, in his insistence on the independence and political integrity of the court of directors, generated considerable friction with the Board of Control, especially during the second presidency (1846-52) of John Cam Hobhouse. 
As both a prominent director and an MP, Hogg was subject to frequent attacks by the company's critics, most notably Sir Charles Napier. Unlike many Conservatives, Hogg was not averse to all acquisitions of new territory in India (for example, he approved of Dalhousie's annexation of Nagpur in 1854), but he deplored Napier's self-propelled conquest of Sind and was further outraged by Napier's publicly expressed scorn for the directors and their servants in India. For his part, Napier freely criticized Hogg in the press, especially in a savage letter published in 'The Standard' and 'The Times' in October 1848, to which Hogg responded in turn by encouraging the court to resist parliamentary pressure to install Napier as commander-in-chief in India. 
In 1853 Hogg declined the governorship of Bombay. After his defeat in 1857 he made no attempt to re-enter parliament, but in 1858 under the 'Government of India Act' he took a seat as one of seven former directors on the new Council of India. He remained on the council (serving as vice-president in 1860) until his retirement in early 1872, the year also in which he was sworn a member of the privy council. 
Hogg died at his home, 11 Grosvenor Crescent, London, on 27 May 1876, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. His wife, mother to their seven sons and seven daughters, had died two years earlier. Their eldest son, Lieutenant-Colonel Sir James Macnaghten McGarel Hogg, afterwards first Lord Magheramorne (1823-1890), succeeded Hogg in the baronetcy. Their seventh son, Quintin Hogg, became a successful merchant and philanthropist. 


@@@@@


doc= 13474


Hogg, John (1800-1869), classical scholar and naturalist, was born on 21 March 1800 at Norton near Durham, the second of four sons (there were also two daughters) of John Hogg (1761-1823), barrister, and his wife, Prudentia Jones ('c'.1767-1838). His brother Thomas Jefferson Hogg was a close friend of the poet Shelley. Hogg was educated at Durham grammar school and entered Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1818, where he was selected Ramsay scholar in 1820. He graduated BA in 1822, and proceeded MA in 1827, when he was also elected a bye-fellow at Peterhouse. He became an MA at Oxford in 1844. In 1828 he was admitted to the Inner Temple, and was called to the bar in 1832. He practised on the northern circuit and was a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant for co. Durham. He married Anne Louisa Sarah (died 1864), second daughter of Major Goldfinch of The Priory, Chewton Mendip, Somerset. They had one son and two daughters. 
Hogg was a learned classicist with wide interests, a capable antiquary and geographer, well read in modern languages, and knowledgeable in natural history. His books include texts on ancient and biblical history, hagiography, archaeology, and philology, as well as on the botany, geology, and geography of Sicily, and the natural history of Stockton-on-Tees and surrounding areas. He wrote articles on the natural history of his home county for botanical journals and contributed plant records to Winch's 'Flora of Northumberland' (1831). In 1838 a paper of his on the action of light on the colour of the river sponge (Royal Society Archives) was read before the Royal Society, who elected him a fellow in the following year. He was also a fellow of the Linnean Society, and a member of the Royal Society of Literature, which he served as foreign secretary and vice-president in 1866. He belonged to the Cambridge Philosophical Society, and to the Royal Geographical Society (secretary in 1849-50). He was a member of the Royal Society of Northern Antiquities of Copenhagen, president of the Tyneside Naturalists' Field Club, and an active contributor to meetings of the British Association. 
Hogg was kind-hearted and popular, though said to lack practical common sense. In many of his studies he was assisted by his brother Thomas Jefferson Hogg, about whom he wrote a memoir for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1862. He died at his home, Norton House, co. Durham, on 16 September 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 13475


Hogg, Thomas Jefferson (1792-1862), biographer of Percy Bysshe Shelley, was born on 24 May 1792 at Norton near Stockton-on-Tees, co. Durham, the eldest of six children of John Hogg (1761-1823), a non-practising barrister and country gentleman, and his wife, Prudentia ('c'.1767-1838), daughter of the Revd Watkin Jones. The classical scholar and naturalist John Hogg was his brother. A reserved boy acutely conscious of his status as a gentleman, Jefferson attended Durham grammar school from the age of twelve until 1810 before matriculating at Oxford in February 1810. In October he met another first-year student, Percy Bysshe Shelley, whose friendship transformed his life. 
Although Hogg's articles of 1832 on Shelley at Oxford, reprinted in 'The Life of Percy Bysshe Shelley' (2 vols., 1858), depict him as Shelley's mentor, Hogg at eighteen was as flighty and unconventional as his friend. As the unaltered versions of Shelley's letters prove, Hogg joined Shelley in writing provocative letters to clergymen, declared his 'love' for Shelley's sister Elizabeth even before his sole glimpse of her (through a church window on a clandestine visit to Field Place), and wrote an anti-religious novel, 'Leonora', which Shelley encouraged him to publish. In March 1811 he was expelled along with Shelley for refusing to reveal who wrote 'The Necessity of Atheism'. Though Shelley wrote the final version and arranged the printing and distribution, Hogg had garnered philosophical arguments for the essay and probably wrote an early draft. Consequently, his decision to share Shelley's expulsion was partly a matter of loyalty and partly of pride -- he could not allow his friend to accept full credit (or blame) for their joint production. 
Sent to York to serve a legal apprenticeship, the nineteen-year-old Hogg not only corresponded with Shelley but followed him to Edinburgh, returning to York along with Shelley and his sixteen-year-old bride, Harriet Westbrook. When Shelley, barely nineteen himself, left Harriet under Hogg's 'protection' while he journeyed to Field Place to beg money from his father, Hogg declared his 'love' for Harriet, who did not reciprocate his feelings. After Shelley's return, Hogg confessed his indiscretion. Soon afterwards the young couple left York for Keswick. After a frenzied correspondence in which Hogg threatened suicide and Shelley grappled with the loss of 'the brother of his soul', Shelley stopped trying to counter his friend's sophistry and ended the correspondence. 
Despite having lost Shelley, apparently forever, Hogg retained his unorthodox views, making anti-religious jokes and later becoming a vegetarian. His novel 'The Memoirs of Prince Alexy Haimatoff' (1813) reveals his view of love (in contrast to Shelley's) as being primarily a matter of sexual attraction. Even his political views, contrary to his self-depiction in the 'Life', remained liberal until about 1836, as his voluminous correspondence makes clear. 
Hogg was admitted to the Middle Temple in November 1812. When Shelley arrived unannounced at his door a month later, their friendship was resumed but on a less intimate level than at Oxford or York. Shelley introduced Hogg to his London circle, which included the eccentric vegetarian J. F. Newton, Newton's sister-in-law Harriet Boinville, and somewhat later, Thomas Love Peacock and Leigh Hunt. Shelley's elopement with Mary Godwin in July 1814 temporarily strained the friendship, but the satirical hook-nosed Hogg could not resist Shelley's charm -- or, it appears, the women associated with him. By January 1815 Hogg was writing love letters to Mary, giving her presents, and requesting a lock of her hair, all with Shelley's full knowledge and approval. 
In 1816 Hogg took a brief European tour before resuming his legal studies in the north. Called to the bar in October 1817, he began the monotonous circuit of Northumberland and Durham, from which he found relief by hunting partridges and reading Greek. The next few years were marked chiefly by loss: the suicide of Harriet Shelley in December 1816, Shelley's departure from England in 1818, and the deaths of two young brothers, Robert in 1817 and William in 1821. Though Hogg's few letters to Shelley hide his feelings under a dry satirical wit, his affection for the poet was still strong; the news of Shelley's death in July 1822 resulted in 'sudden mental anguish' which '[threw] him off his guard' ('Shelley's Friends', ed. Jones, 92). 
Hogg soon found consolation by falling in love with Jane Williams (1798-1884), to whom Shelley had addressed such famous lyrics as 'To Jane with a Guitar' and 'The keen stars were twinkling'. Hogg's attraction to the last of Shelley's women is hardly surprising, but her attraction to the crotchety young lawyer seems to have resulted chiefly from Hogg's willingness to provide a home for her two fatherless children and the appearance at least of respectability. Neither a divorce nor a legal marriage to Hogg was possible for Jane, who had lived with Edward Williams as his wife but was legally married to a Captain John Edward Johnson. Not only did Hogg condone her past, he grudgingly embarked on a second European tour, memorialized in '209 Days', at her request. In any case, her decision to live as Mrs Hogg was necessitated by pregnancy: Mary Prudentia Hogg was born in November 1827 (died May 1829). A second daughter, Prudentia Sarah, was born in 1838. 
Outwardly respectable but still opinionated and satirical, the middle-aged Hogg bore little resemblance to the Oxford student expelled with Shelley. Perhaps to compensate for his unorthodox 'marriage' -- his family refused to see either his 'mistress' or their children -- he became increasingly conventional, even attending church on occasion as a social rather than a religious obligation. His success as a lawyer was limited, but he supplemented his income by writing articles for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' and various periodicals. In 1832 he was appointed to the royal commission on municipal corporations and in 1838 he became revising barrister for Northumberland and Berwick, a post which he held for twenty years. 
In 1857 Sir Percy and Lady Jane Shelley invited the 64-year-old Hogg to write a biography of the long dead poet using the letters and journals in their possession. With these materials and his own collection of letters from Shelley, Hogg ought to have produced a valuable book. But his intention, expressed in an unpublished letter to Lady Shelley, to allow no one to see his manuscript must have warned the Shelleys that neither the tone nor the content would meet their expectations. Disturbed by Hogg's caricature of Shelley and his 'indiscreet use' of their materials (Thoma, 616) and correctly suspecting from his treatment of Shelley's letters to Thomas Hookham that Hogg had altered his own correspondence with Shelley as well, Sir Percy requested the return of his documents and placed an injunction on Hogg to prevent publication of subsequent volumes. The book was in fact even more distorted than the Shelleys realized. Hogg barely mentions and never analyses Shelley's poetry and he denies the poet's strongly held political and intellectual convictions. In addition, he conceals information, including the identity of Shelley's correspondents other than himself and Godwin, and even suppresses a letter from Shelley announcing his new attachment to Mary Godwin. He invents anecdotes to support his depiction of 'poor Shelley' as a bumbling eccentric and of himself as the rational 'prop' on whom 'poor Shelley' leaned. The story of the newly vegetarian Shelley, the son of a Sussex farmer, greedily devouring bacon for the first time ('So this is bacon!'), or the tale of Hogg removing the balls from Shelley's duelling pistols to prevent a shooting accident fully justify Lady Shelley's charge that the Shelley depicted by Hogg is a mere caricature. 
This flawed biography, which protected Hogg's reputation at Shelley's expense, strained Hogg's friendships with Peacock and the dying Hunt. Unhappy, gout-stricken, and overweight, Hogg died at his home, 33 Clifton Road, Carlton Hill, St John's Wood, on 27 August 1862, aged seventy. He was buried on 2 September in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 13476


Hoghton, Daniel (1770-1811), army officer, was born at Hedingham Castle, Essex, on 27 August 1770, the second son of Sir Henry Hoghton, sixth baronet (1728-1795), of Hoghton Tower, near Blackburn and Walton Hall, near Preston, Lancashire, MP for Preston, and his second wife, Fanny (died April 1803), eldest daughter of Daniel Booth, of Hutton Hall, Essex, a director of the Bank of England. A captain in the 82nd (Prince of Wales Volunteers) in 1793, Hoghton was commissioned major in the 97th (Strathspey Highlanders) on its formation on 9 February 1794. After serving as marines in the Channel Fleet, the regiment was disbanded in 1795, and Hoghton was transferred to the 67th foot on 12 August 1795. The 67th went to San Domingo in 1796, and to Jamaica in 1798. On 31 January 1799 Hoghton was transferred to the 88th foot (Connaught Rangers), and joined them in India, where he accompanied Sir John Malcolm on a journey to Bombay. The regiment served in the expedition to Egypt in 1801, but Hoghton seems to have remained in India, and to have been sent home with dispatches from Lord Wellesley in the spring of 1804. 
Hoghton had become lieutenant-colonel in the army on 3 May 1796, and on 22 November 1804 he was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the newly raised 2nd battalion of the 8th foot. On 1 January 1805 he was promoted colonel. He was stationed for a time at Cork, and took part in the siege of Copenhagen in 1807 and the conquest of Martinique in 1809. In April 1810 he was appointed to the staff of the British force at Cadiz as brigadier. He was promoted major-general on 25 July, and in September he left Cadiz to join Wellington's army in Portugal. He was given the command of the 3rd brigade of the 2nd division under Sir William Stewart, with whom he had served at Cadiz, and who had been his lieutenant-colonel in the 67th. 
In the battle of Albuera on 16 May 1811, when the Spaniards gave way on the right, Stewart's division was hurried up to take their place. Its leading brigade (Colborne's) was nearly destroyed by a flank attack of cavalry, and Hoghton's brigade was deployed and moved up to the crest of the hill, which had become the key of the position. There it stood for some time against the 11,000 strong French 5th corps, its three regiments (29th, 57th, and 1st battalion 48th) losing three quarters of their men. Hoghton himself was killed by gunshot as he led forward the 29th. He was buried in the fort at Elvas on 17 May. Wellington wrote to Lord Wellesley: 'I understand that it was impossible for anybody to behave better than he did... he actually fell waving his hat and cheering his brigade on to the charge' ('Supplementary Despatches', 7.134). A public monument, voted by parliament, was placed in the north transept of St Paul's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 13477


Holbeach, Henry (d. 1551), bishop of Lincoln, is of obscure birth but certainly took his name in religion from his Lincolnshire place of origin. His family name was Rands. He became a Benedictine monk of Crowland and subsequently proceeded to Cambridge, where he became BTh in 1527 and DTh in 1534. He was made prior of Buckingham College, the Benedictine house for students in Cambridge which for a time provided hospitality for Thomas Cranmer. It also offered Holbeach the opportunity to undertake reformed biblical and patristic studies. It is uncertain whether he stayed on in Cambridge following his doctorate, but the deep impression he made on Cranmer, by then archbishop of Canterbury, as one of only two 'of that habit, that be of better learning, judgement, conversation and all qualities meet for an head and master of an house' ('Writings and Disputations', 2.310) resulted in his election as prior of Worcester on 13 March 1536, the king's assent being granted on the 22nd. He took the customary oaths of succession and supremacy, and was probably delighted that one of his first acts as prior was to receive the visitation of Hugh Latimer, the newly appointed bishop of Worcester. Among the new bishop's injunctions was a requirement of the prior to provide a whole 'Bible' in English for the convent, and to have a chapter of it read each day at dinner. The friendship between prior and bishop, which may have begun at Cambridge, resulted in the consecration of the former as suffragan bishop of Bristol in 1538. Two years later, however, the priory was surrendered to the king, and on 24 January 1542 Holbeach was appointed dean of the new foundation of Worcester, with prebendaries, minor canons, lay clerks, organists, choristers, and schoolmasters, to say nothing of forty king's scholars under his charge -- a rather more numerous required foundation than the monastery had boasted at its dissolution. He did not preserve the collegiate character of Worcester, and it was not long before dean and canons dined apart, while in the year of his appointment the dean supervised the demolition of the images of St Oswald and St Wulfstan. He also acquired the reputation with contemporaries for so exploiting the lands of the cathedral church that by 1559 neither he nor his successors left 'a patch of land sufficient for a horse to graze upon' (Wilson, 371). 
Holbeach's reputation at Worcester did not prevent his translation to the see of Rochester in 1544, his election on 3 May receiving royal assent on the 26th, and he was made king's almoner in the same year. His growing reputation was recognized in his selection to preside at the funeral of Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, in 1545, and in his attendance at Henry VIII's funeral. He was appointed preacher at the commemoration of the death of Francois I of France in June 1547. Holbeach commended Francois 'for setting forth of the 'Bible' and the 'New Testament' in the French tongue to be read of all his subjects' (Wriothesley, 1.184). He also preached to celebrate the victory at Pinkie, fought on 10 September against the Scots, which suggests that he had the favour of the duke of Somerset. This resulted in his confirmation as bishop of Lincoln on 20 August 1547, but not without the gift of thirty manors and the episcopal palace at Holborn in London to the protector. On the latter's fall Holbeach received thirty-six rectories, formerly appropriated to monastic houses, which had already been leased out by the court of augmentations, together with the return of the manor of Buckden and such buildings as remained of Thornton Abbey. So inequitable was the exchange that the see of Lincoln from being one of the richest in England became one of the poorest. 
Holbeach was in demand, however, to advance a protestant order in England and especially to support Thomas Cranmer in forwarding the preparation and defence of a vernacular liturgy. He assisted in the framing of the offices and in the very famous discussions on the drafts of the 1549 prayer book that came before the bishops in 1548 and were debated in the House of Lords in November. His was a reformist position in recognizing the elements as 'mystically' the body and blood of Christ (Tomlinson, 44). His cathedral received him late; he was not installed at Lincoln until 20 March 1548, more than six months after his election and confirmation as bishop. It saw some of the first experiments with the liturgy in English. Virtually nothing survives of Holbeach's activities as a diocesan, but at a national level he fought critics of the prayer book, such as Stephen Gardiner, as well as the Anabaptists who saw no point in it at all. He was a reliable supporter of Cranmer, whether on a commission to dissolve an unfortunate royal marriage of William Parr (brother of the dowager queen) in 1547, or to make sure that the University of Oxford was brought in line with the new order in 1549. Like the archbishop, Holbeach probably married in 1544 if not earlier; his wife was Joan Manett. His was a radicalism based on scripture and it is possible that his extravagance in parting with the temporalities of the see was prompted by a monastic experience of thrift as much as by his desire to promote the cause of reform on the bench of bishops. He seems to have spent his last years at Nettleham and died there on either 5 or 6 August 1551. 


@@@@@


doc= 13478


Holbein, Hans, the younger (1497/8-1543), artist, was born in Augsburg in southern Germany, the second son of the artist Hans Holbein the elder (1465-1524) and his wife, Anna Mair. He was the younger brother of the painter Ambrosius Holbein, and his age is given as fourteen in a metalpoint drawing of the two brothers by their father dated 1511 (Staatliche Museen, Berlin). However, copies of a lost self-portrait bear an inscription giving the date 1543 and indicating that Holbein was then in his forty-fifth year. Hans Holbein the elder arrived in Augsburg in 1494 after working in Ulm. Presumably Ambrosius and the slightly younger Hans took their places in his workshop, which produced many large altarpieces, often in collaboration with sculptors, but there is no record of their training. There is no documentation at all of the younger Holbein in Augsburg. 
By 1515 both Hans and his brother appear to have migrated to Basel in Switzerland, where they worked on a variety of projects, largely separately. The date 1515 is established by the survival of a copy of Erasmus's 'Praise of Folly' (Kunstmuseum, Basel), in which the margins are illustrated in pen and ink by Holbein and his brother. From this point onwards there are a number of documentary references to Holbein in Basel, and also a number of paintings and other works signed or documented as his work. He was active there not only as a painter of portraits, religious pictures, and wall paintings, but also as a designer of woodcuts, engravings, and stained glass. 
Holbein's earliest surviving dated paintings are the portraits of Jacob Meyer, burgomeister or mayor of Basel, and his second wife, Dorothea Kannengiesser, painted in 1516, and originally joined together to form a diptych (Kunstmuseum, Basel). These vivid but sober and carefully designed images, taken from still surviving drawings carefully recording the sitters' likenesses (Kunstmuseum, Basel), and set within ambitious architectural space made sumptuous by Renaissance ornament, established the artistic foundations for the making of Holbein's reputation in Basel, as well as his later career. In 1517, however, he went to work at Lucerne, where the elder Holbein had a commission to decorate the house of Jacob von Hertenstein (1460-1527), chief magistrate and merchant. Holbein there produced the 'Portrait of Benedict von Hertenstein' (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York), which includes a frieze in the manner of Mantegna's 'Triumphs'. He had returned to Basel by 25 September, when he was admitted as a master in the town's painters' guild. On 3 July 1520 he became a citizen of Basel. Before this date it is likely he had married Elsbeth Schmid, the widow of a tanner, shown with their two elder children, Philip and Catherine (the third, Jacob, not yet born), in the monumental and moving portrait painted on paper of about 1529 (Kunstmuseum, Basel). 
Much of the success of Holbein's art in the decade before he left Basel for England depended on extending the possibilities of the depiction of depth and movement in space. His reputation in Basel, where he was appointed town painter in 1518/19, was made as a house painter of a most spectacular kind: in his decorative painting for the Haus zum Tanz (destroyed, but recorded in drawings) peasants danced along narrow ledges, musicians leant over balconies, and a rider on a rearing horse was poised to jump from on high out into the street below. Holbein, with his knowledge of the Renaissance architectural repertory and, above all, his extraordinary facility in the representation of moving figures from all angles, took the convention of illusionistic wall painting to its limits. His work for the town hall, for which he was paid between 1521 and 1522 and again in 1530, is also lost, but according to surviving drawings consisted of interior wall paintings on classical and 'Old Testament' themes. 
It is a remarkable aspect of Holbein's art that his designs for the facades of buildings are as convincing as the smallest of his woodcuts, just as, later on in England, his portrait miniatures, when enlarged to the scale of the full-size portraits, maintain an entirely convincing solidity and sense of design. His designs for Basel printers, notably the two famous series the 'Dance of Death' and the 'Old Testament', designed in the 1520s but not published for another decade, show in abundance his mastery of composition which here happens to be on a miniature scale. Above all, the figures in these woodcuts display a characteristic sense of movement which played an increasingly pivotal role in all Holbein's artistic production. 
That many of his Basel paintings survive and can be identified as Holbein's work is the result of the patronage of the Amerbach family of that city: they collected his work and listed it in the inventory of their art collections made in 1586. These works passed into the public collections of the city of Basel. They include not only Holbein's head-and-shoulders portrait of the young Bonifacius Amerbach in 1519, with Latin verses composed by the sitter (Kunstmuseum, Basel), but a number of religious works, including the 'Dead Christ' of 1522 (Kunstmuseum, Basel). The precise function and original location of this work is unknown, its power to disturb the viewer with its graphic depiction of the corpse of Christ undisputed: the body is shown stiffened, the flesh around the wounds and in the face becoming green. Yet this is no straightforward realism: Holbein has constructed the composition with immense care, manipulating space and lighting to create the most dramatic effects, and employing a surprisingly free technique. 
Holbein is usually thought of as a supremely realistic painter, yet drama, artifice, and a love of rich colour, allied to his father's exceptional ability as a colourist, played an equally significant part in his work. This is evident in the boldness with which he approaches the composition of the other religious works painted at Basel, which include the 'Passion' altarpiece doors, the 'Last Supper' (both Kunstmuseum, Basel), and the 'Meyer Madonna' (priv. coll.). In all three, usually dated to the middle years of the 1520s, Holbein demonstrates the combination of controlled arrangement of figures in shallow space with the depiction of sumptuous colour and texture. Secular works such as the 'Venus and Cupid' and 'Lais Corinthiaca' (1526; Kunstmuseum, Basel), similarly show an increased richness and a subtle use of shadow sometimes associated with the visit to France Holbein made about 1524, when drawings of tomb sculpture show he had visited Bourges. He may also have had the opportunity to see works by Leonardo at the French court, though this is uncertain, as is the proposition that he journeyed to Italy during his years in Switzerland. 
Holbein's Basel work foreshadows the imagination, the inventiveness, the richness of technique, and the ability to concentrate meaning into gestures of significance with great economy that is reflected in his English portraits. Yet he painted relatively few portraits while working there. The most important are undoubtedly those he produced of the humanist Erasmus in 1523: two profile portraits (Musee du Louvre, Paris; Kunstmuseum, Basel), and a more elaborate half-length (priv. coll., on loan to the National Gallery, London), in which Erasmus is shown against an interior evoking a scholar's study, with his hands resting on a book designated as the fruits of his 'Labours of Hercules', his classical studies in the service of Christianity. In a letter of 3 June 1524 Erasmus mentioned he had sent one version of his portrait to England, almost certainly the latter type. On 29 August 1526 Erasmus wrote to his friend Pieter Gillis (Petrus Aegidius) in Antwerp. He told him that 'the arts in Basel were freezing' and Holbein was on his way to England to 'pick up some angels [a pun on the English coins]' ('Opus epistolarum', 6.392, no. 1740). 
It was presumably the lure of the possible rewards of royal service that tempted Holbein to leave Basel for England in 1526 (and may also have taken him to France earlier). It appears his quest was successful almost immediately, for, if the identification of Holbein as 'Master Hans' is accepted as valid, he was within a few months employed as a decorative painter at court, for the festivities at Greenwich in 1527. He was paid the large sum of $4 10's'. for a 'plat' showing the defeat of the French in battle, and the highest daily wage of any artist, 4's'., for creating a ceiling painting of the heavens in collaboration with the king's astronomer, Nikolaus Kratzer. No doubt he was assisted by the powerful connections that the patronage of Erasmus could have provided for him: Sir Thomas More's brother-in-law John Rastell was one of the creators of the Greenwich revels, and Sir Henry Guildford, one of the humanist's English correspondents, and comptroller of the royal household, was in charge of the whole project. 
Holbein's portrait of Erasmus seems to have spawned a group of half-length paintings which took the juxtapositions of figure and background in the work of 1523 as their starting point, and varied and elaborated them. The portrait of Warham, patron of Erasmus (Musee du Louvre, Paris), flatters both artist and scholar by imitating the 1523 portrait most closely, substituting the mitre and crozier of the archbishop for the classical column, flask, and books used in the earlier work. In the portrait of the royal astronomer and fellow German Nikolaus Kratzer of 1528 (Musee du Louvre, Paris) the subject faces the opposite direction and his instruments are introduced as the accessories. The portraits of Sir Henry and Lady Guildford (in the Royal Collection and the Museum of Art, St Louis, Missouri) of 1527 abandon the convention of tables or parapets at the lower edges of the compositions, and, while a lively and elegant variant on the classical pilaster of the portrait of Erasmus balances the smaller figure of Lady Guildford, the green curtain seen in the scholar's portrait reappears behind the massive figure of Sir Henry, its rail reappearing in the pendant uniting the pair. The portrait of Sir Thomas More (1527; Frick Collection, New York), defines him as statesman rather than scholar: his gilded collar of Tudor SSs lies over his deep fur collar, and Holbein draws a brilliant contrast between the dark green of the curtain looped behind him and the rich red velvet folds of his sleeve. 
For More, Holbein also painted a remarkable group portrait on linen cloth (lost, known only through copies and a series of original drawings). One drawing (Kunstmuseum, Basel), shows the whole composition, with annotations by Holbein recording changes which More had presumably requested. The composition is modelled on contemporary depictions of the holy kindred, adapted to include a Tudor interior and the likenesses of More's own immediate kin, who were identified on the drawing by Nikolaus Kratzer, so that the sketch could be sent to their friend Erasmus in Basel; the latter recorded his delight on receiving it. The portrait drawings for the heads in this group and for those of most of the other portraits mentioned from this period are still preserved (in the Royal Collection; that of Lady Guildford is at Basel). Both portrait drawings and the corresponding painted heads are notable for Holbein's sensitivity to characterization and to details such as the light glinting on the stubble of More's beard in the painted portrait or the wrinkles of Warham's face. Yet Holbein would not be averse to some adaptation of such realities if the results required it: the faces of both Sir Henry and Lady Guildford were altered between drawing and painting -- the latter radically, a smile being changed to a stern countenance. The portrait of the still unidentified 'Lady with a Squirrel and a Starling' (National Gallery, London), underwent a transformation during painting: the pet squirrel on a chain was added, presumably at the lady's request. The brilliant blue background with its pattern of leaves and branches is typically ambiguous, hovering between convincing as sky and outdoor vegetation and deluding as background decoration. 
Holbein's first visit to England lasted only two years, and he was probably concerned at this stage to retain his links with Basel. He also had work to complete there, but the advent of the Reformation, with the violent destruction of many religious works in 1529, must have done considerable damage to the livelihood of artists and encouraged Holbein's swift return to England; the last record of his presence in Basel is a payment for painting a clock face on 7 October 1531. He appears to have returned a protestant, although initially a reluctant convert: records of the attendance of Basel citizens at the new protestant service show that he had asked for a better explanation of it before agreeing to join the congregation; shortly afterwards his attendance is recorded. It is possible that Erasmus's outburst against him in a letter of 1533, in which he claims that 'Olpeius', probably to be identified with Holbein, has 'deceived those to whom he was recommended' in England ('Opus epistolarum', 10.193, no. 2788), relates to this conversion to protestantism. 
Holbein may not have intended to settle in England permanently. He retained his membership of the painters' guild in Basel and seems not to have wanted to sever his links with the town. Two years was the normal maximum period of absence allowed to a Basel citizen, and the town council ruled in 1521 that no citizen could enter the service of a foreign prince. However, the council made an exception for Holbein, in the constant expectation of his imminent return; his presence in Basel is documented in 1538, and it is possible he went back on other occasions. This arrangement no doubt suited Holbein well, for the council maintained his family in his absence, while his will reveals that by the time of his death in 1543 he was keeping a second family in London. 
A letter with the date 26 July 1532 in a portrait called 'Hans of Antwerp', a royal jeweller, but probably representing a German merchant (Royal Collection), gives the earliest indication of Holbein's return to England in that year, though he may have travelled back the previous year. The 'Master Hans' who in 1533/4 painted a gilded statue of Adam and Eve made by the royal goldsmith Cornelis Hayes, listed in an account immediately after references to a cradle for Princess Elizabeth, is likely to have been Holbein, and Holbein was certainly the designer of a table fountain, the drawing for which (Kunstmuseum, Basel), accords with a description of a new year's gift from Anne Boleyn to Henry VIII. The latter confirms Holbein's presence at court soon after his return from Basel in 1532, even if the evidence of his work as a court portrait painter is uncertain until Jane Seymour became queen in 1536. 
In 1536 the 'Paidagogeion' of the French humanist poet Nicholas Bourbon was published, with a woodcut of the poet after a drawing by Holbein. Bourbon had been exiled in England from France on account of his protestant sympathies. In a prefatory letter he addresses the friends he had made at the English court, including Holbein, the king's painter: 'D. Hansi pictori Regio, huius aevi Apelli'. This is the first known reference to Holbein as the king's painter, and suggests that the artist's appointment dates from 1535, when Bourbon was in England, or even earlier. The royal accounts in which payments to Holbein are recorded do not survive as a complete sequence, and the first accounts which mention his salary are those of 1537; for this reason it is even conceivable that he was also engaged as a salaried painter during the period of his first visit to England, in 1526-8. In the royal accounts of the 1530s and 1540s Holbein is not consistently called king's painter, but this title is used when special payments and advances of salary are made to him concerning his trips abroad. In his will Holbein calls himself 'the Kinges Majesties servaunte'. 
Holbein is assumed to have been employed by Henry VIII principally as a portrait painter. Certainly his most important documented function was to supply vital pictorial information on the appearance of the king's prospective brides. In March he was sent to Brussels to paint the portrait of Christina of Denmark, duchess of Milan, with whom Henry was contemplating marriage. After a three-hour sitting he arrived back in London with an image which contemporaries record delighted the king. This was presumably a drawing or series of drawings, the basis for the surviving full-length painted portrait (National Gallery, London), in which Christina, dressed in the black satin of mourning for her husband, seems to advance seductively towards the viewer; the portrait was kept in Henry's collection even though he did not proceed with the marriage. In June 1538 Holbein was sent to Le Havre in France to depict two further potential brides, and in August to Burgundy for three further candidates, two of whom were portrayed; after this he travelled on to Basel. None of these portraits survives. In 1539 the artist was sent abroad again to take the portraits of Anne and Amelia of Cleves. Two portraits of Anne survive, a three-quarter-length one on parchment (Musee du Louvre, Paris) and a miniature head and shoulders (V&A). Both were presumably based on a lost drawing, and made for Henry's inspection; disenchantment came with Anne's arrival in person, but Holbein's record of her appearance is not known to have been put in question. 
Holbein appears to have painted few other portraits for Henry VIII. It is not certain that an individual likeness of the king such as the exquisite small portrait in the Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza, Madrid, was painted for Henry himself. The list of portraits of Henry VIII's immediate family in the inventory of his collection is surprisingly small, but it is possible that Holbein made some portraits of Henry to be sent abroad of which there is no record. The portrait of Edward, prince of Wales, with its Latin verses by a Tudor propagandist, Richard Morison (National Gallery of Art, Washington), is almost certainly that given to the king by Holbein himself as a new year's gift in 1539. 
Holbein's great dynastic portrait of Henry VIII, his third wife, Jane Seymour, and his parents, Henry VII and Elizabeth of York, was painted on the wall of the Palace of Whitehall in 1537, probably in the privy chamber (destroyed in the fire of 1698). Its appearance can be reconstructed from the survival of the cartoon for the left half (NPG), showing the life-size figure of Henry with his father, and from the copy by Remigius van Leemput made for Charles II in 1667 (Royal Collection); the veracity of the Latin inscription celebrating the two heroes of the dynasty on a stone altar between the kings is confirmed by a record of it made by a foreign visitor to Whitehall in 1600. Between the cartoon -- where the head is close to the image of the Thyssen portrait -- and the finished portrait Holbein reorientated the face of the king so that it looks directly at the viewer, an imposing confrontation with the monarch which was to be reiterated in numerous painted copies of the full-length image. None of these individual portraits of Henry is indubitably Holbein's work; however, a portrait of Jane Seymour (Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna) by Holbein, showing the queen against a plain blue background and wearing slightly less elaborate dress and jewellery, relates to the image of the queen in the wall painting and to a preparatory drawing connected to both. It is not known for whom this portrait was produced. 
Sixteenth-century court painters were also on occasion required to provide designs for goldsmiths' work, and there is some evidence that Holbein might have done so. The payment to a Master Hans for painting a statue of Adam and Eve made by the royal goldsmith Cornelis Hayes, the design for a table fountain given to the king by Anne Boleyn, both referred to above, as well as the designs for a cup for Jane Seymour (AM Oxf. and BM), suggest royal requirements in this area, though other work, such as another elaborate design, for a clocksalt, commissioned by Sir Anthony Denny to give to the king in 1544, was given by courtiers rather than the king. Of a number of surviving designs for jewellery and other decorative items (BM and Kunstmuseum, Basel), a few might be associable with royal requirements; others were probably for courtiers. 
Court ceremony often required decorative paintings to be produced at speed, and Holbein's work at Greenwich in 1527, for which he was well paid, is one such instance. There were fewer and less elaborate revels of this kind in the next decade. However, an undated entry in an account connected with the office of revels survives, but is difficult to interpret. This is a payment for a 'peynted boke of Mr. Hansse holby makyng', perhaps a book of designs, or conceivably a stage property (Losely MS 1891, Surrey HC). 
Holbein's position as a court artist must have established his position in London, contributed considerably to his prosperity, and resulted in his decision to further his career there, rather than in Basel. At $7 10's'. a quarter, amounting to $30 a year, Holbein's salary fell a little short of Lucas Horenbout's remuneration of $33 6's'., but was higher than that of any other court painter during Holbein's own lifetime. He seems to have achieved some degree of prosperity, or at least the show of it, to judge from records of his return to Basel in 1538, monied and wearing fine clothes. Like other court artists he was granted a licence to export 600 tuns of beer in May 1538. However, despite this, his will mentions no assets such as property or even the tools of his trade, and there were debts of $16 13's'. to be paid. 
It is unlikely that Holbein ever lived at court. The so-called Holbein Gate at Whitehall Palace was not connected with the painter until many years after his lifetime. Holbein is known to have been living in the parish of St Andrew Undershaft in Aldgate ward in the city of London in 1541, but there are no records which might indicate his occupancy before this date. Holbein would have been affected by the regulations forbidding foreigners to have workshops in the city. Those who were not denizens were not entitled to take on apprentices and journeymen. However, there is no evidence to suggest that he worked at Whitehall Palace. Conceivably Holbein was given facilities near the palace, outside the city but within Westminster, which was to become increasingly favoured by painters, but there is no proof of this. It is likely that his position as king's painter allowed him some degree of freedom and protection from the tightly drawn laws otherwise applying to foreigners without denizenship. Lucas Horenbout had become a denizen in 1534, but Holbein did not take the decision in favour of denizen status until June 1541, along with many others from abroad whose livelihood was suddenly threatened by the enforcement of earlier legislation. Presumably Holbein's royal position both permitted him to take on commissions from those who were not themselves royal, and ensured that other painters were unable to prevent him, as a foreigner, from doing so. The regular payment of a salary meant that the king could call on the painter when he was needed, and that he would not return to Basel. The high daily wages paid to 'Master Hans' in 1527, and the responsibility of the tasks given by Henry VIII, including bringing him vital pictorial information on the appearance of his prospective brides, suggests that Holbein's capabilities were highly valued by the king or his advisers. 
In addition to his role as painter to Henry VIII, Holbein took the portraits of many of his courtiers, as well as those of others living in London, among them several German Hanseatic merchants. A number of painted portraits survive, mostly unsigned, but there are a far greater number of preparatory drawings for them, the vast majority of which (more than eighty) are today in the Royal Collection at Windsor Castle. These drawings include examples which can be matched to surviving painted portraits, and demonstrate that Holbein rarely departed from the method of working established early in his career in Basel -- that of taking a head and shoulders likeness during a sitting, and embellishing this at the painting stage by adding background details and sometimes altering clothing. Nevertheless, the drawing, using coloured chalks and sometimes Holbein's own notations as well, was crucial in establishing the details of likeness. The faces in Holbein's painted portraits are usually identical in dimensions to those surviving corresponding drawings -- for instance the painted portraits of Sir Richard Southwell (1536; Galleria degli Uffizi, Florence) and Simon George (Stadelsches Kunstinstitut, Frankfurt) compared to their respective drawings (both Royal Collection): this fact has helped to establish the method Holbein almost certainly used for creating his painted likenesses, one that involved tracing the outlines of the drawn portrait onto the panels he used for painting. Earlier in his career Holbein used mixtures of metalpoint and coloured chalks to make his portrait drawings, but by the 1530s he seems to have settled on the practice of drawing with chalks onto flesh-tinted paper and reinforcing the likenesses with extensive use of ink and brush, often employed at the same time in handwritten annotations recording the colour or simply the material of the costume to be painted. 
The existence of inscriptions naming the sitters in many of the surviving drawings has assisted in identifying a number of those in the painted portraits, as well as testifying to the range of courtiers Holbein depicted. According to the inventory of the Lumley collection, made at the end of the sixteenth century, and in which the drawings, then bound as a book, are recorded, the identifications were made by Sir John Cheke, tutor to Edward VI. Although the current inscriptions date from a considerably later period, the assertion of the Lumley inventory is a plausible one (not at odds with the few identifications known to be inaccurate). 
The drawings, considered with those painted portraits which bear inscriptions identifying their subjects, testify to Holbein's immense success at court. Early in his career he secured the patronage of Sir Thomas More, but he followed this before 1534 with that of Thomas Cromwell (the inscription on the letter he holds in his portrait in the Frick Collection, New York, gives his title as master of the jewel house, the position he held before he became king's secretary in that year), producing a half-length portrait showing Cromwell seated beside a table bearing books and papers. His three-quarter-length portrait of the third duke of Norfolk (Royal Collection) shows the duke full-face, as Henry VIII himself had been depicted, bearing his two staffs of office, while in a group of exceptionally subtle and beautiful studies for which no corresponding painted versions survive Holbein portrayed the duke's son, the earl of Surrey, his wife, and his sister (all Royal Collection). A number of sitters commissioned pairs of portraits: the humanist Sir Thomas Elyot and his wife, Margaret, were shown in this way (only drawings survive; Royal Collection), as were the royal physician Sir William Butts and his wife, Margaret (both Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston). 
In addition to these full-scale portraits Holbein painted several portrait miniatures in a technique using colours mixed with gum on vellum, an illuminator's technique which his biographer Carel van Mander states he learned in England from Lucas Horenbout. His earliest known essay in this technique appears not to have been in portraiture, but in the manuscript known as the 'Canones horoptri', a manual for an astronomical instrument which the royal astronomer Nikolaus Kratzer presented to Henry VIII in 1528 (Bodl. Oxf.). His portrait of Lady Audley is dependent on a large-scale drawing (both are in the Royal Collection), but it is not known whether Holbein also made a large-scale painted portrait, or whether he invariably made drawings to prepare for the painting of the miniatures. The portrait of Mrs Small (V&A; formerly known as Mrs Pemberton) shows the sitter at half-length and is remarkable for the confident placing of the sitter within the small circle of vellum and for the degree of detailed characterization achieved on this scale, which can withstand a considerable degree of magnification with no loss of effect whatsoever. This portrait is also of interest for the fact that the sitter was from a merchant rather than a courtier family, though she had court connections. Similarly, of two small portraits on panel of a man and woman of 1534 (Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna), one shows the man in the livery of Henry VIII's servants; they were perhaps court officials of a rank similar or only a little above that occupied by Holbein himself. 
The painted portraits of Holbein's English sitters from his second visit to England differ from those of the first brief visit of 1526-8 in the simplicity of their compositions: curtains and tables are largely absent and few sitters are framed by accessories or architecture in background or foreground. A dark blue background sometimes broken by the gilt letters of an inscription giving the year and age of the sitter (not in most cases the identity) was the most common adjunct to the figures. While some were posed with the noble accessory of a falcon (such as Robert Cheseman in the portrait of 1533 in the Mauritshuis, The Hague, or the unidentified man of 1541 in the same collection) or with the lute, less commonly the attribute of a courtier (for example, the unidentified man in the Gemaldegalerie, Berlin), most sitters were shown at half-length or in a head-and-shoulders composition completely alone, looking out of the picture away from the viewer, and without gesture to draw attention to them. The presence of shadows against the blue backgrounds, as well as the presence of inscriptions, however, acted as a subtle reminder of the illusionism that Holbein purveyed: the shadowed blue could not be the sky, and the inscriptions proclaimed that the likenesses were art, not reality. 
The number of portraits painted by Holbein which are certainly of Hanseatic merchants is small. Merchant marks and various inscriptions in these portraits, often on letters giving the address of the sitter as the merchants' steelyard beside the Thames, identify them; records show some did business with courtiers. These portraits are distinctive in format: half-lengths, often with inscriptions of a type not found on surviving portraits of English sitters, they were almost certainly painted to be sent home. The portrait of Derich Born of 1533 (Royal Collection) includes a Latin inscription on a parapet which challenges the viewer to say whether the real Derich or a painted version is present. In the portrait of Derick Tybis the sitter holds a piece of paper with a pious reference to his age, thirty-three, the age at which Christ was crucified. 
The portrait of Georg Gisze of 1532 (Gemaldegalerie, Berlin), is more elaborate than that of any other single individual painted by Holbein. It includes virtuoso representations of a glass vase with water, of pink satin seen through it, and of the coarse stitches of the Turkey carpet. Gisze's portrait is inscribed not only with the sitter's age and the date, but also, in Latin, 'No joy without sorrow', and further lines in Latin, headed in Greek, which draw attention to the veracity of the portrait as a representation of Gisze. The idea of the world's mutability is perhaps also evoked by the fragility of the glass vase, which stands on the edge of the table, by scales seeming to fall, and by the presence of the clock. 
Holbein's largest and most elaborate surviving portrait is the painting of 1533 known as 'The Ambassadors' (National Gallery, London). Its exceptional qualities derive in large part from the fact that it depicts two Frenchmen -- on the left, Jean de Dinteville, French ambassador to England, who commissioned the portrait, resplendent in pink satin and a black silk gown trimmed with fur, and on the right, in a long clerical gown, Georges de Selves, bishop of Lavaur, who visited Dinteville in England in the late spring of that year. Between the two men are shelves full of objects: globes of heaven and earth, other astronomical instruments, books, and musical instruments. Behind is a green damask curtain, which in the top left-hand corner has been drawn aside just sufficiently to reveal a silver crucifix. The two men stand on an inlaid pavement of elaborate geometrical design. Between them, at a diagonal, is a long greyish shape, the distorted image of a skull, which resolves into the correct perspective if the viewer stands parallel to the picture on the right-hand side or views it through a glass cylinder from the front. Holbein signed the picture with an unusually full signature, and if seen by English courtiers Holbein's talent must have astounded. However, the details of the composition were idiosyncratic and personal to Dinteville, and the painting itself was taken back to France to adorn his chateau of Polisy in Champagne. 
While the precise meanings of the objects on the shelves in 'The Ambassadors' have been much debated, it seems clear that collectively, ranging across the arts and sciences from astronomy to music to mathematics, they express a 'vanitas' theme, perhaps a particular preoccupation for Dinteville, who wears a hat badge with a tiny skull, and expressed much melancholy in letters written from the English court. Such a theme may be echoed in the broken string of the lute, but the presence of a Lutheran hymnbook has been linked to the bishop's concern for the divisions caused by the Reformation and with the exacerbation of such divisions caused by Henry VIII's marriage to Anne Boleyn while Dinteville himself was in London. Whether or not such specific events inspired the detail of the painting, there is little evidence to support theories that the astronomical instruments in it show dates and times of significance. 
One more large-scale portrait, 'Henry VIII and the Barber-Surgeons' Company' (Barber-Surgeons' Hall, London), is recorded in van Mander's biography of 1604 and survives today, along with the overpainted cartoon used to create it (Royal College of Surgeons, London). The portrait records the granting of a charter by the king in 1541 to combine the hitherto separate organizations of the Barbers and Surgeons, and includes portraits of the royal physicians William Butts and John Chambers which are similar to individual portraits by Holbein. The seated, frontal image of the king bears some relation to the image of the Whitehall painting, but the hieratic composition with its rows of heads is unexpectedly formal, closer to the woodcut on the title-page of the Coverdale 'Bible'. Parts of the painting have been embellished at a later date, and its condition makes it difficult to ascertain today the precise extent of Holbein's contribution to the painted surface, but other painters were certainly involved. 
The German Hanseatic merchant community in London did not only commission portraits from Holbein. In 1533 the city of London staged a series of nine pageants to celebrate Anne Boleyn's entry to the city on 31 May, the day before her coronation. According to Hall's 'Chronicle', the London Hanseatic merchants were responsible for the second pageant, which showed Apollo and the muses on Parnassus. A drawing by Holbein (Kupferstichkabinett, Berlin), shows just such a Parnassus scene, set on top of a triumphal arch of classical design. The drawing must certainly be connected with this occasion, but it is less clear whether it was made as a record or should be interpreted as evidence that Holbein was the designer of the pageant of Parnassus. It is conceivable that the commission was not a Hanseatic one, and that the English humanists John Leland and his collaborator Nicholas Udall may have involved Holbein in the plans for this or even the whole series of pageants. 
It is certain, however, that Holbein painted two large canvases for the Hanseatic merchants, 'The Triumph of Riches' and 'The Triumph of Poverty', both now lost. According to van Mander both paintings hung in the 'eet sael', or dining-room. Several copies survive, as well as Holbein's own drawing for 'The Triumph of Riches'. Copies of the two works made by Lucas Vorsterman in the seventeenth century show a semi-grisaille colour scheme with a frieze-like arrangement of allegorical figures in shades of brown processing with horse-drawn chariots against a blue sky, both decorous and elegant. The two works differed in length and composition, suggesting they were designed for specific positions, 'Riches' (AM Oxf.) occupying a long wall and 'Poverty' (BM) a short. 'Poverty' showed an old woman in a farm cart drawn by oxen and asses, while 'Riches' depicted an old man seated in a chariot accompanied by figures drawn from antiquity. On one copy of 'Poverty' are verses which refer to the turning of the wheel of fortune, and the cares brought by riches as well as poverty; there is no evidence to support the legend that these verses were composed by Sir Thomas More. 
Similar in style is the exquisite miniature painting on vellum in a grisaille technique of 'Solomon and Sheba' (Royal Collection). It would have been well suited to presentation to the king as a new year's gift, but it is not recorded in any of the surviving lists of such. It includes a biblical inscription also used by writers asserting Henry's supremacy over the English church, and is likely to have been devised as an allegory of the English Reformation, one of a small number of such images which Holbein appears to have produced in England, probably through his association with Thomas Cromwell. 
Holbein's 'Allegory of the Old and New Testaments' (NG Scot.) appears to be the only picture that he painted in England using protestant imagery. Elements of its composition are echoed in the artist's design for the title-page of the Coverdale 'Bible', published in 1535, and its painterly, colourful style is close to paintings of the early 1530s, such as 'The Ambassadors'. Holbein's painting is divided into two halves by the presence of a tree, which is bare of leaves on the left-hand side and in full leaf on the right. Underneath the tree sits a naked man with the prophet Isaiah and John the Baptist. On the left are 'Old Testament' scenes: Moses receiving the tablets, Adam and Eve, the brazen serpent, and manna being showered from heaven, as well as a decayed tomb with a skeleton. On the right are the annunciation to the Virgin, the annunciation to the shepherds, the crucifixion, Christ and the apostles, and the resurrected Christ trampling a skeleton and the devil. The composition has a close relationship with one of the key images of the protestant Reformation, which was produced in several versions by Lucas Cranach the elder. 
Holbein's title-page for the Coverdale 'Bible', although based on the opposition between the law and grace displayed in other contemporary bibles, is tailored specifically to English circumstances: the lower part of the design here is occupied by the king enthroned, distributing the 'Bible' to the bishops in the presence of the laity. The image of Henry VIII is placed directly underneath the tetragrammaton, in apparent acknowledgement of his position as the direct representative of God on earth, without the mediation of the pope. Holbein's design also includes a clear emphasis on the propagation of the word of God, placing Moses receiving the tablets opposite Christ and the apostles, and Esdras opposite the apostles preaching. The clarity and economy of the title-page show his mature powers of illustration and design to the full. 
In addition to the 'Bible' title-page, Holbein produced a 'New Testament' title-page and a design for Melanchthon's 'Loci communes', all of which were possibly intended to be produced as a gift for the king in 1535. Three small woodcuts by Holbein were used in later books, but seem not to appear in publications during his lifetime -- perhaps because the political climate made texts and images alike seem too radical: all three images show monks in the role of the biblical pharisees in scenes from Christ's ministry in the 'New Testament'. Had Holbein lived into the reign of Edward VI he might perhaps have made a greater contribution to the development of a specifically English protestant iconography. His sudden death in November 1543, probably from the plague, prevented this. 
Holbein's surviving portrait paintings and drawings, their likenesses remarkably unaffected by the conventions and fashions of their time, provide a unique and unparalleled depiction of the men and women of the Tudor court, including an image of Henry VIII so powerful that its influence in shaping our vision of Henry has endured to the present day. The loss of several of Holbein's largest and most spectacular paintings in both Basel and London distorts the degree of his achievement, more readily appreciated today in the design of book illustrations, portraits large and small, and altarpieces than in large-scale decorative designs. The range of his abilities in a number of media and artistic forms was remarkable: one of the greatest of European portraitists, Holbein was also instrumental in introducing the decorative styles of the Renaissance to England through his wall paintings and goldsmiths' designs, and he set a standard of extraordinary technical and artistic skill for the new form of the portrait miniature. 
Holbein was one of the very few early northern European artists to achieve lasting fame. His name endured from the sixteenth century through to the nineteenth, although it was frequently misapplied, particularly to English portraits of Tudor appearance and especially to images of Henry VIII. Holbein himself appears to have left no lasting stylistic legacy in England as a portrait painter, and his foreign status may have precluded the establishment of a workshop, but many copies of the portraits were produced, and his work appears to have continued to be well known to artists and collectors. Nicholas Hilliard wrote in the reign of Elizabeth I: 'Holbein's manner of limning I have ever imitated and hold it for the best' (Hilliard, 68-9). In the following century the fourteenth earl of Arundel, much preoccupied with collecting antiquities and the works of artists such as Rubens, confessed his particular 'weakness' for the work of Holbein, many of which he collected. Holbein's first biographer was Carel van Mander, whose life appeared with those of other artists in his 'Schilderboek' of 1604; it includes much information on Holbein's work in London, although van Mander himself appears never to have visited England. In 1676 a detailed list of Holbein's 'oeuvre' was published by Charles Patin and Sebastian Faesch. One hundred years later in England Horace Walpole created his own tribute to Holbein in the Holbein Chamber at Strawberry Hill, adorned with tracings of the Holbein drawings in the Royal Collection made by his compatriot George Vertue. In the nineteenth century the first art historical studies of his work were published, including the first in German by Alfred Woltmann and the first in English by Ralph Wornum. It was for long erroneously believed that Holbein lived through the reign of Edward, dying in 1554, permitting a number of later portraits to be wrongly ascribed to him; the publication of his will in 1861 revealing the date of his death as 1543 led inevitably to a reassessment of the documentary and pictorial sources for the study of his work, culminating in the comprehensive study of life and work by A. B. Chamberlain published in 1913. 
A number of portraits depicting Holbein survive, some showing him holding a paintbrush, possibly based on a self-portrait (such as the miniature version attributed to Lucas Horenbout, Wallace Collection, London). A drawing held to be a self-portrait is in the Uffizi. All show a bearded face and features which can plausibly be related to the portrait drawing of 1511 by his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 13479


Holborne, Antony (d. 1602?), lutenist and composer, may have been the man admitted in May 1562, possibly after attendance at Merchant Taylors' School, 'pensioner' of Christ's College, Cambridge, and in November 1565 to the Inner Temple. On 14 June 1584 at St Margaret's, Westminster, he married Elizabeth Marten; they had three daughters, Anne, Honor, and Dorothy, and an unnamed son known only from a letter of his mother, written in 1606. The family lived in that parish from 1584 to 1585 and from 1594 to 1596, but possibly elsewhere in between. Holborne styled himself gentleman and servant to the queen and was described by Robert Dowland in 1610 as gentleman usher to Queen Elizabeth, but no such appointment is recorded. He was probably a gentleman usher 'extraordinary', receiving no wages (and thus with no entry in the privy chamber accounts) and with no specific duties, but enjoying the status of gentleman and the protection conferred by nominal membership of the royal household. This honorary position would enable him to perform musical services to the queen under the guise of occasional attendance at court. A close parallel would be the place of gentleman-extraordinary of the Chapel Royal. 
Holborne's earliest surviving compositions seem to be 'The Countess of Pembrokes Funeralls', probably commemorating the deaths in 1586 of Mary Herbert's father, mother, and brother, Sir Philip Sidney, and 'The Countess of Ormond's Galliard', given as the tune for a song in Anthony Munday's 'Banquet of Daintie Conceits' (1588). A letter of 1594 requests some of his lessons for the bandora and there are two such by 'AH' in William Barley's 'New Booke of Tabliture' (1596). Holborne's own first publication was 'The Cittharn Schoole' (1597), containing graded pieces, some with separate bass parts, but without instructions. His brother William contributed 'sixe short Aers Neapolitan like to three voices'. Holborne himself was the most prolific composer for these wire-strung instruments; many pieces appear, besides his works for lute and for string ensembles, in English and foreign manuscripts. He provided commendatory verses in English to Thomas Morley's 'A Plaine and Easie Introduction' (1597), and in Latin to Giles Farnaby's 'Canzonets' (1598). Holborne's 'Pavans, galliards, almains and other short aiers both grave and light, in five parts, for viols, violins, or other[wise] musicall winde instruments' (1599) was the first English publication comparable with the continental collections, in several of which his music appears. Only two of his songs survive: 'O Lord whose grace' in the 'Swarland' manuscript, and 'My Heavy Sprite' in Robert Dowland's 'A Musicall Banquet' (1610). 

'The Cittharn Schoole' was dedicated to Thomas, Lord Burgh, who died in the year of publication (1597). In 'Pavans, Galliards, Almains' Holborne addresses Sir Richard Champernowne 'from the experience of many years', suggesting patronage over a period, perhaps in Champernowne's household at Modbury, Devon. There may have been a connection between Holborne and the countess of Pembroke's literary circle; their intense interest in emblematic literature could explain some of his esoteric titles, which have, for example, biblical and Ovidian links. 
Holborne is the only Elizabethan composer from whom there are several different versions of the same music, all apparently from his own pen. Certain pieces exist for solo lute, bandora, and cittern, as well as for five-part instrumental ensemble and for mixed consort (though the last may have been arranged by others). This may be no more than an accident of survival, but is in marked contrast to the works of most of his contemporaries. The key of a piece is often adjusted to suit the particular instrumental medium, but the tune and bass usually remain the same. Holborne excels in melodic and rhythmic invention, and he was clearly an accomplished player of the lute and other plucked instruments. His five-part ensemble collection is conceived as functional dance-music, with correct if unimaginative inner parts. There is little of the wayward part-writing of a Dowland nor the sustained interest of individual lines demanded by amateur string players. 
In January 1599 Holborne was sent by the queen with letters to the states of the United Provinces. On 29 November 1602 Elizabeth Holborne wrote to Cecil of her husband's taking cold on his business, fearing that it would cost him his life and that she would be unable to give him a suitable burial. The letter is endorsed 'primo December 1602 Widow Olborne' (Cecil MS 96, fol. 86), suggesting Holborne had probably died in London in the interim. The burial is unrecorded, but in 1606 Elizabeth described herself as a widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 13480


Holborne, Sir Robert (1598-1648), barrister and politician, was born to a gentry background on 15 November 1598, the eldest son of Nicholas Holborne ('fl'. 'c'.1570-1620) of Chichester, Sussex. His mother was possibly Anne ('fl'. 'c'.1570-1620), sister of John Lane. Holborne began his legal education at Furnival's Inn before entering Lincoln's Inn on 9 November 1615 and was called to the bar in 1623. He married Anne (died 1663), daughter of Sir Robert Dudley, the illegitimate heir of the Elizabethan courtier Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. Holborne was steward for a Sussex manor in 1622 and was involved in further land transactions in that county in 1628 and 1636. Through his marriage Holborne acquired an interest in his wife's Warwickshire lands valued at $80 a year. 
During the 1630s Holborne emerged as a critic of the fiscal policies of Charles I's personal rule (1629-40) during which the king governed without parliament or aid of parliamentary subsidy. Along with Oliver St John he served as counsel for John Hampden in the ship money case, making an elaborate four-day argument from 2 to 5 December 1637. His distaste for the fiscal measures of the personal rule persisted and in 1639 he attacked tonnage and poundage on behalf of a merchant's widow. In 1640 he became a bencher of his inn and sat in the Short Parliament for Southwark speaking occasionally on issues relating to parliamentary subsidies and the legality of ship money. In the Long Parliament he sat for the borough of St Michael, Cornwall, which he may have procured through his association with members of the Arundell family with whom he had been familiar at Lincoln's Inn. In parliament he emerged as a leading royalist, changing sides probably for reasons of religion. Holborne championed both episcopacy and the legislative autonomy of the clerical estate against a rising tide of Erastian sentiment in the early Long Parliament. On 15 December 1640 he confronted his former ally and co-counsel Oliver St John and John Pym over the legality of the 1640 canons passed by convocation after the dissolution of the Short Parliament. Holborne argued that not only could convocation make canons by royal assent alone without parliamentary confirmation but also that these canons could bind the laity provided that they 'weere not against law' (D'Ewes, 152). Holborne argued further that the king was within his right to continue convocation by separate commission after the dissolution of parliament, citing numerous precedents that his opponent Sir Simonds D'Ewes described as 'being very dangerous examples' (ibid., 153). In the spring of 1641 Holborne both opposed in the house and ultimately voted against the attainder of the earl of Strafford. In November of that year he spoke in defence of the impeached twelve bishops on charges of high crimes and misdemeanours. His last committee appointment in the House of Commons was 29 March 1642 and he appears to have absented himself soon afterwards. 
Later in the same year Holborne reappeared, having joined the king at Oxford, where he published 'The reading in Lincolnes-Inne, Feb. 28. 1641: vpon the stat. of 25.E.3. cap. 2., being the Statute of Treasons'. At Oxford the king made him attorney-general to the prince of Wales, knighting him on 19 January 1643. He also received the degrees of MA and DCL from the University of Oxford on 1 November 1642 and 7 February 1643. Also about this time the Long Parliament sequestrated his estates. He was probably not, as the 'Dictionary of National Biography' recorded, the author of 'The Freeholders Grand Inquest' (1648), a tract that more recent scholarship has convincingly reattributed to Sir Robert Filmer. However, it is possible that Holborne was among those whom Filmer consulted in the composition of the tract. He was an avid follower of astrology, being a devotee of William Lilly, at one point paying $100 to Nicholas Fiske for the calculation of his nativity. He died childless, in London or Middlesex, and was buried under Lincoln's Inn chapel on 16 February 1648. 


@@@@@


doc= 13481


Holbrook, Ann Catherine (1780-1837), actress and author, was probably born in London. Her father, Thomas Jackson, was an actor, and she was brought up to that profession. Before she was eighteen she played with success such characters as Juliet, Roxana, and Alicia. Her mother died in 1794 and her father at Norwich in 1798. On his deathbed he commended her to his own manager, John Brunton, of the Colchester theatre, who failed to fulfil this last request. She then went to London to seek work on the stage through a theatrical 'register-office' in Russell Court, which referred her to a provincial company at Lewes in Sussex. Three months later, in Battle, Sussex, she married a man named Holbrook who was an actor with the same company. They acted together with various provincial companies in such towns as Taunton, Preston, and Lancaster, where 'the noble ladies' made her a liberal present. They then tried engagements in Cheltenham, where the countess of Kenmare attended their benefit, in Windsor, and in Daventry, where there was a fire in the theatre. An engagement with W. C. Macready in the midlands followed during which they hoped to earn more for the support of their children, but they soon left the stage, disillusioned with the 'nine years of misery' produced by the general conditions they had encountered in the theatre and with management in particular. Ann Holbrook then turned to writing, and produced in 1809 'The Dramatist, or, Memoirs of the Stage, with the Life of the Authoress'. A large part of this small book, subscribed to by nine members of the aristocracy among numerous others, is devoted to the financial difficulties of life as an actor and the insensitive treatment by management, which she hoped might prove a deterrent to others wishing to enter the profession. She did not hesitate to recount anecdotes against herself, such as a description of a time when she lost her wig on the stage, to the embarrassment of cast and audience. She continued to write, producing 'Tales, Serious and Instructive' in 1821, 'Constantine Castriot, an Historical Tale' in 1829, and 'Realities and Reflections: a Series of Original Tales' in 1834. She died in London in January 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 13482


Holbroke, John (d. 1437), mathematician and astronomer, was a native of Suffolk. He is first recorded in August 1393, when he was admitted to a fellowship at Peterhouse, Cambridge; he became master about June 1421 and held that position for the rest of his life. He was ordained priest in 1413 and was styled DTh by 1418; no doubt he had been awarded the degree of MA several years before. Holbroke endowed the Barnard Castle loan chest at Peterhouse with 10 marks in 1426 and 20 marks in 1436. Borrowers from the chest were to pray for the souls of Holbroke and their other benefactors. He served as proctor of Cambridge University in 1398-9 and as chancellor of the university in November 1429 and in 1430. During his chancellorship a memorable dispute, the 'Barnwell Process', arose with the bishop of Ely concerning ecclesiastical jurisdiction over university scholars. Pope Martin V ('r'. 1417-31) delegated the adjudication to the prior of Barnwell, who ruled in favour of the university's autonomy from diocesan control. Holbroke was a chaplain to Henry V and Henry VI. According to the astrological treatise, 'Cum rerum motu' (a work of uncertain authorship, preserved only in CUL, MS Ee.3.61, fols. 159-75), Henry V, detained by the siege of Meaux, dispatched Holbroke to Windsor to be present at the birth of the king's son. Holbroke is said to have been the first man to set eyes on the infant prince, the future Henry VI. Apparently he twice calculated Henry VI's natal horoscope: 'Cum rerum motu' cites the royal nativity 'secundum Mag.J.Holbroke'. However, an amended version appears in a manuscript owned by Holbroke (BL, Egerton MS 889, fol. 5'r'; an additional copy in Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 369, fol. 182'v'). There is no record of his interpretation of these bare natal horoscopes, that is, of the astrological portents for Henry VI's reign. 
Holbroke's reputation as a mathematician derived from his compilation of astronomical tables for the Cambridge meridian. His 'Opus primum' is a set of tables which allow the calculation of the true and mean positions of the sun, moon, and planets. Striving for greater accuracy, Holbroke extended the calculation of planetary locations to ten sexagesimal places in his 'Opus secundum'. The tremendous, if vain, effort of drafting the 'Opus secundum' impressed users of the tables well into the next century. One sixteenth-century scholar remarked: 'This man was the mathematical glory of Cambridge for ther was nower any one good in this knowledge before Holbrooke who was 'satis profundus'' (Gloucester, Cathedral Library, MS 21, fol. 163). Holbroke died in Cambridge in or before July 1437 and was buried in the chancel of St Mary-the-Less, Cambridge, where a monumental brass remains (although it has been severely damaged). He presented three books to Peterhouse in 1426: a copy of Haly Abenragel's 'De judiciis stellarum' (now Oxford, Corpus Christi College, MS 151), John Ashenden's 'Summa judicialis de accidentibus mundi' (London, Royal College of Physicians, MS 390), and Holbroke's astronomical tables, written partly in his own hand (BL, Egerton MS 889, also known as the 'Codex Holbrookensis'). Another manuscript owned by Holbroke entered the Peterhouse Library at a later date (Cambridge, Peterhouse, MS 267). To the university he gave a copy of Gregory's 'Super Ezechielem', and two knives with ivory handles. Holbroke's will also provided for the construction of the lower choir stalls for the chapel of Peterhouse. 


@@@@@


doc= 13483


Holburne, Francis (1704-1771), naval officer, was the second son of Sir James Holburne, first baronet, of Menstrie, Edinburghshire. He entered the navy in 1720 as a volunteer in the 'St Albans', and passed his examination on 28 January 1726; he was promoted lieutenant on 12 December 1727 and captain on 14 July 1739. In 1740 he commanded the frigate 'Dolphin' in the channel and North Sea. In 1745-6 he commanded the 'Argyle' in the West Indies, and in December 1747 he was appointed to the 'Kent' as Rear-Admiral Edward Hawke's flag-captain in the channel and the Bay of Biscay. In September 1748 he exchanged into the 'Bristol', but was almost immediately afterwards moved into the 'Tavistock' (50 guns), a worn-out ship, in which he was sent to the Leeward Islands as commodore and commander-in-chief. His principal work was diplomatic rather than naval. By the terms of the treaty of 1684 Tobago was neutralized; but early in 1749 it came to Holburne's knowledge that M. De Caylus, the governor of Martinique, had established a fortified post there. As Holburne's squadron consisted of one rotten ship of 50 guns and two equally rotten 20 gun frigates, it was impossible for him to prevent this by force. He knew that De Caylus, who was a naval officer, was aware of this; but upon Holburne's remonstrances the fortifications were dismantled and the garrison withdrawn. Holburne returned to England in 1752. On 5 February 1755 he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue, and in the following May, with his flag in the 'Terrible', he sailed with a strong squadron to reinforce Vice-Admiral Edward Boscawen, whom he met off Louisbourg on 21 June, and with whom he returned to England in November. In 1756, with his flag still in the 'Terrible', he commanded in the third post in the fleet under Hawke or Boscawen off Brest and in the Bay of Biscay, and in the following January he sat as a member of the court martial on Admiral John Byng. On 24 February 1757 Holburne was promoted vice-admiral of the blue and on 7 May, after many delays, he sailed from Cork with a fleet of ships of war and transports intended for the reduction of Louisbourg, which had been restored to the French by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle. It was not, however, until 9 July that the expedition reached Halifax, Nova Scotia. By this date the French had taken advantage of the delay to strengthen the garrison and to collect a numerous fleet. Holburne, in consultation with the general, the earl of Loudoun, decided that nothing could be done without more force. As the season wore on, he determined to parade his fleet before Louisbourg, possibly in the hope that the French would accept his challenge. However, the French fleet, its crews weakened by disease, remained in port. While Holburne waited on the coast his fleet was caught on the night of 24 September by a violent storm, which drove some of the ships on shore, and wholly or in part dismasted almost all. After such refit as was possible Holburne returned to England, where he arrived in the beginning of December. A few days later he was appointed to the command in chief at 'that villainous' Portsmouth (Rodger, 32) a charge which he held either continuously or more probably with a break for the very unusual term of eight years, the latter part of the time being enlivened by a curious inquiry into an alleged plot in November 1764 to set fire to all the dockyards. The several commanders-in-chief and resident commissioners were ordered to investigate the matter; but this was done with the utmost secrecy, and the report cannot now be found. 
During the Seven Years' War Holburne continued to have good relations with Admiral Hawke. These persisted well into Hawke's term as first lord of the Admiralty (1766-71). Boscawen's earlier view of Holburne was less favourable: 'I don't like him, nor ever did' (Mackay, 138); and in 1758 Lord Anson thought him subversive, an opinion that probably drew something from Holburne's Scottish origins and his failure to adopt English 'manners' as befitted a naval officer. On 5 August 1767 Holburne attained the rank of admiral of the blue, and on 28 October 1770 admiral of the white; about the same time he was appointed rear-admiral of Great Britain. He was one of the lords of the Admiralty from February 1770 to January 1771, when he accepted the post of governor of Greenwich Hospital. He died at the hospital on 15 July 1771. 
Holburne had married at Barbados the widow of Edward Lascelles, collector of customs for the island; they had one son, Francis, who in 1772 succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his cousin, Sir Alexander, third baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 13484


Holcombe, Henry (fl. 1707-1748), composer, was, according to Charles Burney, a chorister at Salisbury (not Shrewsbury, as the 'Dictionary of National Biography' stated). As a youth he joined the Anglo-Italian opera at Drury Lane, billed as 'the boy' in Purcell's masque 'Timon' (1 January 1707) and in the masque attributed to the same composer 'The Tempest, or, The Inchanted Island' (5 March 1706). Under his own name he sang between the acts of 'The Recruiting Officer' at Dorset Gardens (24 October and 1 November 1706), and of 'Rosamond' (4 March 1707) at Drury Lane. He sang at the Queen's Theatre in the 1709-10 season, but appeared no more on the stage until 26 February 1729 when he sang six songs at his own benefit concert at Drury Lane. His voice broken, and unable to compete with the vogue for Italian singers, Holcombe became a successful teacher of singing and the harpsichord. He published two collections of songs, 'The Musical Medley' and 'The Garland', and 'Six Solos for Violin', all in 1745. Two of his songs, 'Happy Hour' and 'Arno's Vale', were very popular in their day. He was one of the original subscribers to the Society of Musicians in 1739, and was living in Russell Street, Covent Garden, in 1748. He has been tentatively identified with the Henry Holcombe whose wife, Martha, was buried on 16 August 1752 at St Paul's, Covent Garden, in which case he was living at that date. If this identification is correct, it seems further likely that his wife was Martha Haynes, who married Henry Holcomb on 12 May 1716 at St Giles Cripplegate. 


@@@@@


doc= 13485


Holcot, Robert (c.1290-1349), Dominican friar and theologian, was born about 1290, on the evidence of his later career. His surname, and his later association with the Dominican priory at Northampton, suggest he was born in or near the village of Holcot in Northamptonshire. He probably joined the Dominicans in Northampton, before moving to Oxford, where he remained from 'c'.1326 to 'c'.1334, attending the Dominican school there. In March 1332 he was granted licence to hear confession in the diocese of Lincoln, which included Oxford. He held the Dominican chair of theology in Oxford for a year, ending probably in early 1334 -- his final sermon for this period refers to the riots between northern and southern students, but not to the subsequent migration to Stamford in spring 1334. Holcot looked back on his regency as arduous, describing problems that included strong competition for the post and difficulties with his lecture room; for some unknown reason he had to lecture in hired rooms, rather than at Blackfriars. 
From Oxford, Holcot was sent to Cambridge and held a second regency 'c'.1334- 'c'.1336. During this time he wrote his famous and popular 'Commentary on Wisdom', which represents a two-year lecture course. At some period after this Holcot was one of the scholars who worked as assistants to the book-collecting bishop of Durham, Richard Bury. Holcot may have had some involvement in the production of the 'Philobiblon', a book written in Bury's name. This stage in his life was probably over before the next definite date for Holcot, who during 1342 was granted licence to hear confessions in the diocese of Salisbury. Licences also show that from 10 February 1343 until 21 October 1348, he was at Northampton. He died at Northampton in 1349, reputedly of plague, and was buried there, at the church of Northampton Blackfriars. A will made as late as 1536 left vestments and plate to the church and asked that the deceased, Mary Middleton, should be buried next to Holcot. 
Robert Holcot was a prolific scholar who produced a large number and range of works, mainly but not exclusively theological. Many of these were very popular and survive not only in manuscript, but also in printed editions. Holcot is interesting in a number of ways beyond his undoubted role as a theologian. He was a humanist and a moralist, with a lively sense of humour described as the strongest of any medieval moralist by Beryl Smalley, who considered him the most celebrated and the most diversely gifted of all the friars of her famous 'classicizing group' -- those English friars dedicated to integrating classical tales and knowledge into their religious works, in order to increase the interest and appeal for the reader or listener. The notable success of works of this type indicates the shrewdness of their authors. However, their decision to use this method was no cynical marketing ploy, but rather a reflection of these writers' own personal fascination with, and delight in, such classical culture as they were able to obtain access to. Holcot's enjoyment of, and enthusiasm for, such classical material shows clearly in his writings. In his case, classical lore and theological learning were allied to vivid descriptions of the political and social issues of his day: the student riots of the 1330s, the deposition of Edward II, the Scottish wars, and many other topical subjects are referred to in his theological works. 
The diversity of Holcot's interests is further shown by the fact that he also played a part in the history of science, and in the development of English calculation, through his 'Tractatus de stellis', a text on astronomy, geography, and astrology which is in effect a commentary on Aristotle's 'De coelo'. 
Holcot was an important figure in the development of English scholasticism which followed upon the work of William Ockham. Ockham and Thomas Aquinas were his two chief mentors, although he was capable of disagreeing with both, as he did, for instance, on the nature of the Trinity. In the earlier part of the twentieth century Holcot was thought to be an intellectual sceptic, but later close study of his works by Fritz Hoffman and others has suggested that the reverse is true. 
In his 'Commentary on the Sentences', Holcot famously disagreed with Ockham on the nature of logic, concluding that there must be two systems of logic: Aristotelian logic, appropriate to the natural order; and a logic of faith, differing in its rules from Aristotle and more appropriate to the supernatural order. Later in his career he changed his views, and his 'quodlibeta' show a return to the belief that Aristotelian logic was universally applicable. Holcot's theological views attracted attention both during his lifetime and long afterwards. He was one of the Pelagians attacked in Thomas Bradwardine's defence of predestination; throughout his career Holcot argued that each individual had the free will to make confession of his or her sins, and subsequently receive God's grace. His views on predestination were studied by a number of medieval scholars, and were still discussed in works as late as those of the Reformation theologian Johann Eck. 
Holcot's works typically show a great range and number of quotations in illustration of his themes. The sources he used were astonishingly numerous and varied, ranging from the common 'exempla' collections of the period to the rarer of Seneca's letters and the 'Noctes Atticae' of Aulus Gellius, said to be a scarce book in England. This is particularly true in his 'Commentary on Wisdom'. The earliest surviving manuscript, Oxford, Balliol College, MS 27, dates to the middle of the fourteenth century or earlier, and if not an actual autograph copy is close to it. Many editions were later printed, at least five before the end of the fifteenth century. 
Holcot's 'Commentary on Wisdom' was one of the most popular commentaries of the late middle ages. It made his name famous throughout medieval Europe, and surviving catalogues show that every well-stocked library came to have a copy. It is a vast work, and although it follows most of the conventions of its genre, in many ways it resembles one of the pastoral handbooks popularized in the late thirteenth century. It could certainly have functioned as such: indeed it seems probable that this quality was one of the main reasons why it was such an outstanding and lasting success. Alongside its many chapters on youth, education, and the family, lie lengthy discussions of married life, society, and its structure, theories on the republic, the duties of kings and judges, and many other topics. A late fourteenth-century 'explicit' attributes its success to the fact that it addresses and informs rulers. This would have appealed in an age of growing interest in political science, and was certainly a factor in the success of the 'Communiloquium' of John of Wales. The contents of this earlier pastoral handbook have much in common with Holcot's the 'Wisdom of Solomon' commentary: Holcot owed John of Wales a substantial debt, which he himself only partly acknowledged. 
While the 'Commentary on Wisdom' was probably Holcot's most famous work, he wrote many others. At least ten survive today, and careful study has established the order in which some of them were written. This makes it possible to trace the development of Holcot's views on theology, politics, and logic, to an extent that was not previously possible. 
One of his earliest works must have been his 'Quaestiones super libros sententiarum', completed before 1332, when Holcot took up his Oxford regency. More than thirty complete manuscripts survive, and several partial manuscripts. The text was studied by many medieval scholars, and was printed three times (Lyons 1497, 1505, 1518). The Parisian master Jacques Almain wrote a treatise upon it. 
Another early work was the 'Commentary on the Twelve Lesser Prophets'. Only four manuscripts of this survive, and it is in a very rough and unfinished form. It tells stories about Oxford that suggest it was written there, and it refers to Holcot's own 'Quaestiones super libros sententiarum'. It probably dates to Holcot's Oxford regency in 1333-4, immediately before the 'Wisdom of Solomon' commentary of 1334-6. The latter was followed not long afterwards by the 'Moralitates', which survives in many manuscripts, and also three printed editions (Venice 1505, Paris 1510, Basel 1586). The 'Moralitates' must have been completed before 1342, as it was a major source for the famous 'Gesta Romanorum', a collection of classical tales whose earliest manuscript dates to this year. 
Holcot's 'Commentary on Ecclesiasticus', although incomplete, was also popular and was printed at least six times (including Venice 1509). It appears to have formed part of a lecture course, and its nature, and the sources used, which include Pierre Auriol's 'Compendium litteralis' and works by Nicholas de Lyre, indicate that it belongs to the last few years of his life, the late 1340s, when he was teaching at Blackfriars in Northampton. This supports the medieval tradition that Holcot was still working on it when he fell victim to plague in 1349. 
Holcot's other published works were long believed to include a commentary on 'Proverbs' (Paris 1510), now attributed to the Dominican Thomas Ringstead, and possibly one on the 'Song of Songs' (Venice 1509). He also left a number of works which were never published and survive in only a very few manuscripts. These include his 'Sermons', a lifetime's collection surviving only in Cambridge, Peterhouse, MS 210, and his 'Quodlibeta', found in a few manuscripts including BL, Royal MS 10 C.vi, fols. 141-174. The sermon collection covers a wide range of subjects, and contains sermons from many stages of his career. It is therefore an important source for those wishing to trace the development of Holcot's views. The 'quodlibeta' are an essential source for their author's late conversion to the general applicability of Aristotelian logic. 
Other lesser works by Holcot include a fragmentary commentary on 'Ecclesiastes' (BL, Royal MS 2 D.iv, fols. 90-159); the 'Principium' for an unfinished lecture series on 'St Matthew' (probably dating from February 1334 -- see BL, Royal MS 10 C.vi, fol. 136'v'b), and a preaching aid, the 'Convertimini', dated by Smalley to the period 1337-41. 


@@@@@


doc= 13486


Holcroft, Francis (1628/9?-1692), clergyman and ejected minister, was a younger son of Sir Henry Holcroft ('c'.1580-1650), of Green Street, East Ham, Essex, and his wife, Lettice, daughter of Francis Aungier, first Baron Aungier of Longford in Ireland. He was admitted as a pensioner at Clare College, Cambridge, on 24 June 1647, and had as his 'chamber-fellow' John Tillotson, later archbishop of Canterbury. Holcroft graduated BA in 1650, became a fellow in 1651, and proceeded MA in 1654. While at Cambridge he embraced puritan principles, and became a communicant with the congregation of Jonathan Jephcot, vicar of St Mary, Swaffham Prior, acting for a time as an unpaid minister at Littlington, Cambridgeshire. On 8 January 1656 he accepted the living of Bassingbourn, and also in that year joined the voluntary Cambridgeshire association of ministers. On 10 December 1657 he was appointed an assistant to commission for the ministry in the counties of Cambridge and Huntingdon. 
In 1660 Holcroft was ejected from both his fellowship and his living. He stayed in London for a time and preached at Croydon with Thomas Taylor, the former pastor at Bury St Edmunds. In 1663 it was reported that he 'lyes at Widdow Hawkes att Barly in Harfordshire who hath meetings of 300 at a time... meets with many hundreds at Cambridge' ('Calamy rev.', 271). Holcroft formed a gathered church on congregational principles; the wide geographical spread of his people led, after a meeting at Eversden, to the recruitment as elders of Joseph Oddy and two others. A government agent reported that these rode 'by turns... into Hertfordshire, Cambridgeshire and Bedfordshire to gather a concourse of people to their meetings' (Davids, 621). 
In August 1663 Holcroft was imprisoned in Cambridge gaol for illegal preaching, and was said to have been sentenced 'either to take the oath of abjuration of the kingdom, never to return, or be hanged... if theyl transport him and sell him for a slave it will be worse than death' ('Heywood... Autobiography', 3.83). In August 1664 he petitioned for a pardon, protesting that he had taken the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, and asked to be able to travel overseas for a time. A reprieve was granted following the intervention of the earl of Anglesey, but travel plans were disrupted first by plague, and then by war with France, and he was still in prison in July 1666. In 1669 Holcroft was reported as preaching at the city of Cambridge, in Histon, Over, Stoke-cum-Quy, and Haddenham (all in Cambridgeshire), and also at Hugglescote, Leicestershire. The episcopal returns report meetings of about a hundred in four of these parishes. On 8 May he was licensed to teach as a congregationalist in Bridge Street, Cambridge, and he was released on 17 May, but the licence did not discourage the authorities from rearresting him on 6 April the following year. Renewed imprisonment resulted in insolvency and committal to the Fleet prison, where it was reported that he frequently preached to large crowds of people. He was helped through these difficulties, Edmund Calamy reports, by his old room-mate, John Tillotson. 
Holcroft's troubles, however, continued. He appears to have moved to Chesterton, Cambridgeshire, for on 1 September 1676 he was presented for absence from church for a month as of that place. Also in that year he and Oddy debated at Triplow with the Quaker Samuel Cater. In a bad-tempered series of exchanges, Holcroft described Cater's view that every man is enlightened by Christ as 'cursed idolatry' and Cater said Holcroft was 'in knowledge more brutish than a beast'; the two congregationalists are said to have 'hastened away with railing words' (Whiting, 123). Holcroft is known to have preached in Hitchin on 24 May 1678. It is not known how long he actually spent in Cambridge gaol -- the few months following the indulgence are the only certain extended period of freedom during the years from 1662 to 1680. Whether his preaching activities in other periods stemmed from the sympathies of his gaoler or from official discharges is unclear. In his 'A Word from the Watch Tower', dated from Cambridge Castle, 27 December 1679, he states that he had been there for seven years. The work was directed to 'the faithful brethren in Christ in London'; this reflected his connection with the congregational churches whose leaders were John Owen and John Griffith. 
On 7 October 1680 at the quarter sessions, Holcroft 'late of Chesterton' was imprisoned for having failed to appear in church for a month; recently 'in the mansion house of one Robert Stainsmore, in Chesterton aforesaid' he had been 'voluntarily present at an unlawfull assembly' ('The Case of many Protestants in the County of Cambridge'). His efforts were regarded with suspicion on the respectable wing of dissent, and not only because of his opposition to communion with members of the established church. Edward Pearse wrote to Richard Baxter on 23 December 1687 complaining that at Holcroft's house 'Anabaptists have exercised there, and young raw fellows have exercised upon scripture their own conceits' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.293). Holcroft himself seems to have come to regret his own liberalism, for after 1689 he became prone to deep depression 'promoted by grief for the headiness of some of his people, who turned preachers, or encouraged such as did so' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.86); reference was later made to 'God's dark and severe dispensation towards him in his latter days' (Milway, 21). According to Thomas Milway's 'A Funeral Sermon' (1692), Holcroft died at Triplow, Cambridgeshire, on 6 January 1692 aged sixty-three, and was buried in the dissenters' graveyard at Oakington, although his memorial there gives his age at death as fifty-nine. 


@@@@@


doc= 13487


Holcroft, Thomas (1745-1809), writer, was born in Orange Court, Leicester Fields, London, on 10 December 1745, the son of Thomas Holcroft (died 1797), a shoemaker, and his wife, Sarah, an occasional costermonger. He was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 25 December. Detailed knowledge of Holcroft's life comes mainly from his autobiography. The elder Thomas Holcroft was probably from Martin Mere near Stockport and was the son of a 'white cooper' or maker of pails and tubs for domestic and dairy use. He kept a shoemaker's shop in Orange Court specializing in the unique boots worn by sedan-chair carriers, and later hired out horses. 
When the family encountered financial difficulties they settled in Berkshire, beyond Ascot Heath. Here Holcroft's father taught him to read; he went through eleven chapters of the 'Old Testament' a day and read chapbooks such as 'Parismus and Parismenes' and 'The Seven Champions of Christendom'. Holcroft's parents then became itinerant pedlars throughout East Anglia and the midlands. Holcroft later wrote of his father, 'I believe few men in the kingdom had in the course of their lives been the hucksters of so many small wares; or more enterprising dealers in articles of a half-penny value' (Holcroft, 1.26). They kept a run-down house at Rugeley, Staffordshire, and attended markets and fairs. The young Holcroft was put to many tasks to augment the family income, and at times the family had to sleep rough, permanently impairing Holcroft's health. Holcroft's father was a sober man and proud of his son's intellectual superiority to other boys, but he had a short temper and often beat Thomas for minor faults. 
For a while Holcroft was apprenticed to a stocking weaver at Nottingham, but having a passion for horses he became a stable boy at Newmarket in 1757 and worked for various grooms of noblemen horse-breeders over two and a half years. Here he lived relatively well, though he was occasionally thrown by horses and was called upon to defend himself with his fists against bullying. At Newmarket he continued his informal education, learning arithmetic and singing from occasional teachers and reading whatever he could find, including ballads and broadsheets pasted on alehouse and cottage walls. His father's friend gave him 'The Spectator' and 'Gulliver's Travels'; he loved the latter, and tales of the marvellous, though he disbelieved in spirits and ghosts. He also enjoyed pious books such as 'The Whole Duty of Man' and Horneck's 'Crucified Jesus', and he ranked Bunyan 'among the most divine authors I had ever read' (Holcroft, 1.93). He caught betting fever at Newmarket, and was chagrined to find that boys he thought intellectually inferior were cleverer at placing wagers. Unpopular with most of his workmates, he eventually left Newmarket to work at his father's cobbling stall in South Audley Street, London, continuing to spend any spare money on books. When he was nineteen he accompanied his father to Liverpool and taught reading at a school before returning to London and the cobbling trade. 
In 1765 Holcroft married and had a daughter, Ann, but nothing more is known of this union, and his wife appears to have died prematurely. He had some essays published in the 'Whitehall Evening Post', but an attempt to start a school in the country failed. He then entered the household of Granville Sharpe as part servant, part secretary, but was dismissed for persistently attending a spouting club for amateur dramatic recitation. Holcroft considered joining the East India Company army, but instead turned to the theatre; he played small parts with Samuel Foote's Haymarket Theatre in summer 1770 and then, with Charles Macklin's introduction, became a prompter and bit-part actor at William Dawson's Capel Street Theatre in Dublin. He quarrelled with Dawson and joined Henry Mossop's Smock Alley company briefly, then a company at Leeds, and then Roger Kemble's company at Hereford. After another quarrel he joined Samuel Stanton's company at Birmingham. In 1774 he married Matilda Tipler from Nottingham; in the autumn of that year the couple joined Booth's company at Carlisle, where Holcroft remained for a year and a half. A son, William, was born in 1773 and a daughter, Sophy, at Cockermouth in 1775; their mother died soon afterwards, apparently from complications of childbirth. Aiming to better himself in London, Holcroft, like many others, wrote to David Garrick, stating that he specialized in low comedy and old men, knew music well, had some French, and could fence; he enclosed a poem, 'Hope, or, The Delusion', but received no response. He met the composer William Shield and knew Muzio Clementi, the pianist and composer; he sang in concerts and continued to play the violin. He carried on acting in the provinces, from Edinburgh to Canterbury, and, conscious of his haphazard education, he read such books as Lowth's grammar and Pope's translation of Homer, preferring moral to descriptive and sentimental poets. Wherever he was, he cultivated men of enquiring mind and literary bent, such as the antiquary and promoter of vegetarianism Joseph Ritson at Stockton upon Tees. 
Holcroft still longed for a career in London, however, and went there in 1777. Soon afterwards, on 14 June 1778, he married for the third time. With his new wife, Dinah Robinson, he had a fourth child, Fanny ['see below'], who later became a novelist, playwright, and translator. He and his wife kept a house in Southampton Buildings and took lodgers to make ends meet. While with Booth he had written dramatic sketches, and he now sent an afterpiece, 'The Crisis, or, Love and Fear', to the wife of R. B. Sheridan, with a long list of the roles he played and his other theatrical skills. He landed a place in the Drury Lane company at 20's'. a week, and began in small singing parts in January 1777. 'The Crisis', with music by Shield, lasted only one night, 1 May 1778, but Sheridan raised his wage. In summer 1778 Holcroft joined W. W. Dimond's company at Canterbury for the London off-season, during which he acquired many new parts and staged his comedy 'Rosamond, or, The Dutiful Daughter'. Back at Drury Lane in the autumn, still with only minor parts, he tried any kind of writing possible to earn more money. A small volume of poems entitled 'Elegies' (1777) received little attention. He completed two afterpieces, 'The Shepherdess of the Alps' and 'The Maid of the Vale' (a translation of Goldoni's opera 'La buona figliuola', then being performed in London). His series of essays entitled 'The philosopher' and a serial novella, 'Manthorn, the Enthusiast', were published in the 'Town and Country Magazine' (1777-8, 1778-9). He also wrote some pieces for Thomas King, manager of Sadler's Wells Theatre, and songs with music by Shield for performance at the Vauxhall pleasure gardens, some of which achieved popularity. His column entitled 'The actor', which dealt with theatrical issues, ran in the 'Westminster Magazine'. He fictionalized his experiences as a strolling player, including his aspirations for upward mobility, in an epistolary picaresque novel, 'Alwyn, or, The Gentleman Comedian' (1780), that followed in the tradition of Le Sage, Fielding, and Smollett. Holcroft also wrote two books about the infamous Gordon riots of 1780, more as a journalist for money than out of any political leanings: 'A Plain and Succinct Narrative' was described in the 'Town and Country Magazine' as 'one of the best productions of the kind' in pamphlet form (vol. 12, July 1780, 351), and was followed the next year by Holcroft's account of Gordon's trial. Holcroft financially helped his mother and father, now living in or near Bath, and continued to do so for many years. He took minor roles at Drury Lane through the season of 1781-2 and parts in provincial companies at Portsmouth, Nottingham, and elsewhere in the summers. His comedy 'Duplicity', whose plot resembles the story of Edward Moore's popular tragedy 'The Gamester', was staged at Covent Garden on 13 October 1781 and was performed six more times, but was postponed on several occasions because of a leading actor's illness. 
Although Holcroft felt the play was not allowed an appropriate run, this modest success encouraged him. He also widened his artistic and intellectual circle with friends such as Richard Fulke Greville and William Nicholson. Still aiming to rise socially and professionally, he wrote to Lord Shelburne seeking a place in the British embassy at Paris and identifying himself as a well-wisher to the government. In 1783 he went to Paris, as a correspondent for a newspaper, the 'Morning Herald', at a guinea and a half a week, a little more than he had been getting as an actor. The printer John Rivington engaged him to scout for French publications suitable for translating; some of these translations Holcroft later made himself, though the extent of his published translation has been questioned. At Paris he wrote a tragedy, 'Ellen, or, The Fatal Cave', and met the children's writer Arnaud Berquin, some literary aristocrats including the marquis de Dampierre, later a general in the French revolutionary army, and L. S. Mercier and Nicholas de Bonneville, who became his close friends. He had left another play, 'The Noble Peasant' (music by Shield), with Colman, manager of the Haymarket summer season theatre, and it had a successful run of ten performances in 1784. Rivington's payments were irregular, and Holcroft returned to London, where he edited and wrote much of the 'Wit's Magazine' in 1783-4. He published 'Tales of the Castle', translated from the popular French writer Mme de Genlis, who produced works in the genre usually called the 'novel of education'. Beaumarchais's 'Le mariage de Figaro' was the rage in Paris, and Holcroft and Bonneville transcribed it from performances there in autumn 1784; Holcroft's adaptation as 'Follies of a Day' (Covent Garden, 14 December) was performed twenty-eight times in the season and brought him $600 plus sale of the copyright. It was performed during every season through the 1790s and into the next century. Another comic opera, 'The Choleric Fathers' (Covent Garden, 10 November 1785), had seven performances and brought him $140; 'Seduction: a Comedy' (Drury Lane, 12 March 1787) had nine performances and made him $250. By now critics were distinguishing Holcroft's work from others' for its somewhat more careful construction and more serious moral and social criticism. He was also making significant income from translation, receiving $1200 for the works of the king of Prussia. 
By now, too, Holcroft's political views had changed, and he acquired a considerable library in preparation for a 'history of 'bad' governments' (Holcroft, 1.281), based on the career of Frederick II of Prussia and attacking the effects of war and despotism. With friends such as Shield, Nicholson, and Samson Perry, the journalist and editor, Holcroft attended clubs debating both broad philosophical questions and issues of the day. In 1786 he met William Godwin, who later termed Holcroft one of his 'four principal oral instructors, to whom I feel my mind indebted for improvement' (Kegan Paul, 1.17). By 1788 they were close friends, meeting almost daily. Both followed the materialist argument that society and the individual are products of the political and economic order, and they developed a philosophical anarchism that advocated the elimination of government with the aim of freeing humanity to exercise its innate benevolence and sense of justice. Godwin, Holcroft, and their friends advocated open discussion and press freedom to effect the spread of truth that would emancipate all people. As a self-conscious vanguard who believed they had, through superior talents, discipline, and study, escaped indoctrination by the prevailing and unjust order, they practised an idealized, philosophical, and classical republican moderation, abstemiousness, and public virtue, and aimed in their writings to set an example as public intellectuals, while still making a living. Holcroft's philosophical stoicism was severely tested in 1789, however. His son William committed suicide on a ship at Deal rather than face his father, from whom he had taken some money in a plan to flee to the West Indies. Though supported by Godwin's friendship, Holcroft took more than a year to recover from the loss. His wife died in 1790. 
Meanwhile Holcroft had to support himself, and the theatre was his mainstay. A play entitled 'The German Hotel' (adapted from Johann Christian Brandes's 'Trau, Schau, Wem!'; Covent Garden, 11 November 1790; eleven performances) is usually ascribed to him but was probably by James Marshall (Hogan). In the early 1790s Holcroft did have further theatrical successes. 'The School for Arrogance' (based on P. N. Destouches's 'Le glorieux'; Covent Garden, 4 February 1791; nine performances) was restaged into the late 1790s. 'The Road to Ruin' (Covent Garden, 18 February 1792; thirty-seven performances) was his major hit; it made him $900 from performances plus several hundred from publication, and ran every season into the next century. These plays advanced reformist social criticism in the comic and genially satirical form that was fairly common at the time. One result was an account of Holcroft in the 'European Magazine', representing him as 'an instance of the great effects of persevering fortitude' who had by his own efforts 'rendered himself one among the first of writers in a nation abounding with men whose talents have been cultivated under every advantage' (vol. 22, December 1792, 405). 
Holcroft and his friends, with many others like them throughout Britain and Europe, were electrified by the French Revolution, which in its early stages effected many of the reforms they advocated, and which seemed but the beginning of a process that would bring about an earthly paradise where even disease and death would be eradicated. The French Revolution debate was conducted largely through the press, especially after publication in November 1790 of Edmund Burke's anti-revolutionary 'Reflections on the Revolution in France'. Many replies were rushed into print, and Holcroft joined the committee to publish part 1 of Tom Paine's 'Rights of Man' early in 1791, when it became clear that most publishers were unwilling to risk it. By autumn 1791 Holcroft was working on his own intervention in the revolution debate, which, characteristically, addressed a wider readership than polemical disputations or philosophical treatises. Holcroft understood that dramatic writing had to be highly conventionalized to suit the repertory theatre company system and the expectations of audiences drawn from all social classes and interests. The novel, though widely disparaged at the time as inartistic, commercialized, and intellectually and morally corrupting, would enable him to reach a large reading public while expressing more radical social criticism than drama could accommodate. As he later put it in his review of Robert Bage's 'Man as he is': 'When we consider the influence that novels have over the manners, sentiments, and passions, of the rising generation, -- instead of holding them in the contempt which, as reviewers, we are without exception said to do, -- we may esteem them, on the contrary, as forming a very essential branch of literature. ('Monthly Review', 10, March 1793, 297)' Holcroft's 'Anna St Ives' (7 vols., 1792) revises the plot and characters of Richardson's 'Clarissa' and 'Sir Charles Grandison' for the French Revolution debate. In epistolary form, it also contains numerous extended dialogues expounding republican and pro-revolutionary views, but, as in the romantic comedy that was Holcroft's literary mainstay, the plot enacts reform rather than overthrow of the social order, through replacement of the weak and vicious by the virtuous and public-spirited. The work was well received, and was enjoyed as a lively novel despite the fact that its utopian politics were treated with scepticism or ridicule in some reviews. Holcroft was also engaging directly in political organization. The success of the French revolutionary government in defeating the armies of the European monarchist forces in September 1792 inspired new sympathy for the revolution in Britain, especially among artisans and middle-class people. In October Holcroft began attending meetings of the predominantly middle-class Society for Constitutional Information, which aimed to create an informed and politically conscious public, largely through public discussion and print. In November he joined the society, but he remained on its more cautious wing. According to Elbridge Colby, editor of Holcroft's memoirs, in two years Holcroft missed only half a dozen of the society's fortnightly meetings and belonged to the joint committee of correspondence and co-operation formed with similar groups, but, 'fearful that partisan sentiment might hurt his literary and dramatic reputation', he avoided a conspicuous role (Holcroft, 2.27n.). At meetings he spoke seldom, counselled caution, and felt that decisions should be made by reasoning rather than majority vote. 
In 1793 Godwin published his 'Political Justice', enunciating positions worked out with Holcroft and other friends, and the work caused a sensation, partly because of its comprehensiveness, partly because it transformed the particulars of the French Revolution debate into abstract and general arguments, and partly because of its detached yet energetic style. Holcroft, too, preferred to respond to the debate with general principles and dispassionate argument. Others opted in favour of practical action and counteraction. After the 'British convention' of reformists held in 1793 at Edinburgh and modelled on the French revolutionary conventions of the early 1790s, the government reacted by successfully trying several participants, whom Godwin and Holcroft knew, for treason in the Scottish court. Such so-called English Jacobins as Godwin, Holcroft, and their friends expected a similar move in England. Holcroft continued to write, working on another novel and staging two dramatic pieces, 'Love's Frailties, or, Precept Against Practice' (based on O. H. Gemmingen's 'Der deutsche Hausvater'; Covent Garden, 5 February 1794) and a prelude, 'The Rival Queens, or, Drury-Lane and Covent-Garden' (based on Fielding's 'Covent Garden Tragedy'; Covent Garden, 15 September 1794). In 'Love's Frailties' the hero, Charles Seymour, attacks fashionable society, insincerity, corruption, social snobbery, and other social vices. Lady Fancourt, as her name indicates, follows fashion, but is converted to the cause of virtue by the example of the direct and sincere Paulina. According to the 'Monthly Review' (vol. 13, April 1794, 449), the play's liberal reviews evoked a politically motivated campaign to disrupt performance and the work was withdrawn after six representations. 'The Rival Queens' was performed only once. Loyalist organizations were energetically harassing prominent reformists, and the government suspended habeas corpus and banned seditious meetings and publications in May 1794. When a carefully selected group, including Holcroft, the artisan Thomas Hardy, and the scholar John Horne Tooke, was indicted for treason, Holcroft's friends and his father urged him to flee the country, but he had already decided to face the situation directly. He turned himself in and was confined in Newgate. He was mocked in the loyalist press, but friends such as Godwin, Elizabeth Inchbald, and the publisher Robinson visited him in gaol. The prominent lawyer Thomas Erskine defended Holcroft without fee. At the trial Horne Tooke made the government's charges seem ridiculous, and he and Hardy were acquitted. The prosecution then abandoned the case against the others, including Holcroft, and they were released, to widespread public rejoicing. Deprived of his say in court, and smeared after release as an 'acquitted felon' (Holcroft, 2.78), Holcroft vindicated himself and impugned government and loyalist persecution in 'A Narrative of Facts, Relating to a Prosecution for High Treason' (1795), in which he included letters to various participants in the trial and the defence he would have read to the jury. He addressed the heightened level of political confrontation in 'A Letter to the Right Honourable William Windham' (1795), deploring the intemperate rhetoric and conduct of the government and its supporters. 
Holcroft's courage in facing arrest and trial and the high-minded tone and public-spirited arguments of his two pamphlets made him a model for reform-minded intellectuals such as Robert Lovell, Thomas Dermody, and the New York Theatre manager William Dunlap, and he became an adviser to Godwin's ward Thomas Cooper. When the young Tom Wedgwood planned an academy to educate a vanguard for social change, he envisaged Holcroft among the presiding committee. Others shunned Holcroft because of his political associations. He published the first part of a picaresque novel of education, 'The Adventures of Hugh Trevor' (3 vols., 1794; second part, 3 vols., 1797), which recounts the vicissitudes of a well-meaning young man in the face of systemic social corruption and in pursuit of a profession that will permit him to retain his moral integrity and ethical values. 
Holcroft devoted time to his family; his daughter Sophy had married a Mr Cole, and in 1796 his eldest daughter, Ann, married Colonel Harwood, who too was a member of the Society for Constitutional Information. Holcroft continued to support his father, providing $20 a year, and visiting him occasionally, until his death in 1797. He enjoyed riding, and belonged to a musical club that included Shield, Clementi, Crompton, and Villeneux, but withdrew when membership proved too expensive. He collected books, including a number in languages he could not read, and some pornography. He bought rare musical instruments, invested in a device for copying handwriting, and speculated in buying and selling paintings; these endeavours lost money. His health was impaired, too; he suffered some kind of stroke in 1792, apparently from overwork, and fell from a tree in 1794 during a visit to his daughter Sophy. He may have sought another partner about this time; after Mary Wollstonecraft returned from France and Scandinavia and was abandoned by Gilbert Imlay she received in January 1796 an impassioned proposal that may have come from Holcroft. While contributing regularly to the 'Monthly Review' from 1792 to 1796, Holcroft continued to turn out plays, though with little success. 'The Deserted Daughter' (Covent Garden, 2 May 1795), based on Richard Cumberland's 'The Fashionable Lover', had twelve performances and was restaged into the late 1790s. Then there was a series of flops, including 'The Man of Ten Thousand' (Drury Lane, 23 January 1796, seven performances); 'Duplicity' restaged as 'The Mask'd Friend' (Covent Garden, 6 May 1796, one performance; 1 June 1797, two performances); 'The Force of Ridicule' (Drury Lane, 6 December 1796, one performance); and 'Knave or not' (based on Goldoni's 'La serva amorosa' and 'Il padre di famiglia'; Drury Lane, 25 January 1798, six performances). In the preface to the published version of 'Knave or not' Holcroft attributed these failures to political persecution, and in August 1798 a satirical engraving in the magazine 'Anti-Jacobin' included Holcroft in a crowd of so-called 'English Jacobins'. Only 'He's much to Blame' (adapted from Pont-de-Veyle's 'Le complaisant' and Goethe's 'Clavigo'; Covent Garden, 13 February 1798), with twenty-one performances, interrupted the series of failures. These continued with 'The Inquisitor' (from Unzer's 'Diego und Leonore'; Haymarket, 23 June 1798, three performances) and 'The Old Cloathsman', an afterpiece with music by Thomas Attwood (Covent Garden, 2 April 1799, two performances). 
Holcroft nevertheless maintained an active social life with intellectual and artistic friends and fellow reformists such as George Dyer and Benjamin Flower. Every second Sunday he dined with Godwin and other friends. He married as his fourth wife Louisa, daughter of his friend L. S. Mercier, on 4 March 1799 but, facing insolvency, had already planned moving to the continent to live more cheaply, to pursue translating work, to deal in paintings, to familiarize his daughters with foreign languages, and to absent himself from England 'till certain prejudices in the public mind, respecting me, should subside' (Holcroft, 2.222). As he wrote to the commissioners for the 'Income Bill': 'My income has always been the produce of my labour; and that produce has been so reduced, by the animosity of party spirit, that I find myself obliged to sell my effects for the payment of my debts, that I may leave the kingdom till party spirit shall subside. (ibid., 2.248)' 

The Holcrofts left England in May 1799 and settled in Hamburg for a year with the Coles, who were in trade there. Holcroft wrote some 'Letters concerning emigration' addressed to the public, but they remained unpublished. He met literary figures such as Klopstock, Voss, Sander, and Stolberg and set up a periodical, the 'European Repository', but it soon failed, and he lost money through dealing in paintings. He then lived in Paris for two years and there visited the likes of the Mountcashells and Mme de Stael, arranging for a friend to translate her recent novel. When 'The Times' on 26 January 1802 reported that he was employed by the French secret service, some of the Holcrofts' acquaintance dropped them. They returned to England in October 1802. The experiment of living abroad was a qualified success, and Holcroft's literary career and income revived. He enjoyed a run of success with 'Deaf and Dumb' (Drury Lane, 24 February 1801, nine performances) and 'A Tale of Mystery' (1802), which Thomas Dibdin claimed was 'the first entertainment acted on the English stage under the description of melo-drama' ('Reminiscences', 1827, 336-7). Holcroft made $1500 from the copyright of 'Travels from Hamburg, through Westphalia, Holland, and the Netherlands, to Paris' (2 vols., 1804). It belongs to a form of philosophical travel writing begun by Dr John Moore, Helen Maria Williams, and others, and it capitalizes on the British public's fascination with the political and social condition of the European states amid the prolonged Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. 'Travels' is an essay in social, cultural, and political analysis of the revolutionized European countries, and especially of France and Paris, after more than a decade of internal and international struggle, and insists that, despite a long catalogue of errors and crimes in the name of progress, application of education and reason would effect gradual enlightenment, resolve present conflicts, and ameliorate the human condition. Still trying to establish himself through business, Holcroft, with Mercier, set up a printing house, but it failed. In the theatre he had two more successes with the comedy 'Hear both Sides' (1803) and the melodrama 'The Lady of the Rock' (1805). He published another novel, 'Memoirs of Bryan Perdue' (3 vols., 1805), picaresque in form and partly following Sterne's reflexive style. With its plebeian anti-hero, scenes of low life, and comprehensive range of social criticism and satire it sustains the impulse of the political novel of the 1790s and foreshadows the later 'Newgate novel' and the fiction of Dickens. 'Tales in Verse' (1806) attempted to cash in on the emerging vogue for narrative poetry. Neither novel nor poems did anything for Holcroft, and the failure of his play 'The Vindictive Man' (Drury Lane, 20 November 1806, two performances) left him and his family in straitened circumstances, according to Charles Lamb (letter to T. Manning, 5 Dec 1806, 'Letters of Charles Lamb'). He continued working on a number of plays and other works, but he suffered increasingly from asthma and his health began to deteriorate. 
Holcroft began dictating his autobiography, intended: 'to excite an ardent emulation in the breasts of the youthful readers; by shewing them how difficulties may be endured, how they may be overcome, and how they may at last contribute, as a school of instruction, to bring forth hidden talent. (Holcroft, 1.38)' He had a reconciliation with Godwin, from whom he had been estranged since his return to England in 1802. Thomas Holcroft died on 23 March 1809 and was buried in Marylebone greater cemetery. He was survived by his fourth wife. 
The Romantic liberal William Hazlitt completed what Holcroft had begun and, using Holcroft's letters, diaries, and other papers, published 'Memoirs of the Late Thomas Holcroft' in 1816. This helped found the nineteenth-century genre of working-class autobiography. Republished and annotated several times until 1925, it established Holcroft in liberal literary and political culture as an 'author sprung from the people' (Mitford, vol. 1, chap. 7), exemplifying the liberal ideology of the sovereign subject and public-spirited citizen. As H. N. Brailsford wrote in 1915, 'The true monument to such a man is not his Opera Omnia, but his biography' (quoted in Holcroft, 1.xvi). Apart from the 'Memoirs', Holcroft's 'opera omnia' were forgotten. The renewed interest, from the 1960s on, in social history, especially of the lower classes, brought new attention to the political and cultural context of Holcroft and his works, including particularly his novels and also some of his comedies and melodramas. 




@@@@@


doc= 13488


Holden, George (1783-1865), Church of England clergyman and biblical scholar, only son of the Revd George Holden LLD, headmaster of the free grammar school at Horton in Ribblesdale, Yorkshire, was born there in 1783. He was educated at Glasgow University, where he graduated. In 1811 he was presented to the perpetual curacy of the village of Maghull, near Liverpool; living there in seclusion he read and wrote much. He succeeded his father as vicar of Horton in 1821, but resigned that living in 1825, preferring to devote himself to Maghull. He died suddenly at Maghull on 19 March 1865, aged eighty-one. He was not married, and his large library and more than half of his property were left for the benefit of clergy of the diocese of Ripon. 
Holden's fifteen works show him to have been a competent Hebraist and an able Christian apologist. His early works include 'An Attempt towards an Improved Version of the Proverbs of Solomon' (1819), 'The Scripture Testimonies to the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ' (1820), 'An Attempt to Illustrate the Book of Ecclesiastes' (1822), and 'A Dissertation on the Fall of Man' (1823). In the 1830s he published several expositions of scripture, and 'The Authority of Tradition in Matters of Religion' (1838). His later works include 'The Anglican Catechist' (1855) and 'An Essay on the Angels of the Church' (1862). 
For many years Holden compiled the 'Liverpool Tide Tables', which were begun by his grandfather and continued by his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 13489


Holden, Henry (1596/7-1662), Roman Catholic priest, was born in 1596 or early 1597 into a long-established Lancashire gentry family. He was the second son of Richard Holden of Chaigley Manor, near Clitheroe, and Eleanor Gerard from near Wigan. His family was strongly recusant on both sides. Nothing is known of his early education, but he entered the English College, Douai, to study for the priesthood in September 1617, using the alias of Johnson for several years. His philosophy teacher was the controversial Thomas White (alias Blacklo), of whom he remained an enduring and important ally as well as an occasional but mild critic thereafter. Following ordination at Cambrai in March 1622 he joined the community of English ecclesiastics and scholars at the college of Arras, Paris, in late 1623, and resumed his studies at Paris University, where he was an MA in October 1625. The next year he interrupted them as he obtained the position of almoner in the household of Michel de Marillac, keeper of the seals, which brought him into contact with prominent 'devot' circles, including the reformed Carmelites of Pontoise. In 1627 he obtained 'lettres de naturalite' enabling him to hold benefices in France. He remained with Marillac after his disgrace and exile to Chateaudun in late 1630, attending him on his deathbed in August 1632. He then rejoined Arras College, and resumed his theology studies, taking twenty-third place in the 1636 licentiate and the doctorate in October 1636. He defended Richard Smith and the English hierarchy against perceived Jesuit efforts to undermine it in the seculars-regulars controversy of the early 1630s. He was briefly agent of the English Catholic clergy in Rome (from 1638 to early 1639), failing to obtain papal recognition of the English chapter established by William Bishop to administer the English Catholic church in the absence of episcopal hierarchy. The low opinion he formed of the papacy's handling of English questions owed something to Gallican attitudes he had already developed in France, and doubtless reinforced them. 
Made a canon of the English chapter (1638) with Blacklo and others by Smith, Holden was directly involved in the affairs of the English church, visiting London in 1639-40, 1641-2, and later. In 1647 he participated in short-lived attempts to win toleration of Catholics from Independent army leaders who had rejected both Anglican and presbyterian church settlements, but he, White, and a few others, later to be nicknamed Blacklo's cabal, were ready to make some controversial concessons in order to achieve that goal. Holden's Gallicanism enabled him to support an oath of allegiance from Catholics, the expulsion of the Jesuits, and a frank rejection of the pope's deposing power. His own daring plan for a restored episcopate, if necessary without papal approval and largely independent of papal authority, was typical of the Blackloist approach, ever eager for an agreement with Cromwell, but predictably it alienated the moderate and conservative forces in English Catholicism. Although condemned by the Holy Office, Holden escaped punishment, possibly because of French protection. 
In Paris, Holden taught theology at the university and was penitentiary of St Nicolas-du-Chardonnet, one of the city's most reform minded parishes, but he was never a vicar-general of the diocese (his name was probably confused with that of Cardinal de Retz's vicar-general, Hodencq). His Gallican and anti-Jesuit views facilitated accusations of unorthodox sympathies during the Jansenist crisis of the mid-1650s. Although initially willing to defend Antoine Arnauld, whose apologia of the church fathers he had previously approved, he was one of many doctors who withdrew from the faculty assemblies rather than condemn and expel Arnauld (1655-6). He subsequently signed the condemnation to clear his name and defend his own orthodoxy, though his embarrassment appears in letters to Feret, cure of St Nicolas, and to Arnauld, in which he pleaded for Arnauld to take his own Thomist position on divine grace and related questions. Apart from publishing a defence of the anti-Jansenist formulary (1661), he largely avoided the Jansenist controversy in later years. His attention turned again to English Catholic ecclesiastical politics after Smith's death (1655) reopened older controversies over episcopacy, in which he showed his customary anti-Jesuit and Blackloist views, especially in 1661 when a House of Lords committee held discussions about the conditions for repealing the penal laws. 
Holden's published output dates largely from the final decade of his life, but probably gestated over many years. The 'Divinae fidei analysis' (1652) is his most systematic work of theological scholarship, and adopted an approach to its subject matter that was unusual for its time. He aimed to distinguish the certain from the uncertain in Christian teaching, fundamental truths from theological speculation, and to establish the degree of assent required for each kind of truth. But as the object of one's belief could not be known directly, everything depended upon the means by which it was transmitted to believers, and Holden stoutly defended unbroken tradition within an institutional church as superior to scripture or individual inspiration. He showed his Gallican convictions by insisting that only a general council could define truth, leaving the pope the lesser role of judge of theological controversies. The logical rigour and intellectual solidity of this work was admired by scholars like Richard Simon or Ellies du Pin, and even J. H. Newman, but on publication its novelty and boldness struck contemporaries, leading to suggestions of unorthodoxy. Other items of Holden's 'oeuvre' -- on usury, on schism, his exchanges with Arnauld and others, several defences of Blacklo -- figured in later editions of the 'Analysis', which first appeared in English in 1658. A treatise on the truth of Christianity was apparently lost in England during the civil wars. 
Having helped Richard Smith and Thomas Carre to establish the English convent of Our Lady of Syon, in Paris, in 1634, Holden acted in his final years as superior to newly settled English blue nuns in Paris, using his connections to smooth the way to their installation there. He also persuaded them to exchange their original Franciscan rule for that of the immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin, essentially because the archbishop of Paris insisted on the nuns' subjection to episcopal authority. He visited England for the last time in June-September 1661, falling ill on his return of a quartan fever, of which he died in March 1662. He left much of his estate to the blue nuns but only with great difficulty was the crown dissuaded from seizing it under French laws governing property owned by foreigners resident in France. 


@@@@@


doc= 13490


Holden, Hubert Ashton (1822-1896), classical scholar and headmaster, was born in Birmingham on 12 May 1822, the son of Hyla Holden (1792-1849), incumbent of Erdington, Warwickshire, and his wife, Anne. He was educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham, first under Francis Jeune, and then under James Prince Lee. He proceeded to Trinity College, Cambridge, and in his first year of residence in 1842 gained the first Bell university scholarship. He graduated BA in 1845, being senior classic and junior optime in the mathematical tripos. He was fellow of Trinity College from 1847 to 1854, when he vacated his fellowship by his marriage on 18 July to Laetitia, elder daughter of R. E. Lofft of Troston Hall, Suffolk; they had three sons (the eldest of whom was the army officer and inventor Sir Henry Capel Lofft Holden) and five daughters. 
Holden was ordained deacon in 1848 and took priest's orders in 1858. He was assistant tutor and classical lecturer of his college from 1848 until 1853, when he was appointed vice-principal of Cheltenham College, continuing in that post until 1858. From 1858 to 1883 he was headmaster of Queen Elizabeth's School, Ipswich, where he was chosen to succeed Stephen Jordan Rigaud. In a successful effort to raise academic standards and improve discipline he replaced the entire full-time teaching staff. He taught only the sixth form himself, but knew and followed the progress of every pupil. In 1866 all ten boys leaving the sixth form entered Cambridge, eight with scholarships. He was invited to the first conference of headmasters, convened by Edward Thring at Uppingham in 1869, and attended in the following year and every meeting thereafter. Always immaculately dressed, he took his afternoon ride on a well-groomed horse, and never appeared on foot in Ipswich without cap and gown. He inherited the antagonism towards the school among radicals on the town council that dated from his predecessor's period of office. He held no speech day after 1876, probably because he objected to sharing a platform with the governors, who disliked what they perceived as his reserved and superior manner. Their chance to be rid of him arrived in 1883 when he rashly wrote offering his resignation when building works overran into the September term and he was not permitted to defer the school's opening. His attempt to retract was rejected, and he left unthanked and unregretted by his governors, but revered by his pupils and by his colleagues, all but one of whom left just before or with him. He published a fifty page 'Plain Statement of the Circumstances Attending my Resignation'. 
In 1890 Holden was appointed by the crown to a fellowship of the University of London, where he was classical examiner from 1869 until 1874, and examiner in Greek from 1886 until 1890. In 1892 the degree of LittD was conferred on him by Dublin University. He was a vice-president of the Hellenic Society from 1893. He died on 1 December 1896 at 20 Redcliffe Square, London, and was buried on 5 December at Highgate cemetery. 
Holden, who was a classical scholar of fine taste and full knowledge, was best known for his collections of English passages for translation into Latin and Greek, 'Foliorum silvula' and 'Foliorum centuriae' (1852), and for a selection of Latin and Greek versions of these published as 'Folia silvulae' (1865 and 1870). He also produced useful editions of various classical texts, including several of Plutarch's 'Lives' and Xenophon's 'Hiero' (1883) and 'Cyropaedeia' (1887-90). 
A cousin, 


@@@@@


doc= 13491


Holden, Sir Isaac, first baronet (1807-1897), inventor of a wool-combing machine, entrepreneur, and politician, was born on 7 May 1807 at Hurlet, near Paisley, the seventh child of Isaac Holden (died 1826) and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Forrest. His father, a native of Cumberland, combined small-scale farming with leadmining there before moving in 1801 with his Scottish-born wife to Nitshill, between Glasgow and Paisley, where he worked as a coalmine foreman developing local educational facilities in his spare time. The family moved several times during Isaac's youth: to Kilbarchan, where a brief spell at grammar school was followed at the age of eleven by employment as a draw boy and attendance at night school, where he became interested in mechanical matters; to Johnstone, where Isaac combined cotton-factory work with part-time schooling; and when he was fifteen to Paisley, where a year later he became a full-time student, and then teaching assistant, at James Kennedy's school, where the curriculum included maths, physics, Latin, and Greek. Isaac thus received a well-rounded education despite his early acquaintance with the world of work, and his enthusiasm for study, allied to a weak constitution, indicated a cerebral rather than a physical career. 
During his early twenties, to support his mother after the death of his father in 1826, Isaac held a succession of teaching posts in Yorkshire and Reading, where he allegedly discovered the Lucifer match. At the same time a deep commitment to Wesleyanism and extensive preaching engagements suggested the possibility of a life of ministry. In 1828 he returned to Glasgow but two years later, poised to establish his own school specializing in commercial subjects, he accepted a bookkeeping position at the worsted manufacturing firm of Townend at Cullingworth, near Keighley in Yorkshire. He achieved semi-managerial status during his sixteen years there and developed, through his own efforts, an expertise in mechanical engineering. Although his employers recognized his value they failed to offer Holden the partnership he frequently requested. At the age of forty he left the firm to form his own small and short-lived worsted factory in Bradford. In 1832 he had married Marion Love, daughter of Angus Love of Paisley, with whom he had four children, Angus ('b'. 1833), Edward ('b'. 1835), Mary ('b'. 1839), and Margaret ('b'. 1842); Marion died in 1847 following a period of ill health and on 5 April 1850 Holden married his second wife, Sarah Sugden (died 1890), daughter of John Sugden of Keighley and sister of the Sugden brothers, worsted manufacturers of Oakworth. Her family was known for Wesleyan piety. Sarah was an important force in his life, particularly in religious matters. They had no children. 
It was while he was employed at Townends that Holden became fascinated by the problem of mechanizing the combing of wool, which, for several decades since Edmund Cartwright's first patent for the process in 1789, had proved intractable. Holden was determined to produce a commercially viable machine comb and upon leaving Townend he sought to make the acquaintance of Samuel Cunliffe Lister, a wealthy and influential Bradford worsted manufacturer, who not only shared his intense interest in wool-combing technology, but owned the patents of the main elements of the machine he hoped to bring to perfection. Pooling their knowledge, but making particular use of Holden's efforts, a patent was filed in 1848 -- significantly in Lister's name only -- on which the 'square-motion' comb was based. The next step was to exploit the machine commercially, by establishing a wool-combing enterprise. A partnership agreement was reached in 1848 (signed 1 January 1849) whereby Lister was to provide the necessary capital and machinery (and was to be free to develop other interests) while Holden was to manage the business and perfect the machine. The enterprise was to be located in France because the square motion was particularly suited to conditions in the industry there, and because the partners wished to dominate French wool-combing by impeding the diffusion of competing technology and filling the market with combed wool produced on their own machine. Accordingly a factory, previously owned by John Collier, also an inventor of a significant machine comb, was rented at St Denis and business began in 1849. As planned, Holden perfected his machine, and developed an enterprise that was organizationally and technically unique. The square motion was one of 169 combing techniques patented in the peak of the 1840s and 1850s, yet it was one of only a handful that achieved long-term commercial success. It possessed special features and was unique in its ability to comb all grades and thicknesses of wool, but its position among the leaders was also the result of Lister's manipulation of the patent system. Through the practice of purchasing patents on inventions which competed with their own designs, the partners achieved a technical near-monopoly, and Holden created a machine that removed potential competitors by producing the finest combed wool. Once the square-motion comb was fully protected he set his mind on manufacturing and on the problems of conducting business in a foreign country. 
Operations at St Denis were immediately successful, returning profits of $2000-$3000 per month by the early 1850s. Expansion into the mainstream of the French industry quickly followed; in 1853 production began at purpose-built factories at Croix and Rheims, which became the focus of the Holden family empire. In 1858 Holden bought Lister's share of the business, thus ending ten turbulent years of partnership, and in 1860 the St Denis plant ceased production. Upon Lister's departure, Holden's sons, Edward and Angus, became partners, while the active management of the French factories was undertaken by his nephews, Jonathan Holden and Isaac Holden Crothers, who each received a 10 per cent share in the firm. Holden's activities took the French industry by storm: between 1865 and 1895 his two factories produced 25 per cent of the industry's requirement of combed wool. Production was on the basis of commission combing, and although Holden could not take credit for introducing it into France, he was responsible for maximizing its potential and extending its practice. His factories, which expanded rapidly, were revered as the marvel of the period and in time were copied and became the standard for the wool-combing industry. On the basis of immense profits (over $1 million at Rheims alone in 1863-80, $4000 per week at the two factories during the 1870s), Holden became a wealthy man. While he was not completely self-made, he did practise the well-rehearsed Smilesean values (to the extent of embarrassing his children with his extreme thrift) and his approach to people and business typified the French paternalist entrepreneur. Such was his influence that he became a respected authority on French textile matters and the town of Croix became known as Holden City. 
Upon Holden's return to Yorkshire in 1860, Penny Oak Mills in Bradford were acquired for Angus and Edward, and what was to be his own main wool-combing concern in Yorkshire, Alston Works, Bradford, was opened in 1864. He settled at Oakworth House, constructed to his own specification, and became a central figure in the West Riding textile community, a position strengthened by the marriage of three of his children to members of the Illingworth family ['see 'Illingworth, Alfred]. He retained a close interest in his French factories, which continued to be managed by his sons and nephews, and although business and mechanical issues remained important to him -- legal wrangles with Lister over the invention of the square motion preoccupied his later years -- political and religious interests absorbed more of his time. He was sustained in his religious life by his exceedingly devout second wife. While in France he built Wesleyan chapels and ran 'Bible' classes at the sites of each of his enterprises. He gave generously to further the cause of British Wesleyanism, and in 1871 donated $5000 for fifty chapels in the London area. He entered parliamentary politics following the advice of his doctor to find a less onerous occupation after a period of ill health. He sat as Liberal MP for Knaresborough in 1865-8 and remained involved in political activity, offering policy advice on economic matters to the Liberal cause, until he located a replacement seat. In 1882 he became MP for the north-west division of the West Riding and from 1885 to 1895 sat as member for Keighley. In recognition of his contribution to the nation's political life, Holden received a baronetcy in 1893. He died at his home, Oakworth House, Oakworth, on 13 August 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 13492


Holden, Lawrence (1710-1778), Presbyterian minister and author, was born at Bolton-le-Moors, Lancashire, probably the son of John Holden, and might have been baptized at Bolton-le-Moors on 14 January 1711. He was educated for the ministry at Warrington under Charles Owen and commenced his ministerial career about 1732 at Whitworth, Lancashire, moving to Doncaster in 1735 and finally to Maldon, Essex, in 1740, where he remained until his death. 
Holden was a rational dissenter whose beliefs evolved through Arianism into the adoption of unitarian principles, and 'he had not the smallest tincture of Calvinistic divinity about him' ('Monthly Repository', 1806, 561-3). His theological views were considered advanced in Maldon, and there was opposition from the parish church to the school which he ran. 'He was possessed of learning but his style was remarkably diffuse... he appears to have been a very amiable man though not a popular preacher' (Burls, 22). His amiability did not prevent a split in the congregation arising over his theology, the seceders opening a separate place of worship in 1765. At his death the original congregation disappeared, and the seceders moved back into the old building the following year. Holden's chief works were paraphrases of books of the 'Old Testament'. 'A Paraphrase of the Books of Job, Psalms, Proverbs and Ecclesiastes', published in 1763, was widely quoted among dissenters, with 'A Paraphrase on Isaiah' following in 1776. 
Holden married, first, a daughter of Mr A. Whitworth in the 1720s and, second, between 1736 and 1740, a daughter of John Slack of Long Elmsel, West Riding; she died on 7 January 1808 aged eighty-five. He died on 5 August 1778 at Maldon of a bladder disorder. His son by his second marriage, 
Holden was appointed assistant minister at the Presbyterian meeting-house at Tenterden, Kent, in July 1772 at the age of nineteen ('the laying on of hands I considered an absurdity'; 'Christian Reformer', 782), and was still the nominal minister when he died aged ninety-one. A ministry of nearly seventy-two years is a remarkable feat of endurance, though he played only a very limited part in preaching after the appointment of Edward Talbot as a co-minister in 1827. In January 1777 he married Mary, a daughter of James Blackmore; she died in 1809. Longevity and his strong views made him a well-known figure among dissenters, and he was rightly considered by Edward Talbot as 'the father and apostle of Unitarianism in Kent' (ibid., 780). He died at Tenterden on 19 March 1844 and was buried in the burial-ground of the meeting-house he had served for so long on 26 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 13493


Lawrence Holden (1752-1844), also a Presbyterian minister but later a Unitarian minister, was born at Maldon on 17 December 1752. He took over his father's theological position and developed it over a long life. In 1766 he entered Hoxton Academy, which while orthodox in foundation provided the basis for his future thinking: 'almost all the students were against me' ('Christian Reformer', 780-83). He was much influenced while at the academy by Caleb Fleming, whose biography he later edited. 


@@@@@


doc= 13494


Holden, Moses (1777-1864), astronomer, was born on 21 November 1777 at Black Horse Street, Bolton, Lancashire, the youngest of the three children of Thomas Holden, a hand-loom weaver, and his wife, Joyce. His parents moved some five years later to Preston, where Holden first worked as a hand-loom weaver. On their return to Bolton he laboured in a foundry there until disabled by an accident, after which he found employment as a landscape gardener near Preston. His love of astronomy developed at an early age, leading him to acquire an extensive library of books to guide his studies of this and other sciences. He gave talks on astronomy, and found patrons among the rising manufacturers of Preston, including Samuel Horrocks MP, to whose daughters he gave lessons in astronomy. 
In 1814 Holden began to design his celebrated grand orrery, manufacturing its castings and gear wheels with the assistance of several local mechanics and a watchmaker. He learned to paint on glass the pictures of the planets and the various diagrams which, projected by a magic lantern, accompanied his demonstrations. His first public lecture with the orrery and lantern slides was given at the Theatre Royal in Preston in April 1815. A tour through the northern towns which followed proved so successful and profitable that for the next eleven years Holden toured continually throughout England. In 1826 he devoted the proceeds of one of his lectures to the erection of a memorial tablet in St Michael's Church, Toxteth, near Liverpool, dedicated to the astronomer Jeremiah Horrocks (1618-1641), who was born and died at Toxteth. Holden published a small atlas of fixed stars in 1818 which ran through several editions, and issued a yearly almanac from 1835 until the repeal of stamp duty flooded the market with cheap almanacs. He made the acquaintance of many scientists and astronomers, including William Rogerson of the Royal Greenwich Observatory; Rogerson's letter praising the educational value of Holden's orrery and a testimonial signed by the worthies of Preston were useful advertisements. The date of Holden's marriage to Isabelle is not known. She, and their daughter, Ann Leonora ('b'. 1829), survived him; their son, William Archimedes Holden ('b'. 1818), predeceased him, leaving a young family. Holden settled again in Preston from 1828, giving courses on astronomy there until 1852 and occasionally lecturing in nearby towns. In 1834 he was presented with the freedom of the borough of Preston. 
Holden was a skilful mechanic and made several microscopes and at least one telescope, the latter for the Revd William Carus Wilson, who declared it superior to the more expensive one he had purchased from the noted London maker Dollond. He helped to establish the Institution for the Diffusion of Knowledge in Preston, and from 1837 was an enthusiastic member of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, attending their yearly meetings until 1855. Holden frequently officiated as a Methodist preacher and, though he attended services in the established church, he took part in Wesleyan 'Bible' and prayer meetings throughout his life. Despite the theatrical nature of his own lectures, he refused to attend stage plays, nor could his friends persuade him otherwise even when his son played the ghost in a local performance of Hamlet. Holden was none the less known for his ability to tell humorous stories, in a rich Lancashire accent which he never lost. In his later years he suffered from poor health, and he died at his home, one of two houses he owned in Jordan Street, Preston, on 3 June 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 13495


Holder, William (1615/16-1698), Church of England clergyman and natural philosopher, was born in Southwell, Nottinghamshire, the third son of Clement Holder (died 1638), prebendary of Southwell and rector of Kilvington and South Wheatley, and his wife, whose maiden name was Brudenell. William matriculated pensioner from Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1633, aged seventeen; he graduated BA in 1637 and proceeded MA in 1640. He was a fellow of his college from 1640 to 1642. He was rector of Barnoldby-le-Beck in Lincolnshire in 1641-2. 
About the time war broke out Holder resigned his fellowship and moved to royalist Oxfordshire, becoming rector of Bletchingdon and tutor to the young Christopher Wren, the future architect. In 1643 he married Christopher's elder sister, Susanna Wren (1626/7-1688). Their union was long and happy, but childless. Susanna had (says Aubrey) a 'strange sagacity as to curing wounds', ministering to rich and poor alike, and at one stage incurring the enmity of the court physicians by curing Charles II of a swollen hand ('Brief Lives', 1.405). Susanna's father, Dean Christopher Wren, joined them after the war at Bletchingdon, where he died in 1658. At Oxford Holder was incorporated MA in 1644, watched over the undergraduate Christopher Wren, helped obtain the Savilian chair of astronomy for Seth Ward in 1649 after the parliamentary visitation, and became a member of the circle of natural philosophers surrounding Ward and John Wilkins. 
At the Restoration Holder was incorporated DD at Oxford in 1661, and was among the first institution of ordinary members of the Royal Society. Through the patronage of Susanna's uncle, the nepotistic Bishop Matthew Wren of Ely, he became prebendary of Ely (installed in 1660), rector of Northwold, Norfolk (1662-87) and, in plurality, rector of Tydd St Giles in the Isle of Ely (1663). He was also a prebendary of Southwell from 1660 to 1664. In 1672 he succeeded to Bishop Stillingfleet's prebendal stall at St Paul's, and from 1674 to 1689 was subdean at the Chapel Royal, where for his haughty discipline and exacting musical standards he was called 'Mr Snub-dean' (Hawkins, 541-4). In 1687 he took up the living of Therfield in Hertfordshire, where he retreated after the death of his wife in 1688. Latterly he overwintered at Alderman Keynton's home in Hertford, where, growing 'old and crazy' (BL, Add. MS 4275, fol. 294), he died on 24 January 1698. He left $455 in his will, in addition to property, much of it in the form of gifts and legacies to his servants and the poor. He was buried, with his wife, in the undercroft of St Paul's Cathedral, their monument standing near to that of its architect. 
Holder was, according to his friend and correspondent John Aubrey, 'a handsome, gracefull person, and of a delicate constitution, and of an even and smooth temper... a perfect good man' ('Brief Lives', 1.404-5). Wood acclaimed him 'a great virtuoso' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.59). In 1660 at Bletchingdon he achieved considerable fame by teaching a deaf mute, Alexander Popham, to speak 'plainly and distinctly, and with a good and graceful tone'. Afterwards regressing, Popham was retaught by the eminent mathematician John Wallis, author of a theoretical treatise on speech, who ostentatiously claimed the credit. In 1668 Holder presented a paper to the Royal Society on the workings of the ear, and followed it in 1669 with a treatise, 'Elements of Speech', in which he deplored the 'faulty alphabets' of grammarians and named and analysed the physical parts of speech in pursuit of a basis for a universal language. Wilkins's treatise of 1668 on universal language had owed much to discussions with Holder. Holder's account in the 'Elements' of his work with Popham provoked an exhaustive and unconvincing rebuttal from the disputatious Wallis (in his 'A Defence of the Royal Society', 1670, and in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of July 1670). In a long-delayed reply Holder accused Wallis of 'rifling his Neighbours, and adorning himself with their spoyls' (Holder, 'Supplement', 10), supplying extensive details to support his charge. Senior fellows, including Hooke and Oldenburg, supported Holder; Wallis's eminence sheltered him. Holder was a moderately active member of the Royal Society, mainly between 1663 and 1683, although his practical contributions were disappointing, and also a member of Robert Hooke's informal 'clubb for Natural Philosophy and mechanicks' ('Espinasse, 109, 114-15). 
A competent composer of services and anthems, Holder in retirement wrote an influential and well-received treatise, 'Principles of Harmony' (1694), the surviving correspondence concerning which illustrates the complexities of contemporary music publishing. It was still regarded as a standard work for long afterwards, both in England and abroad, and remains of interest for its account of mean-tone tuning. 
Holder's subsequent 'Discourse Concerning Time' (1694), written to explain the issue of calendar reform and reissued in 1701 after the renewed English rejection of the Gregorian calendar, was an elegant exposition of the concept of harmony on a cosmic scale. In it he developed the idea that rational human perception was required to give meaning to creation, for 'Time is always Transient, in a continual Flux, neither to be seen, nor felt, nor reserved; but only measured by an Act of the Mind' (Holder, 'Discourse Concerning Time', 1-2, 13). 
Holder's reputation was probably hampered in his day by his lack of intellectual competitiveness. His work was none the less of enduring value, memorable for his declaration of the value of the written word: 'Written language... is permanent, and it reacheth the absent, and posterity, and by it we speak after we are dead' (Holder, 'Elements', 8-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 13496


Frederick Holding (1817-1874), watercolour painter, born probably in Manchester, lived in Manchester for most of his life and painted watercolours, showing much skill in figure drawing. He also worked as an illustrator; the 1864 edition of Robert Southey's 'Battle of Blenheim' includes some of his designs. Towards the end of his life he was the scene painter at the Theatre Royal and the Prince's Theatre in Manchester. He died in 1874, probably in Manchester. There is a Shakespearian scene by him in Manchester City Galleries. 


@@@@@


doc= 13497


Holding, Henry James (1833-1872), landscape painter, the youngest son of Henry Holding, an amateur painter, was born at Salford, Lancashire, in November 1833. At an early age he was employed as a pattern designer to calico printers, but he soon began his career as an artist, following the example of three of his brothers. All the members of the family were artists, but none received any regular art training. While still a teenager he exhibited in Manchester, Liverpool, and London, his favourite subjects being marine landscapes and scenes featuring torrents, which he painted in both oil and watercolours. He was also noted for his historical scenes, especially his Tudor subjects. His last work, 'Betws-y-coed', exhibited in 1872, was considered his best. Another highly regarded picture, 'Finding of the Body of Rufus by the Charcoal-Burners', was exhibited in 1862. He died of consumption on 9 August 1872 in Paris while on a sketching tour, which had been expected to restore him to health. He was buried in the English cemetery (des.) at Paris. As his death left his wife and children in financial difficulties, an exhibition was held in Manchester for their benefit. 
Holding's elder brother 


@@@@@


doc= 13498


Holdsworth, Edward (1684-1746), Latin poet, was born on 6 August 1684, the son of Thomas Holdsworth (died 'c'.1714?), rector of North Stoneham, Hampshire. He was educated at Winchester College, where in 1694, aged only nine, he was elected to a scholarship. On 14 December 1704 he matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford; in July 1705, however, he was elected a demy of Magdalen College, where he remained for the next ten years. He graduated BA on 22 June 1708, and MA on 18 April 1711. 
Holdsworth's most important (certainly his most celebrated) literary work was written soon after he became a BA. Dr Henry Sacheverell, Magdalen's most notorious member, is said to have encouraged its composition. This was a slightly scurrilous, and very funny, comic poem about the Welsh, entitled 'Muscipula' (1709). A faulty, allegedly unauthorized, edition was rapidly followed by several correct ones, translations, and something of a literary furore. Softening the nationalistic blow, Holdsworth dedicated it to a Welsh gentleman commoner at Magdalen, Robert Lloyd: 'iracundioribus quibusdam vix in patriae tuae laudem confici videatur' ('this trifle, which to some pettish people may seem contriv'd not much to the honour of your country'). 
The story begins in heroic style: '
Monticolam Britonem, qui primus vincula muri 

Finxit, et exiguum vexavit carcere furem, 

Lethalesque dolos, et inextricabile fatum, 

Musa refer. 
(Muse, tell of the Mountain-Briton who first caged the mouse, imposing on that little thief his deadly tricks and unavoidable death.)' Our hero is Taffy, an eater of cheese, the Welsh national dish; while Taffy slept off a cheese feast, '
mus audax sectatus, opinor, odores, 

Quos non concoctus pingui exalavit ab ore 

Caseus, accessit furtim. 

' In the version by F. T. (1709): '
A Mouse, said he, pursuing as I guess 

The scent of undigest[ed] toasted cheese 

That from my mouth she smelt, which open lay, 

Crept in and made strait down my throat her way. 

Whilst she was feasting there, I did awake, 

And as she try'd t'escape, her fast did take 

Between my teeth. 

' Thus was the idea for the mousetrap born. Holdsworth effectively mixes elegant, vigorous Latin with gloriously low subject matter. We later meet a cat, who shares some characteristics with literary critics: '
mentitur amorem 

dum lacerare parat: varia sic arte jocosam 

barbariem exercet, lepidaque tyrannide ludit. 
(ll. 218-20)' In Hoadly's version (1749): '
His neck now lightly pats with hurtless paw, 

Dissembling love: but ruminates the while 

To tear him limb from limb. The Mouser thus, 

Witty in tyranny, with various art 

Wanton barbarity enjoys... 

' Welsh pride demanded a reply. Thomas Richards of Jesus College, Oxford, rapidly produced 'Hoglandiae descriptio' (1709), a satire on Hampshire (and another fine piece of Latin). Anthony Alsop, Oxford's most elegant Latin poet, and Edward Lhwyd, its most prominent Welshman, may have been involved. 'Muscipula' was regularly reprinted, anthologized, and translated throughout the eighteenth century. The immediate stir caused by the poem led to four rival versions in 1709; others followed in 1712, 1715, 1718 (by Archdeacon Cobden), 1722, 1728 (published in Annapolis, Maryland), 1749 (by John Hoadly, a translation which Holdsworth greatly admired), and finally Richard Graves in 1793. Holdsworth's poem is firmly in the mock-heroic tradition, inspired by the pseudo-Homeric 'Batrachomyomachia' ('Battle of Frogs and Mice'), a popular work in the Renaissance, as his Greek subtitle 'Cambromyomachia' ('Battle of the Welsh and Mice') makes clear. Holdsworth's mock-heroic poem is a significant precursor to Alexander Pope's famous 'Rape of the Lock', which first appeared just a few years later, in 1712. 
The fame of 'Muscipula' spread to some surprising quarters. An interesting edition appeared in Florence in 1765; the anonymous Italian editor notes that he has received from England 'elegans quoddam ludicrum poemation manu exaratum' ('an elegant, humorous little poem in manuscript') -- clearly he was unaware that 'Muscipula' had been printed many times before. He has to explain many of Holdsworth's Welsh jokes laboriously to his audience, who have probably barely heard of Wales; yet he is still greatly impressed by the poem. Holdsworth himself, on his visits to Italy, or other Englishmen on the grand tour, may have helped the poem circulate; nevertheless, it is rare to find British neo-Latin of this period being read on the continent. 
Holdsworth remained at Magdalen as a tutor, but rejected the opportunity to become a full fellow of the college, when his turn came in 1715, because he was not prepared to take the oath of allegiance to the new Hanoverian monarch. He therefore felt obliged to resign his post and leave the university; although he would have found many in Oxford to sympathize with him, and a few nonjurors, such as Thomas Hearne, did manage to retain some attachment to the university, it was more satisfactory to make a clean break. Holdsworth retained a strong affection for Magdalen; he planned the rebuilding of the college in the Palladian style. There have been doubts about his role, but 'Holdsworth's responsibility for the design... has now been fully established by letters and other documents recently discovered among the archives of Magdalen' (H. M. Colvin, in 'Hist. U. Oxf.' 5: '18th-cent. Oxf.', 840). A survey was made for his use in 1720; the fellows could finally contemplate building in 1729, when Holdsworth consulted the architect James Gibbs for help in revising the plans (the college paid Gibbs 20 guineas). The full scheme was approved, and illustrated in the 1731 'Oxford Almanack'; the college began to put it into practice in 1733. Only a single block, the majestic New Buildings, was ever completed. 
For the rest of his life Holdsworth acted as a private tutor to the children of nonjuring or Jacobite families, or accompanied them on their travels in Europe. He remained in close touch with his extensive family (and the legacies in his will suggest that he had sufficient private means for a comfortable existence). He knew Pope, who wrote to him in December 1737 to ask for his vote for Harte in the election for professor of poetry at Oxford ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 4.90). Holdsworth's travels encouraged his Virgilian studies. Joseph Spence declared him 'better acquainted with Italy as classic ground than any man' then living (Spence, 'Polymetis', quoted in 'DNB'). He is said to have caught rheumatism, from which he never completely recovered, while exploring ancient drainage. He made many notes on Virgil, some incorporated in later editions. His 'Pharsalia and Philippi' (1742) concentrated on explaining some contentious lines on the civil war battlefields; an expanded posthumous version ('Dissertation upon Eight Verses', 1749) doubles the coverage to eight lines ('Georgics', 2.65-72). Richard Bentley had shown how an apparently minor issue could produce a great dissertation; Holdsworth was no Bentley, but a respectable scholar none the less. 
Holdsworth's scholarly and antiquarian interests did not, to the eighteenth-century mind, appear incompatible with his creative use of Latin verse, as the editor of his 'Dissertation' (1749) asserts: 'No reader, I hope, will think it at all improper, that the Dissertation should be accompanied by the Poem ['Muscipula']; since, as that plainly shews, how well the Author understood Virgil, this is a demonstrative proof how well he could imitate him; a faculty very rare, and greatly superior to the other. (p. xv)' In other words, it is better to write than to comment on Latin.Holdsworth died of fever on 30 December 1746, at Lord Digby's house, near Coleshill, Warwickshire. He was buried in the church there on 4 January 1747. His friend Charles Jennens, of Gopsall in Leicestershire, placed a plain black marble stone above his grave. A more elaborate monument was erected in 1764, in a classical temple Jennens had built at Gopsall; this contained a long Latin inscription, and a statue by Roubiliac representing 'Religion'. 
Holdsworth left his notes on Virgil to Jennens. 'I give to my dear friend Charles Jennens of Queen Square London... my interleaved Virgils with all my papers relating thereto and my pictures which now are in his custody.' His will bequeathed $100 to the building fund at Magdalen, towards the completion of his own architectural designs. Another $100 went to 'my nephew Robert Downes fellow of Magdalen College... to be employed in fitting up Chambers for him in the New Buildings there'. His brother Henry Holdsworth was chosen as executor; another brother, Winch Holdsworth DD, is mentioned, along with his sisters, Philadelphia Downes (who received $800) and Mary Ann Taylor. 


@@@@@


doc= 13499


Holdsworth, Richard (1590-1649), Church of England clergyman and college head, was baptized in the parish of St Nicholas, Newcastle upon Tyne, in the year of his birth in that town, the youngest son of Richard Holdsworth (died 1596), the vicar there, and his wife, whose maiden name was Pearson. After his father's death he was brought up by an uncle, William Pearson, who was a curate and lecturer in the town. Holdsworth may be assumed to have imbibed from this Newcastle background the moderate Calvinism often equated with puritanism -- but somewhat misleadingly, since it was the dominant tendency in the Jacobean church of his youth. From grammar school he proceeded to St John's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted scholar on 2 November 1607. He graduated BA in 1610, was elected fellow on 20 March 1613, and was ordained deacon and priest at Peterborough in 1617. He was incorporated MA at Oxford in 1617 and in 1620 was appointed one of the university preachers. He became chaplain to Sir Henry Hobart, who presented him to a benefice in Yorkshire which he at once exchanged for the London rectory of St Peter-le-Poer in Broad Street, his home base from 1624 and for the remainder of his life, which was spent split between London and Cambridge. In 1629 he became professor of divinity at Gresham College. He took his BD in 1622 and his doctorate in 1637. 
Holdsworth gained a golden reputation as both tutor and preacher. The lawyer and parliamentarian Simonds D'Ewes left a number of snapshots of his 'loving tutor' as he led him through the standard texts in logic, ethics, and moral philosophy, and, for light relief, some history and Virgil's 'Eclogues'. He remembers Holdsworth returning late from London and rousing the seventeen-year-old from his bed to share in a conversation which went on half the night with friends who, for their 'late watchings', were called 'noctuae Londinenses'. As tutors did, Holdsworth accompanied his pupil to his Suffolk home, where he preached for D'Ewes's father 'so sweetly and profitably' that Simonds 'began to love him better than ever', and almost forgot to mention the young man's debts of $13. A Suffolk contemporary of D'Ewes who in politics was his opposite, the future Archbishop William Sancroft, wrote that at Emmanuel College (where he was master from 1637) Holdsworth was his 'card and compass', and that only his directions 'for study, for life, for all' had made Sancroft a scholar. These 'Directions for students in the university', while preserved at Emmanuel, doubtless record Holdsworth's practice at St John's. His curriculum was enlightened and perhaps novel, substituting for the year-by-year progression through grammar, logic, and rhetoric of the Elizabethan university statutes a varied day of studies, commencing with a morning of logic and philosophy and continuing with a more relaxed afternoon of poetry, classical oratory, and history, the fruits of which were to be stored in a commonplace book, full of 'choice and witty sayings, sentences and passages'. A gentler course was prescribed for gentlemen who had no need to make themselves scholars, readings mostly in English to provide 'such learning as may serve to delight and ornament'. This remarkable pedagogue amassed one of the largest private libraries of his time, estimated to contain more than 10,000 volumes by the time of his death. 
Meanwhile, Holdsworth had become one of the most famous London preachers of the day. According to Thomas Fuller he 'dominated' the pulpit, a position marked by his presidency of the London clergy guild, Sion College (1639). D'Ewes says that his sermons were 'by general approbation deemed extraordinary' but, with a single exception, they were not published in a form which Holdsworth had himself authorized. The posthumous collection 'The Valley of Vision' (1651) derived from inferior shorthand notes and appeared with a request that the reader make 'charitable allowances in things of this nature'. No such allowances were made, Fuller condemning the publication as 'none of his', with 'little vision therein' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 448). But Holdsworth's cousin Richard Pearson (grandson of William) was able to locate in Cambridge manuscript copies of the Latin sermons preached at Gresham College in the early 1630s, which he published in 1661 as 'Praelectiones theologicae', a folio volume of 737 pages. Six English sermons dating from 1634 and 1635 are also preserved (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 331). 
In 1633 the mastership of St John's fell vacant and while the vice-master, Robert Lane, received the support of the senior fellows and obtained a royal letter of recommendation, Holdsworth was elected by a clear majority of the governing body, presenting the vice-chancellor of the day with an embarrassing impasse. When a royal commission of the heads of other houses succeeded only in digging up a good deal of irregularity and some dirt (Lane was accused of 'singing drunken catches') Charles I took the matter into his own hands and appointed by mandate the Arminian high-churchman William Beale. This 'cause celebre' lasted for months and soon even Archbishop Laud was weary of it. Holdsworth bore no resentment and presented the college with some books, before collecting his compensation prize, the archdeaconry of Huntingdon. The fact that on 26 April 1637 he was freely and without fuss elected master of Emmanuel, where earlier vacancies had seen cloak-and-dagger manoeuvres designed to protect the 'pure' traditions of the college, may or may not indicate a bad conscience in high circles for his treatment at St John's. Holdsworth may well have been the best and most popular master of Emmanuel in its history, receiving the full approbation of the foundation master, Laurence Chaderton, who lived on in the vicinity of the college into his hundredth year and beyond. In spite of other commitments, especially in London, his record of residence, which can be checked against a remarkable register of 'admonitions' for offences against the college statutes, was good. 
By now, however, Holdsworth's more public life was entering stormy waters. He was a natural fence-sitter, from the most honourable of motives. When in 1637 Sylvester Adams of Peterhouse preached a sermon asserting the necessity of auricular confession, the heads of houses were divided, with five Arminian heads refusing to endorse the condemnatory sentence passed by the vice-chancellor, Ralph Brownrigg. Holdsworth believed that a recantation was necessary, but characteristically recommended 'that a longer time be given to Mr Adams to deliberate of it'. His misfortunes in England's gathering troubles he was to share with other moderate Calvinists, including the Emmanuel men Samuel Ward, master of Sidney Sussex College, Joseph Hall, bishop of Exeter, who recorded the 'hard measure' he received, and his particular friend and Hall's successor at Exeter, Brownrigg. 
As a man of what had been the centre, Holdsworth was now raked by the vicious crossfire of an increasingly polarized political and ecclesiastical scene. Fuller wrote that when the times turned 'he, standing still, was left to the censure of factious innovators' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 447). No enemy of Laud, Holdsworth could write: 'His Grace Delights in Gentleness'. As archdeacon of Huntingdon, he was stricter than his diocesan, Laud's enemy John Williams, in insisting on the placing of the holy table altarwise and on reception of communion at the altar rails, and he was pleased to have achieved compliance in this respect at St Ives. But he confessed to 'weakness' when it came to dealing with scrupulous consciences. In his London parish he refused to read the 'Book of Sports'. He was a natural choice to preach one of the fast sermons before the Short Parliament in 1640, and he opposed the continuation of convocation after the dissolution of that parliament, and the new canons which it legislated, especially the seventh, which enforced what he called 'these new taken up ceremonies'. By the early months of 1641 Holdsworth had joined with Archbishop James Ussher and Brownrigg in propounding a scheme for so-called 'reduced' episcopacy. Charles I made him a royal chaplain and he was one of five anti-Arminian moderates, including Brownrigg, to be offered a mitre. Holdsworth was the only one to refuse, whether, according to Fuller, because he thought the appointment in the circumstances 'unsafe and unseasonable', or, as both Fuller and Holdsworth's nephew Pearson report, because the 'smallness' of the see in question, Bristol, would not allow him to maintain appropriate hospitality (Fuller, 'Worthies', 448). 
The logic of the polarizing situation would now drive Holdsworth towards royalism, but for a time the Long Parliament did not know what to make of him. In December 1640 he was summoned to appear before it, it was thought because of his position on altar rails, but in May 1642 he was appointed to the Westminster assembly of divines, although in the previous October Oliver Cromwell, MP for Cambridge, had opposed the appointment of the five new bishops, and had spoken 'somewhat bitterly' against Holdsworth in particular, provoking Simonds D'Ewes to come to his old tutor's defence. According to D'Ewes himself, this business was debated 'with as great earnestness almost as I ever saw in the House'. Cromwell's hostility was perhaps provoked by Holdsworth's actions in contributing from his college, but really, it seems, from his own pocket, $100 towards the royal war chest. 
As vice-chancellor (from 1640 to 1643) and head of his house, Holdsworth had already risked the ire of parliament in defending the interests of both university and college, particularly in his oration at the commencement in 1641. Now he could no longer avoid taking sides. In late March 1642 Charles I paid his last visit to Cambridge and Holdsworth preached before him in the university church. The sermon complained that the royal influence had been 'intercepted', and made much of 'manifold yieldings and recessions' on the part of the king, 'who knows how to recede from power, and in some cases, even from prerogative', the care of his people's happiness being 'radiant in our gracious Sovereign'. Charles having ordered the sermon to be published by the university printer, Holdsworth offered it as 'some little portion of that great happiness which this eighteen years we have enjoyed, under your blessed government' ('A Sermon Preached... the 27 of March', 1642). 
Holdsworth was now marked as 'delinquent'. In August 1642 the university published a pamphlet which called the resistance offered to the king by parliament 'unwarrantable', 'damnable', 'murder'. Holdsworth had to explain himself before the House of Commons, although he remained at liberty until May 1643, when he was arrested and imprisoned at Ely House, where he continued to live, and to preach, dangerously, and to license the republication of royal declarations. A parliamentary committee now wanted to know how he had become master of Emmanuel and wondered 'whether, by his demeanour since, he hath not forfeited the said place'. When the university provocatively elected Holdsworth Lady Margaret professor of divinity in succession to Samuel Ward, who had himself died in custody, Holdsworth was removed to the Tower, but not perhaps for long. In April 1646 he was at Carshalton in Surrey. There were rumours of a plot to enable Holdsworth to take up the Lady Margaret chair, which remained vacant, but he never returned to Cambridge, or only on fleeting visits. In 1647 he was in the king's presence at Hampton Court, and received the now empty honour of the deanery of Worcester. In September 1648 he made further unsuccessful attempts to attend the king, now weeks away from trial and execution. 'So here is their circle: first we are imprisoned because with the king, and then denied to be with the king because imprisoned.' 
The earl of Manchester's visitation of the university had ejected Holdsworth from his master's lodge and had intruded as his successor Anthony Tuckney, but Tuckney was in no hurry to take possession, and in Emmanuel many regarded Holdsworth as, morally, still master. Sancroft, who had written 'I had not thought they would have beheaded whole colleges at a blow', was a constant correspondent, and looked for the time when Holdsworth would come back 'as the soul and life of this body, which hath been in a fainting and swooning condition ever since he was by violent hands snatched from us'. Holdsworth continued to feed Sancroft with prize gentry pupils ('you may please to take notice that he is a baronet'), hoped that Sancroft would be civil to Tuckney as man to man, if not as master, and was courtesy itself in all his dealings with Tuckney. 
Holdsworth died, unmarried, on 22 August 1649 at his home in Broad Street, London, and was buried at St Peter-le-Poer. His final legacy to Cambridge was princely, but problematical: his huge library. It was gifted under the terms of a most unsatisfactory will, and come the Restoration, Emmanuel and the university were at legal loggerheads over the matter. Eventually the court of arches referred the dispute to the arbitration of three bishops, who found for the university, with some financial compensation for the college. Holdsworth's 10,000 books remained in the Cambridge University Library, but not, as the bishops' judgement required, 'distinguished from other books there by the name of Dr Holdsworth's library'. 


@@@@@


doc= 13500


Henry Fulke Plantagenet Woolocombe Hole (1782-1852), wood-engraver, was the son of a captain in the Lancashire militia who, for marrying a butcher's daughter, had been dispossessed of the family's Devon estate, Ebberley Hall, near Torrington. He was apprenticed to Bewick between October 1794 and 3 October 1801, when he was responsible for a few of the engravings in the second volume of the 'British Birds'. He appears to have come to the workshop aged about twelve, having lost his father. Bewick was obviously fond of him, and when he left for Liverpool, he took with him a letter of introduction to Thomas Vernon (4 Dec 1801), in which Bewick hoped Vernon might be able to provide advice and introductions, saying that his 'late pupil... knows little of mankind... has read a good deal, is of a poetic and romantic turn of mind, is unsettled, and does not know where to cast Anchor'. Hole found his feet and eventually had enough work to seek the workshop's assistance with a long series of cuts for a 'Bible': his commissioning letter of 14 September 1804 was wildly optimistic in expecting to get fifteen finished within a week, despite saying 'something showy will be the most appropriate, for 'fineness' or 'labour' of execution is out of the question'. Other work that came from Liverpool connections were cuts for 'The Nurse' translated by William Roscoe from the Italian (3rd edn, 1804), and for the printer John McCreery's poem 'The Press', part 1 (1803). His large engraving 'Seed Sown', for Ackermann's 'Religious Emblems' (1809), shows him to have been a skilful interpreter of the work of John Thurston. As a member of the Liverpool Academy he exhibited in 1814 his engraving 'An Attempt to Restore the Old Method of Crosslining on Wood' (Redgrave, 'Artists'). Through the intervention of Roscoe, Hole went to see his uncle in Devon, who to his astonishment, after a tour of the house and grounds and a good dinner, immediately made over the estate to him (Meyer). Twenty years after the completion of the 'Bible' cuts, Bewick had still not had final payment (letter, 11 Oct 1826). Although claiming that the debt was the responsibility of Troughton, the publisher, Hole was no doubt encouraged to settle by Bewick's passing reference to adding a full account of his apprentices in his 'Memoir'. He died at Roborough, Bickington, Devon, on 19 August 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 13501


Hole, Matthew (1639/40-1730), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, is of unknown origins. He matriculated as servitor from Exeter College, Oxford, on 18 March 1658 and graduated BA on 15 October 1661. Elected to a Devonshire fellowship on 30 June 1663 and to a full fellowship on 2 July 1664, he proceeded MA (1664), BD (1674), and DD (1716). Having taken deacon's orders he was appointed lecturer of St Martin's, Carfax, Oxford, on 18 December 1668. In June 1669 he was ordained priest by Bishop Walter Blandford at Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, and held the vicarage of Bishops Lavington, Wiltshire, from 1673 to 1674. Through the influence of his friend Henry Godolphin, a fellow of Eton College, he was presented by the college to the vicarage of Stogursey, Somerset, in January 1688. He was made a prebendary of Wells Cathedral on 1 March 1688 and vacated his fellowship of Exeter in February 1689. From 1708 to 1711 he also held the living of Fiddington, Somerset. 
Hole delighted in preaching and preached in many churches in Somerset as well as before the University of Oxford. His sermons were clear and straightforward and not overtly intellectual. He stirred up controversy, however, with a visitation sermon on a fixed form of liturgy that he delivered at Bridgwater on 19 August 1695. It provoked an exchange of pamphlets with John Moore (1642-1717), Presbyterian minister in Bridgwater, in 1698 and 1699. He continued to write in defence of the established church and published a two-part rejoinder, 'An Antidote Against Infidelity' (1702, 1717), to William Coward's 'Second Thoughts Concerning Human Soul' (1702). 
Hole returned to Oxford after his election as rector of Exeter College on 8 March 1716. Two other candidates for the post had divided the college on party lines, and Hole had been chosen as a compromise. He was readmitted to a fellowship in 1718. He was unable to impose his will on the college and became embroiled in a long-running dispute with the fellows and the visitor over the plans of Richard Newton to turn Hart Hall, a tenant of Exeter, into a college. While rector he succeeded, however, in completing his most significant work, with publication of the fourth volume of his weighty 'Practical Discourses upon the Communion Service' (1714-19). He continued to preach to within a year or so of his death and, according to Thomas Hearne, did not need spectacles even in his eighties. He never married and was cared for by two nieces who lived with him in his final years. 
Hole died in his college lodgings on 19 July 1730, aged ninety, and was buried in the chapel on 21 July. He had a reputation for parsimony in his lifetime but left several charitable bequests in his will, including $200 for two charity schools in Oxford and $100 to his college towards building a new library. 


@@@@@


doc= 13502


Hole, Richard (bap. 1746, d. 1803), poet and antiquary, was baptized on 2 June 1746 at St Peter's Cathedral, Exeter, the son of William Hole (died 1791), archdeacon of Barnstaple and canon of Exeter Cathedral, and his wife, Thomasin. He was educated at the grammar school in Exeter before matriculating on 23 March 1764 at Exeter College, Oxford, where he graduated BCL on 3 May 1771. As a young man Hole involved himself with amateur theatricals, acting in 'The Beaux' Stratagem' at grammar school and composing prologues and epilogues at college. While studying law at Oxford he circulated some facetious poems and began his 'Poetical Translation of Fingal', published in 1772. Under the influence of his friend General John Graves Simcoe, afterwards the first governor of Upper Canada, Hole briefly entertained the idea of a military career, though in the event he elected to enter the clergy. On 28 October 1776 he married Wilhelmina Katenkamp, daughter of a prosperous Exeter merchant, and the following year obtained the curacy of Sowton, near Exeter. He remained at Sowton after being presented in 1777 to the living of Buckerell, which lacked a suitable residence. 
Hole's couplet adaptation of 'Ossian' was the beginning of a literary career devoted to the more obscure corners of literature, history, and geography. His next literary enterprise, a translation of the 'Homeric Hymn to Ceres' (1781) undertaken with the assistance of Samuel Badcock, proved more successful, being several times republished in the nineteenth century. Like his friend Richard Polwhele, Hole had a passion for Greek literature, local history, and religious superstitions. He contributed to the 'Monthly Review', 'British Magazine', and 'Gentleman's Magazine', and in 1782 contributed to the 'London Magazine' a series of eight satirical dialogues entitled 'The Link Boy' in which the speakers include Don Quixote, Walter Shandy, Matthew Bramble, Clarissa Harlowe, and Sophie Western. Hole's humour also appears in a posthumously published farrago of scholarship and vulgarity, 'The Exmoor courtship, from the best editions, illustrated with notes critical, historical, philosophical, and classical', a Theocritean eclogue in the Exmoor dialect with a facing 'translation' into court pastoral. 
Hole's major work, 'Arthur, or, The Northern Enchantments' (1789), is a romance epic in seven books which in places imitates Homer, Virgil, Ariosto, and Spenser. But 'Ossian' is the presiding influence in the first Arthuriad to recreate the manners and belief systems of fifth-century Britain. In an original story Arthur's Britons, allied with the Irish, repel a horde of invading Saxons and Scandinavians. Supernatural forces figure largely as Merlin, whose daughter is betrothed to Arthur, is pitted against Urda and the Weird Sisters, who assist Hengist. The historical and geographical setting suggests that the Exeter poet was attempting to do for west Britain what Macpherson's 'Ossian' had done for Scotland. 
Hole was a founding member of the literary society at Exeter whose members included Richard Polwhele, Hugh Downman, and William Jackson (who set to music Hole's 'Ode to Imagination'). Writings by Hole (including Miltonic odes to terror, melancholy, and stupidity, and several philological essays) appear in the society's two publications, 'Poems Chiefly by Gentlemen of Devonshire and Cornwall' (1792) and 'Essays, by a Society of Gentleman at Exeter' (1796). Papers read before the Exeter literary society resulted in 'Remarks on the Arabian Nights' Entertainments' (1797) which in turn led to a parallel work on Homer, a fragment of which was posthumously published in 1807 as 'An Essay on the Character of Ulysses'. Hole displays a considerable if curious erudition in illustrating the monsters and marvels encountered by the two Mediterranean travellers. He left behind a commonplace book containing several original plays. Polwhele later quarrelled with Downman and Hole, and a review of the 'Essays' which Hole erroneously attributed to Polwhele led to a falling-out and acrimonious exchanges in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. In 1792 Hole was promoted by the bishop of Exeter to the rectory of Faringdon, which he held with Buckerell, and afterwards to Inwardleigh, near Okehampton, which he held with Faringdon until his death. He died at Exmouth, after a painful illness, on 28 May 1803. He was survived by his wife of twenty-six years. 
Hole's legacy as a poet and translator appears most obviously in the poetry of his nephew John Herman Merivale. While his personal character and literary abilities were highly esteemed in his Exeter circle, Hole's wry humour and antiquarian enthusiasms did not attract much attention elsewhere. In his 'Reply to 'Blackwood's'' Byron catalogues 'Hoole, and Hole, and Hoyle' among the bards of wilted reputation (Byron, 'Letters', ed. R. E. Prothero, 1898-1904, 4.488). In the Devonshire 'Essays' appear defences of Shylock and Iago, the irony of which, like that of Swift's 'Modest Proposal', was lost on several later critics. 'Arthur, or, The Northern Enchantments' drew mixed reviews: while all approved of the subject, Nathan Drake objected to Hole's imitation of Ariosto, Egerton Brydges to his use of couplets, and Robert Southey, comparing 'Arthur' to Wilkie's 'Epigoniad', to the departures from the Arthur of legend. Yet Southey's own ethnographic epics probably owe something to a childhood reading of Hole's romance. If his heroic couplets and Shandean wit belonged to the last age, Hole's imaginative reconstructions of exotic places and pagan beliefs anticipated much later romantic fabling. 


@@@@@


doc= 13503


Hole, William (d. 1624), engraver, was the most versatile and prolific of the native-born members of his profession working in the reign of James I. Nothing is known of his origins or training, and the assumption that he was English is a deduction from his name. His first dated plates belong to 1607 and are the title-plate and nineteen of the maps for the second edition of William Camden's 'Britannia'. The first edition had been engraved by William Rogers, the first significant native-born engraver, and Hole may have been his pupil. 
As a copperplate-engraver Hole remained a specialist in engraving maps, music, and lettering. His figurative plates, mostly portrait frontispieces of the authors of books, are crude and wooden, especially by comparison with the work of Simon and Willem de Passe and Francis Delaram, the immigrants who displaced him in this field. His lettering is always delightful, and he stands at the head of the seventeenth-century tradition of engravers who worked for writing-masters. He engraved the plates to Martin Billingsley's 'The Pens Excellencie, or, The Secretaries Delighte' of 1618, the first important English engraved copybook, dedicated to Charles as prince of Wales, and he was also responsible for the first engraved plates of music made outside Italy: the famous 'Parthenia' of 1612-13 which contained music by William Byrd, John Bull, and Orlando Gibbons, and Angelo Notari's 'Prime musiche nuove' of 1613. 
In 1618 Hole was given a lifetime appointment to the office of head sculptor of the iron for money in the Tower and elsewhere. The steady stream of his dated portrait plates that begins in 1607 stops abruptly in 1619, and he henceforth confined himself to engraving coin dies. His salary of $30 was paid every year until his death in 1624: a document of 15 September that year granted his office as 'Chief Engraver of the Mint and Graver of the King's seals, ensigns and arms' to John Gilbert and Edward Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 13504


Holgate, Robert (1481/2-1555), archbishop of York, was the youngest son of Thomas Holgate and his wife, Elizabeth, members of a family of lower gentry in Hemsworth, Yorkshire. 
Holgate was educated in Cambridge, where he proceeded BTh in 1524, and DTh in 1537, having resided near Peterhouse in a study house belonging to the Gilbertine order. He entered that order as a canon and was to play an important role in the life of the community in the years before the dissolution of the monasteries. Appointed prior of St Catherine's-without-Lincoln in 1529, by 1534 he had been promoted to the position of master of Sempringham, the head of the Gilbertine order. His opponents were to claim that he owed this appointment to the agency of Thomas Cromwell, but Holgate's career continued long after Cromwell's fall, as one of the main players in the religious upheavals in England between 1530 and 1555. 
As master of the Gilbertines Holgate settled at the house in Watton in Yorkshire as its prior, and he continued to exercise this role even after his promotion to higher office in the church. He was to be responsible for the surrender of the Gilbertine order in December 1539, during the dissolution, and as prior of Watton he received a substantial pension, amounting to some $68 per annum. In 1541 he was granted priory land and eight of its manors, as well as a house in the London parish of St Sepulchre. In March 1537 he was appointed as bishop of Llandaff, a position that again seems to have been due to Cromwell's favour. He was consecrated as bishop by John Hilsey, who had replaced the executed John Fisher as bishop of Rochester, and who had marked out his own evangelical credentials in the campaign to expose the alleged fraud behind the rood of Boxley and the blood of Hailes. It has been suggested that Holgate had gravitated towards the emerging evangelical grouping in Cambridge during his time there, and that the choice of Hilsey to officiate at the consecration was thus in keeping with Holgate's own views. He had certainly been a contemporary of such men as Cranmer, Barnes, and Ridley in Cambridge, and was not unsympathetic to the Reformation of the 1530s and 1540s. 
Holgate's position at Watton had come under threat in 1536 when the house was targeted by the rebels leading the Pilgrimage of Grace. His position was not without ambiguities. In his confession, Robert Aske made it clear that he viewed Holgate as a protege of Cromwell, but there were also charges that Holgate did little to ensure the defence of the house from the rebels, and indeed he fled as the rebel army approached. But the canons seem to have remained loyal to their prior, and in fact Holgate was to benefit from the turbulent events of 1536-7. In the aftermath of the defeat of the rebels efforts were made to strengthen royal government in the north of the county, and Holgate was appointed president of the council of the north in 1538, a post he held for eleven years. Despite his importance within the Gilbertines he was not a major force in the politics of the north, and probably for this reason he received upon his appointment a number of instructions from the crown, outlining the structure of the council and concerns of the king. Most reflected the perceived need for 'good governance', including the collection of rents, the limitation of liveries, and the suppression of pro-papal sentiments and acts. After initial troubles, not least the fact that the new lord president would need a residence in the north (the former house of the abbot of St Mary's was provided), it is clear that Holgate was a useful appointment for the crown, in both practical and financial terms -- after he became archbishop Henry was able to cut by two-thirds the payments made to him as lord president. 
Following the death of Archbishop Lee on 13 September 1544, the earl of Shrewsbury recommended Holgate, as 'an honest and painstaking man', to be his successor ('LP Henry VIII', 19/2, no. 239), and Holgate was duly consecrated at Lambeth on 26 January 1545, renouncing papal authority. Henry VIII was quick to seize the opportunities for land transfer presented by Holgate's elevation, and one of the latter's first actions as archbishop of York was to alienate some sixty-seven diocesan manors, to the impoverishment of the see. The baronies of Hexham, Ripon, Sherburn, Scrooby, and Churchdown were ceded to the crown, in return for the rectories which made up what came to be known as the 'great collection'. But Holgate escaped the seizures of church land under Protector Somerset, and his activities as archbishop suggest he was one of the more competent of the former religious to rise to high office. Certainly he made the best of the uncertain financial situation of his bishopric and the available lands. At his death he was able to leave the estate of Sand Hutton to the hospital that he had founded at Hemsworth, and his will suggests strong investment in farming, showing that he possessed some 2500 sheep, about 100 horses, and quantities of grain in store. 
Archbishop Holgate was to be a loyal servant of the crown, acting as both lord president and archbishop for five years. He did much to assist the military efforts of the duke of Somerset in Scotland in the reign of Edward VI, at great personal cost. His policy of co-operation with Somerset was built upon the relationship that the two men had developed during the latter's time as lieutenant-general in the north in the latter years of the reign of Henry VIII, but their alliance and friendship would cost Holgate dear after the fall of Somerset and the rise to power of John Dudley, later duke of Northumberland. As someone who had worked closely with Somerset, Holgate was clearly an object of suspicion, even after his removal from the presidency in 1550, and he himself records that Northumberland taunted him as a papist. But Holgate's own words and actions suggest that he was sympathetic to reform. He is listed in the commission for the composition of the 'Bishops' Book' in 1537, and in 1540 was appointed a member of the committee that compiled the 'Rationale of Ceremonial'; the latter remained unpublished until 1910, probably because the evangelical members of the committee, most notably Goodrich and Holgate, prevented any discussion of the eucharist. Holgate was also named to the doctrinal commission established by Henry VIII in April 1541, while in 1542, as part of the plan to produce a revised translation of the 'Bible', the epistles of 'Peter' were assigned to him. 
In his response to a set of questions sent to the bishops late in 1547 concerning matters of doctrine and practice, Holgate displayed an enthusiasm for the vernacular liturgy, arguing that it was appropriate to use 'such speech in the Mass as the people might well understand' (Burnet, 5.211-12). His injunctions for York Minster, issued in August 1552, display a strong commitment to the vernacular scriptures, and a clear concern that the clergy of the diocese should be well equipped to preach the word. All vicars and deacons were required to memorize parts of the Pauline epistles each week, and the choristers were to learn chapters of 'Acts' or the gospels. All vicars were expected to possess a copy of the vernacular scriptures, and to read a chapter after dinner and after supper. The minster library was to be supplied with the works of the fathers, Lutheran literature, and works by Erasmus, Calvin, and Bullinger. Education was clearly important to the archbishop, who founded three schools, in York, Hemsworth, and Old Malton, and offered financial support to several others. Holgate was appointed to serve on the two Yorkshire chantry commissions, and his apparent friendship with the evangelical William Turner suggests that there was some common ground between the two men. The archbishop was also happy to find employment for the Scottish reformer John Rough in his diocese, securing a stipend for him at Hull. 
Holgate's acceptance of doctrinal change in the reign of Edward VI is evidenced by the visible changes that he made to his cathedral. After his first visitation of the minster in 1547 Holgate had demanded that repairs be made to the fabric, and that the condition of ornaments and clerical vestments be improved. However as the Edwardian Reformation advanced Holgate was to oversee substantial changes, including the removal of images from above the high altar, and their replacement with texts from scripture. Organ music in the minster was abolished, and singing was expected to be plain and audible. The result of Holgate's work has been described as the transformation of the building from 'a resplendent if somewhat shabby edifice of late medieval Catholicism to a sombre temple of the new Protestantism' (Cross, 200). 
Nevertheless there were signs that Holgate did not hold to some of the more radical opinions expressed in the reign of Edward. In response to the question on the eucharist put to him in 1547, Holgate's reply, buttressed with references to the 'New Testament', suggests a more conservative attitude than that of some of his fellow bishops, stating that: 'the oblations and sacrifice of Christ in the Mass is the presenting of the very body and blood of Christ to the heavenly father, under the forms of bread and wine, consecrated in the remembrance of his passion with prayer and thanksgiving for the universal church. (Burnet, 5.201, 203)' Although he was appointed to the committee for the revision of the prayer book in 1551, Holgate's allegiance was given rather to the first Edwardian prayer book of 1549. But his evangelical credentials should not be doubted: he has been suggested as a plausible successor to Thomas Cranmer had the plot to subvert the succession in 1553 succeeded and the protestant Jane Grey secured the throne. 
Doctrinal issues were not the only cause of conflict between Holgate and Dudley. The latter secured Holgate's removal from the presidency of the council of the north, and his designs on the archbishop's lands at Watton were to sour relations further. Moreover Holgate was later to claim that it was pressure from Northumberland that had led him to marry at the age of sixty-eight, and this marriage to Barbara Wentworth, celebrated in January 1550, threatened to become something of a scandal. The legality of the marriage was challenged by one Anthony Norman, who had been espoused to Wentworth in childhood. The law required that both parties give their consent to marriage on reaching the age of discretion, and this Barbara refused to do, instead pursuing a claim for annulment, evidently successfully. Perhaps inspired by the financial rewards reaped by the first husband of the wife of John Ponet, bishop of Winchester, Norman lodged a suit against Holgate, with the result that in November 1551 Holgate and his wife were summoned before the privy council. The order was then retracted, however, suggesting that the marriage of the archbishop was accepted by the government. But the same was not true of the more conservative laity and clergy of the diocese of York, including Robert Parkyn, curate of Adwick-le-Street, whose account of the Reformation made much capital out of the embarrassment of Holgate, and indeed of other married clerics. Holgate's position was to worsen dramatically with the accession of Mary in 1553. He was deprived of his see on 16 March 1554, alongside bishops Ferrar, Bird, and Bush, all married men and former monastics. The commissions of deprivation made it clear that marriage was their major offence, and when Holgate tried to recover his position later in 1554 in his 'Apology', his marriage provided the starting point. 
The text of the 'Apology', addressed to the council through Sir Richard Southwell, is a valiant effort at self-justification, and sheds light upon both the character of the archbishop, and the events and controversies of the Reformation in the north of England. A. G. Dickens, writing in 1937, denounced it as a 'cringing' document, but later modified this position and, in recognition of the importance of the text, printed it in full. Probably writing late in 1554, Holgate uses his 'Apology' to petition to be released from imprisonment in the Tower, and expresses the hope that he may be restored to sacerdotal functions. He was indeed released in January 1555, but that was the limit of his success. Holgate died on 15 November following, apparently in his London house, and was probably buried in the church of St Sepulchre nearby. 
Holgate's 'Apology' expresses regret on only one point -- his marriage. The petition opens with an admission that he has married a 'gentilwoman' named Barbara Wentworth, but asserts that he did so only 'by the councell of Edwarde then the Duke of Somerset and for feare of the laite Duke of Northumberlande using to call him papiste and he thought verelye then that he myght have done soo by Godes lawes and the Kinges' (Dickens, 'Reformation Studies', 355). In contrast to this error of judgement, he outlines the able service that he has given to Henry VIII and Edward VI in the defence of order in the north, and promises that he will serve the queen if she grants him his freedom. Holgate points to the example of the other deprived bishops and claims that they were 'moche further gone amysse in religion then he was' (ibid., 357), although he does concede that by his marriage he has set a poor example to others, particularly those clergy in his diocese who have married. Holgate clearly hopes that he will be permitted to recover his lands and incomes, and concludes his petition by offering the queen the sum of $1000 as a token of his obedience and service. At the age of seventy-four, imprisoned in the Tower, Holgate had clearly decided to throw in his lot with the new regime. His career and more particularly his marriage point to sympathy with the ideals of the Edwardian Reformation, but his last months suggest a return to loyalties formed before the decade of more radical activity that did so much to shape his reputation. 


@@@@@


doc= 13505


Holinshed, Raphael (c.1525-1580?), historian, was the son of Ralph Holinshed or Hollingshead of Cophurst in the township of Sutton Downes, Cheshire. His cousin Ottiwell was a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, from 19 December 1546, and though a layman was a canon of Windsor from 24 September 1550 until Mary's accession. Cooper in the 1850s reported the belief that Raphael Holinshed had been educated at Cambridge, and cited Thomas Baker's opinion that he had attended Trinity Hall. But Anthony Wood gave credit to a report that Raphael Holinshed was 'a minister of God's word' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.714), thereby associating Holinshed with the growth of protestantism in England, and this may explain why during Mary's reign, when he was probably in his late twenties and early thirties, he found employment in the London printing house of Reyner Wolfe, a committed evangelical, rather than seeking a living in the church. Wolfe employed Holinshed to assist him in his grand plan to create 'a universal cosmographie', a vast historical and geographical description of the world, complete with maps. 
The first edition of Holinshed's 'Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland' appeared in 1577. It formed part of a deliberate movement to elevate the status of England, English letters, and English language through writing and publishing maps, histories, national epics, and theoretical works on English poetry. In April 1547 Reyner Wolfe had received a royal privilege as the king's printer in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew that, according to its patent, included the exclusive right to provide charts and maps useful or necessary to the king and his countries. Although Wolfe's universal cosmology, according to Holinshed's preface to the 'Chronicles', 'wanted little to accomplishment' when Wolfe died in 1573, it was still incomplete a year later at the death of Wolfe's wife, Joan. Her will gave high priority to assuring Holinshed the 'benefit profit and commoditie' promised by her husband 'concerning the translating and prynting of a certaine Crownacle'; this was the first item after the bequest of Wolfe's substantial printing establishment to a son Robert and son-in-law, the haberdasher John Hun (Plomer, 19-23). 
John Hun now joined John Harrison, the overseer of his mother-in-law's will and a prominent London printer, and together they formed a consortium with two members of the close-knit printing establishment at Wolfe's Brazen Serpent, Lucas Harrison and George Bishop, as the publishers of the 'Chronicles'. For the printing they turned to Henry Bynneman, one of London's finest craftsmen and a man with considerable experience of printing histories -- in 1580 Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, and Sir Christopher Hatton secured for Bynneman the royal privilege to print 'all Dictionaries in all tongues, all Chronicles and histories whatsoever' ('CPR', '1578-80', no. 1594). In 1577 he completed the printing of Holinshed's monumental two-volume work, comprising 2835 small folio pages, besides preliminaries and indexes. 
The 'Chronicles' that appeared in 1577 fell short not only of Wolfe's projected 'Polychronicon' but also of Holinshed's expectations and the standards of some of the contributors. Holinshed's epistle dedicatory of 1577 to William Cecil, Lord Burghley (also printed in the 1587 edition) suggests not only that Burghley may have been Wolfe's patron, but also that Holinshed was concerned that his own work might be censured for falling short of Wolfe's original conception -- the 'universal cosmologie' illustrated with maps. The epistle dedicatory blames the work's relatively limited scope on Wolfe's executors, who although they brought the 'Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland' to fruition, earned little thanks from Holinshed for their efforts. William Harrison, the author of the 'Historicall description of the island of Britain', which prefaced the 'Chronicles', expressed concern that the speed with which he had written his contribution might have led to errors and omissions. 
Whatever disappointments Holinshed himself may have felt about his published work, posterity has seen the 'Chronicles' of 1577 as a commercial success. It was certainly both an expensive book and an important one. One of the books that Robert Devereux, later second earl of Essex, bought when he went up to Cambridge in 1577, at $1 6's'. it was the most expensive volume among the young man's purchases (an investment equal to breakfast for the term). But its presence also suggests how informed Elizabethans were coming to place the understanding of their own history alongside the classics as part of the education of a young gentleman preparing for government service. How much 'benefit proffit and commoditie' Holinshed actually enjoyed as a result of the publication of his 'Crownacle' is not altogether clear. By 1 October 1578 he was in Bramcote, Warwickshire, acting as steward to Thomas Burdet, to whom he bequeathed his papers and books in a will that was proved on 24 April 1582. Wood reports that Holinshed probably died late in 1580. 
In 1587 a second edition of Holinshed's 'Chronicles' appeared. It was a substantial undertaking. The colophon to this text indicates that it was printed 'cum privilegio', that is, under a royal privilege, by Henry Denham at the sign of The Star in Aldersgate at the expense of John Harrison, George Bishop, Ralph Newbury, and Thomas Woodcocke. The 1587 'Chronicles' required the financial support of these backers as well as their co-operation. John Harrison and George Bishop owned the Stationers' Company's licence for the book, but in 1584 Ralph Newbury and Henry Denham held the exclusive right to print chronicles and histories under the queen's patent, which they obtained from the estate of Henry Bynneman, who had died in 1583. Thomas Woodcocke had purchased Lucas Harrison's share in the 'Chronicles' from Harrison's widow. The stature of these printers and the extraordinary care they exercised in preparing the 1587 edition suggest that their concern to produce a distinguished history was as great as Wolfe's and Holinshed's had been, and since they controlled the project, they could produce a text that better met their expectations. 
The seriousness with which Denham and the other publishers approached the second edition of Holinshed's 'Chronicles' can be seen in the care with which it was prepared. While Reyner Wolfe had worked along with Holinshed in compiling the 1577 edition, the second edition's publishers placed the project in the hands of Abraham Fleming, a 'learned corrector' who worked extensively with Henry Denham (Donno, 'Abraham Fleming', 205). Acting as general editor between 1585 and 1587, Fleming revised the 'Chronicles' and extended the English history to 1586. Among his inclusions were Thomas Churchyard's accounts of Elizabeth's progress to Suffolk and Norfolk in 1578 and of the elaborate tournament devised by Philip Sidney, Fulke Greville, and the earl of Arundel for the French ambassadors in 1581, Lord Burghley's pamphlet 'The Execution of Justice' (1583), and parliament's demand in 1587 for sentence of death against Mary, queen of Scots, along with Elizabeth's refusal to execute her. 
The 'Chronicles' of 1587 were printed in three volumes in large-folio format gathered in six. William Harrison's 'Historical description' and the 'History of England' to 1066, both carried over from the 1577 edition and each signed and gathered independently, comprise the first volume. The second volume consists of the description and history of Ireland, revised and continued by John Hooker, and the description and history of Scotland, similarly treated by Francis Thynne. Again, each is signed and gathered independently. Volumes 1 and 2 are generally bound together. Volume 3 is the 'History of England' revised and continued by Fleming, although substantial parts of the continuation were contributed by John Stow. 
Both editions of the 'Chronicles' underwent censorship. The first edition came to the privy council's attention in December 1577 because of Richard Stanyhurst's contribution to the 'History of Ireland'. The council ordered John Aylmer, bishop of London, to stay the sales until the text could be reformed, and he called upon the eleventh earl of Kildare to present Stanyhurst to the council. On 13 January 1578 the council ordered the bishop to release the stay once he received notice from Burghley as lord treasurer that the revisions Stanyhurst had agreed to make were completed. While the 'Short title catalogue (STC)', second edition, notes three cancels in the 'Chronicles' of 1577, only the F7 gathering appears to contain significant changes. The revision toned down the text's strong bias against Kildare's grandfather, the ninth earl, and removed some disparaging remarks about Archbishop John Alen. 
On 1 February 1587 the privy council wrote to Archbishop John Whitgift of Canterbury requesting 'the staye of furder sale and uttering' of a 'new booke of the Chronicles of England... until they shall be reviewed and reformyd' ('APC', '1585-7', 311). The concern expressed in this order was specifically directed towards the recent additions made 'as an augmentation to Hollingsheades Chronicle' that contained 'sondry thinges which we wish had bene better considered, forasmuch as the same booke doth allso conteyne reporte of matters of later yeeres that concern the State, and are not therfore meete to be published in such sorte as they are delivered.' The order included the appointment of reviewers experienced in those state matters that warranted 'reformation': Henry Killigrew, Thomas Randolph, and John Hammond. 
Holinshed's 'Chronicles' of 1587 were castrated and reformed in three stages. The hands of Randolph, Killigrew, and Hammond clearly dictated the earliest stage of censorship evident in the earliest revised state of the text. Their work removed passages in the continuation of the Scottish history that might jeopardize Anglo-Scottish relations, especially those concerned with English intervention in Scottish factional politics. In the continuation of the 'History of England' their reforms enhanced the stature of Leicester, distanced England from the duc d'Alencon, who had recently offended the Dutch, and polished accounts of English legal practice to insist that trials and executions in England were administered fairly and according to due process of law. The censors apparently acted with the speed required by the privy council's order, since the first stage of the censorship was probably completed during the first week of February. This can be detected in one cancel in the 'History of Scotland', containing revised text that refers to the 'now imprisoned queene of Scotland' (p. 443, sig. A6-7). Since the page with this reference was reset, the initial review and reformation, including the resetting of the cancel leaves, must have taken place within a week of the initial order for censorship and before Mary's execution on 8 February 1587. Then, once the text had been reformed to meet Killigrew's, Randolph's, and Hammond's requirements, it was fine-tuned, probably by Whitgift, since at this stage censorship eliminated much of a long history of the archbishops of Canterbury. 
The 'Chronicles'' final revision, very likely dictated by political developments that followed the completion of the first and second reformations, reflects a careful attempt to cultivate good opinions both at home and abroad, and especially abroad, ahead both of English efforts to negotiate a settlement in the Low Countries and of the expected response to the execution of Mary, queen of Scots. Finally, in addition to the important matters of state reflected in the 'Chronicles'' censorship and reform, the factional interests of certain councillors affected the text early and late, in particular the rivalry at court between the earl of Leicester, whose sympathies rested with international protestantism, and his more conservative opponents, notably William Brooke, Lord Cobham, and Thomas Sackville, Lord Buckhurst, who had both been appointed to the privy council in February 1586. 
All the castrations and cancels appear in the sections of the 1587 'Chronicles' that extended Holinshed's earlier histories of Scotland and England. Besides the few extant copies of the 'Chronicles' that escaped castration and reformation, some copies exist that contain variant cancels together with more original leaves than the state of the text described in the 'STC'. The greatest number of original leaves, formerly part of a broken copy of the 'Chronicles', survives in a fragment now in the Huntington Library, San Marino, California. This fragment represents the earliest state of the Holinshed text, and its cancels reflect the reformations indicated by Killigrew, Randolph, and Hammond. The second state of the 'reformed' text appears in a privately owned copy of the 1587 'Chronicles'. At each of these sites, when the original leaves, the Huntington Library fragment, and the private copy cancels and their adjacent leaves are compared with the 'STC' cancels and their adjacent leaves, it can be seen that the textual reformations reflect a continuous process of revision, one completed by the time the book reappeared in the bookshops in 1587. Although 'STC' suggests that the text was censored again in 1590 at the request of James VI of Scotland, in fact James relented in his demand and the 'Chronicles' were not recalled. 
Without a census of extant copies of Holinshed's 1587 'Chronicles', it is unclear how many copies reflect each successive state of the text. Since the sale was stayed and the subsequent reformations made within a month of the book's completion and initial publication, copies with a fully uncensored text appear to be very rare. And although a particular copy may predominantly reflect a given state of the text of 1587, two circumstances may produce yet more variation. It is possible that in any one copy, where leaves should have been castrated and replaced with cancels, the site none the less may have been overlooked and the castration not made. Thus original leaves in one site (or more) may coexist in a copy with cancels elsewhere. Conversely, a castration may have been made, but the cancel not added. As a further complication, besides the variations that may have been produced in the sixteenth-century printing house, some copies of the 'Chronicles' result from changes produced by antiquarian interests in the eighteenth century. Between 1723 and 1728 three facsimile reprints of the castrated leaves were sold, with the clear intention that they should be sophisticated into existing copies of the 'Chronicles' to replace cancels and missing leaves. Consequently many copies of the 1587 edition have eighteenth-century leaves sophisticated at one or more of the castration sites. A third edition published in 1807-8 restored the censored passages but reordered the descriptions and histories and changed attribution practices. 
Although Holinshed's 'Chronicles' have been appreciated as a useful resource for sixteenth-century history, scholars have also tended to ignore their integrity. Their importance as a source for several of Shakespeare's plays -- they underlie not only all the conventional English history plays, but also 'King Lear', 'Macbeth', and 'Cymbeline' -- has long been understood, but otherwise until late in the twentieth century historians were apt to consign the 'Chronicles' to the margins of study, as either a vestige of medieval historiography or the sixteenth-century equivalent of a coffee-table art book, a commercial rather than an intellectual product. From the mid-1980s, however, the development of cultural studies has led to a renewed interest in Holinshed's 'Chronicles' as the product of the emergent English nationalism of the end of the sixteenth century. The 'Chronicles' may be regarded as a secular equivalent to John Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments', a massive and wide-ranging work of scholarship which served as a source for Holinshed, his colleagues, and successors. 


@@@@@


doc= 13506


Jean-Louis Holker (1770-1844), seems not to have had any British connection. He was a major French chemical industrialist, largely responsible for the continuous production method in sulphuric acid, and extending into soda and chlorine bleach manufacture. 


@@@@@


doc= 13507


Holker, John (1719-1786), Jacobite soldier and industrialist, was born on 14 October 1719 at Stretford, near Manchester, the son of John Holker, probably a blacksmith, and Alice, daughter of John Morris. His father died early; his mother was still alive in 1760. He was a partner with Peter Moss in a calendering business in Manchester while still in his twenties, and around 1740 he married Elizabeth Hilton, a Manchester woman. When the army of Charles Edward Stuart entered Manchester in 1746, Holker and Moss purchased commissions in the regiment raised there. He clearly stated that he was captured at Carlisle, though others in France later said it was at Culloden. He and Moss made a most daring escape from Newgate prison, and Holker made his way to France via the Netherlands. Once in France he joined a Jacobite regiment in the French army and saw service in Flanders. In 1750 he again showed the greatest courage in returning to England as Charles Stuart's sole companion, when he vainly urged the English Jacobites to rebel. Though given a sword of honour by Charles, Holker never seems to have claimed any merit for this act. 
At this point Holker became known to Marc Morel, a French inspector of industry, who had examined the industrial situation in England. Morel drew him to the attention of Daniel-Charles Trudaine, the brilliant head of the bureau of commerce, who had a wide administrative brief. He and the scientist Mignot de Montigny, an industrial adviser to government, interviewed Holker. They concluded that he had the ability to raise the Rouen cotton industry to English standards. He was found capital and partners to set up two enterprises, one for spinning and weaving, and one for finishing cloth, particularly by calendering. Holker went to England, and to his native Lancashire, where his mother helped him to gather a well-selected group of workers, including some relatives. He successfully organized their removal to France, together with some machine models, and in many cases their families joined them. The two Rouen enterprises were very successful, and Holker gained the high esteem of Trudaine. 
Holker submitted a scheme to the French government, probably with its strong encouragement, for the creation of a post that would encourage the seduction of workers from England, together with equipment, and, in the long term, would employ agents to continue this activity, and would then spread the industrial espionage beyond cotton. He was well aware of the British anti-suborning legislation of 1719 and after. He proposed that emigrant workers be encouraged by tax concessions and pensions. He himself would embark on tours through France to examine the industrial situation, and advise where it could be improved by an infusion of English technology and workers. The scheme was approved, and he became inspector-general of foreign manufactures in 1756. 
Holker's tour reports are penetrating, often brilliant, and amazing, given his youth and limited industrial experience when he left England. For over quarter of a century he was the favoured and respected adviser of Trudaine and his son Trudaine de Montigny, who succeeded his father in 1769. One of his hardest tasks was to advise, direct, and comment on three other Englishmen, who were establishing themselves in France: John Badger, calenderer and maker of watered silks; Michael Alcock, a Birmingham metal manufacturer; and John Kay of fly-shuttle fame. All were difficult men to deal with, and the last two almost unreasonably so. Holker was largely responsible for setting up two large proto-industrial colonies of workers, at Sens and Bourges, based on the skills, and partly on the management, of British textile workers, many of whom he had secured himself. With his only son, John Holker ['see below'], he embarked on vitriol production after long preparations, which involved industrial espionage by his son in England. They established 'c'.1768 the glass-globe process, and then 'c'.1772 the lead-chamber process, the basis of much of the future heavy chemical industry. 
In 1766 Holker and his wife took French nationality; in 1770 he received the cross of the military order of St Louis, and in 1774 he was granted letters of nobility because of his outstanding services to industry -- there being a small preliminary charade of his proving gentility in England. Widowed by 1776, he took as his second wife Marie-Marguerite Therese Ribard, widow of Jean Testard, from a prominent Rouen business family claiming nobility. 
During Holker's last years he was important in introducing English experts on the new textile machinery into France, particularly the Milnes of Stockport. Weeks before his death he gave greatly valued, and debated, advice on the potential terms of the Eden-Rayneval treaty of 1786 for freer trade between Britain and France. The 1780s were saddened for him by a bitter pamphlet attack on his achievements by his former protege Roland de la Platiere, and by his guaranteeing the vast debts which his son ran up as an envoy and then merchant and speculator in the United States. 
Given Holker's limited industrial experience in England, his very poor written English, and his limited spoken French even in the 1770s, his achievements were remarkable. He was largely responsible for giving Rouen a significant cotton industry and France the basis of a heavy chemical industry, while intervening helpfully in many branches of French industry over much of the country. Able to maintain a successful rapport with some of the greatest and best French statesmen of the old regime, and become the respected friend of Jefferson and particularly Franklin, Holker remained sympathetic to the problems of the lowest worker. He died at Rouen on 27 April 1786. 
John Holker's only child was his son, 


@@@@@


doc= 13508


John Holker (1745-1822), born at Manchester. He had from 1764 received a specialized training to enable him to succeed his father, partly by studying science under Rouelle, Cadet, and others, partly by accompanying his father on industrial tours and inspections in France. In 1768 he was appointed 'adjoint' to his father, and was deeply involved in obtaining the English technology of sulphuric acid (vitriol) manufacture; the Holkers started to produce the acid in Rouen by the globe process in 1769, and then by the lead-chamber process about 1772. The younger John Holker made major industrial espionage expeditions to Britain in 1767, 1770, and 1772; the 1770 visit brought the spinning jenny to France. He was made inspector-general of foreign manufactures in 1777. But in the same year he was sent on an ambitious but ill-defined diplomatic mission to the United States. He was appointed consul in Philadelphia and became concerned in the supply of the French fleet in America and that of the French and American land forces. He was also heavily involved with American finances and internal and external trade. He was unable to settle his accounts with the French navy, and unable to return to France until after his father's death, and then only very briefly. He became a land speculator in America on a large scale. His wife, Elizabeth Julie Quesnel, whom he had married in 1769, never joined him in America. He died there in 1822. His son, 


@@@@@


doc= 13509


Holker, Sir John (1828-1882), judge and politician, was born in Bury, Lancashire, the son of Samuel Holker, a manufacturer there, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of John Brocklehurst of Clitheroe, Lancashire. He was educated at the Bury grammar school, and, though at first intended for the church, was articled to a solicitor by the name of Eastham of Kirkby Lonsdale, Westmorland. After some years he entered Gray's Inn, where he was called to the bar in 1854, and then became first a bencher and in 1875 treasurer. After a short time in London he joined the northern circuit, and settled in Manchester. For some time, he got little work and was nicknamed 'sleepy Jack Holker' by his fellow barristers. According to an obituary in 'The Times' he was a 'tall, plain, lumbering Lancashire man, who never seemed to labour a case nor to distinguish himself by ingenuity or eloquence, but through whom the justice of his cause appeared to shine as through a somewhat dull but altogether honest medium. ('The Times')' On 5 September 1861 he married Janis, daughter of James Wilson of Eccles, Lancashire; they had no children. 
After ten years building a miscellaneous practice, Holker finally distinguished himself through his work in a parliamentary committee on the 'Stalybridge and Ashton Waterworks Bill', and moved to London in 1864. He became queen's counsel in 1866, and at once took a leading position on his circuit; he was so successful in his first patent case at his first assize as a queen's counsel that patent became the mainstay of his practice. 
In 1872 Holker won a by-election as a Conservative at Preston. The election was the first under the 'Ballot Act' and attracted much attention. At the same time, the Tichborne case, which absorbed many of the best-known leaders at the bar, opened up opportunities for him in London where he was little known until then, and gave him a lot of work. After the death of his first wife, on 13 January 1874 he married Mary Lucia Richardson, daughter of Patrick McHugh of Cheetham Hill, Manchester; they had no children. 
At the general elections in 1874 and in 1880 Holker was re-elected for Preston. He was appointed solicitor-general by the prime minister Disraeli and was knighted (1874). On the appointment of Sir Richard Baggallay to the Court of Appeal in November 1875, Holker became attorney-general. His practice became enormous, and his income for two consecutive years was $22,000 a year. Persuasiveness, shrewdness, and tact made him extraordinarily successful in winning verdicts. 
In the House of Commons, Holker proved a successful law officer: he opposed Bass's bill to abolish committals for contempt in county courts, vigorously attacked W. E. Gladstone's eastern policy in 1877, introduced the 'Criminal Code Bill' and 'Bankruptcy Bill', and carried the 'Summary Procedure Act' and 'Public Prosecution Act' in 1879. It was known that he was anxious to become lord chief baron, but Sir Fitzroy Kelly was unwilling to quit, so Holker returned to private practice on the fall of Lord Beaconsfield's government in 1880. The Liberal prime minister, William Gladstone, who appreciated Holker's close powers of reasoning, appointed him a lord justice of appeal in January 1882, but he sat for only a few months before failing health led him to resign on 19 May. He died on 24 May 1882 at his house, 46 Devonshire Street, Portland Place, London. He had suffered from heart and kidney trouble for some time but died of inflammation of the lungs after a cold. He was buried on 30 May in his mother's grave at Lytham, Lancashire. His widow, a Roman Catholic, became quite a close friend of Gladstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 13510


Holl family (per. c.1800-1884), printmakers, came to prominence with the engraver William Holl the elder (1771-1838), who was apparently of German origin and a pupil of Benjamin Smith, engraver. William Holl's prints were executed mainly in stipple and included many plates of portraits, decorative subjects, and statuary after contemporary artists, one of his best works being 'The Boar which Killed Adonis Brought before Venus' after Richard Westall (1802). Although a man of retiring disposition, Holl was an advanced liberal in politics with strongly held views on social equality. At the time of the Spa Fields riots in 1816 he exposed himself and his family to great risk by concealing the ringleader, James Watson, son of the radical James Watson (1766-1836), and helping him escape to America. He was married to Mary Ravenscroft, who was recorded as the mother of his children in 1815. Holl was one of the first engravers to try out the new matrix of the steel plate for engraving banknotes in 1819. He also pioneered the use of stipple-engraving on steel, as seen in his 'Portrait of the Reverend John Roadhouse' (1821). He died in London on 1 December 1838. 
William Holl had four sons who were all apprenticed to their father as engravers. The eldest son, William Holl the younger (1807-1871), was born at Plaistow, London, in February 1807 and baptized on 6 August 1815 at St Mary's, St Marylebone, Middlesex. His independent plates date from 1835 with a series of portraits for E. Lodge's 'Portraits of Illustrious Personages' (2nd edn, 1835). He also worked in line-engraving and mezzotint and between 1860 and 1871 he exhibited twenty-two engravings at the Royal Academy. He produced plates for the Art Union of London from 1851 and his plate after W. P. B. Frith's 'An Old English Merrymaking' (1849), was the first large engraving to be executed in the 'chalk' style. William Holl the younger was a founder member of the Chalcographic Society formed by several prominent engravers in 1830. He died at his home, 174 Adelaide Road, Haverstock Hill, London, on 30 January 1871, leaving a widow, Annie. His brother Charles Holl ('c'.1810-1882) worked in his studio for thirty years and completed several plates after William's death, including 'Rebekah' after Frederick Goodall (1871) for the Art Union of London. Charles exhibited only one plate under his own name at the Royal Academy, in 1874. 
Henry Benjamin Holl (1808-1884) was baptized on 6 August 1815 at St Mary's, St Marylebone, Middlesex. He was also a portrait engraver of merit whose plates date from 1828 to 1861. He was also an actor and a wine merchant and enjoyed a gregarious and cultured life. He was living at Broadstairs, Kent, with his wife and family in 1874 but apparently he died at Marisiana in the United States in 1884. 

Francis Holl (1815-1884) was born on 23 March 1815 at Bayham Street, Camden Town, London, and baptized on 6 August that year with his brothers and sister, Isabella, at St Mary's, St Marylebone, Middlesex. He became a successful and fashionable engraver, working for book as well as print publishers. He frequently collaborated with his brother William, as in the four plates after J. Hayter for Finden's 'Gallery of Beauty' (1841). He worked for twenty-five years engraving the queen's pictures and received royal commissions to execute private plates of portraits of the royal family. He engraved many plates after works by famous artists of the day. Two of his most popular engravings were 'The Railway Station' (1862) and 'Coming of Age in the Olden Time' (1854), both after paintings by W. P. B. Frith. Between 1856 and 1883 he exhibited twenty engravings at the Royal Academy and was finally elected an associate engraver in 1883. Francis Holl was also well known as an amateur actor and was a member of the Histrionics, who played at St James's Theatre, London. In 1846 and 1848 he played comic characters in performances in aid of the Artists' General Benevolent Fund, given by an amateur company of eminent artists which included George Cruickshank. He also sang well and played the cello. On 23 September 1841 he married Alicia Margaret, the daughter of Robert Dixon, a veteran of Trafalgar, and they had two sons and two daughters. The family lived for many years at 30 Gloucester Road, Regent's Park, London. In 1879 Francis Holl retired to live at Elm House, Milford, Surrey, where he died of peritonitis on 14 January 1884. He was buried on 19 January at Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. His wife survived him. His eldest son, Francis Montague Holl, known as Frank Holl (1845-1888), showed artistic talent from an early age. He became a celebrated portrait painter and was elected a Royal Academician in 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 13511


Holl, Francis Montague (1845-1888), painter and illustrator, was born on 4 July 1845 at 7 St James's Terrace, in Kentish Town, London, the eldest among the four children of the well-known engraver Francis Holl (1815-1884) ['see under 'Holl family] and his wife, Alicia Margaret Dixon, who was the daughter of a naval officer and veteran of the battle of Trafalgar. His grandfather William Holl the elder (1771-1838) and uncle William Holl the younger (1807-1871) ['see under 'Holl family] were also engravers. 
Frank Holl learned the rudiments of drawing from his father. Because of a sickly constitution his formal schooling was limited, and the strain of ill health in boyhood may have contributed to his early death. Despite his apparent frailty, however, he exhibited a passion for cricket and tennis, playing the latter as an adult with considerable skill. Holl was accepted at fifteen as a student at the Royal Academy Schools, and won a gold medal for a religious painting, 'Abraham about to Sacrifice Isaac', in 1863. A year later two of his paintings were accepted for exhibition at the Royal Academy, where he showed work regularly until his death. (His election as associate of the Royal Academy in 1878 was followed by full membership in 1883.) On 16 May 1867 he married Annie Laura, daughter of the watercolourist and landscape painter Charles Davidson (1824-1902). They had four daughters: Ada, Olive, Madeline, and Phillis. 
The critical and public success of Holl's first great subject picture, 'The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away' (1869; Guildhall Art Gallery, London), which depicts a grief-stricken family praying together in their lowly cottage, resulted in the award of a travelling scholarship. In an unusual move Holl relinquished the scholarship after only a few months of travel abroad when he realized that he preferred to paint subjects from modern English life rather than to study Old Master paintings. On his return Queen Victoria commissioned from him 'No Tidings from the Sea' (1871; Royal Collection), having been unable to purchase his first exhibited success, which was already sold. The subject matter endorsed Holl's reputation as an artist with a morbid temperament whose works often focused on themes of impending tragedy and death. Other melancholy images of family life from the 1870s include scenes of funeral processions, and maternal loss and grief, such as 'I am the Resurrection and the Life' (1872; Leeds City Art Gallery), 'Her First Born' (1877; Sheffield City Art Galleries), and 'Hushed' (1877; Tate Collection). While critical response to these lugubrious themes was often negative they remained extremely popular with the general public, and engravings after them extended their appeal to a wider audience. 
Reviewers often compared Holl's mournful pictures to those of his contemporary the Dutch artist Jozef Israels (1824-1911), whose work, though admired by Holl in Antwerp while on his scholarship travels, was already well known in England. Holl's painting of prison life, based on his own observations -- 'Newgate: Committed for Trial' (1878; Royal Holloway Collection, University of London) -- was another socially-aware image that obtained for the artist strong critical notice and public response. With Luke Fildes and Hubert von Herkomer, two artists with whom he worked at 'The Graphic' magazine between 1872 and 1883, Holl became part of an informal school of social-realist painting that flourished during the 1870s; its aim was to draw attention to the everyday conditions of the working classes and the poor, and implicitly to criticize the social structures that maintained such conditions. Working intermittently for the periodical, Holl made some twenty illustrations either drawn especially for the magazine or based on paintings exhibited earlier at the Royal Academy. He also completed in 1874 a set of twenty-four illustrations for the novel 'Phineas Redux', by Anthony Trollope. Vincent Van Gogh collected several of Holl's social-realist engravings for his collection of works by English illustrators, now housed in the Vincent Van Gogh Museum and Foundation in Amsterdam. 
When Holl exhibited a portrait of the engraver Samuel Cousins (Tate Collection; pen and wash drawing, NPG) at the Royal Academy in 1879 it created a sensation, and until his death in 1888 he painted a further 197 portraits, a staggering number in such a short period of time. It was thought that this feverish overwork aggravated the heart disease that eventually killed him. Holl painted many great men of his day (he painted only two female portraits); his most admired portrait work included 'William Ewart Gladstone' (1888; Hawarden Castle, Flintshire), 'The Earl Spencer' (1888; priv. coll.), 'William Agnew' (1883; Thos. Agnew & Sons, Ltd, London), and 'The Duke of Cleveland' (priv. coll., USA). One of his last portraits was of the American millionaire J. Pierpont Morgan (1888; Pierpont Morgan Library, New York), painted when Holl was mortally ill. It was this kind of conscientiousness in executing his commissions that exacerbated his already fragile health. His workload and exhausting schedule did, however, bring financial rewards that enabled Holl and his family to afford a lavish lifestyle resembling that of the illustrious figures whom he painted. He lived in two grand houses designed for him by the architect Richard Norman Shaw: Three Gables, Fitzjohn's Avenue, Hampstead, and Burrows Cross, Albury, Surrey. 
Holl's success as a portraitist was often equated with that of his contemporaries John Everett Millais and George Frederic Watts. His portraits were distinctly sombre in hue, with a preponderance of black; the sober colouring of his work paid homage to his idols Velazquez and Rembrandt. Holl's technique, however, with its swiftly executed, sketchy brushwork also bears comparison with the then fashionable French portraitist Charles-Emile-Auguste Carolus-Duran. Holl felt privileged to meet the important people whom he painted and, wearing his signature checked suit, kept up a steady stream of conversation with his sitters, who numbered three a day. He was noted for capturing an excellent likeness and also for delineating in paint the essentials of his subjects' personality and character. 'Sir John Tenniel' ('c'.1883) and 'Joseph Chamberlain' (1886), both in the National Portrait Gallery, London, are good examples. 
Holl died, of heart failure, at his home in Hampstead -- Three Gables, Fitzjohn's Avenue -- on 31 July 1888, and was buried in Highgate cemetery on 7 August. His wife survived him. In paying tribute to her father A. M. Reynolds wrote of 'his striking and vigorous intellect', remarking that he was 'gifted in many ways, of which painting was only one, and one into which he threw his whole soul' -- a comment tempered by her observation that 'if one seeks for the dominant trait in his character... it was, perhaps, his extreme simplicity and modesty' (Reynolds, 315-16). 


@@@@@


doc= 13512


Holl family (per. c.1800-1884), printmakers, came to prominence with the engraver William Holl the elder (1771-1838), who was apparently of German origin and a pupil of Benjamin Smith, engraver. William Holl's prints were executed mainly in stipple and included many plates of portraits, decorative subjects, and statuary after contemporary artists, one of his best works being 'The Boar which Killed Adonis Brought before Venus' after Richard Westall (1802). Although a man of retiring disposition, Holl was an advanced liberal in politics with strongly held views on social equality. At the time of the Spa Fields riots in 1816 he exposed himself and his family to great risk by concealing the ringleader, James Watson, son of the radical James Watson (1766-1836), and helping him escape to America. He was married to Mary Ravenscroft, who was recorded as the mother of his children in 1815. Holl was one of the first engravers to try out the new matrix of the steel plate for engraving banknotes in 1819. He also pioneered the use of stipple-engraving on steel, as seen in his 'Portrait of the Reverend John Roadhouse' (1821). He died in London on 1 December 1838. 
William Holl had four sons who were all apprenticed to their father as engravers. The eldest son, William Holl the younger (1807-1871), was born at Plaistow, London, in February 1807 and baptized on 6 August 1815 at St Mary's, St Marylebone, Middlesex. His independent plates date from 1835 with a series of portraits for E. Lodge's 'Portraits of Illustrious Personages' (2nd edn, 1835). He also worked in line-engraving and mezzotint and between 1860 and 1871 he exhibited twenty-two engravings at the Royal Academy. He produced plates for the Art Union of London from 1851 and his plate after W. P. B. Frith's 'An Old English Merrymaking' (1849), was the first large engraving to be executed in the 'chalk' style. William Holl the younger was a founder member of the Chalcographic Society formed by several prominent engravers in 1830. He died at his home, 174 Adelaide Road, Haverstock Hill, London, on 30 January 1871, leaving a widow, Annie. His brother Charles Holl ('c'.1810-1882) worked in his studio for thirty years and completed several plates after William's death, including 'Rebekah' after Frederick Goodall (1871) for the Art Union of London. Charles exhibited only one plate under his own name at the Royal Academy, in 1874. 
Henry Benjamin Holl (1808-1884) was baptized on 6 August 1815 at St Mary's, St Marylebone, Middlesex. He was also a portrait engraver of merit whose plates date from 1828 to 1861. He was also an actor and a wine merchant and enjoyed a gregarious and cultured life. He was living at Broadstairs, Kent, with his wife and family in 1874 but apparently he died at Marisiana in the United States in 1884. 

Francis Holl (1815-1884) was born on 23 March 1815 at Bayham Street, Camden Town, London, and baptized on 6 August that year with his brothers and sister, Isabella, at St Mary's, St Marylebone, Middlesex. He became a successful and fashionable engraver, working for book as well as print publishers. He frequently collaborated with his brother William, as in the four plates after J. Hayter for Finden's 'Gallery of Beauty' (1841). He worked for twenty-five years engraving the queen's pictures and received royal commissions to execute private plates of portraits of the royal family. He engraved many plates after works by famous artists of the day. Two of his most popular engravings were 'The Railway Station' (1862) and 'Coming of Age in the Olden Time' (1854), both after paintings by W. P. B. Frith. Between 1856 and 1883 he exhibited twenty engravings at the Royal Academy and was finally elected an associate engraver in 1883. Francis Holl was also well known as an amateur actor and was a member of the Histrionics, who played at St James's Theatre, London. In 1846 and 1848 he played comic characters in performances in aid of the Artists' General Benevolent Fund, given by an amateur company of eminent artists which included George Cruickshank. He also sang well and played the cello. On 23 September 1841 he married Alicia Margaret, the daughter of Robert Dixon, a veteran of Trafalgar, and they had two sons and two daughters. The family lived for many years at 30 Gloucester Road, Regent's Park, London. In 1879 Francis Holl retired to live at Elm House, Milford, Surrey, where he died of peritonitis on 14 January 1884. He was buried on 19 January at Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. His wife survived him. His eldest son, Francis Montague Holl, known as Frank Holl (1845-1888), showed artistic talent from an early age. He became a celebrated portrait painter and was elected a Royal Academician in 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 13513


Holl family (per. c.1800-1884), printmakers, came to prominence with the engraver William Holl the elder (1771-1838), who was apparently of German origin and a pupil of Benjamin Smith, engraver. William Holl's prints were executed mainly in stipple and included many plates of portraits, decorative subjects, and statuary after contemporary artists, one of his best works being 'The Boar which Killed Adonis Brought before Venus' after Richard Westall (1802). Although a man of retiring disposition, Holl was an advanced liberal in politics with strongly held views on social equality. At the time of the Spa Fields riots in 1816 he exposed himself and his family to great risk by concealing the ringleader, James Watson, son of the radical James Watson (1766-1836), and helping him escape to America. He was married to Mary Ravenscroft, who was recorded as the mother of his children in 1815. Holl was one of the first engravers to try out the new matrix of the steel plate for engraving banknotes in 1819. He also pioneered the use of stipple-engraving on steel, as seen in his 'Portrait of the Reverend John Roadhouse' (1821). He died in London on 1 December 1838. 
William Holl had four sons who were all apprenticed to their father as engravers. The eldest son, William Holl the younger (1807-1871), was born at Plaistow, London, in February 1807 and baptized on 6 August 1815 at St Mary's, St Marylebone, Middlesex. His independent plates date from 1835 with a series of portraits for E. Lodge's 'Portraits of Illustrious Personages' (2nd edn, 1835). He also worked in line-engraving and mezzotint and between 1860 and 1871 he exhibited twenty-two engravings at the Royal Academy. He produced plates for the Art Union of London from 1851 and his plate after W. P. B. Frith's 'An Old English Merrymaking' (1849), was the first large engraving to be executed in the 'chalk' style. William Holl the younger was a founder member of the Chalcographic Society formed by several prominent engravers in 1830. He died at his home, 174 Adelaide Road, Haverstock Hill, London, on 30 January 1871, leaving a widow, Annie. His brother Charles Holl ('c'.1810-1882) worked in his studio for thirty years and completed several plates after William's death, including 'Rebekah' after Frederick Goodall (1871) for the Art Union of London. Charles exhibited only one plate under his own name at the Royal Academy, in 1874. 
Henry Benjamin Holl (1808-1884) was baptized on 6 August 1815 at St Mary's, St Marylebone, Middlesex. He was also a portrait engraver of merit whose plates date from 1828 to 1861. He was also an actor and a wine merchant and enjoyed a gregarious and cultured life. He was living at Broadstairs, Kent, with his wife and family in 1874 but apparently he died at Marisiana in the United States in 1884. 

Francis Holl (1815-1884) was born on 23 March 1815 at Bayham Street, Camden Town, London, and baptized on 6 August that year with his brothers and sister, Isabella, at St Mary's, St Marylebone, Middlesex. He became a successful and fashionable engraver, working for book as well as print publishers. He frequently collaborated with his brother William, as in the four plates after J. Hayter for Finden's 'Gallery of Beauty' (1841). He worked for twenty-five years engraving the queen's pictures and received royal commissions to execute private plates of portraits of the royal family. He engraved many plates after works by famous artists of the day. Two of his most popular engravings were 'The Railway Station' (1862) and 'Coming of Age in the Olden Time' (1854), both after paintings by W. P. B. Frith. Between 1856 and 1883 he exhibited twenty engravings at the Royal Academy and was finally elected an associate engraver in 1883. Francis Holl was also well known as an amateur actor and was a member of the Histrionics, who played at St James's Theatre, London. In 1846 and 1848 he played comic characters in performances in aid of the Artists' General Benevolent Fund, given by an amateur company of eminent artists which included George Cruickshank. He also sang well and played the cello. On 23 September 1841 he married Alicia Margaret, the daughter of Robert Dixon, a veteran of Trafalgar, and they had two sons and two daughters. The family lived for many years at 30 Gloucester Road, Regent's Park, London. In 1879 Francis Holl retired to live at Elm House, Milford, Surrey, where he died of peritonitis on 14 January 1884. He was buried on 19 January at Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. His wife survived him. His eldest son, Francis Montague Holl, known as Frank Holl (1845-1888), showed artistic talent from an early age. He became a celebrated portrait painter and was elected a Royal Academician in 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 13514


Holland, Abraham (d. 1626), poet, a son of Philemon Holland (1552-1637) and his wife, Anne (1555-1627), daughter of William Bott, alias Peyton, was probably educated at the grammar school in Coventry, a school where his father was from 1608 an usher, in a town which Abraham's late epistle to him makes plain he had cause to be resentful of. He graduated BA in 1617 from Trinity College, Cambridge. 
Holland's first published work advertises him as a scholar of Trinity; it is an elaborate Latin elegy on Lord Harington, presumably written close to the time of its subject's death in February 1614, but not printed before Holland's brother Henry added it to his 'Heroologia' in 1620, the last item in the first folio volume. His 'Naumachia', not printed until 1622, but again presumably written earlier, describes a sea battle in the overblown manner associated with Lucan; it comes with prose and verse dedications, in English and Latin, to George Gordon, earl of Enzie, a favourite of King James, educated with the princes Henry and Charles, and, to judge from other dedications, the focus of a dominantly Scots courtly literary culture. The earl's father, the Catholic marquess of Huntly, also merits a set of complimentary verses. Verses to the author from Drayton and others commend the poem for its early promise. The prefatory 'Caveat to his muse', announcing Holland's preference for 'cabinet' poetry, nervously promotes this 'first Minerva' of his 'brain' and suggests he keeps darker verses in reserve. 

'A Continued Inquisition Against Paper-Persecutors by A. H.', appended to John Davies of Hereford's 'Scourge for Paper-Persecutors' (which had appeared in 1611 as the 'Scourge of Folly'), republished by Holland's brother Henry in 1625, is a satire on popular print culture. The 'Posthuma', printed supposedly at Cambridge (actually in London) at Henry's expense, collects pieces belonging to the year of the poet's death: a fulsome elegy on King James which welcomes the new King Charles; one more distinctive on Henry, earl of Oxford; a long poem on the London plague of 1625, like the 'Naumachia' indebted to Lucan's manner but here, particularly in the prefatory 'Envoy' to his friends in the country, informed by fine observation; an epistle to his sick father, Philemon, with a companion piece on his own sickness; and a miscellany of prose epistles (addressed to friends and relations) and meditations, verse translations of the psalms, and his own epitaph. The poems were marked as delivered to his brother by the dying poet on 18 February 1625 (that is, 1626), the day he died of the plague. 
The 'Naumachia', with the sea battle now carefully identified as Lepanto, is reprinted in some copies of the 'Posthuma', and again in some copies of the 1632 edition of his father's translation of Xenophon's 'Cyropaedia'. The poem on the plague from the 'Posthuma' was reprinted under the title 'London Looke-Backe', along with related pieces by his brother Henry Holland and, from the previous century, by Thomas Phaer, as an appendix to 'Salomon's Pest-House or Towre-Royall', by J. D., 'Preacher of God's Word'. Crum identifies as autograph the versions in Bodleian Library, MS Rawlinson poet. 83, folios 1-4 and 5-17, of the 'Caveat' (under the title 'L'Envoy') and the 'Naumachia' (fragmentary towards the end); and also the versions in Bodleian Library, MSS Ashmole 36, 37 (an assembly of unrelated items), folios 151 and 152, of 'To my honest father Mr Michael Drayton, and my new, yet loved freind ['sic'], Mr Browne' and 'To Mrs E. F. in defence of a white blemish which lately grew in the sight of her ey ['sic']', one of the few Cambridge poems later printed (but anonymously, and the address to 'E. F.' cancelled) in Abraham Wright's 'Parnassus Biceps' (1656, 16-18). Newdigate (199) quotes from the manuscript poem to Drayton and Browne. 


@@@@@


doc= 13515


Holland, Charles (1733-1769), actor, was born on 12 March 1733 in Chiswick, the third of the three sons of John Holland (1697-1764), a baker, and his wife, Sarah (died 1778). At the age of fourteen he was apprenticed to a turpentine merchant, but he later pursued an interest in the theatre: he applied to David Garrick, and made his debut at Drury Lane on 13 October 1755 in the title role in Thomas Southerne's 'Oroonoko'. By the end of the month he was performing as Dorilas in Aaron Hill's 'Merope' and on 1 January 1756 he played George Barnwell in George Lillo's 'The London Merchant'. Other roles in his first season at Drury Lane included Hamlet, and Florizel in 'The Winter's Tale, or, Florizel and Perdita', Garrick's adaptation from Shakespeare. 
Holland was to remain at Drury Lane until his death in 1769, and he became renowned there as a capable performer of significant lead and secondary roles. In his fourteen years on that stage he tackled characters as diverse as Bajazet, Hotspur, Iago, Macbeth, Oakley, Prospero, Richard III, Romeo, Young Norval, and Ferdinand in 'The Tempest'. Some of the original performances he gave included Hamlet in Murphy's 'The Orphan of China' (21 April 1759), Moody in 'The Country Girl', Garrick's adaptation of Wycherley's 'The Country Wife' (25 October 1766), Colonel Rivers in Hugh Kelly's 'False Delicacy' (23 January 1768), and Sir William Evans in Elizabeth Griffith's 'The School for Rakes' (4 February 1769). He also enjoyed some success over the summer months in provincial theatres: he played at the New Concert Hall in Edinburgh in the summers of 1757 and 1758, at Birmingham in 1762, at Bath in 1762-3, and at the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, in 1763. 
Holland maintained a close friendship with his fellow actor William Powell (1736-1769), and in 1766 they joined together (along with Matthew Clarke) in the management of the King Street Theatre, Bristol. As an acting team they were showered with praise, and their two summers' work together in Bristol enjoyed both financial and critical success. On hearing of Powell's untimely death on 3 July 1769, shortly before the curtain was to go up on his performance in 'Richard III', Holland apologized to his audience for being too overcome with grief to be able to tread the boards that evening. 
Holland was a good-looking and masculine actor with a strong and resonant voice, and his talents developed and improved steadily as he gained more experience. He earned the trust and friendship of Garrick, whom he admired and emulated, and his style was frequently compared with that of his mentor (though not always favourably). The 'Theatrical Review' of 1757-8 stated, for example, that he had 'all the merit a copy can pretend to; his face and voice are not disagreeable; and he cannot fail of being an actor of note'. Holland came to excel in Garrick's favourite roles, such as Chamont in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan', Hastings in Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore', and Tancred in James Thomson's 'Tancred and Sigismunda'. His performances in 1767 in Bristol earned him the praise of Thomas Chatterton, who enthused in his poem 'To Holland' that 'No single part is thine, thou'rt all in all'. There is some doubt, though, over how accomplished an actor he truly was. Susceptible to the flattery of women, he was also prone to arrogance and overstatement under the influence of generous applause. Gentleman described him in the role of Iago as 'hunting after a meaning he never found' (Gentleman, 1.152), and Kelly described his style as 'sententious, dull, and heavy' (Kelly, 13). 
Holland, an attractive young man, was not beyond a little philandering and engaged in romances with ease. His affair with the wife of William Earle landed him in court in 1765 on charges of criminal conversation. He never married though he was engaged for a brief time to the actress Jane Pope (1744-1818). That relationship came to an end in 1768 following his being discovered with the actress Sophia Baddeley (1744?-1786) on a boat on the river at Richmond. Holland left no known children, except that he made provision in his will for $200 to be placed in trust for a boy named as Harry should any inquiry prove the child to be his illegitimate son. The actor Charles Holland (1768-1849) was his nephew. 
Holland died of smallpox at the age of thirty-six in the early hours of 7 December 1769 in his house in Cecil Street, Strand, London. He was buried on 15 December in his family's vault at St Nicholas's Church, Chiswick. A monument was erected to his memory in the chancel of the church, though it was later moved to the wall of the north tower and accompanied by a bust. This carried an inscription by Garrick testifying to Holland's 'Talents to make entertainment instructive to support the credit of the Stage by just and manly Action'. 


@@@@@


doc= 13516


Holland, Charles (1768-1849), actor, the son of Thomas Holland of Chiswick, was a nephew of Charles Holland (1733-1769), also an actor. After playing for some time in the provinces he appeared at Drury Lane on 31 October 1796, as Marcellus in 'Hamlet'. He remained at this theatre until the season of 1819-20, but gained few opportunities and failed to improve his position. Some notice was taken of his opening performance, however, and his Trueman in George Lillo's 'The London Merchant', when he supported Sarah Siddons as Millwood, earned him praise. During the illness of Charles Kemble he performed Alonzo in Sheridan's 'Pizarro', in which piece he was the original Centinel (May 1799). He also attempted John Palmer's character of Sydenham in 'The Wheel of Fortune' by R. Cumberland, and gradually began to make a name for himself. While at Drury Lane he took many subordinate parts in minor dramas, as well as roles such as Cassio in 'Othello' and the Dauphin in 'King John'. In June 1809, as Steinfort in Benjamin Thompson's 'The Stranger', he made his first appearance at the Haymarket. He went with the Drury Lane company in its move to the Lyceum, and on the opening of the new theatre, on 10 October 1812, was Horatio to R. W. Elliston's Hamlet. Holland supported Edmund Kean in many plays: he was York to the latter's Richard II, the original Mendizabel to his Manuel in Maturin's play 'Manuel' (1817), and Buckingham to his Richard III (1819). He was the Earl of Angus in 'Flodden Field', an adaptation of 'Marmion', and Cedric in an adaptation of 'Ivanhoe'. In April 1820 he played Gloucester to Kean's Lear, repeating the character on several succeeding nights. Holland was an educated and graceful actor, but his nervousness interfered with his success. He died on 5 December 1849 at St Peter's Cottage, Hammersmith. His sister Elizabeth married Joseph Constantine Carpue. 


@@@@@


doc= 13517


Holland, Cornelius (1600-1671?), politician and regicide, the eldest son of Ralph Holland (1581-1625), Merchant Taylor, of London, and his wife, Joan (died 1634), was born at St Laurence Pountney, London, on 3 March 1600; his family may have been that which had been prominent in the Merchant Taylors' Company since the fifteenth century. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School from 1610 and Pembroke College, Cambridge, between 1614 and 1618. By 1627 he had married his wife, Sybill, shortly after which he moved to the parish of St Margaret, Westminster. This was occasioned by his having entered court service under Sir Henry Vane senior, and may have been effected through contacts forged by his own father, groom of the robes under Elizabeth and James. By 1626 he was a clerk in the cofferer's office, before becoming clerk of the acatry, and, by 1636, clerk comptroller of the household of the prince of Wales. In 1638-41 he acted as paymaster and clerk of the greencloth in the prince's court. Perhaps as a result of his refusal to provide money to finance the first bishops' war in 1639 he was replaced as cofferer in early 1641, although he remained clerk of the greencloth until at least the end of the year. 
Holland was elected to the Long Parliament for New Windsor, and although the election was voided he succeeded in securing the seat at the second poll. He rapidly emerged as a prominent advocate of 'further reformation' in religion, and was prominent enough to be appointed to the 'recess' committee in 1641. Thereafter he emerged as a member of the war party in politics, hostile to negotiating with Charles other than from a position of great strength. He was undoubtedly motivated by religious zeal, in addition to which he displayed a pronounced political radicalism. It was these factors that led him to support parliament in the war, rather than the craven desire for self-advancement and financial gain that has generally been ascribed to him. 
By 1643 Holland, along with men such as Henry Marten, was styled one of the 'fiery spirits' in the Commons. He was named to many of the most powerful committees, and became heavily involved in raising money for the war effort, and in the prosecution of delinquents. The issue with which he would become most clearly connected was the welfare of those who suffered most for their zeal in the war effort, in terms of maimed soldiers and their families. As an experienced courtier he was also involved in the care of the king's children, and this, together with an ongoing involvement in negotiations with the elector palatine, may indicate his willingness to consider replacing Charles with another king. On one occasion in late 1648 he was reported as having made a virulent speech against the Stuart monarchy, and in favour of banishing Charles. He also emerged as an opponent of a presbyterian church settlement, and a supporter of Independent 'dissenting brethren' and of toleration. By late 1648 he was perceived as being associated with the Levellers. He supported the army remonstrance calling for the king to be brought to justice, and may have been involved in planning Pride's Purge. He was certainly involved in preparing the king's trial, and attended its meetings assiduously. Although labelled a regicide for having been present on the day of sentencing, he did not sign the death warrant, which perhaps offers further evidence of his reticence to sanction the king's execution, if not his removal from power ['see also 'Regicides]. 
Holland was extremely active on the first two councils of state (1649-50), as well as on the fourth (1651-2), and displayed enthusiasm for selling land and property of both crown and church. Thereafter he appears to have become disillusioned with political developments and the dominance of the army. There is little evidence that he opposed the protectorate, which he appears to have been willing to accommodate, but he was largely inactive in the mid-1650s. He may have sought election to Cromwell's parliament of 1656, but he was not returned, and only resumed his political work during the return of the Rump in 1659, when he was appointed to the committee of safety. After renewed army pressure in October, however, he withdrew from parliament. At the Restoration he fled to the continent, initially to the Low Countries, but by 1662 was with other regicides in Lausanne and Vevey under the alias John Ralfeson. There, he was free to exercise his dissenting beliefs in peace. He was clearly ill by early 1671, and probably died later in the same year. 


@@@@@


doc= 13518


Holland, Edmund, seventh earl of Kent (1383-1408), magnate, was the third and youngest son of Thomas Holland, fifth earl of Kent (1350-1397), and Alice (died 1416), daughter of Richard (II) Fitzalan, third earl of Arundel. He had two brothers: Thomas Holland, sixth earl of Kent and duke of Surrey (c.1374-1400), and Richard, who died young; and six sisters: Eleanor (died 1405), wife first of Roger (VII) Mortimer, earl of March, and then of Edward, Baron Charlton of Powys; Joan (died 1434), wife of Edmund, duke of York, William, Lord Willoughby, Henry, Lord Scrope of Masham, and Henry Bromflete, Lord Vessy; Margaret Holland (b. in or before 1388, d. 1439), wife of John Beaufort, earl of Somerset, and Thomas, duke of Clarence; Eleanor (died 'c'.1420), wife of Thomas Montagu, earl of Salisbury; Elizabeth (died 1423), wife of John, Lord Neville; and Bridget, a nun. 
Holland's career as a court nobleman began in 1398 with his award, as 'king's nephew', of an exchequer annuity of 100 marks. He went to Ireland with Richard II in 1399 and was left there when the king with his close supporters, including Edmund's brother Thomas and his uncle John, returned to England to confront Henry Bolingbroke in August of that year. Edmund only finally returned from Ireland on 13 January 1400, and was seized on landing at Liverpool following the collapse of the rebellion of his brother and uncle against the new king, Henry IV. The death as a rebel of his brother Thomas left Holland as the heir to the Kent inheritance, but landless, since the inheritance was forfeited. However, Henry IV had a dearth of natural magnate support, and Holland, who was gradually making his mark at court, was restored to his estates and titles on 1 July 1403; he fought for the king against the Percys at the battle of Shrewsbury shortly afterwards. His brief career was dogged by impecuniosity: his inheritance was curtailed by the claims of three surviving dowager countesses of Kent, and in the aftermath of the 1400 rebellion some Kent estates were repossessed by the king, who claimed them to be rightfully part of his duchy of Lancaster inheritance. He did come to an advantageous agreement with one of the countesses, Joan, widow of his late brother Thomas, in January 1404, whereby she agreed to accept less than her full entitlement of dower estates, but his career continued to be dictated by the need to secure further royal patronage at court. 
Holland first appeared in royal council in 1405 and he soon began to take up his father Thomas's reins on the south coast, acting as a JP in Dorset, Kent, Hampshire, Surrey, and Sussex, and investigating Beaulieu Abbey's problems in 1406 and 1407. Yet he impressed more militarily, serving at sea under Prince Thomas, Henry's second son, in 1405, and distinguishing himself at Sluys and along the Norman coast. He jousted against the earl of Mar at Smithfield in 1406 and was made a knight of the Order of the Garter. On 24 January 1407 he was married in St Mary Overie's, Southwark, to Lucia Visconti (1380-1424), one of the ten daughters of Bernabo Visconti, sometime lord of Milan. She should have brought a dowry of 70,000 florins to help Holland's finances, but her executor's executor was still pursuing claims for it in the 1470s. Holland was appointed admiral of the west and north in 1407. The piracy problem in the English Channel was an ever prevalent menace, and he received his first major independent command in March 1408 to sweep the channel in a series of patrols. This he did, though the successful assault on the Ile de Brehat, off Brittany, for Henry IV's queen, Joan, marked the end of his brief career: he discarded his helmet and was cut down by a crossbow quarrel through the head. He was buried at Bourne Abbey in Lincolnshire. 
Holland left no heir, although he did have an illegitimate daughter, Eleanor, with Constance Despenser (c.1375-1416), the daughter of Edmund, duke of York; Eleanor later married James Touchet, Lord Audley. Edmund Holland's widow, Lucia, remained in England and died in 1424. She was buried in the Austin Friars in London. The Kent inheritance was divided after 1408 between the four surviving dowager countesses of Kent and Holland's five sisters and their heirs. 


@@@@@


doc= 13519


Holland, George Calvert (1801-1865), physician, was born at Pitsmoor, Sheffield, on 28 February 1801, the second son of a respectable artisan who arranged for him to have a 'fair' elementary education. Originally intended for a trade he was apprenticed to a wig maker at the age of twelve. At sixteen he discovered an ability to write verse and contributed several poems to the 'Sheffield and Rotherham Independent', a local journal. As a result he developed a desire to educate himself. He read the classics and taught himself Latin, French, and Italian. 
When Holland was twenty his ability was recognized by his elder brother and others, and he was placed under the tutelage of a Unitarian minister in Derby to study for the ministry of that church. However, after a year he turned to medicine and went to study in Edinburgh. A brilliant student, he graduated MD in 1827. He also studied for a year under R. T. H. Laennec in Paris and took the degree of bachelor of letters. Holland went into practice in Manchester but after a year his enthusiasm for phrenology, possibly spurred by the examination of heads undertaken during his time as a wig maker, led to friction with his colleagues. He returned to Edinburgh where he undertook a year's research. It appears that it was at this time that he became president of the Royal Physical Society and of the Hunterian Society of Edinburgh. In 1828 he published 'An Essay on Education, Founded on Phrenological Principles', which was followed in 1829 by 'An Experimental Inquiry into the Laws of Life'. In 1830 he returned to Sheffield and began to play an important part in the life of the town. 
Holland next opened a dispensary for the poor, with Dr C. F. Flavell. He became lecturer in physiology and jurisprudence at the Sheffield Medical Institute but resigned the post in 1843. He also lectured regularly on phrenology and was enthusiastic about the revived science of mesmerism. In 1832 he was elected physician to the General Infirmary. In addition he became a member of the council of the Literary and Philosophical Society and lectured in aid of the formation of a mechanics' institute. He founded the Sheffield Physiological Society in 1837. 
The next years were the most important of Holland's medical career. His 'Inquiry into the Moral, Social and Intellectual Condition of the Industrious Classes of Sheffield' (1839) was followed by the publication in 1843 of his greatest work, 'The Vital Statistics of Sheffield', which won him recognition as a pioneer of industrial medicine. That same year saw the publication of the important but neglected 'Diseases of the Lungs', in which Holland described silicosis and silico-tuberculosis, and their cause by the silica dust raised in dry grinding. He described a system of dust extraction, which he correctly believed would prevent it. 
Holland had a very successful practice but gave up medicine almost completely as he became increasingly involved in politics. Surprisingly, being a Liberal, he defended the corn laws, publishing 'An Exposition of Corn-Law Repealing Fallacies and Inconsistencies' (1840) and 'Suggestions towards Improving the Present System of Corn-Laws' (1841). This brought him a purse of 500 guineas from his new friends, but his actions probably cost him ten times that amount. He became a director of several railway companies at a time when there was a mania for such projects. He also became a director of the Leeds and West Riding Bank and the Sheffield and Retford Bank. Their failure led to his ruin. A writ against him for $54,000 resulted in his bankruptcy and he retired to Worksop until his affairs were settled. Here in 1848 Holland wrote what he regarded as his best work, 'The Philosophy of Animated Nature'. 
After an unsuccessful effort to establish himself in London, Holland returned to Sheffield in 1851. By this time he had been converted to homoeopathy, which destroyed his previously high reputation with the medical profession. He edited the 'Sheffield Homoeopathic Lancet' in 1853. He was elected a member of the town council but lost his seat in 1858, as did all members of his party, due to their advocacy of the highly unpopular 'Local Improvement Act'. However, in 1862 he was made alderman of the borough. 
Holland was described as a man of courtly figure with full grey eyes and a thin intellectual face. A man of kindness and courtesy, his popularity was such that a public subscription was raised for him during his last illness, though at the time he was probably moderately well-to-do. He developed bronchitis, which according to his obituary 'supervened upon disease of the base of the brain brought on by close study and severe mental exertion' ('Sheffield and Rotherham Independent', 8 March 1865). He died in Broomhall Lodge, Broomhall Road, Sheffield, on 7 March 1865 and was buried on 13 March at Sheffield general cemetery. He was survived by his wife, Anne Martha, and a son and a daughter. In 1873, his wife having died, a petition was finally accepted for his daughter to receive a pension from the queen's bounty, in recognition of her father's work for industrial medicine. 


@@@@@


doc= 13520


Holland, Guy (1585/6-1660), Jesuit, was a native of Gainsborough, Lincolnshire. He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, matriculating at Easter 1602 and graduating BA in 1606. Soon afterwards he became a Roman Catholic. He entered the English College at Valladolid on 26 November 1608, aged twenty-two, under the name of Guido Holt. At Valladolid he was ordained priest in 1613, and in May sent to England. A member of the Society of Jesus from 1615, his movements for the next years are not known, but it is likely that he was engaged on missionary work in England. 
Certainly from 1621 to 1632 Holland was a missioner of the House of Probation of St Ignatius in London. He appears in John Gee's 'A Foot out of the Snare' as a Jesuit resident in the city in 1623. On 15 March 1628 the house, at Clerkenwell, was raided. Holland and four colleagues were discovered hidden in a small enclosure created by a newly built brick wall. On 27 March the privy council issued a warrant for his imprisonment. Nothing discouraged, on 14 July he was professed of the four vows. In 1634 and 1636 he was still attached to the London house. In 1633 and in 1638, however, he worked under the supervision of the residence of St George (Worcestershire and Warwickshire). 
From 1639 Holland acted as a missioner of the residence of St Mary (Oxfordshire), serving as its superior in 1645-6. A reply to the 'Discourse of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome' by Lucius Cary (Lord Falkland) has been attributed to Holland, and 'The Grand Prerogative of Human Nature' (1653), an attack on the belief that the soul dies with the body, is probably his work. Other writings remained unpublished because the censors considered 'that in one or two points he rather deviated from the common opinion of the doctors' (Foley, 7(1).365). He was attached to the Oxfordshire residence in 1655 and it seems likely that his last years were spent there. He died on 16 November 1660. 


@@@@@


doc= 13521


Holland, Henry (1555/6-1603), writer on witchcraft, was educated at Magdalene College, Cambridge, and graduated BA in 1579 or 1580. In 1580, aged twenty-four, he was ordained priest in the diocese of Ely and appointed vicar of Orwell, Cambridgeshire. In 1594 he moved to St Bride's, London. 
Holland's theology was Calvinist. He was a firm predestinarian and placed a heavy emphasis on the active role of divine providence. Like many contemporary divines he was troubled by the failure of the bulk of the laity to comprehend the essential truths of Calvinism. Despite sermons and treatises the 'poor sheep', the 'seelie men', continued to adhere to a semi-pelagian position that confused the 'righteousness of faith and the righteousness of men' (Holland, 'David's Faith and Repentance'). They also refused to respond properly to providential affliction. Rather than accept in patience and turn to God, they met misfortune with the resources of traditional magic as purveyed by the 'cunning-folk'. Holland shared other concerns with his clerical contemporaries. He was a sabbatarian, an opponent of dancing and of modern fashion -- 'misfiguring of head and face... following of strange attire' (Holland, 'Christian Exercise of Fasting', 192-3). After settling in the City of London he expressed his loathing for the capital's theatre, 'the nurceries of whoredome and uncleanesse' (Holland, 'Spirituall Preservatives', dedication; 'The Historie of Adam', fol. 93'v'). 
Holland was a diligent parish minister; catechizing, expounding scripture, and preaching. Edward Topsell, the editor of his posthumous work 'The Historie of Adam' (1606), attributed his death to his strenuous activity in his function. The bulk of his published works began as sermons: 'David's Faith and Repentance' (1589), 'The Christian Exercise of Fasting' (1596), and 'Spirituall Preservatives Against the Pestilence' (1593, 1603). He was also a translator and an editor. His edition in 1599 and 1600 of the works of Richard Greenham (died 1594), the great 'physician of the conscience' and his near neighbour in Cambridgeshire, cost him a good deal of effort in collecting and collating the manuscripts in which Greenham's 'cases of conscience' circulated. Holland's one scholarly treatise is his 'Treatise of Witchcraft' (1590). This has a double inspiration. Like the related works of George Gifford and William Perkins, the 'Treatise' was partly inspired by the 'brutish ignorance' of the 'rude people' that led them into 'a continuall trafficke and market' (Holland, 'Witchcraft', sig. A4) with the purveyors of folk magic. But Holland also sought to confute the sceptical arguments of Reginald Scot, and to do this he borrowed heavily from continental demonologists like Bodin, Daneau, and Hemmingsen: even the inquisitor authors of the 'Malleus malificarum' receive favourable mention. In consequence Holland's tract, despite its populist intentions and solemn translations of all the Latin texts, has a curiously remote and academic flavour. The discussion of the diabolic covenant, sabbats, magical transformations, and transportations, sit as uneasily with the English popular beliefs and practices that he is ostensibly seeking to confute. 
Throughout his life Holland was a conformist. He was not involved in any of the stirs instigated by many of the puritan ministers, his colleagues, in London in the 1590s. His works are dedicated to a variety of members of the Elizabethan lay establishment, from the court, legal, and civic hierarchies. He fulsomely praises Elizabeth's regime and, unlike Perkins, refuses to criticize overtly what he clearly viewed as the inadequacies of the legislation against witches and its enforcement. His unexpected death in London in August 1603 left his wife and children in some financial difficulties. 


@@@@@


doc= 13522


Holland, Henry (1550-1625), Roman Catholic priest, was a native of Daventry, Northamptonshire, of whose family nothing is recorded except that he was related to the last abbot of Westminster, John Feckenham (1518-1585). Brought up at Worcester, he was sent for his further education to Eton College and on 24 March 1566 was admitted as scholar to St John's College, Oxford, where he was a contemporary of his future colleagues Edmund Campion and Gregory Martin. His education is aptly summed up in the epitaph recorded by Wood, 'Dantria me genuit, me clara Vigornia fovit,/Aetona me docuit, post docet Oxonium (Daventry bore me, famous Worcester reared me, Eton taught me, and now Oxford teaches me) (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.386)' After receiving his BA in 1569 Holland was converted to Rome and made his way to the English College, Douai, in 1573. There, after studying theology, he was ordained deacon on 6 April 1577, graduated BD at the University of Douai in 1578 and, after the difficulties involved in moving the college from Douai to Rheims that year, was eventually ordained priest on 19 March 1580. He went on to win some fame as preacher there, while collaborating with Gregory Martin in the Rheims translation of the 'New Testament', which was published in 1582. 
Once his task of translation was over Holland was sent on the English mission, where he laboured for several years while living with his sister at Cleeve, Gloucestershire. By 1587 he was back at Douai to receive a licentiate of theology from the university there. On again venturing into England, however, he was arrested in January 1600 at the house of a Mr Sweating in Yorkshire and was imprisoned for a time in York Castle. 
From then on Holland seems to have spent the rest of his life in Flanders as divinity reader at the two monasteries of Marchiennes in Hainault and Anchine near Douai. To this period belong various Latin writings, notably his 'Urna aurea, vel, In sacrosanctam missam... expositio', which was published at Douai in 1612. Another issue, with the altered title of 'Arca novi foederis in sacrosanctae missae canone representata', was published at Antwerp in 1615. In the title he is accorded the rank of canon. He probably edited the collected works of Thomas Stapleton, with his own 'Vita Thomae Stapletonii'; they appeared in four volumes at Paris in 1620, being the one substantial achievement of the group of Catholic controversialists at the college of Arras (founded in 1611). It was finally at the monastery of Anchine that, as Wood remarks, Holland 'gave way to fate in good old age' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.386) and died on 28 September 1625. 


@@@@@


doc= 13523


Holland, Henry (b. 1583, d. in or after 1649), printer and bookseller, the son of Philemon Holland (1552-1637) and his wife, Anne (1555-1627), daughter of William Bott, alias Peyton, was born at Coventry on 29 September 1583. His brothers were the poet Abraham Holland (d. 1626) and the print publisher Compton Holland (d. 1622). He went to London as a young man and usually designated himself 'Londonopolitanus'. Although he proved in later life a good classical scholar, and was clearly well educated, Holland was apprenticed to John Norton from 25 March 1599 and made free of the Stationers' Company on 5 December 1608. The first book published by him was Thomas Draxe's 'Sicke Man's Catechisme' (1609), which was licensed to Holland and John Wright jointly on 4 February 1608-9. In 1610 he published, from a previously unprinted manuscript, Sir John Cheke's 'A Royal Elegie', on Edward VI; the book is now of great rarity. In 1613 he accompanied John, first Lord Harington, whose family had been on friendly terms with his father, to the Palatinate, when Harington accompanied Princess Elizabeth to the home of her husband, the elector palatine. In 1614 Holland published, in conjunction with Matthew Law, his compilation 'Monumenta sepulchraria sancti Pauli: the monuments... of kings, nobles, bishops, and others buried in the cathedrall church of St. Paul, London, untill this present yeare... 1614, and a catalogue of all the bishops of London... untill this present'. It was reissued as 'Ecclesia sancti Pauli illustrata' in 1633 with a dedication by Holland, addressed to Laud, then bishop of London, and to the dean and chapter of St Paul's Cathedral. 
Holland's reputation as a bookseller rested chiefly on two elaborately illustrated antiquarian works, with letterpress from his own pen. The earlier venture was 'Baziliologia: a booke of kings, beeing the true and lively effigies of all our English kings from the conquest untill this present, with their severall coats of armes, impreses, and devises, and a briefe chronologie of their lives and deaths, elegantly graven in copper, printed for H. Holland, and are to be sold by Comp. Holland over against the Xchange, 1618'. The engravers employed included R. Elstracke, Simon Pass, and Francis Delaram, the last being responsible for the fine portraits of queens Mary and Elizabeth and princes Henry and Charles. Perfect copies include thirty-one portraits besides the title-page engraved with portraits of James I and Queen Anne. 
Holland's second and more famous illustrated publication, 'Heroologia Anglica, hoc est, clarissimorum et doctissimorum aliquot Anglorum qui floruerunt ab anno Christi M.D.' usque ad presentem annum M.D.C.XX, vivae effigies, vitaeogia, duobus tomis, authore H. H., Anglo-Britanno, impensis Crispini Passaei calcographus et Jansoni bibliopolae Arnhemiensis (1620), appeared in two folio volumes, the first dedicated to James I and the second to the universities of Cambridge and Oxford. There are sixty-five portraits, the first of Henry VIII, the last of Thomas Holland (died 1612), regius professor of divinity at Oxford, and two engravings of monuments (of Prince Henry and Queen Elizabeth respectively). A presentation copy from Holland to Sir Thomas Holland is in the Grenville collection at the British Museum; another copy, with an inscription addressed by Holland to Robert Sidney, earl of Leicester, is described by Lowndes. 
Holland seems to have carried on his publishing business until 1630. His less elaborate publications included 'Newes from Frankfort' (1612) and 'Newes from Gulick and Cleve' (1615) (jointly with G. Gibbs). In 1626 he printed at his own expense and published at Cambridge his brother Abraham's posthumous works as 'Hollandi posthuma'. To 'Salomon's Pest House', by I. D., which he published with T. Harper in 1630, he added 'Mr. Hollands Admonition', a poem by his brother Abraham. Holland helped his father with his later publications. He wrote the dedication to Charles I of his father's 'Cyropaedia' of Xenophon (1632), and edited after Dr Holland's death his Latin version of Bauderon's 'Pharmacopoeia' (1639), and his 'Regimen sanitatis Salerni' (1649). 
Holland's last days were spent in great poverty. A broadsheet issued on 26 June 1647, addressed 'to men, fathers, and brethren', appealed for charitable aid, stating that Holland had been 'a grandjury-man, and a subsidy-man, and one of the trained band charged with a corslet' (BL, 669, fol. 11, no. 34), and had acted as a commissioner under the great seal against bankrupts. His credit had been good, and he had rented a house in the parish of St Mary-le-Bow. During the plague in London in 1625 he and his wife, Susannah, had worked hard among the poor. She had since died (10 December 1635) at the Black Raven in Cheapside. As 'a zealous hater and abhorrer of all superstition and Popery and prelaticall innovations in church government' he had incurred the wrath of Laud, and had been imprisoned by order of both the high commission court and the Star Chamber. He declared himself adverse to 'all late sprung-up sectaries'. In 1643 he served in the life guards of Basil Feilding, earl of Denbigh, the parliamentary general, and was 'eldest man' of the troop, being sixty years old. Subsequently his eyesight and hearing had much decayed, he was crazy in his limbs, impotent in body, and so 'indigent in estate' owing to lawsuits that he had had to plead in a chancery suit 'in forma pauperis'. The facts are attested by four persons, including William Gouge the puritan divine; but the facts that Holland dedicated his book about St Paul's Cathedral to Laud in 1633, and that his imprisonment has not been corroborated, throw some doubt on the details. The title-page of his father's posthumously published 'Regimen' shows that Holland was still alive in 1649. The circumstances of his death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 13524


Holland, Henry (1745-1806), architect, was born in Church Row, Fulham, on 20 July 1745, the eldest son of Henry Holland (1712-1785) and his wife, Mary (1716-1783), third child and only daughter of William Byrom of Fulham. Master of the Tylers' and Bricklayers' Company in 1772-3, Henry Holland senior was a prosperous Georgian builder who executed much of the architectural work of the celebrated landscape gardener Lancelot (Capability) Brown. After a modest architectural training, probably in his father's yard in Fulham, Holland entered into an informal but profitable partnership in 1771 with Brown, who lived not far away at Hampton Court. Gradually assuming responsibility for the architectural side of Brown's practice, Holland made the acquaintance of Brown's extensive and influential clientele. These contacts were particularly valuable for a young architect who had received the benefit of neither professional pupillage nor foreign travel. 
The first product of the partnership between Holland and Brown was the prestigious Claremont House, Esher, Surrey, built in 1771-4 for Robert Clive, first Baron Clive of Plassey, following his final return from India in 1767. Claremont is a very large Palladian house with a giant Corinthian portico, but somewhat spartan interiors with minimal classical trim. Representing a deliberate rejection of the elaborate ornament associated with the Adam brothers, this style was to reappear in Holland's later work. On 11 February 1773, while work was going forward on Claremont, Holland cemented the partnership with Brown by marrying his elder daughter, Bridget (1744-1828). They took up residence at 17 Hertford Street, Mayfair, recently built by Holland and his father. When Brown made his will in 1779, he named his son-in-law as one of his executors, and it was in the Hertford Street house that he died four years later. 
Claremont was followed by a second collaboration between Brown and Holland, Benham Place, Berkshire (1774-5), for the sixth Baron Craven. Benham has a more interesting plan than Claremont, boasting a circular vestibule or tribune, two-storeyed and galleried, rising to a shallow dome containing a circular glazed lantern. Presumably contributed by Holland, this remarkable space made an impression on John Soane, who had indeed worked with Holland on the entrance hall at Claremont in 1772. Holland and Brown continued their collaboration at Cadland (1775-8), a modest 'marine villa' in the Palladian style overlooking the sea near Southampton. Holland's surviving sketches for interior decoration at Cadland are important because he noted the illustrated books on classical archaeology on which he drew for inspiration: Bernard de Montfaucon's 'Antiquite expliquee' (1719-24), and 'The Antiquities of Athens' by James Stuart and Nicholas Revett (vol. 1, 1762), a book to which Capability Brown was a subscriber. 
The first important work which Holland undertook independently was Brooks's Club, St James's Street, London (1776-8), a club fashionable with the whig aristocrats who were to become his principal patrons; through them Holland met the prince of Wales who, in 1783, joined the club and appointed him as his architect. Behind a Palladian facade of pale yellow brick with stone dressings, like one of his country houses, Holland provided a suite of three first-floor rooms, the great subscription room, the small drawing-room, and the coffee (that is, dining) room, now the card room. With its segmental vaulted ceiling decorated with bands of guilloche ornament and chaste swags of husks, the great subscription room is one of the finest eighteenth-century rooms in London. 
Holland was the obvious choice of architect for Brooks's, for not only did he own the site on which it was to be built, but his father had built the house in Pall Mall which the club had originally occupied. Like many eighteenth-century architects, Holland had taken to speculative building, purchasing in 1771 with money lent by his father a lease of 89 acres in Chelsea from Lord Cadogan. Here, from 1777 to 'c'.1797, he built what was known as Hans Town, consisting of Sloane Street, Cadogan Place, and Hans Place. This urban development of simple terraced houses of stock brick, now largely demolished, immediately proved popular with the upper middle and professional classes for whom it was planned. As a piece of planned residential speculation, it found many imitators in London, though few as fashionable. 
The octagonal Hans Place was left open at its south end to allow for an impressive view of a handsome detached villa with a large garden, the site of which is now partly occupied by Cadogan Square. Known as Sloane Place, this delectable residence was built by Holland for his own occupation between 'c'.1782 and 'c'.1789 as a public demonstration of his taste and professional success, in which role it is said to have attracted the favourable attention of the prince of Wales. Faced with the yellowish-white, thin imitation bricks known as mathematical tiles, it was U-shaped in plan with a colonnade of coupled Ionic columns along the south front. Behind this was a 113 foot enfilade of five intercommunicating rooms: drawing-room, dining-room, lobby, library, and music room, in which Holland displayed his collection of antique marbles and casts. 
The miniature landscaped park at Sloane Place included a 16 acre meadow, formal flowers beds laid out in the French fashion, and an island containing a Gothic ice house. It was one of the very few detached mansions built in London in the second half of the eighteenth century with its own entrance courtyard and garden, an essentially Parisian form. It is known that Holland visited Paris in autumn 1785, but even before this he could have derived knowledge of contemporary French architecture and decoration from publications by Jacques Gondoin, Marie-Joseph Peyre, Pierre Patte, and Jean-Francois de Neufforge. It was partly Holland's Gallic tastes which made him sympathetic to his many whig clients, among whom it was fashionable to show some sympathy with the ideals of revolutionary France. The whig prince of Wales -- to the annoyance of his father, George III -- was a close friend of the duc de Chartres, who succeeded as duc d'Orleans in 1785; during the French Revolution, Orleans became known as Philippe Egalite. He was a frequent visitor to London, where he was a member of Brooks's. 
In 1783 the prince of Wales employed Holland to rebuild his London residence, Carlton House, in Pall Mall. Holland brilliantly remodelled the rambling buildings which then occupied the site, creating a coherent facade of emphatically channelled rustication in the French manner with a central 'porte-cochere', the first in England. He screened the entrance court from Pall Mall by a low open colonnade of Ionic columns, a feature directly inspired by the colonnade which Peyre had proposed in 1763 for the Hotel de Conde, and which Pierre Rousseau had built in 1782-5 at the Hotel de Salm (now the Legion d'Honneur). These were a product of the opposition of French neo-classical theorists to the high, solid walls which had traditionally concealed aristocratic town mansions from the public gaze in both Paris and London. 
By the end of 1783 Holland had engaged as draughtsmen and interior decorators two French emigres, Guillaume Gaubert, who stayed until 1787, and J.-P. Trecourt. They were soon joined by others, including Louis Delabriere and, about 1786, Dominique Daguerre, who remained until 1795. The interiors which, with their help, Holland created at Carlton House from 1783 to 1796 were among the most sophisticated in planning, design, furnishings, and craftsmanship ever created in England. The complicated plan of smallish interlocking rooms was French in origin, as at the Palais Bourbon in Paris, though the central octagonal tribune on which the whole complex plan pivoted may have been indebted to that proposed by Robert Adam in 1766 for Lord Bute at Luton Hoo. Holland's oval, top-lit staircase, one of the most dramatic in eighteenth-century England, was a baroque 'tour de force' equalled only by William Kent's at 44 Berkeley Square (1742-4). 
Carlton House was tragically demolished in 1826-7 by its creator (by then George IV), who by that date had turned his attention to the remodelling of Buckingham House and Windsor Castle. Something of its quality can be appreciated at Berrington Hall, Herefordshire (1778-81), built by Holland for the Hon. Thomas Harley, who was a tory, unlike most of his clients. The ambitious staircase incorporates coffered arches, free-standing columns on the first-floor gallery, and a tall glazed dome. The entrance front of Berrington shows Holland in a starker mood: a giant Ionic portico of startling abruptness carries a pediment pierced unconventionally by a Diocletian window. 
In 1786 the prince of Wales acquired a farmhouse at Brighton, and employed Holland to expand it into a 'marine pavilion'. Holland gave it a Gallic flavour with a curved, domed bow, surrounded by engaged columns, as in the Hotel de Salm in Paris. Faced with mathematical tiles, Holland's work was carried out in 1786-7, but was subsequently submerged by Nash's remodelling of the building as Brighton Pavilion in 1815-22. 
In 1787-8 Holland rebuilt York (previously Featherstonhaugh, later Melbourne, and now Dover) House, Whitehall, for Frederick, duke of York, younger brother of the prince of Wales. Holland filled in the courtyard of the existing house, built in the 1750s, with a circular, galleried vestibule, 40 feet in diameter, a disposition inspired by French plans such as that for a town house published in Neufforge's 'Recueil elementaire d'architecture' (vol. 3, 1767). The vestibule is lit by a lantern above a shallow dome, and surrounded by eight pink scagliola columns. Holland added an entrance portico in Whitehall, featuring columns of the Greek Ionic order of the temple on the River Ilissus in Athens, as illustrated in 'The Antiquities of Athens' (1762). This is set into a rusticated screen wall inspired by the library of Hadrian in Athens, again from a plate in the same volume of the 'Antiquities', where it is described as a 'Stoa or portico'. 
In December 1786 Holland was commissioned to remodel Althorp, Northamptonshire, by the second Earl Spencer, one of the whig grandees who was a prominent member of Brooks's. Holland's handsome library is divided by two screens of his favourite Greek Ionic columns. The most exquisite room, however, is Lady Spencer's dressing-room with neo-classical painted pilasters and panels executed in 1790-91 by T. H. Pernotin. For Lord Spencer, Holland also remodelled Wimbledon Park House in 1799, adding a striking Tuscan portico with broadly projecting eaves, inspired by Inigo Jones's at St Paul's, Covent Garden. 
While work at Althorp proceeded, Holland received a commission in 1787 from another whig nobleman, Francis Russell, the 21-year-old fifth duke of Bedford, to modernize Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire. As at Althorp, Holland provided a fine tripartite library, divided with screens of columns. He also remodelled the east front, turning it into the main entrance front, which he marked by a deep 'porte-cochere' in a version of Tuscan which borders closely on Greek Doric. At the same time he added the Chinese dairy, overlooking the pool to the north-east of the abbey. The pretty lantern with its finials is based on plates in Chambers's 'Designs of Chinese Buildings' (1757), from which source Holland also drew inspiration for the interior decoration. 
In 1789 Holland built a handsome greenhouse at Woburn with a Venetian window flanked by Louis XVI medallions and wreaths, carved in 1790 by Le Maison, who described himself on his bill as 'of Paris and London'. The duke subsequently decided to turn this building into a sculpture gallery, and commissioned Holland to set up the temple of liberty at one end in 1801. This was built to house busts of the duke's favourite political heroes, notably Nollekens's bust of Charles James Fox, who also presides over Brooks's Club and the prince of Wales's octagonal tribune at Carlton House. Holland's temple of liberty is an exceptionally refined creation with details based on two Athenian monuments, as recorded by Stuart and Revett: the Greek Ionic order from the Ilissus temple, and the frieze adorned with wreaths from the choragic monument of Thrasyllus in Athens. In 1788-92 the second Viscount Palmerston commissioned Holland to provide a handsome new Ionic portico in antis on the east front of Broadlands, Hampshire, as well as interior decoration; Brown had already worked on the house and park for the same client in 1766-8. 
Holland's last major domestic commission came in 1796 from Samuel Whitbread, the wealthy brewer, for the remodelling of Southill House, Bedfordshire, where the grounds had been landscaped for a previous owner by Capability Brown. Holland's exteriors at Southill were understated, almost to the point of gracelessness, but he provided a series of varied but always exquisite astylar interiors, which are the climax of his personal style. Mrs Whitbread's room and boudoir, finished in April 1800, were the most French, with decorative painting in a Pompeian manner by A. L. Delabriere. The drawing-room has an almost sensuous beauty with its crimson silk wall panels, while the library has antique panels of griffins and candelabra. 
Both the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, and the Covent Garden Theatre stood on land owned by the duke of Bedford, so that Holland was the obvious choice of architect in the 1790s to rebuild the former, and to make alterations to the latter. Turning for inspiration to recent publications on French theatre design by Pierre Patte and Etienne Dumont, Holland provided the Theatre Royal with chastely classical interior decoration and rich furnishing. Both theatres were burnt to the ground in 1808-9. 
An unusual commission came in 1803 to remodel Melbourne House, Piccadilly, as residential chambers, and to add two ranges of apartments in the garden on the north. Built by Sir William Chambers for Lord Melbourne in 1771-4, the house had been the residence of the duke of York from 1792, and the decision to turn an aristocratic, and now royal, mansion into residential apartments, named the Albany, was highly unconventional. This commission involved the destruction of Chambers's magnificent staircase, but the two long ranges which Holland added were elegant and convenient, and serve the same purpose today as that for which they were erected. They flank an attractive covered way, known as the Ropewalk, which has a tent-shaped roof of narrow boarding with a faintly Chinese flavour. 
Holland's collection of antiquities, its arrangement and display, was an important part of his presentation of himself to the world as a man of taste; in this he followed the example of Adam as well as setting a precedent for Soane. In 1776 Holland made his first important purchase of casts from the antique, which were acquired for him in Italy by Christopher Ebdon, a former pupil of James Paine. In 1794 Holland sent his talented draughtsman Charles Heathcote Tatham to Rome to pursue his own studies and to collect for Holland decorative pieces such as fragments from antique altars, carved pilasters, and candelabra, as well as cinerary urns. For these services Holland made him an allowance of $60 a year, plus expenses. Holland thus made a vital contribution to the development of neo-classical taste in England: first, because Tatham's subsequent publications, beginning with 'Etchings of Ancient Ornamental Architecture' (1799-1800), were to be influential on architects and furniture designers, and, second, because in 1816 Soane purchased the marbles which Tatham had acquired for Holland. He mounted them on the walls of the study at 13 Lincoln's Inn Fields, where they can be seen today. 
Holland's brother John, who also spent much time in Italy, acquired further antique fragments for him. A sufficient quantity of objects were installed in Sloane Place by early 1796 for Holland to show them to experts, such as Charles Townley, who supported his election as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in December 1796. Holland offered them to the trustees of the British Museum who declined them, so they remained in his collection, passing on his death to his nephew. 
In 1799 Holland became surveyor to the East India Company, in which capacity he built the long neo-Palladian facade of East India House, Leadenhall Street (1799-1800), with interiors designed by his predecessor as surveyor Richard Jupp. His other official appointments included clerk of the works at the Royal Mews at Charing Cross (1775-82) and surveyor to the Bridewell and Bethlem hospitals (1782-93); he was appointed a JP for Middlesex in 1778. He acquired from Lord Spencer, seemingly in payment of debts, an estate at Okehampton, Devon, which was a political borough and a whig stronghold where the duke of Bedford played an important role. A committed whig, Holland secured the Okehampton seat in the House of Commons for his son Henry in 1802. He died in his London house, Sloane Place, on 17 June 1806, and was buried below the simple family tomb which he had designed for his parents in the churchyard of All Saints', Fulham. He left two sons, Henry and Lancelot, and five daughters. His drawings and papers seem to have been destroyed after his death by his nephew and executor, Henry Rowles. 
It is hard to guess at Holland's personality for he was of a retiring disposition, and carefully avoided public notice. He chose not to exhibit his work at the Royal Academy, though he did take an active part in founding the Architects' Club in 1791 with George Dance, S. P. Cockerell, and James Wyatt. He took a practical interest in new materials and methods of construction for buildings of all types, such as mathematical tiles, fireproofing, Hartley's 'fire-plate', and 'pise' (rammed earth construction on brick or rubble foundations). He published papers in 1793 on the problems of fire prevention, and in 1797 on agricultural cottages and on 'pise'. His use of 'pise', as in estate cottages supposedly built at Woburn in the early 1790s, was part of his admiration for France, for he was indebted to a publication on the subject by A. M. Cointereaux of Paris in 1791. The caustic Soane, who began his architectural career as an assistant in Holland's office, dismissed him, privately, as 'a bricklayer architect' (D. Watkin, 'Sir John Soane: Enlightenment Thought and the Royal Academy Lectures', 1996, 230). 
Holland's principal stylistic debt was probably to Sir William Chambers, whose restrained Gallic tastes he echoed, though with the introduction of neo-Greek detail of which Chambers would have disapproved. It must also have been galling for Chambers to see Holland replace or succeed him at Melbourne House, Carlton House, and Woburn Abbey, while he was still in professional practice himself. But, as a whig, Holland was more acceptable to some patrons than the tory Chambers. Holland's opposite numbers as royal architects in France, Claude-Nicolas Ledoux and Richard Mique, were, respectively, imprisoned during the terror and guillotined, fates Holland would have been unlikely to have escaped had he too been French. 


@@@@@


doc= 13525


Holland, Sir Henry, first baronet (1788-1873), physician, was born on 27 October 1788 at Knutsford, Cheshire, the son of Peter Holland (1766-1855), physician, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Willits (1766-1803). He was related to Josiah Wedgwood, a keen patron of the arts, and to the novelist Elizabeth Gaskell. At Newcastle upon Tyne Holland was tutored by the Revd William Turner, from whom he acquired a love of natural science and travel. In 1803 he was sent to Dr John Prior Estlin's school in Bristol. As he records in 'Recollections of Past Life' his 'most intimate friend [there] was Richard Bright... who as Dr. Bright held such a high and well-merited place in the medical world' ('Recollections', 11). The boys shared the same keen interest in science and geology. On leaving Estlin's school Holland walked the entire distance home to Knutsford, a precursor perhaps to his later obsession with adventure and travel. This probably led to his decision to follow a career in business which he believed would provide him with opportunity for travel; to this end he became an articled clerk with a major Liverpool merchant house. A family connection with the senior partner gave Holland the opportunity to enrol for two sessions at Glasgow University in 1804 and 1805 which in his own words 'virtually decided the course of my future life' ('Recollections', 17). He was released from his articles and in 1806 embarked on a medical degree at Edinburgh. He also spent two winters at the United Hospitals of Guy's and St Thomas's in London. In 1810 his spirit of adventure was gratified by an expedition to Iceland in company with Sir George Mackenzie of Coul and Richard Bright. His study of the diseases of the Icelanders provided data for his doctoral thesis 'De morbis Islandiae' with which he graduated in 1811; it was dedicated to Bishop Geir Vidalin of Iceland. He contributed his accounts 'History and literature of Iceland' and 'Diseases of the Icelanders' to Mackenzie's 'Travels in the Island of Iceland' (1811). Holland nearly lost his life when he and Bright made an abortive attempt to reach the summit of Snaefell Jokul. When retracing their steps Holland was the second to cross a precarious snow bridge; his foot broke through the ice and he just managed to save himself from being plunged into the deep chasm below. As he wrote in his journal this was not accomplished 'without much fear and trembling whilst thus hazardously engaged!' ('Iceland Journal', 195). 
Having graduated Holland spent the next eighteen months travelling in Portugal, Gibraltar, Sardinia, Sicily, the Ionian Isles, and Greece. The publication in 1814 of an account of the eastern part of this journey, 'Travels in the Ionian Isles, Albania, Thessaly, Macedonia etc. during 1812 and 1813', provided him with an entree to London society which would be of great benefit in a medical career which he determined would allow him to devote two months of every year to travel. In 1814 he again visited Europe, this time as medical attendant to the princess of Wales (later Queen Caroline). He was subsequently asked to testify at the inquiry of 1820 which sought the necessary evidence to divorce her from George IV. 
Holland was made a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 8 April 1816, and fellow in 1828. He commenced his professional life in 1816 in a fashionable practice at his home in Mount Street, London. Four years later he moved to Lower Brook Street where he lived until his death. Holland gave the Goulstonian lecture at the college in 1830 and served in numerous years as censor or consiliarius. He neither sought, nor apparently needed, a hospital appointment to further his career. He moved freely in society circles and his advice was much respected, albeit that a practised bedside manner was rather more in evidence than hard medical insight. At the end of the London season he visited the popular resort of Spa which further cemented his growing clientele of the rich and famous and allowed him to maintain his resolve to limit his professional work to that which afforded him an income of $5000 and gave him the freedom to pursue his great love of travel. In his lifetime he visited every European capital, made two visits to Iceland, and eight to America, covering more than 26,000 miles of that continent. The exploration of rivers afforded him particular pleasure: 'watching the flow of waters which come from unknown springs or find their issue in some remote ocean or sea. I have felt this on the Nile at its time of highest inundation, when crossing the Volga when scarcely wider than the Thames at Oxford and still more when near the sources of the streams that feed the Euphrates, south of Trebizond. ('Recollections', 25)' On the accession of Queen Victoria in 1837 Holland was appointed physician-extraordinary, and in 1840 he became physician-in-ordinary to the prince consort. He declined the offer of a baronetcy made by Lord Melbourne in 1841 but happily accepted the offer in 1853. He received an honorary DCL from the University of Oxford and also from the University of Harvard, Massachusetts. As president of the Royal Institution Holland strove to popularize science by promoting the lectures to the elite of the fashionable circles in which he moved. He keenly supported the efforts of Faraday and Tyndall to improve the society and also set up the Holland Fund to which he contributed $40 each year for the promotion of scientific research. His 'Recollections' (1868; 4th edn, 1873) not only provide interesting accounts of his travels but also record the diversity of leading figures of the times with whom he could boast intimacy. His Edinburgh days had brought him into contact with men such as Lord Brougham, Sydney Smith, and Francis Corner, while in London he was a frequenter of the soirees at Holland House and was acquainted with figures from the literary world such as Madame de Stael, Maria Edgeworth, and Joanna Baillie. 
While Holland could not be described as a great physician, his medical text 'Medical Notes and Reflections' (1839) is of some interest in its attempt to expose the relationship between mind and body. The book comprises several discrete essays on subjects relating to the philosophy and practice of medicine. The parts relating specifically to mental philosophy were published in 1851 in one volume entitled 'Chapters on Mental Physiology'. 
Holland was twice married, first in 1822 to Margaret Emma (1792-1830), daughter of James Caldwell of Linley Wood, Staffordshire. She died on 2 February 1830 leaving two sons, Henry Thurstan Holland, created Lord Knutsford in 1888, and Francis James Holland, canon of Canterbury, and two daughters. In 1834 he married Saba (1802-1866), daughter of the Revd Sydney Smith; the couple had three daughters. Holland very determinedly carved out for himself exactly the life he wanted. Spare of stature but blessed with exceptionally good health, he was able to indulge his abiding love of travel right up to the time of his death. In the autumn of 1873 he journeyed with his son Francis from Nizhniy Novgorod in Russia to southern Italy. He returned to London on 25 October feeling somewhat unwell and gradually lost the power of speech over that weekend. He died peacefully at his home, 72 Brook Street, Grosvenor Square, on 27 October 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 13526


Holland, Hezekiah (fl. 1638-1660), clergyman, was a native of Ireland who described himself as Anglo-Irish, and was almost certainly the Ezekias Holland who graduated BA at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1638. In a preface dated 10 July 1649 he made clear that he was new to England, 'a stranger, (a kind of a banished man) out of Ireland', explaining that 'five years ago I came out of that Kingdom into this' (Holland, 'Looking Glasse', 3, 7). It seems, then, that he had arrived in England about 1644. Following the sequestration of its vicar, Robert Smith, in March 1645, Holland was approved by parliament as the minister of Sutton Valence, Kent, and the preface cited above introduced a selection of his sermons preached there. In 1650 he published 'An Exposition... of the most Choice Commentaries upon the Revelation of Saint John' (including those of St Augustine, Heinrich Bullinger, Thomas Brightman, and especially David Parens), which he had first delivered in his parish church. In Kent the General Baptists were building up a substantial following and it soon became necessary to engage in controversy with one of their most prominent Kentish leaders, George Hammon of Biddenden. For Hammon had 'gotten into great repute with those who know not how to contradict you', as his opponent admitted in the preface of his 'Adam's Condition in Paradise Discovered', signed from Sutton Valence on 3 February 1656. Since each side considered the other to be antichristian the controversy generated much acrimony. It seems from a work issued by Hammon in 1660 that Holland was still preaching at Sutton Valence in that year. After this time, however, nothing is known of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13527


Holland, Hugh (1563-1633), poet, was born in Denbigh, the younger son of Robert Holland and his wife, whose maiden name was Pain or Payne. He became a pupil of William Camden, for whom he retained a lifelong loyalty, and who numbered him with Philip Sidney, Edmund Spenser, Ben Jonson, and Michael Drayton as one of the 'most pregnant wits of these our times' (W. Camden, 'Remaines', 1614, 8). After attending Westminster School he was elected scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1589. He graduated BA in 1593-4 and MA in 1597. A Hugh Holland matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, in March 1583. This is usually identified with the poet, although his cool references to Oxford in 'A Cypress Garland' suggest that he felt little connection with that university. He retained close links with Wales, returning there for a period in 1601, probably in connection with the disturbances surrounding the Denbighshire elections in that year. While travelling through Germany and Holland in 1603 he heard news of the death of Elizabeth I. This journey, he said, fulfilled 'the desire I had but once in my life to see the world (for until then I had been always one of the Queen's deer)' (Holland, 'Pancharis', sig. D5'r'). Fuller reported that: 'he travailed beyond the seas and in Italy (conceiving himself without ear-reach of the English) let flie freely against the Credit of Queen Elizabeth. He went to Jerusalem, though there he was not made, or he would not own himself Knight of the Sepulchre (Fuller, 'Worthies', 16)' and that he was subsequently rebuked by Sir Thomas Glover, James I's ambassador in Constantinople, for his indiscretion. This detail dates the trip to 1606-13, the period of Glover's residence in Constantinople. 
In London Holland was one of several poets and parliamentarians (including John Donne, Inigo Jones, and John Hoskyns) who met at the Mitre tavern about 1610. His ties with literary men remained strong throughout his life: Ben Jonson (whom Holland may have introduced to his near neighbour in Wales, Sir John Salusbury of Lleweni) wrote a dedicatory ode for Holland's 'Pancharis' (1603), and Holland wrote dedicatory poems for Giles Farnaby's 'Canzonets to Fowre Voyces' (1598), for Jonson's 'Sejanus' (1605), Bolton's 'Elements of Armory' (1610), 'Parthenia' (1611), and Thomas Hawkins's 'Odes of Horace' (1625). He also contributed mock-heroic verses to Thomas Coryate's 'Odcombian Banquet' (1611) in Greek, Latin, and Welsh. In his last year he wrote Latin verses for the authorized edition of the Latin drama 'Roxana' (1632), composed by his fellow student of Westminster and Trinity, William Alabaster. Fuller records that he also wrote a life of Camden, verses in description of the chief cities of Europe, and chronicles of the reign of Elizabeth. 
Holland is chiefly remembered as the author of a dedicatory poem included in the First Folio of Shakespeare's plays, although his other works are of greater note. They include an elegy on the death of Henry, prince of Wales, an epitaph on Queen Elizabeth (printed in Camden's 'Remaines'), 'A Cypress Garland' (1625) on the death of James I, and an incomplete epic poem, 'Pancharis'. This poem relates, in richly Spenserian language, and with many echoes of 'Aeneid' 4, the courtship of Owen Tudor and Queen Katherine. Intended as a dynastic compliment to Elizabeth, and probably composed about 1601 (when several natives of Denbighshire sought to show their loyalty to the crown in the aftermath of the Essex rebellion), the poem was eventually printed in the summer of 1603, after the queen's death. The epistle appended to 'Pancharis' promises further books which were to have recounted the martial exploits of Owen Glendower, and which would have been dedicated to Henry, prince of Wales. 
Holland recorded that through the patronage of the duke of Buckingham he kissed the hand of James I three times in twenty weeks ('And with his snowy hand my lips he warmed'; 'A Cypress Garland', sig. A4'r'). There is no record that he ever received more material favours from the Stuarts, although Buckingham forwarded a suit of his to the king, and Holland's elegy for Prince Henry records that: '
oft, when as to Westminster I trudged 

About my fift yeers Suite (but yet unjudged) 

He [that is, Henry] cheered my heart that was full heavy. 
('Sundry Funeral Elegies', 1613, sig. D2'v')' Fuller's claim that 'he grumbled out the rest of his life in visible discontentment' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 16) may have some truth in it: he had a lengthy legal dispute with John Reynoldes over the freehold of property in Paternoster Row and 'Ivey Lane'. This remained unresolved at his death. 
Holland was a Catholic until April 1626, when he submitted to the national church after having been indicted for recusancy. He married Ursula, the widow of Robert Woodard of Burnham, Buckinghamshire. A daughter 'Phil' and a son Martin were dead by 1625; a son, Arbellin, or Arbellinus, lived to be his father's executor, and eventually, in 1638, resolved his father's legal battle with Reynoldes. Holland was made a freeman of the Mercers' Company by redemption, gratis, on 4 September 1621. Holland died intestate in London on or about 18 July 1633, presumably after a long illness, since reports of his death circulated as early as June 1632. He had suffered from gout. His son Arbellin was granted letters of administration on 31 August 1633. He was buried in Westminster Abbey in the south part of the church on 23 July 1633. No likeness survives, but his dark hair and skin (described in 'Pancharis' as his distinguishing features) led Ben Jonson to describe his friend as the 'black swan'. 


@@@@@


doc= 13528


Holland, James (1799-1870), watercolour painter, was born on 17 October 1799 in Burslem, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, the illegitimate son of Martha Holland (1777-1847). His father is believed to have been Timothy Edge (1776-1838), whom Martha Holland married in 1800, and who was employed in the Holland family pottery at Hill Top in Burslem. At the age of twelve James was taken on by John Davenport at Longport Hall as an apprentice pottery and porcelain painter, where he developed his skill in flower and bird painting. His apprenticeship was completed in the spring of 1819 and he decided to seek a career as an artist in London, while supporting himself through continued pottery painting. He found employment at one of the works in Deptford, which was at that time well outside London itself, and on 24 January 1820 he married a local girl, Elizabeth Mary Evans, at St Paul's parish church. By 1823 his circumstances had improved sufficiently to enable him to give up pottery painting, and to move to Marylebone, which was much closer to central London. A year later he moved again, this time to the St Pancras area of the city where, apart from an extended period in Greenwich, he was to spend the rest of his life. 
Holland's first exhibition success came in 1824 when he had a flower painting accepted by the Royal Academy and thereafter he became a regular exhibitor both there and at the exhibitions of the Society of British Artists and the Society of Painters in Water Colours. Although his marriage was only brief -- his wife died in 1828 -- they had three sons and two daughters; only the daughters survived into adulthood. In 1831 he travelled abroad for the first time, to Paris with fellow artist John Scarlett Davis, and in 1835 made the first of many trips to Venice, a city that he painted extensively, especially in watercolour. This work largely established his reputation. That same year, he was elected to the Society of Painters in Water Colours. About this time he met Charlotte Martha Morrant (1817-1909), with whom he had a relationship for the rest of his life, fathering a son who died in infancy and two daughters both of whom survived him. In 1837 he was commissioned by the 'Landscape Annual' to travel to Portugal and produce illustrations for their forthcoming traveller's guide to that country. Many other overseas painting trips took him as far afield as Egypt, in addition to which he travelled and painted extensively throughout mainland Britain. 
In 1842 Holland resigned from the Society of Painters in Water Colours to concentrate his efforts on gaining election to the Royal Academy which, curiously, he never achieved; he rejoined the society in 1856. His last continental painting trip was again to Venice in 1865 and thereafter he mainly worked only from his studio. He last had works accepted for exhibition at the society's winter exhibition in Pall Mall, London, in February 1870. He died on 13 February 1870 in his house, 8 Osnaburgh Street, St Pancras, of cirrhosis of the liver and exhaustion, and was buried in the family grave at Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. Well over two hundred of his works were exhibited during his lifetime, and several hundred were still in his studio when he died. Although best known as a watercolourist, he was equally talented in oils and is generally regarded as one of the finest artists of the English school, both a contemporary and an equal of the likes of R. P. Bonington and W. H. Hunt. His works can be found in most of the major collections in Great Britain, and many abroad, with particularly fine examples in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the City Art Gallery and Museum, Stoke-on-Trent; and the Huntington Library, San Marino, California. 


@@@@@


doc= 13529


Holland, John, first earl of Huntingdon and duke of Exeter (c.1352-1400), magnate and soldier, was the second son of Thomas Holland, earl of Kent (c.1315-1360), and Joan (d. 1385), daughter of Edmund of Woodstock, earl of Kent. Holland became one of the premier nobles in the kingdom, one of the principal props of Richard II's regime in its later years, and a military figure of some renown with a considerable territorial base in the south-west. He had an elder brother, Thomas Holland, earl of Kent (d. 1397), and two sisters, Maud (died 1392), wife to Sir Hugh Courtenay and then Waleran, count of St Pol, and Joan (died 1384), wife of Jean, duke of Brittany. Perhaps most significantly, Holland was half-brother of Richard II, the son of Joan and Edward, the Black Prince, whom Joan married in 1361 after the death of Thomas Holland. 
Although John Holland's precise date of birth is unknown, it was after 1350, and he was probably his father's youngest child. His stepfather, the Black Prince, assigned his yeoman John de la Haye to be Holland's guardian and he received royal household livery from 1371. He first came to prominence in 1378, shortly after his half-brother Richard's accession as king. Then he was awarded an annuity of $100 from the exchequer, served on John of Gaunt's abortive siege of St Malo in Brittany, and received his first grant of estates, the manors of Ardington and Philberds Court at East Hanney in Berkshire, to replace his annuity. He was given the Marensin lordship in Gascony in 1380. The award of the wardship of Rhys ap Gruffudd's estates, mainly in Staffordshire, Northwich in Cheshire, and Hope and Hopedale lordship in Flintshire, was extended by his first administrative appointment as justice of Cheshire for life on 6 May 1381. In 1381 he was also made a knight of the Garter. A proposal to send him to Ireland as lieutenant in August 1382 was not carried out. 
Holland came increasingly under the influence of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, going on embassies with him to Calais in 1383 and again in 1384 when he was made a banneret. The Salisbury parliament in May 1384 witnessed the first indication of John Holland's violent temper. A friar who accused Gaunt of conspiring to kill the king was horribly murdered by Holland, and others, 'propter amorem ducis' ('for love of the duke') according to the chronicler Walsingham. The fuller account of the monk of Westminster has Holland acting as a member of a household clique. Whatever his motive, this was his first real involvement in the politics of Richard II's court. 
The grant in December 1384 of the reversion on their deaths of thirteen manors of Sir James Audley in Somerset, Devon, and Cornwall, and two manors of Sir Nigel Loryng in Devon provided Holland with the first properties in his later extensive south-western patrimony. He then joined Richard II's expedition to Scotland in July 1385. It had only reached York when in a brawl one of Holland's esquires was killed by an archer of the retinue of Ralph, son and heir to the earl of Stafford. Seeking the perpetrator, Holland happened upon Ralph Stafford and slew him without having ascertained properly who he was. He fled to claim sanctuary at Beverley Minster and was disgraced, losing many of his earlier awards. After suitably abject apologies he was pardoned in February 1386, at Gaunt's request according to the chronicler Knighton, and on condition that he establish three chaplains to pray for Ralph's soul. 
Holland, still under a cloud at court, was now very much under Gaunt's aegis, and became constable of the army which Gaunt took to Spain in 1386 to win the crown of Castile. On 24 June of that year, near Plymouth, Holland married Gaunt's second daughter, Elizabeth ['see 'Elizabeth of Lancaster (1364?-1425)], whom he had made pregnant while she was still married to the earl of Pembroke. The full importance of this marriage would only become apparent in 1471 when, on Henry VI's death, Holland's grandson, Henry, became the Lancastrian claimant to the throne. Gaunt's Spanish campaign was inconclusive, for which Holland as constable must take some blame. He featured extensively in the diplomatic engagements and his prowess in the jousts was lauded by the chronicler Froissart. He abandoned the army and returned by April 1388 to England, where he was wooed at court by Richard's appellant opponents, possibly in an attempt to gain, through Holland, Gaunt's support. 
Holland was created earl of Huntingdon on 2 June 1388 with estates and revenues, mainly in the south-west and Suffolk, giving him an income of 2000 marks p.a. This was augmented by a number of grants of duchy of Cornwall estates, such as Berkhamsted Castle on 8 October 1388, Tintagel Castle on 6 January 1389, and Trematon Castle and manor in 1392. He used Berkhamsted Castle as a base but he then also built himself a considerable residence at Dartington Hall in Devon. Although regarded by Edward Courtenay, earl of Devon, as an intrusion into his area of authority, Holland's influence in the south-west grew further when he was made admiral of the west on 18 May 1389, and initiated a characteristically aggressive administration. On 1 June 1389 he was made captain of the Breton port of Brest, an English outpost requiring the leadership of an experienced, self-sufficient figure. 
In addition to such military duties Holland was appointed chief chamberlain of England on 31 May 1390, a move prompted by Richard's increasing desire to build his own group of royal kin and supporters. This life award was augmented into a grant to him and the heirs male of his body on 2 February 1398. The post reflected Holland's chivalric renown, recorded and lauded by Froissart in tournaments at Calais in May and Smithfield in October 1390, and involved him in a number of ambitious foreign projects. He made preparations for a journey to Jerusalem and possibly Hungary in 1394, but joined the Irish expedition of 1395 late. He recruited troops for a projected expedition to Florence in 1397, when he was also appointed gonfalonier of the Roman church and captain-general of the papal troops on 1 March 1397, with the aim of ridding Italy of schismatics. 
Despite the fact that Holland held an annuity of 200 marks from duchy of Lancaster estates in Norfolk by March 1391, his earlier ties with Gaunt seem to have cooled in the 1390s. One cause may have been the involvement of one of Holland's men, Sir Nicholas Clifton, in an anti-Gaunt rising in Cheshire in 1393; Holland also clashed with Gaunt over rival marital plans involving the duke of Brittany's children. Although Holland was Gaunt's son-in-law, he does not feature in Gaunt's will of 1398. By contrast, he was increasingly identified with the royal court. During the 1390s Richard handed to him a life interest in much of his duchy of Cornwall inheritance. The king further entrusted him with a series of castles to add to his south-western holdings: Rockingham on 19 April 1391, Horeston on 29 September 1391, Haverfordwest on 10 January 1392, and Conwy on 3 September 1394. After serving in Ireland on Richard's first expedition there in March and April 1395, Holland was appointed by Richard warden of the western march towards Scotland and custodian of Carlisle on 16 February 1397, as part of his policy of loosening the grip on that office of the Nevilles and Percys. His military exploits also encouraged Philippe de Mezieres to enlist Holland's support as a patron for his order of the Passion and to present him with an abridgement of the order's rule, now Oxford, Bodleian, MS Ashmole 813. His violent intemperance and physical rashness were characteristics not then despised by contemporaries. 
With his nephew Thomas, the new earl of Kent on his father's death in 1397, Holland was very firmly a supporter of Richard II in his actions to remove the appellants in his coup of 1397. In the absence of children of his own, Richard used his Holland relatives to bind his noble supporters closer to his cause and bring them within the royal kin. Holland's elder daughter, Constance, had been betrothed in 1391 to Thomas (II) Mowbray, the heir of one of Richard's supporters, and his other daughter was married to Richard de Vere, the heir of the earl of Oxford, Holland's predecessor as king's chamberlain. The marriages of his nieces into the Mortimer, York, Beaufort, Montague, and Neville families, and of his nephew Thomas to a Stafford, all helped to tie these families closer to the king. 
In July 1397 Richard II struck against the lords appellant of 1388. After dining with Holland in London, the king rode with him to Pleshey Castle to arrest the king's uncle, the duke of Gloucester. The earls of Arundel and Warwick were similarly seized. All their estates were forfeited. Holland was rewarded with the southern lordships of the earl of Arundel, including Arundel Castle, on 3 August 1397 and he was promoted duke of Exeter on 29 September. Thomas (I) Mowbray's banishment in 1398 brought Holland further southern Arundel estates, previously awarded to Mowbray, in Lewes Castle on 23 September 1398 and Reigate Castle on 15 January 1399. He was also established in south Wales with the wardship of the Mortimer estates there on the death of the earl of March in July 1398 and custody of Gaunt's powerful south Wales holdings on the death of his former mentor in February 1399. 
Holland continued to help defend the peripheries of the kingdom, being appointed captain of Calais on 24 February 1398. He left Calais to serve on Richard's second Irish expedition in May 1399. On the news of Bolingbroke's landing in England, Holland accompanied Richard on his hasty journey to Pembroke in July and then on to Conwy Castle. Sent by Richard to negotiate with Bolingbroke, Holland was imprisoned in Chester, and Richard soon followed him into captivity. He was probably moved with Richard to London in September 1399, though he may have been at large to see to the birth of his youngest son, Edward, around this time, and his administration was still active in September. 
Holland attended the parliament in October 1399 that formalized Richard's deposition. He denounced Richard's actions and assisted in Henry IV's coronation. He was then imprisoned in Hertford on 20 October, before being tried with fellow members of the previous regime on 3 November and stripped of all his gains since July 1397, so reverting to the status of earl of Huntingdon. Given the short time he had held these gains Holland's benefits from them had not been great, but the awards he had received before 1397 now also came under threat. He suffered from Richard's policy of passing on estates where the title was by no means absolute: his tenure had been secure while the king supported him, but now a number of rivals revived their claims to these lands. On 22 December Holland lost his Cornish duchy of Cornwall estates to the new prince of Wales. The abbey of St Mary Graces disputed his Devon lands and a claimant had seized from him Barford St Martin, a Wiltshire manor, in August. Other former supporters of Richard II, such as Holland's nephew Thomas, also saw their positions eroded after 3 November, with the result that a plot was hatched in the last days of 1399 to remove the new Henry IV. 
The conspirators met at Kingston in Surrey on 4 January, with the intention of surprising Henry at a tournament at Windsor. Henry had been forewarned and left Windsor for London. The rebels fled west to Cirencester where the earls of Kent and Salisbury were killed on 8 January. Holland had been waiting meantime to seize London on the news of success at Windsor. He escaped east on 6 January, but contrary winds drove his ship ashore in Essex. He received shelter at the de Vere castle of Hadleigh but was arrested at Prittlewell and imprisoned by the king's mother-in-law, the countess of Hereford, at Pleshey, Essex. In the presence of the new Fitzalan earl of Arundel, he was executed there by popular demand on 9 or 10 January. His head was displayed on London Bridge until it was buried with his body in the collegiate church at Pleshey in February 1400. 
Holland left five children: Richard (died 1400); John Holland, earl of Huntingdon and duke of Exeter (1395-1447); Edward, count of Mortain (died 1418); Constance (died 1437), who married Thomas (II) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham, and then John Grey of Ruthin; and a daughter, name unknown, who married Richard de Vere, earl of Oxford. His widow, Elizabeth, married John Cornwall, later Lord Fanhope (died 1443). She died on 24 November 1425 and was buried at Burford, Shropshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 13530


Holland, John, first duke of Exeter (1395-1447), soldier and magnate, was born on 29 March 1395, at Dartington, Devon, the second son (his elder brother died in 1400) of John Holland, duke of Exeter (c.1352-1400), who was Richard II's half-brother, and Elizabeth of Lancaster (died 1425), Henry IV's sister. His father was executed and attainted for plotting against Henry IV. The younger John was brought up by his mother and her second husband (whom she married in 1400), Sir John Cornewall (d. 1443), a dashing knight who served Prince Henry; in 1407 the king gave Cornewall 100 marks a year for the boy's maintenance. Holland was knighted in April 1413, on the eve of Henry V's coronation, and the new king appreciated his military potential, for he was 'brave and high spirited though young' ('Gesta Henrici quinti', 46-7). He spent a lifetime in the French war, but captivity in France between 1421 and 1426 and the Lancastrians' unwillingness to endow him with substantial estates prejudiced his financial security. 
Just before Henry V's departure for France in 1415, Holland sat on the tribunal that condemned the 'Southampton' plotters, including his own kinsman, Richard, earl of Cambridge. He accompanied the king to Normandy and, with his stepfather, led a force to reconnoitre Harfleur; at Agincourt on 25 October he was distinguished for his valour. He was elected to the Order of the Garter in May 1416, and in July became commander of the fleet to relieve Harfleur and patrol the seas. Holland had begun to style himself earl of Huntingdon, his father's title, earlier in 1416, and formal restoration came in parliament in October; yet he did not receive his father's dukedom of Exeter, which was pointedly granted to the king's uncle, Thomas Beaufort. Livery of his inheritance in the following March included only entailed estates. As a result, he did not enjoy his father's close links with Devon, and his resources were an inadequate foundation for his military career. 
While commanding the fleet (ironically under Exeter as admiral), on 29 June 1417 Huntingdon captured Genoese ships, prisoners, and treasure, in an engagement off the Caux peninsula that was admired by contemporary chroniclers. This heralded Henry V's invasion of Normandy in which Huntingdon took the castle of Touques and besieged Caen; in the spring of 1418 he seized Coutances, Avranches, and other fortresses. He rejoined Henry V at the siege of Rouen (1418-19), where his brother, Edward Holland, was killed. He was accomplished alike in the field (as at Fresnay in March 1420) and at sieges, and his stepfather was usually at his side. Henry V rewarded him, notably in 1418 with the lordship of Bricqueville-sur-Mer, which he had subdued; in 1419 he was appointed captain of Gournay and Pontoise, and when Melun fell in November 1420 he became its governor. Following the treaty of Troyes (21 May 1420), Henry V made him constable of the Tower of London for life, with an annuity of $100 (20 August). Huntingdon entered Paris on 1 December with the two royal families: he was appointed captain of Vincennes and custodian of the infirm Charles VI. 
Within months Huntingdon's fortunes had collapsed. He was captured at the battle of Bauge on 22 March 1421 and found himself the prisoner of a Scot, Sir John Sibbald; he spent five years in captivity in Anjou. Raising a ransom was his daunting priority: he was not well endowed with estates and parliament was told in 1424 that he was owed $10,500 from Henry V's day. His stepfather eventually negotiated, in 1425, an exchange with the count of Vendome (captured at Agincourt and in Sir John Cornewall's hands), and Huntingdon returned to England by the beginning of 1426. He later claimed that his captivity cost him 20,000 marks. 
Huntingdon's priorities on his return were to repair his fortunes; he also became a king's councillor in March 1426 and an ally of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester. In seeking a wife, a dowager would be more immediately profitable than a young heiress: by 15 July 1427 he had married Anne, daughter of Edmund Stafford, earl of Stafford, and widow of Edmund (V) Mortimer, earl of March (died 1425), though he was fined 1200 marks for doing so without licence. After his mother's death in 1425 he inherited much of her property, and the king granted him the Norman county of Ivry in 1427. His place in noble society was less comfortable, for he may have quarrelled with the duke of Norfolk in 1428, and with his own brother-in-law, the earl of Stafford, when both came armed to parliament in 1429; he was one of several nobles requested to leave their large retinues at home when attending the parliament of 1430. 
When Henry VI visited France in April 1430, Huntingdon accompanied him: he joined the duke of Burgundy at the siege of Compiegne but withdrew through lack of funds, and then, as captain of Gournay and Gisors, supported Bedford. At Paris he witnessed Henry's crowning as king of France in December 1431. During his absence from England, his son Henry Holland was born in June 1430, but in September 1432 Anne Stafford died. Huntingdon quickly sought a new wife, and it is not surprising that he chose another dowager: in January 1433, on payment of 200 marks, he married Beatrice, illegitimate daughter of Joao I, king of Portugal and widow of Thomas Fitzalan, earl of Arundel (died 1415). 
With his affairs in fair order, Huntingdon resumed his military career, though it required 1300 marks in recognition of past services to persuade him to go to France in 1433; he displayed his usual flair and relieved Montargis. At the discussions with France and Burgundy at Arras in the summer of 1435, Huntingdon was an English envoy -- a noble of repute and royal lineage rather than an experienced diplomat. A licence to take with him household goods worth $6000 reflected lavish tastes, which are confirmed by his will and an inventory of his possessions made after his death (Westminster Abbey muniments, 6643). Just before leaving for Arras, in July 1435 he and the earl of Northumberland were jointly appointed wardens of the east and west marches towards Scotland after the earl of Salisbury resigned as western warden. On his return he received the office of admiral of England on 2 October, and so helped to defend Calais against the Burgundians in August 1436. 
After Henry VI came of age (1436-7), Huntingdon, like Gloucester, was eased out of the king's counsels, though his other services were still valued. In March 1439 he was appointed the king's lieutenant in Aquitaine for six years; $1000 was paid to him personally before he would sail for Bordeaux, accompanied by his wife, in August. He did not stay long, possibly because of inadequate resources: his own situation worsened after Beatrice's death at Bordeaux on 23 October 1439, although he was granted the wine-producing lordship of Lesparre in February 1440. After returning to England in December 1440 he sought an annual allowance, and in July 1441 was given 500 marks per annum in tail male to compensate for losses in France. At the same time, he was caught up in the Gloucester-Beaufort feud, perhaps as a king's councillor once again, and he sat in judgment on the duchess of Gloucester when she was charged with sorcery. His abilities in defence of the realm continued to be acknowledged: in November 1441 he received custody of Southampton Castle for life. He also found yet another wife, Anne Montagu (died 1457), daughter of the earl of Salisbury and twice widowed. The king's grant of the royal manor of Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, for life in December 1443 may have signalled Henry VI's affection for one of his closest male relatives and reliable commanders; it certainly brought him closer to the court, and on 6 January 1444 John Holland was created duke of Exeter, with precedence next to the duke of York. In 1445 he arranged that his son Henry should marry York's daughter, Anne, and York was prepared to offer a large dowry. The new duke's health may have been failing by 1446, for in February he associated his son with him as admiral, and then, a year later, as constable of the Tower. Exeter died on 5 August 1447 and was buried at St Katharine by the Tower, alongside his first wife and his sister Constance (died 1437), the countess marshal. 
John Holland's finances were precarious: his taxable income in 1436 was almost the lowest among the earls (a little over $1000 per annum). Three widows' dower estates were welcome, but they were hardly the basis for a sustained landed interest, and he never identified closely with the west country. His military reputation was high, despite his capture, and his royal blood was increasingly valued by Henry VI; but his political influence at court seems to have been modest. 


@@@@@


doc= 13531


Holland, John (1658-1721), merchant and banker, was born in the Bridewell precinct of the City of London, the elder son of Captain Philip Holland, a professional sailor whose family originated from Colchester, Essex, and who was captain, in the Cromwellian navy, of the 'Assurance', flagship of the earl of Sandwich's Baltic fleet in 1659. Philip Holland obtained a pardon under the terms of the declaration of Breda and initially retained his command. He remained a nonconformist and although appointed to the fireship 'Loyal Merchant' in 1665, he deserted and joined the Dutch during the Medway raid in 1667. The family remained in England, and Philip Holland was arrested but pardoned in 1672 in return for information about Dutch intentions during the Third Anglo-Dutch War. 
John Holland was apprenticed to a London mercer in 1673, and there is evidence that in the mid-1670s he spent time in the Netherlands learning Dutch bookkeeping and accounting methods. In 1676 he was appointed clerk assistant to Francis Beyer, appointed auditor-general of the East India Company in 1675. The next twelve years were spent as a successful merchant, which cannot be explained by his salary of $40 a year as accountant for cotton imports in the company. A best guess is that he took shares in major voyages. In 1687 he married Jane Fowke ('c'.1669-1740), the only daughter of the second marriage of Walter Fowke MD, of Brewood Hall and Little Wyrley, Staffordshire. Brewood Hall became their principal home, and this was where their three surviving children, Richard Holland ['see below'], Jane ('b'. 1690), and Fowke ('b'. 1700), were brought up. After 1688 he became the friend and associate of a group of London-based Scottish merchants led by David Nairn, James Campbell, and Thomas Coutts, whose prime business was the supply of clothing and victuals for the newly raised Scottish regiments. After Francis Beyer's dismissal from the East India Company in 1692, he seems to have gone into semi-retirement, but in 1693 he was involved in a venture with the same group of Scots to introduce baize cloth into Scotland, a joint-stock project approved by the Scottish parliament. 
Together with other London Scots John Holland secured the necessary political backing in Scotland in 1695 to obtain an act of parliament setting up a bank in Scotland under the name of the Governor and Company of the Bank of Scotland. It was founded on joint-stock principles, with limited liability for shareholders and a nominal capital of $100,000 sterling of which the initial trading capital was $10,000. It was also given a monopoly over banking in Scotland for a period of twenty-one years. Holland was appointed first governor, and it opened for business in February 1696. From the beginning there were problems. A few months earlier the Scottish Company had been set up in direct opposition to the East India Company as a general trading and banking company with a paid-up capital of $400,000 sterling. It moved into banking operations in Edinburgh and during the summer of 1696 nearly caused the collapse of the fledgeling bank. Holland's guidance, sagacity, and experience were vital ingredients in survival. It was in this context that he wrote and published the pamphlet 'A short discourse on the present temper of the nation with respect to the India and Africa Company, and of the Bank of Scotland; also of Mr. Patterson's pretented fund of credit' (1696). At the general meeting in 1697 he stood down for two reasons: first, he was too closely associated with the East India Company; and second, the bank needed overt political protection in Scotland. This it found in the third earl of Leven, a professional soldier and governor of Edinburgh Castle. Thereafter Holland retired to Staffordshire, but in his writings and background advice helped to steer the bank through the difficulties of the next twenty years. In recognition of his many services the bank directors presented him with a silver cistern, which is mentioned in his will as a family heirloom ('will', TNA: PRO, PROB 11/585/96). 
Holland died at Brewood Hall, Brewood, Staffordshire, on 30 November 1721 and was interred in the Fowke family vault in the parish church at Brewood. His will was proved on 4 May 1722. Jane, his wife, died on 24 December 1740, having been predeceased by all her children. 
His son 


@@@@@


doc= 13532


Holland, John (1766-1826), Unitarian minister, was born in Manchester, the second son (and second child of four) of Thomas Holland and his wife and cousin, Anne Holland; the parents ran a boarding- and day school for girls. He entered Daventry Academy in 1783, and succeeded his uncle Philip Holland as minister at Bank Street Chapel, Bolton, in 1789, though some in the congregation would have preferred a less outspoken Unitarian. Holland threw himself energetically into congregational affairs. He recommended the formation of a Sunday school on the plan of Robert Raikes, successfully repeating the first such effort in Bolton by the Methodists, and established a vestry library, prefixing 'Directions for a course of reading' to the printed catalogue. He also founded a short-lived periodical, the 'Christian Miscellany' (1792). 
Like many of his contemporaries he was a follower of Joseph Priestley. In 'An Address to the Members of the Establishment in the Town and Neighbourhood of Bolton', printed anonymously in 1790, he used Priestley's arguments to plead for repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts', an initiative then before parliament but with little hope of success. In 1791 he and several fellow ministers published 'Letters to the Inhabitants of Wigan', one of the earliest concerted defences of Unitarianism. Surviving doctrinal sermons hew to the Priestleyan line, emphasizing the humanity of Christ, the rejection of propitiatory atonement, the progress of humankind under a beneficent God, and the importance of avowing truth, but without distinction of either mind or rhetoric. Despite his evident seriousness and piety some in the congregation later criticized his preaching as 'abstruse and uninteresting', with insufficient attention to practical morality. 
Philip Holland had run a well-known boarding-school; John Holland ran a co-educational day school, and published many teaching aids -- on the 'Bible', geography, and history, among other subjects. The format was set in 'Exercises for the Memory and Understanding' (1798), published jointly with his elder brother, Thomas, who had become a schoolmaster after blindness cut short a promising mercantile career. If the strategy of these publications brings to mind the insufferable Bitzer in M'Choakumchild's schoolroom, it is worth noting that the 'interrogative method' which they employ -- William Turner 'secundus', a brother-in-law, credited it to Thomas -- was accounted a novelty, and that Holland's books depart from strict catechetical form in omitting answers or printing them separately from questions, to encourage individual responses. A small surviving correspondence concerning two pupils, Robert and Hannah Heywood, shows him to have been a sensitive and caring teacher. 
Holland was married to Esther Pilkington; there were no children. A growing temperamental irritability deepened into depression and reclusiveness, leading to his resignation in a sad letter of 20 August 1820. He took occasional services thereafter, but his decline into mental illness ended only with his death, in Bolton, on 25 June 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 13533


Holland, John (1794-1872), poet and writer, was born in Sheffield Park, Sheffield, on 14 March 1794, the son of John Holland, optical instrument maker, of Richmond Hill, in the parish of Handsworth, Yorkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Samuel Cox of Staveley, Derbyshire. He was brought up in his father's trade but soon abandoned it for literary pursuits, and was encouraged by James Montgomery, Sheffield's leading writer and evangelist, who became a close friend. As a prominent member of the Wesleyan Chapel in Carver Street, about 1818 he was appointed one of the secretaries of the Sheffield Sunday School Union. 
As a young man he produced several volumes of poetry with a religious or moral purpose. Some, such as 'Sheffield Park' (1820) and 'The Village of Eyam' (1821), had a local setting. His evangelical writings found a wide audience but are no longer read. 
From 1825 to 1832 Holland was, in succession to Montgomery, editor of the radical newspaper the 'Sheffield Iris'. In 1832 he became editor of the 'Newcastle Courant', but he returned to Sheffield in 1833 and acted as co-editor of the 'Sheffield Mercury' from 1835 until the journal ceased publication in 1848. A lifelong interest in botany and geology led him to the publication of diverse works on local flowers, the cultivation of gooseberries, a historical survey of fossil fuels and the coal trade of Great Britain (1835), and the impressive 'A Treatise on the Progressive Improvement and Present State of the Manufactures in Metals' (1831-49). He is chiefly remembered today for his historical and topographical writings, especially the 'History, Antiquities and Description of the Town and Parish of Worksop' (1826) and the 'Tour of the Don' (1837), and for various memoirs of the lives of poets, clergymen, and other notables, including 'Memorials of Sir Francis Chantrey... in Hallamshire and Elsewhere' (1851) and 'Memoirs of the Life and Writings of James Montgomery' (7 vols., 1854-6). He also wrote numerous sermons, hymns, and articles for 'Notes and Queries' and 'The Reliquary', and for magazines and newspapers. 
In acknowledgement of Holland's journalistic services an annuity of $100 was subscribed for by ten gentlemen of Sheffield and presented to him in 1870. He died, unmarried, at his residence at The Mount, Sheffield, on 28 December 1872 and was buried in the churchyard of the neighbouring parish of Handsworth. 


@@@@@


doc= 13534


Dance, Nathaniel (1735-1811), painter and politician, was born on 18 May 1735 in Chiswell Street, London, the third son of George Dance the elder (c.1694-1768) and his wife, Elizabeth Gould (died 1762). His father was clerk of works for the City of London, and his brother George Dance the younger (1741-1825) was also an architect; James Dance (1721-1774), the eldest son, was an actor and writer, and another brother, William Dance ('fl'. 1780), was a miniature painter. Nathaniel Dance was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London (his father was a freeman of that company), from 1743 until 1748. From about 1752 he trained as an artist for approximately two years under the painter Francis Hayman, whom he evidently admired; it was during this period that he came to know the young Thomas Gainsborough. He was in Rome from May 1754, but his activities there remain obscure until summer 1758; however, it is possible that he undertook some further training during this time. In winter 1758-9 he visited Leghorn and Florence, where he met his brother George: the two probably shared an apartment in strada Felice, Rome. 
Dance devoted much of his time in Italy to developing his powers of invention, drawing, and colouring: he made copies after old masters, remarked on the development of his use of colour, and sought criticism of his work from the most esteemed painters then in Rome, including Gavin Hamilton. However, this careful approach often delayed the completion of his most important works. Two commissioned works begun in 1760, 'Nisus and Euryalus' and 'Meeting of Aeneas and Achates with Venus' (exh. Society of Artists, 1766) made slow progress in his studio; the former was not completed by the time Dance left Rome, while the latter was nearing completion only in 1764, the year of his election to the Accademia di San Luca. It was as a history painter that Dance sought to develop: his first recorded such work, 'Death of Virginia', its composition based upon that of Raphael's 'Sacrifice of Lystra', was intended for the Society of Arts exhibition of 1760, and Dance was confident that it would win the $100 premium. However, as it was painted abroad it was excluded, and was exhibited the following year at the Society of Artists. 
Dance was also a successful and well-connected portrait painter. He was engaged in some form of partnership with one of the most fashionable portraitists of British visitors to Rome, Pompeo Batoni; a travel card of 1762 introduced 'Rome, Sigr. Pompeo Batoni & Mr Dance, for Portrait and History Painting' (Ingamells, 275). His portraits in Italy included 'Charles, Lord Hope, James, Later Third Earl of Hopetoun, and their Tutor William Rouet', a conversation piece of 1763 (priv. coll.) and 'Lord and Lady Spencer' (1764), but his reputation as a portrait painter was already established by 1760, when he was commissioned to paint four versions of a conversation piece, one for each of the group of gentlemen depicted in front of the Colosseum: James Grant, John Mytton, Thomas Robinson, and Thomas Wynn (Yale U. CBA). His most prestigious commission came from the royal librarian and keeper of pictures, Richard Dalton, on behalf of George III, to paint a full-length portrait of Edward, duke of York (1764; Royal Collection). However, a painting of more personal significance was the portrait of the artist Angelica Kauffman (priv. coll), whom he 'courted at Rome' (Farington, 'Diary', 8 Dec 1797). 
By June 1766, Dance had returned to London, where he established himself as a fashionable portrait painter at 13 Tavistock Row, Covent Garden. Kauffman arrived in Britain at this date, but their relationship changed and she married the so-called count Frederick de Horn in 1767. Both Dance and Kauffman were foundation members of the Royal Academy ['see 'Founders of the Royal Academy of Arts]. To its inaugural exhibition of 1769 he sent full-length portraits of George III and Queen Charlotte (Uppark, Sussex), as well as likenesses of a bishop and two gentlemen, and his exhibited work until 1772 was dominated by portraiture. In 1773 both he and Gainsborough refused to exhibit at the Royal Academy after a disagreement with the president, Sir Joshua Reynolds: Dance and Gainsborough are the only foundation members not represented in Johann Zoffany's 'The Academicians of the Royal Academy' (1771-2; Royal Collection). However, Dance returned to the academy exhibition in 1774, showing 'Orpheus Lamenting the Loss of Eurydice', and in 1776, showing 'The Death of Mark Anthony'. 
The rococo style of Dance's early works, apparent, for example, in the portrait of George Dance the younger and his sister Hester ('c'.1753; priv. coll.) and that of the composer and violinist Pietro Nardini and an unknown man (1759; priv. coll.), learned from Hayman, was modified in Italy through the influence of Batoni. Dance criticized his former master's 'colouring and correctness of drawing' (Allen, 59), and it was precisely those elements that apparently altered after his association with Batoni began. Dance worked in the high keys of grand-manner portraiture and the paint became more translucent in quality; however, it has been observed that his manner of painting was 'as dry and closely textured as before' (Goodreau, 'Nathaniel Dance, 1735-1811', introduction). 
The opportunities for history painting were very limited in eighteenth-century Britain, and although Dance's name was among those chosen for potentially the most important project of the time, the decoration of St Paul's Cathedral, the scheme never came to fruition. His name was also among those listed to decorate the Great Room of the Society of Arts, but this project was realized by James Barry alone. His most public history painting was ephemeral, a transparency depicting an allegory of architecture and displayed on the Royal Academy's building in Pall Mall in 1770 to mark the king's birthday. 
At some time in the 1770s Dance became financially independent. Although he stopped exhibiting professionally in 1776 and produced fewer paintings, he was still active professionally and contributed to running the Royal Academy. However, in 1782 he gave up his studio and moved to Cranbury Park, Hampshire -- the home of a widow, Mrs Harriet Dummer (died 1825), daughter of Sir Cecil Bishopp; she had an income of $18,000 per annum. They were married in London on 17 July 1783; there were no children. 
Dance resigned from the Royal Academy in 1790, the year of his election to parliament as member for East Grinstead, Sussex, but continued to exhibit there as an amateur in 1792, 1794, and 1800. On each occasion he showed a landscape, a more fitting subject for a gentleman than portraiture. However, the story circulated by the obituarist in the 'Monthly Magazine' (December 1811) that he bought back and then destroyed his work in order to consolidate his position as a gentleman is unfounded, although he did destroy a number of works that remained in his studio with which he was dissatisfied. From about the time of Dance's retirement from professional life he produced a number of political caricatures. 'War' and 'Neither War nor Peace' were etched by James Gillray and published in March 1783, and four volumes of unsigned caricatures and other comic drawings by Nathaniel and his brother George were sold at auction in 1912. The works were dispersed, but many of these pen-and-ink drawings are in the Tate collection. 
On 4 July 1800 Dance took, by royal licence, the name Holland, after his wife's cousin Charlotte. He was created a baronet in November in that same year. He served East Grinstead until 1802 and from 1807 until his death; he was MP for Great Bedwyn in Wiltshire from 1802 to 1806. Both seats were gained through family connections and acts of financial generosity. He was generally a supporter of Pitt, but was not an active member of the house; he served on the select committee on the British Museum appointed in June 1805. 
Dance was 'considered a singular man in His manner... on the whole very well liked by the neighbouring aristocracy' (Farington, 'Diary', 2 Nov 1807). According to Farington, he 'always objected to wine... but in company passes the bottle so as to keep up an appearance of drinking some wine' (ibid., 6 June 1807). He was wealthy: by 1794, in addition to savings of $50,000, he had an estate near Dorchester, Oxfordshire, and another in Wiltshire, for which he paid $30,000 and $12,000 respectively. In 1807 he built a house in Piccadilly, London, for his wife. He died, suddenly, at a house where he was a guest, in Kingsgate Street, Winchester, on 15 October 1811, while humorously describing to a party of ladies the 'absurdity' of some monuments recently placed in Winchester Cathedral (ibid., 26 Nov 1811). He was buried in the cathedral. The National Portrait Gallery, London, and Tate collection have a number of his portraits. He is also represented at the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. 


@@@@@


doc= 13535


Holland, Philemon (1552-1637), translator, was born in 1552, probably on 6 November, in Chelmsford, Essex, the son of John Holland (died 1578), clergyman. He was a member of the same Norfolk family as Sir John Holland, first baronet (1603-1701); this family claimed to be related to the rather grander Hollands of Up Holland, Lancashire, from whom the nineteenth- and twentieth-century viscounts Knutsford were descended, but the connection is questionable. 
When Philemon Holland was very young his father left England as a protestant exile, returning to be ordained by Edmund Grindal in 1559; he became rector of Dunmow Magna (Great Dunmow), Essex. Philemon attended the nearby Chelmsford grammar school and from about 1568 became a scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge, where he received the BA in 1571, and was elected to a minor fellowship in 1573 and to a major fellowship in 1574. On 10 February 1579 he married Anne (1555-1627), daughter of William Bott, alias Peyton, of Perry Hall, Handsworth, Staffordshire. His fellowship terminated on his marriage, and he moved to Coventry, about 25 miles from Perry Hall. There he became the usher, or junior of the two full-time masters, at the free school (now King Henry VIII School, Coventry, a position which brought him a salary of $10 a year and a house. He and his wife were famous for their hospitality, and brought up a family of ten children, among whom were the poet Abraham Holland, the publisher and miscellaneous writer Henry Holland, and the print publisher Compton Holland. In 1585 he was incorporated MA at Oxford. In 1597 he received the degree of MD from Cambridge and began to practise medicine. Like other schoolmaster-physicians of the early modern period, such as Richard Argentine of Ipswich, he was able to combine his double profession with learned work. At some time before 1600 he began translating Livy's history of Rome. 
Holland's first book, the first complete rendering of Livy into English, was published in 1600 when he was nearly fifty. It was a work of great importance, presented in a grand folio volume of 1458 pages, and dedicated to the queen. The translation set out to be lucid and unpretentious, and achieved its aim with marked success. It is accurate, and often lively, and although it does not attempt to imitate the terseness of Latin, it avoids prolixity. As part of his book Holland translated two other substantial works -- an ancient epitome of Roman history which provides an outline of the lost books of Livy, and Bartolomeo Marliani's guide to the topography of Rome -- as well as some smaller texts. These were taken from the edition of Livy published in Paris in 1573; by translating them, Holland was making available in English a great learned compendium of historical knowledge, not simply a single ancient author. The Livy was followed in the next year by an equally huge translation, of the elder Pliny: 'The Historie of the World, Commonly called, the Naturall Historie'. This encyclopaedia of ancient knowledge about the natural world had already had a great indirect influence in England, as elsewhere in Europe, but had not been translated into English before, and would not be again for 250 years. Indeed, after four centuries, Holland is still the only translator of this work to attempt to evoke its literary richness and beauty. Two years later Holland turned from Latin to Greek, publishing the first English translation of Plutarch's 'Moralia', a very large collection of miscellaneous essays and lectures which was widely read in the early modern period. This, together with Plutarch's 'Lives', had been translated into French by Jacques Amyot in the sixteenth century; whereas Sir Thomas North's English rendering of the 'Lives' is directly from the French, Holland at least compared Amyot's translation, and a Latin translation, with the original. In all, over the four years 1600-1603, Holland published 4332 folio pages of translations of the very highest quality. 
Holland's next translation, undertaken when an outbreak of plague in 1605 confined him to his house and published in the following year, was of a somewhat briefer work, 'Historie of Twelve Caesars', from the Latin of Suetonius, whose wealth of minute biographical detail lent itself very well to Holland's talent for conversational liveliness. Like his previous translations it was scholarly as well as vivid, with annotations drawn partly from Isaac Casaubon's edition of 1595. He dedicated it to Anne, Lady Harington, and his epistle to her suggests that he was on visiting terms at her house at Combe, a couple of miles from Coventry, where a former master of the free school, John Tovey, was chaplain and tutor; his son Henry travelled to the Palatinate in Lord Harington's retinue in 1613. In 1609 Holland published his translation of another Roman history, the extant books of Ammianus Marcellinus's history of the empire in the later fourth century, together with a chronology which had appeared in an edition of Ammianus printed in Paris in 1591, dedicating the translation to the corporation of Coventry. In 1610 he completed a translation of William Camden's 'Britannia', in the course of which he had corresponded with Camden and had also added some material from his own knowledge. This material was reprinted among the footnotes of the 1697 reworking of 'Britannia'. 
In 1612 at the age of sixty, Holland was admitted to the freedom of the city of Coventry. Despite his local celebrity he was by no means rich enough to rest on his laurels, and over the next twenty years he kept working, though at a less astonishing rate than he had in his fifties. In 1615 he published a supplement to Thomas Thomas's Latin dictionary of about 6000 previously unrecorded words and meanings, of which many are from Pliny and Ammianus but others show a wide reading in ancient authors such as Apuleius, Prudentius, and Varro, and moderns such as Pomponio Leto and Joseph Scaliger. This was followed the next year by a translation into Latin of John Speed's 'The Theatre of the Empire of Great Britaine', published in London and Amsterdam as 'Theatrum imperii Magnae Britanniae'. In 1617 Holland translated the medieval medical verse text 'Regimen sanitatis Salerni', to be published with a new edition of Thomas Paynell's ninety-year-old translation of the commentary thereon by Arnaldus of Villanova, for a popular market, and when James I visited Coventry in that year Holland made a speech in his honour, which was subsequently printed. A second edition of the 'Britannia' was entered in the Stationers' register in 1625, but was only published twelve years later. This was not the only piece of work which languished on Holland's desk in these years; he began work on Xenophon's 'Cyropaedia' during the lifetime of Henry, prince of Wales, but completed the first draft only in 1621, and then continued reworking it for more than a decade. 
In or before 1626 Holland fell dangerously ill, and his son Abraham addressed a poem to him in 1626 regretting that his merits have been unrewarded, and particularly that Coventry has been to him a '
lucklesse Cage 

Wherein you have bin cooped all your age 

And spent your golden yeares, 

' befriended only by those who wished to exploit him (Holland, sig. H2'v'). The following year, his wife, Anne, died. In 1628 he was appointed to the mastership of the school where he had taught for forty years, but he was too old to cope with the job and resigned it within a year; if the story that he taught Richard Allestree, who was born in 1619, is true, he may have returned to the position of usher. He became too infirm to practise as a physician. In 1632 his translation of Xenophon's 'Cyropaedia' was published at last, together with a reprint of his son Abraham's poem on the battle of Lepanto, in a volume edited by Henry Holland. A treatise on the gout by another son, William (1592-1632), which was published in the following year as 'perused by P. H.' ('Gutta podagrica', title-page) may also have been sent to the press by Henry, who also helped correct the second edition of 'Britannia' for its eventual publication in 1637. In 1633 Philemon contributed a six-line epigram, in Greek, to a Cambridge collection celebrating Ralph Winterton's edition of Hippocrates. 
From 1632 to 1636 Holland received an annual pension of $3 6's'. 8died from the city of Coventry. In 1635 he was authorized to receive charity from the members of his old university. He became bedridden in the following year and died, in Coventry, on 9 February 1637. He was buried in Holy Trinity Church, Coventry, under an epitaph which he composed in the last year of his life, in which he laments the deaths of six of his sons and describes himself as having entered a second childhood, nursed by his two unmarried daughters. Two years after his death his translation from French into Latin of Brice Bauderon's popular 'Pharmacopoea' was published by Henry Holland, so that it could be read, as a conservative alternative to the 'Pharmacopoea Londinensis' of 1618, by learned medical practitioners who did not know French. 
Holland's grandson remembered him as a hale old man -- 'his intellectuals and his senses remained perfect until the eighty fourth year of his age; and more especially his sight so good, that he never used spectacles in all his life' -- adding that he was a remarkably moderate drinker, that he was 'always of a peaceable and quiet spirit, and hated contention as a serpent', and that he was 'most indefatigable in his study, saying often, that there was no greater burden and enemy to him than idleness' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 234). 
Holland's translations were widely circulated and read into the eighteenth century. On their account Thomas Fuller included Holland in his 'Worthies of England', saying that he was 'the translator general in his age, so that those books alone of his turning into English will make a country gentleman a competent library for historians' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 287). Because he was a translator of large and learned works he became a byword for weighty erudition, perhaps especially among persons of limited education: the epigram: '
Phil: Holland with translations doth so fill us, 

He will not let Suetonius be Tranquillus 
(Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 466, fol. 66'v')' evidently made up by a person proud of knowing Suetonius's cognomen, can be found in printed and manuscript collections. Even Pope made Holland's books, together with those printed by Caxton and Wynkyn de Worde, raw material for the altar erected to dullness in the first book of the 'Dunciad'. 
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries Holland was remembered not only as a translator but as a penman. The story that he wrote out the whole of his Livy with a single quill pen, which was then preserved as a precious relic by Lady Harington, survives in several versions, and suggests that he wrote with a particularly light and fastidious touch. A manuscript in his hand of the musical treatise ascribed to Euclid called 'Harmonic' was said to have been one of the models shown to John Baskerville as he designed his Greek types for the University of Oxford. 
In the nineteenth century Holland was still a living author. So, for instance, the readers for what became the 'Oxford English Dictionary' were assiduous in gathering quotations from his works, of which 8095 were printed in the finished dictionary: only seven authors (Shakespeare, Scott, Milton, Wyclif, Chaucer, Caxton, and Dryden) are quoted there more often than Holland. Holland even became the object of sentimentality: 'Wherever the pestilence raged, or fever burned', wrote Charles Whibley in 1899, 'there went Holland, bringing with him the comfort of medicine and good counsel' (Whibley, viii); this overlooks the fact that when the pestilence raged Holland stayed at home and translated Suetonius. By the twentieth century his translations had (with a few minor exceptions such as that of Marliani's 'Topographia') been superseded for practical purposes, and very little has been written on him since 1900 except in general surveys. But he is doubly important. His classical translations made some of the major prose works to have survived from antiquity, together with some important recent European scholarly apparatus, available to the growing body of people who could read English fluently but Latin with difficulty if at all, and his translation of 'Britannia' helped to bring the learned study of the British Isles and their antiquities into the mainstream of English vernacular culture: 'In this, through thee,' wrote John Davies of Hereford, '
we see (as in a Glasse) 

The wrinckled face of grave ANTIQUITY. 
(Davies, 248)' 



@@@@@


doc= 13536


Holland, Philip (1721-1789), Presbyterian minister, eldest son of Thomas Holland ('bap'. 1690, died 1753), dissenting minister, and Mary Savage, granddaughter of Philip Henry, was born at Wem, Shropshire. His grandfather was John Holland (died 1713) of Dam Head House, Mobberly parish, Cheshire. The Hollands of Mobberly and Knutsford were local yeoman farmers and supporters of the protestant dissenting congregation that built the Brook Street Chapel at Knutsford. His father, a pupil of James Coningham, had been approved to preach by the Cheshire classis on 9 November 1711, and was ordained on 3 August 1714. About 1712, he succeeded Joseph Mottershead to the congregation at Kingsley, Cheshire, then moved to the congregation in Wem, Shropshire, around 1716-17. 
Philip Holland entered Philip Doddridge's academy in 1739. He was followed in 1744 by his brother John, who ministered to the protestant dissenting congregations at Wem, Shropshire, and Allostock, Cheshire, before conforming to the Church of England in 1763. Another brother, Henry, entered Doddridge's academy in 1751 and transferred to Daventry upon Doddridge's death. He was minister in Prescot and Ormskirk, Lancashire, where he died on 10 December 1781. Philip Holland first preached at Wolverhampton, Staffordshire and succeeded his father to the pastorate at Wem. In 1755 he became the minister of Bank Street Chapel, Bolton, Lancashire, in succession to Thomas Dixon (1721-1754). 
On 25 May 1758 Holland married his cousin, Catherine Holland ('b'. 1728) of Mobberley, the daughter of John Holland (1690-1770) of Dam Head House and Mary Colthurst; she was a great-aunt of Mrs Gaskell. They had a son, Philip Henry Holland MD (died 1788), and a daughter, Catherine, who married John Cole Rankin, merchant of Newcastle upon Tyne. The ministerial career of Philip's brother John Holland should not be confused with that of his wife Catherine's brother, John Holland (1720-1751), who ministered in Ormskirk and at the High Pavement Chapel, Nottingham. He was called to Chowbent, Lancashire, but died before commencing his work. 
Philip Holland's theology was that of the Arminian Presbyterian divines of his day. At Wolverhampton he is described as being more liberal than his former tutor and out of step with the majority of the congregation, 'who were inclined for the most part to the tenets of Calvin' (Matthews, 'Congregational Churches', 152). He was influenced by John Seddon of Warrington, who introduced him to the moral philosophy of Francis Hutcheson. He was probably an Arian by the time of his Lancashire pastorate. During the 1750s in Bolton, a number of the Bank Street congregation left because of the tenets preached by Dixon and Holland, and joined John Bennet's Methodist chapel at Duke's Alley, which became Independent in 1759. 
Holland's congregation none the less flourished, and the chapel was enlarged in 1760. Richard Arkwright, cotton-spinning entrepreneur and pioneer of the factory system, was a member of the Bank Street congregation between 1750 and 1767. Holland ran a boarding-school in Bolton, educating, among others, Josiah Wedgwood's son. He assisted Seddon in the foundation of the Warrington Academy in 1757 and contributed to the debate over the introduction of liturgical forms into dissenting worship, writing the third service in 'A form of prayer and a new collection of psalms, for the use of a congregation of protestant dissenters in Liverpool' (1763), generally known as the 'Liverpool liturgy'. He was active in the movement to repeal (1779) the doctrinal subscription required by the 'Toleration Act', and was an advocate of independence for the American colonies. In the last decade of his life his views became somewhat more heterodox, Job Orton complaining that Holland had sunk 'the inspiration of the apostles and their epistles lower than I think he can justify' (Nightingale, 3.13). He published several sermons, including 'The importance of learning' (1760), which was reprinted in the 'English Preacher', volume 9 (1773), and his 'Sermons on Practical Subjects' (2 vols., 1792) was printed posthumously, edited by John Holland and William Turner. Holland died at Bolton on 2 January 1789, aged sixty-seven. A mural monument was erected to his memory in Bank Street Chapel, where his nephew John Holland (1766-1826) succeeded him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13537


Holland, Richard (d. in or after 1483), ecclesiastic and poet, is best remembered as the author of the alliterative verse 'The Buke of the Howlat'. Of his background, education, and early career little is known. The records generally style him 'priest of Caithness' -- probably a reference to the diocese in which he was ordained -- and he may have been a native of Orkney, where he would later spend some ten years. It was his status as a priest which led to his being usually referred to as Sir Richard Holland. By 1444 he was in possession of the prebend of Kirkmichael in the diocese of Ross. He subsequently sought to exchange this for the archdeaconry of Caithness (1445), a move that led to an acrimonious three-year dispute with Alexander Sutherland, which he seems eventually to have lost. Holland was described as the rector of Halkirk, near Thurso, in 1450 and of Abriacher in the diocese of Moray in 1451. In 1452 he was provided to the canonry and prebend of Croy and a year later he was presented to the precentorship of Moray, another disputed benefice. His career was closely associated with the fortunes of the powerful Black Douglas family, in particular those of Archibald Douglas, earl of Moray, who in a charter of 1450 referred to Holland as his secretary. This charter was one of several witnessed and drawn up by Holland in his capacity as a notary public, which he had become no later than 1441. Although the exact circumstances surrounding the connection between Holland and his patron are unknown (it may have originated in the service of the earl's wife), he was clearly suited to this type of office. 
Indeed, Holland's skills went beyond the secretarial, and some time about the year 1448 he composed 'The Buke of the Howlat', written, according to the final stanza, at Darnaway Castle and dedicated to the countess of Moray, Elizabeth Dunbar. Recognized as the earliest major poem of the Scottish alliterative revival, its 1001 lines are arranged in 13-line alliterative stanzas with wheel, a form which was to remain in use in Scotland throughout the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Holland's work offers a novel and amusing twist on the bird-assembly poems popularized in the fourteenth century, most notably Chaucer's 'Parliament of Fowls'. The tale centres on a howlat (owl), who, lamenting his ugliness, is given a feather by each of his fellow birds. His overweening pride in his new appearance causes him to be stripped of his apparel, underlining the well-worn adage: '
That pryde never yit left 

His feir but a fall. 
(Amours, 80)' As well as acting as moral exemplum, the poem is distinguished by the richness of its description, particularly of the two bird courts (papal and imperial), and provides vivid glimpses of contemporary opinion of clerical standards and of the life of a fifteenth-century aristocratic household.The poem, its dating, and its possible allegorical significance have all been the subject of considerable debate. Internal evidence has led late twentieth-century critics to suggest dates of 1446, 1448, and 1450, while attempts to decode a hidden warning in the work have seen the unfortunate owl as James II, the powerful Livingston family, or the Douglases themselves. On balance, however, the poem seems less a warning to the Douglases than a passionate validation of the dynasty, celebrating its well-established tradition of loyal military service and glossing over the family rivalries of recent years. Certainly, if the poem was written in the summer of 1448, then it would have formed part of a programme of Douglas activity, of which the concluding event, a lavish tournament staged at Stirling Castle in 1449, also acted as a reminder of the family's carefully cultivated reputation as the 'wer wall', or rampart, of Scotland. 
It was a message little appreciated by James II. He launched an aggressive campaign to destroy Douglas power in Scotland that culminated in royal victory at the battle of Arkinholm on 1 May 1455, when Moray was killed and his brothers forced into exile. Immediately following this Holland was at Darnaway, named among the countess's men placed under the protection of the earl of Huntly. The changed political climate of the late 1450s clearly rendered him uneasy, and by 1457 he had retreated to Kirkwall to serve as vicar of Ronaldsay and canon of Kirkwall Cathedral. A deed of collation dated 3 June 1467 refers to his demission of this benefice and it was probably then that he left for England, where he was apparently active in the Douglas cause. In 1480 a Richard Holland, clerk, was sent to Scotland by Edward IV, and the continuing support he gave his erstwhile patrons presumably explains his exclusion from an act of parliament of 1482 offering remission to all those who forsook the traitor James Douglas. Holland seems to have spent the rest of his life in political exile in England and in 1483 was placed under official royal protection. Thereafter he disappears from the records, and it is not known when he died. His literary reputation, however, survived. Praised by William Dunbar in his 'Lament for the Makaris' (between 1505 and 1508) and David Lindsay in 'The Testament and Complaynt of our Souerane Lordis Papyngo' (1530), Holland's verse was preserved in the two great sixteenth-century manuscript collections Asloan (between 1513 and 1530) and Bannatyne (1565-8), and was also among the first works published by Scotland's nascent printing industry about 1508. 


@@@@@


doc= 13538


Holland, Richard (1596-1677), mathematician, was born at Lincoln. He was educated at Oxford, but appears not to have taken a degree. His life was mainly spent as a teacher of mathematics and geography at Hart Hall, Oxford, which included the instruction of his students in the use of globes and other mathematical instruments. 
Holland wrote three books for the use of his pupils. The first -- 'An Explanation of Mr Gunter's Quadrant... Enlarged' -- appeared in 1676. The second, entitled 'Globe Notes', was published posthumously, in 1678 and again in 1684. It contains many of the simple propositions in astronomy, with definitions of such terms as colure, solstice, and equinoxial, and is clearly intended to be used in conjunction with the instruments themselves. The other book is 'Notes how to Get the Angle of Parallax of a Comet or other Phenomenon at Two Observations' (1668). It contains diagrams, with practical directions implying some knowledge of trigonometry. 
According to Wood, Holland was in such high demand as a teacher that he became a rich man. He died in Oxford on 1 May 1677, and was buried in the parish church of St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford. He should not be confused with another Richard Holland, of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, who was incorporated MA at Oxford in 1679, became rector of Stanford, Lincolnshire, and published five sermons between 1698 and 1702. 


@@@@@


doc= 13539


Richard Holland (1688-1730), medical writer, was born in London and educated at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1709, MA in 1712, and MD in 1723. He and his father drew up a scheme for the establishment of a bank in Ireland similar to that in Scotland, but the scheme was not taken up. Holland inherited an estate in Ashdown Forest, Sussex. He was admitted as a candidate of the College of Physicians on 25 June 1724, a fellow on 25 June 1725, and was censor in 1728. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 30 November 1726. He wrote 'Observations on the Small Pox, or, An Essay to Discover a More Effectual Method of Cure' (1728), to which John Chandler wrote an anonymous reply in 1729. Holland died, unmarried, at Shrewsbury, Shropshire, on 29 October 1730. 


@@@@@


doc= 13540


Holland, Robert (1557-1622?), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was born at Conwy, Caernarvonshire, the third son of Hew Gwyn Holland (died 1584) and Jane, daughter of Hugh Conway of Bryneuryn. His father's family originated in Lancashire, but had been wealthy and influential in north Wales for centuries. Baptized at Conwy on 18 January 1557, Robert entered Clare College, Cambridge, at Easter 1577, graduated BA from Magdalene College in 1578, and proceeded MA from Jesus College in 1581. He was ordained deacon probably in early 1580 at Bangor and was ordained priest at Bangor on 15 January 1581, an application to be ordained at Ely the previous April having been rejected. In his paraphrase of the gospels he states that 'the race of his youth was unadvisedly run', but that after he had been 'four years or more tossed with sundry troubles', the hearts of his friends had been stirred up 'to favour his innocency, and to grant him breathing time after his travels' (Holland, 'Holie Historie', dedication). 
Holland served for a time as curate of Weston Colville, and in 1580 was a schoolmaster in Dullingham, both in Cambridgeshire. In 1591 he returned to Wales, settling in Pembrokeshire, where he was presented to the rectory of Prendergast, north of Haverfordwest, by Sir Christopher Hatton, lord chancellor. He founded a dynasty in the nearby parish of Walwyn's Castle: with his wife, Jane, daughter and heir of Robert Meylir of Haverfordwest, he had six sons, of whom Nicholas became rector of Marloes in Pembrokeshire. The senior branch of the family remained at Walwyn's Castle until almost the middle of the eighteenth century, when they settled in England. By 1600 he had also become rector of Llanddowror, Carmarthenshire. 
Holland's ministry had important consequences for the course of the later Reformation in Wales. He has been described as one of the most 'fluent and prolific' of early Welsh protestant writers and is known to have written six books (Williams, 392). He first went into print in English, publishing 'The holie historie of our lord and saviour Jesus Christ's nativitie, life, actes... gathered into English meter and published to withdraw vaine wits from all unsaverie and wicked rimes and fables, to some love and liking of spirituall songs and holy scriptures' in 1594. But thereafter he turned his attention to presenting the protestant message in the Welsh language. 'Dau Gymro yn taring yn bell o'u gwlad' (1600) is a notable discussion, in dialogue form, of the current state of popular religion in Wales particularly concerning witchcraft; it may have been modelled on the exercises in practical divinity, also in dialogue, recently published by English writers like George Gifford. Tudur is in no doubt that everyone still believes in magic and expatiates on the subject, while drawing a distinction between the white and black varieties. His opponent, Cronw, remains unmoved by his arguments, exhorting him to study the 'Bible' and to attend sermons. Impressed, Tudur is nevertheless forced to point out that he has never heard a sermon in his parish church, that the clergy are negligent in expounding biblical texts, and that most laymen are too poor to be able to buy a bible for study at home. Holland's brother Henry was also a leading writer against witchcraft; their mother Jane had been accused of witchcraft during the case of Gwen ferch Elis in 1594. 
About 1600 Holland published at Oxford 'Darmerth, neu, Arlwy i weddi', a preparation for prayer and guide to exaltation, designed to guide the unlearned towards the true service of God; this was followed shortly afterwards by 'Sail crefydd Gristionogol', a translation of William Perkins's influential English catechism. In 1603 Holland embarked on a Welsh translation, with the help of George Owen Harry, of James I's 'Basilikon doron'. The project was probably completed but both known surviving published copies are incomplete. Several other translations by Holland were probably lost because of the prevalence of plague in London that year. On 5 May 1607 Holland was presented to the rectory of Walwyn's Castle, and in 1612 to that of nearby Robeston West, both like Prendergast in the gift of the lord chancellor. Nothing is known of his later career, but he seems to have lived until 1622, when successors were appointed to his livings. Several of his writings survive only in late seventeenth-century reissues by Stephen Hughes. 


@@@@@


doc= 13541


Smith, Sydney (1771-1845), author and wit, was born on 3 June 1771 at Woodford, Essex, the second of the five children of Robert Smith (1739/40-1827), merchant, and his wife, Maria ('c'.1750-1801), the daughter of Isaac Olier, a Huguenot. He had three brothers and a sister; Smith's elder brother Robert Percy Smith, known as Bobus, was a major influence. 
Smith's early life was unhappy. His father was vain, petty, selfish, and tyrannical: after dinner every day he forced his children to sit, often for hours, in motionless silence. For Smith, an energetic boy, the experience was purgatorial. Worse still was watching his mother's attacks of epilepsy. A woman of artistic sensibility and ravishing beauty, Maria Olier was beloved by all her sons. As she grew older the frequency and intensity of her fits steadily increased, and her final hours were gruesome. 
Smith's lifelong desire for comfort and financial ease was, at least in part, a reaction against his father's rootlessness and financial imprudence. When Robert Smith was about twenty, he left the family business in Eastcheap in his brother's hands and went off to make his fortune in America. He married in 1768, returning to America shortly afterwards. During the War of Independence his American investments became virtually valueless, but failure did not blunt his entrepreneurial ardour. After his marriage he engaged in commercial ventures as far afield as Europe, India, and the West Indies. Most of his speculations met the same fate as his American investments. The attempts to salvage something from the wreckage necessitated frequent trips abroad, leaving his five children in the care of his dedicated (but increasingly helpless) wife. As though this were not enough, Robert Smith kept moving house. The number of his residences in Sydney's formative years is not known, but was probably more than five. 
Smith's early years at Winchester College, where he went as a scholar at the age of eleven, were also painful. The headmaster, Joseph Warton, was brilliant, but also, at sixty, ageing. Winchester, in consequence, was in a state of serious decline. Four years before Smith entered the school there had been 116 fee-paying pupils, but when he left, in 1788, there were only thirty-eight, a third as many. Discipline was poor and there was much bullying. Smith also had other complaints: the curriculum, with its virtually exclusive concentration upon the study of Latin and Greek, was tedious, the way of life monastic, and the food execrable. He nevertheless did well, carrying off a number of prizes and becoming, in his last year, senior boy, known at Winchester as prefect of hall. 
On 6 February 1789 Smith entered Winchester's sister foundation of New College, Oxford, as a probationary fellow, becoming a full fellow after he had fulfilled the residence qualification of two years. Life at New College was easy, but it was also dull. For the four-year period 1789-92 there are only fifteen names in the admissions book. Smith was still faced with the drudgery of writing vast amounts of Latin and Greek verse, and he was not encouraged to think. 'A genuine Oxford tutor', he later wrote, 'would shudder to hear his young men disputing upon moral and political truth, forming and pulling down theories, and indulging in all the boldness of youthful discussion. He would augur nothing from it, but impiety to God, and treason to kings' ('Works', 1.196). 
For a two-year period starting in the summer of 1794 Smith was curate at Netheravon on Salisbury Plain, an isolated hamlet of fewer than fifty families. He was appalled by the desperate poverty of the majority of his parishioners, but could do little to help them because he lacked the financial means. He did, however, start a Sunday school, then considered a bold step, and also set in motion a school of industry for twenty girls. The girls met in the forge of Bendall the blacksmith and were taught to darn, knit, and sew. 
Smith was priested soon after his return to New College in the summer of 1796. His whereabouts over the next two years are uncertain but he seems to have been mainly at Oxford, where he learnt thoroughly both French and German. Michael Hicks-Beach, the son of Smith's squire at Netheravon, was intending to set out on a continental tour before going to Oxford, and Smith was to accompany him as private tutor. The invasion of Switzerland by France in February 1798 forced a rethink: Weimar was discarded as a destination in favour of Edinburgh. 
Smith set off north with his pupil on 1 June 1798. He did not enjoy his tutorial duties -- Beach was a lazy young man of mediocre intellectual ability, whose main interest was socializing with his friends -- but he loved Edinburgh and quickly built up a friendship network. A major formative influence was Dugald Stewart, professor of moral philosophy. Stewart was not an original thinker, but he fired Smith's imagination with his eloquent exposition of the enjoyment to be gained from the study of literature and science, and also with his passionate defence of the immortality of the soul. Still more important was the companionship of three ardent young whigs: Henry Brougham, Francis Horner, and Francis Jeffrey. 
One evening shortly before the Christmas of 1801, Jeffrey asked Smith and Horner to tea at his house in Buccleuch Place. During the meal Smith suggested, half in jest, that they should start a literary review. The idea was taken up enthusiastically, gaining financial support from Archibald Constable, a leading Edinburgh bookseller. The first issue of the 'Edinburgh Review' came out on 10 October 1802. Editorial duties were initially shared among Jeffrey, Horner, and Smith; but after three issues Constable -- on Smith's advice -- appointed Jeffrey editor on a permanent, salaried basis. It was a wise choice: Jeffrey had persistence and an eye for detail, qualities which Smith lacked. 
Smith did much to establish the literary reputation of the 'Edinburgh Review'. Of the 101 articles in the first four issues, he was responsible for nineteen; only Brougham, credited with twenty-one, wrote a greater number. Smith ranged wide, writing on matters as diverse as philosophy, travel, drama, and theology. He was the best communicator among the reviewers, and also the one with the most scabrous wit. As he told Jeffrey: 'Too much would not do of my style, but the proportion in which it exists enlivens the 'Review'. I am a very ignorant, frivolous, half-inch person; but, such as I am, I am sure I have done [the] 'Review' good, and contributed to bring it into notice. (Virgin, 3)' By the time the 'Edinburgh Review' was floated, Sydney was married. Catharine Amelia Pybus (1768-1852) had long been a friend of Sydney's sister, Maria. Her father, John, had been a member of the council of Madras and was the first English ambassador to Ceylon, while her brother, Charles, MP for Dover, was a lord of the Treasury. The marriage, which took place on 2 July 1800, was a love match. Smith revelled in domestic life, and Catharine adored her husband, giving him strong emotional support during his occasional bouts of depression. 
There were five children from the marriage, three sons and two daughters, one of whom died in infancy. Sydney pinned high hopes upon his eldest son, Douglas, a diligent scholar but physically weak. Douglas's death in 1829 at the age of twenty-four was the most serious sorrow that Sydney ever had to face: 'I never suspected', he wrote, 'how children weave themselves about the heart' ('Letters', 2.496). Sydney's elder daughter, Saba [Saba Holland (1802-1866)], was born in February 1802, and became the second wife of Henry Holland (1788-1873), physician-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria, in 1834. Saba Holland's memoir of her father, who had superintended her education, was published in two volumes in 1855. It records many of Smith's best jokes; his daughter apparently 'possessed no slight share' of his humour ('GM', new ser., 2, 1866, 844), and also contains valuable reminiscences. Saba died at 25 Brook Street, London, on 2 November 1866, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Smith left Edinburgh for London on 8 August 1803, settling at 8 Doughty Street, not far from Gray's Inn Road. He lived in the metropolis for the next six years, the final three of them at 18 Orchard Street, just north of Oxford Street. 
During the 1790s Smith's elder brother, Bobus, had introduced him to Holland House, the citadel of whig power and influence ['see also 'Holland House set]; now that he was living in London, Smith, along with Samuel Rogers and Henry Luttrell, quickly became known as one of the resident Holland House wits. One of Smith's main specialities was aphoristic analogy. 'Correspondences are like small-clothes before the invention of suspenders; it is impossible to keep them up' and 'Marriage resembles a pair of shears, so joined that they cannot be separated; often moving in opposite directions, but punishing anyone who comes between them' are memorable examples (Holland, 1, chap. 11). On a proposal to surround St Paul's with a wooden pavement, Smith remarked: 'Let the Dean and Canons lay their heads together and the thing will be done' (Pearson, chap. 10). 
Some of Smith's 'mots' occur in his published books and articles (few other writers have succeeded in making ecclesiastical disputes amusing to a readership almost 200 years later), but many were delivered verbally and recorded by his daughter in her 'Memoir'. Several of these 'mots' have entered the common currency of British humour, for example, 'I never read a book before reviewing it; it prejudices a man so' (Pearson, chap. 3) and 'I am just going to pray for you at St Paul's, but with no very lively hope of success' (ibid., chap. 13). His humour was reinforced by his incongruous appearance -- dark, piercing eyes, a high forehead, and a Roman nose, commanding features that were offset by untidy hair brushed upwards after the contemporary French fashion, a small mouth once unkindly compared to an oyster, careless dress, and clumsy movements. 
At Holland House, Smith met royalty, writers, and politicians of all persuasions. He also soon became a close friend of his host, Henry, third Baron Holland, and his formidable wife, Elizabeth. Lord and Lady Holland were, from now on, Sydney's chief patrons. In October 1806 they persuaded Thomas Erskine, lord chancellor in the 'ministry of all the talents', to make Smith rector of the rich living of Foston-le-Clay, 12 miles north-east of York. 
During these London years Smith also became a popular preacher. He had the use of three pulpits: Berkeley Chapel in John Street, Mayfair, the Fitzroy Chapel a little further north in the parish of St Pancras, and the Foundling Hospital. Smith's doctrinal views were conventional -- he was an uncritical follower of the theology of William Paley -- and his sermons were firmly moral in their tone. What made him famous was his fiery delivery. Smith's 'Sermons', in two volumes, were published in 1809. 
Starting on 10 November 1804 Smith gave two sets of lectures at the Royal Institution in Albemarle Street. An eyewitness gives a graphic account of the press of people. 'All Albemarle Street and a part of Grafton Street were rendered impassable by the concourse of carriages... Many persons, to obtain seats, came an hour before time' (Holland, 128, n.). Smith's subject was moral philosophy, which he defined in typically cavalier fashion as the study of 'everything which belongs to the human mind'. This allowed him to speak on such favourite topics as the nature of wit and the influence of the passions. He used the lectures to popularize Scottish psychology, putting his case with eloquence, humour, and common sense. A third series of lectures, given in the early months of 1806, attracted significantly smaller audiences. His 'Elementary Sketches of Moral Philosophy' was published posthumously in 1850. 
Following the fall of the 'talents' in March 1807, Smith defended the late ministry in ten short, and brilliantly funny, pamphlets, published as 'Peter Plymley's Letters'. Although anonymous, authorship was an open secret. The 'talents' had fallen because it had proposed that Irish Catholics should be allowed to serve as officers in both the English army and the English navy. Smith's defence of this ill-fated policy was deft. He appealed to protestant prejudice by ridiculing Catholic ritual: 'How would my admirable brother, the Rev. Abraham Plymley, like to be marched to a Catholic chapel, to be sprinkled with the sanctified contents of a pump, to hear a number of false quantities in the Latin tongue, and to see a number of persons occupied in making right angles upon the breast and forehead?' while, at the same time, he also advanced the thoroughly modern, as well as secular, notion that the state should be indifferent towards the religious affiliation of its citizens. In 1808 'Peter Plymley's Letters' were printed in a collection which quickly ran through sixteen editions. 
William Markham, archbishop of York, aged and complaisant, allowed Smith to use his preachership at the Foundling Hospital as an excuse for non-residence in his Yorkshire living of Foston. Markham, however, died in November 1807 at the age of eighty-nine, and was succeeded in the new year by Edward Vernon-Harcourt, who was much more zealous. After a protracted correspondence, Smith set out for Foston in June 1809. For the first five years he hired a house at Heslington, 12 miles from Foston, riding over to his parish on Sundays to take services. But from March 1814 he lived at Foston, in a new parsonage which he had designed himself and upon which he spent about $4000 from his own resources. 
Smith was an innovative and unconventional rector, putting into practice what would later be called the social gospel. He planted a number of small gardens with fruit trees, allowing the villagers to gather the produce, and also set aside part of his glebe as allotments at nominal rents. He excelled as a makeshift doctor, keeping copious notes on all his patients and ordering drugs for them from London. In January 1814 he was made a magistrate, subsequently dispensing his own brand of humane justice in preference to the rigours of statute law. He was especially lenient towards poachers. 
Influential articles by Smith on social issues appeared in the 'Edinburgh Review'. 'Mad Quakers', in April 1814, was a defence of the therapeutic practice of The Retreat, an asylum for mentally ill Quakers near York: management did away with chains, using instead the earliest form of occupational therapy. Smith's article was partly responsible for the formation of a House of Commons select committee on madhouses in May 1815. The committee came down heavily in support of the regime at The Retreat, and its findings led to revolutionary changes in the treatment of mental illness. 
This was the only issue on which Smith managed to play a part in initiating immediate change, yet his ideas on other topics can nevertheless be commended for anticipating the future direction of official thinking. He turned the fire of his righteous anger on the practice of sending young boys up chimneys in order to sweep them, ridiculed the game laws, and advocated important changes in legal procedure, including payment of defendants' costs out of the public purse. He was also an important early feminist. In an article in the 'Edinburgh Review' in 1810 he argued that women should participate fully in the economy -- 'Half the talent in the universe runs to waste, and is totally unprofitable' ('Works', 1.203); he challenged the assumption of male intellectual superiority and advocated a radical extension of female educational provision. 'A century ago', he concluded mischievously, 'who would have believed that country gentlemen could be brought to read and spell with the ease and accuracy which we now so frequently remark?' (ibid., 1.216). Although he was perceptive and forward-thinking, Smith's social ideas nevertheless lack coherence. He was a pioneer of humane treatment of the mentally ill, but advocated inhumane treatment of those who were in prison: 'We would banish all the looms of Preston jail, and substitute nothing but the tread-wheel, or the capstan, or some species of labour where the labourer could not see the results of his toil' (ibid., 1.440). 
During these Foston years Smith's aristocratic connections continued to grow. He paid annual visits to Earl Grey's home at Howick in Northumberland, where he was accepted as part of the family, thus adding a new string to his patronage bow. His relations with Frederick Howard, fifth earl of Carlisle -- the master of Castle Howard, 5 miles to the north of Foston -- were more ambiguous and also more fraught. In 1823 Carlisle used his influence to persuade the duke of Devonshire to present Sydney to the living of Londesborough, worth the large sum of $800 a year. Before entering the benefice Smith signed a resignation bond, under which he agreed to vacate nine years later in favour of the duke's nephew, W. G. Howard, who would then be of canonical age. This was a thoroughly dubious transaction; in 1828 resignation bonds were made illegal except in cases where both the presentee and the future incumbent were related to the patron of the living either by blood or by marriage. A year after he gained Londesborough there was a rupture with Carlisle, who was incensed by the astringency of Smith's social articles in the 'Edinburgh Review'. Smith, much chastened, promised the earl that he would, in future, 'attack less frequently, & joke less severely'. 
Early in 1828 Smith, through the patronage of Lord Lyndhurst and John Ward, first earl of Dudley, was made a prebendary of Bristol Cathedral. Desiring further promotion, Smith immediately gave up writing for the 'Edinburgh Review'. The next three years were a period of turbulence. In March 1829 Smith exchanged Foston for Combe Florey, 7 miles from Taunton, and the next month he gave up Londesborough. After Grey succeeded Wellington as prime minister in November 1830, Smith entered the political fray, delivering three speeches in favour of the 'Reform Bill', most famously at a meeting at Taunton on 11 October 1831, where he compared anti-reformers with Dame Partington, an old woman who, some years previously, had tried to hold back a storm at Sidmouth in Devon with a mop and bucket. 
Smith hoped for a bishopric, but it never came. Grey, instead, translated him from his prebend at Bristol to a canonry at St Paul's, a move that took place in September 1831. Smith's pride was hurt, but he did have ample financial compensation. His income, in 1832, was almost $2900. Only twenty-five beneficed clergy of a total of 7500 were paid more. 
After Grey's resignation in July 1834, the continuing failure of the whigs to offer him a bishopric made Smith exceedingly angry. There was a fierce row with Lord Holland in November 1834: the third baron, with aristocratic nonchalance, let slip that he would have preferred Samuel Butler, the famous reforming headmaster of Shrewsbury, as the new bishop of Bristol to the successful candidate, Joseph Allen. Desertion by Lord Holland was a bitter pill to swallow. More bitter still was Melbourne's support for the ecclesiastical commission, set up by Peel during his brief administration that lasted from November 1834 until April 1835. Smith was enraged by the commission's plans to trim the patronage of cathedral dignitaries, interpreting the move as a personal attack. In three letters to Archdeacon Singleton, published in January 1837, the spring of 1838, and February 1839, Smith put himself forward as the leading opponent of church reform. He made his position clear in the first letter: any measures for change must not exceed 'one thing more than was absolutely necessary'. 
The letters won warm approval from the influential section of the whig party, which was strongly opposed to the centralizing tendency of Melbourne's administration, but Smith's defence of ecclesiastical privilege is a shabby episode. A letter to him from Blomfield, bishop of London, written on 24 January 1837 -- a week after publication of the first letter -- shows that Smith had made informal contact with the ecclesiastical commission, and had given an assurance that he would cease his attacks provided his own rights of patronage, as a canon of St Paul's, were not interfered with. 
Smith, although still claiming to be a whig, became more politically conservative in the 1830s. His pamphlet 'Ballot', published in 1839, was a witty defence of open voting. His arguments were eloquent and original. A man, he contended, should be prepared to stand up for his beliefs; it was wrong to 'seek for liberty by clothing ourselves in the mask of falsehood, and trampling on the cross of truth'. 'Ballot' was well received. 'Since the days of Pascal', said Smith's brother Bobus 'no such piece of Irony, involving so much wisdom, had ever been penned' (Virgin, 269). 
After his appointment as canon of St Paul's, Smith spent Christmas and part of the summer at Combe Florey, but was otherwise in London. He initially rented houses, but in the autumn of 1835 purchased a fourteen-year lease on 33 Charles Street, just south of Berkeley Square, moving in the next February. In 1839 he was again on the move: his new house was 56 Green Street, near Park Lane. Smith's life in London was very sociable. In the early 1840s, when he was approaching seventy, he was dining out eight or nine times a week. He was elected to The Club, the highly prestigious literary club founded in the previous century by Samuel Johnson and David Garrick, and also met most of the leading literary figures, including Charles Dickens. It is from this period that most of Smith's conversational 'bons mots' have come down to posterity. He found fame irksome. The poet Tom Moore was amused by Smith's response to the new fashion of lionizing famous authors. 'Here', said Smith, 'is a new man of genius arrived; put on the stew pan; fry away; we'll soon get it all out of him' ('Memoirs, Journal, and Correspondence of Thomas Moore', ed. J. Russell, 8 vols., 1853-6, 7.52). 
From the autumn of 1840 Smith's letters are full of references to aches and pains, and the dreaded subject of his own death begins to come up for frequent discussion. The former fluency of his pen slows to a trickle, and he shows his old controversial flair only in two minor disputes, both of them conducted in the columns of the 'Morning Chronicle'. Three letters, written in May and June 1842, persuaded the directors of the Great Western Railway that they had been wrong to try to protect the safety of passengers by insisting that the carriage doors on both sides of trains should be locked while they were in motion. Perhaps it was just as well that the directors gave in, because Smith was planning a fourth letter in which he intended to depict them looking with satisfaction at a trainload of incinerated passengers: 'a stewed Duke... two Bishops done in their own Gravy... two Scotchmen dead but raw, sulphuric acid perceptible' ('Miscellanies of the Philobiblon Society', 15, 1872-84, 7.17-18). Smith's two letters of November 1843 attacking the state of Pennsylvania for suspending interest payments on its public debt -- Smith had lost $400 on a purchase of Pennsylvanian bonds -- were less successful, serving merely to antagonize American opinion. 
Smith, always overweight, had a severe heart attack in October 1844 while at Combe Florey. His son-in-law, Sir Henry Holland, hurried down to see him and arranged for him to be moved to his London home at 56 Green Street, where he could be under Holland's constant care. Smith died at Green Street on 22 February 1845. He was buried next to his beloved elder son, Douglas, in Kensal Green cemetery. In one of his best-known 'mots', he had said: '[Lutterell's] idea of heaven is eating 'pate de foie' to the sound of trumpets' ('Sayings', 198-9). 
Like many famous wits, Smith had a depressive streak, of which he was fully aware and which he struggled against. The battle with himself helped to hone his humanity: he was kind, compassionate, full of goodwill, quick to anger, and quick to forgive. Known throughout society as 'Dear Sydney', he was one of the most approachable men of his generation, treating his servants in much the same way as he treated prime ministers. Outgoing and immensely charming, especially to women, Smith was very well liked, had few enemies, and possessed a great gift for friendship. He was at his best with children, speaking to them on their own level and being endlessly amusing. 
There were also some contrasts and paradoxes. Although proud, Smith was without the slightest trace of vanity. His language was coarse -- he said of a friend called Miss Alcock that 'her Latin name would be 'Domina omnis penis'' -- and yet he was also capable of revealing, on occasion, an underlying moral earnestness. A man of strong feeling, he was reticent about his deepest emotions. He had a high degree of self-knowledge but there were also some blindnesses -- he failed to acknowledge, for instance, that he was ravenously ambitious. It is also true that he failed to outgrow his 'nouveau riche' origins; always socially insecure, he was, when occasion offered, money-grubbing. His unique achievement nevertheless stands: an important contributor to the growth of libertarian thought in England, he was also, as G. K. Chesterton later pointed out, the inventor of nonsense, a very English style of humour. 


@@@@@


doc= 13542


Holland, Seth (d. 1561), dean of Worcester, is of unknown parentage. He was educated at All Souls College, Oxford (BA 19 December 1534, MA 31 March 1539), and held a fellowship there from 1535 to at least 1542. In 1540 he took subdeacon's and deacon's orders, on 21 February and 13 March respectively. Shortly thereafter he served as chaplain to Richard Pates on embassy to Charles V, and may have accompanied Pates when he 'went to Pole' in early 1541. He is supposed to have been in Rome during Edward VI's reign. Perhaps after meeting Cardinal Reginald Pole at the English Hospice in Rome, Holland entered his service and undertook several missions to England for him. On 6 November 1554 he brought back the news of Pole's recall. Holland was well rewarded, beginning on 28 April 1555 with the second prebend in Worcester Cathedral. On 17 April 1556 he was elected warden of All Souls before receiving the prebend of Combe ix of Bath and Wells on 11 November. In the following year he gained further benefices after giving up the rectory of Upton upon Severn, Worcestershire (by March): rector of Newington, Oxfordshire, 1 July; of Fladbury, Worcestershire, 3 August (vacated by October 1558); and dean of Worcester, 21 August. As dean he handled some of his finances for Pates, who was now bishop. Two more rectories in Gloucestershire came to him after he resigned as warden of All Souls (by 9 June 1558), Bishops Cleeve on 5 September 1558 (institution bond 6 September; he gained the advowson as well; deprived by March 1559) and Naunton in 1559 (deprived 1561). 
By October 1558 Holland had left Worcester and rejoined Pole's household at Lambeth. At some point he acted as secretary to Pole, transcribing some of his exegetical works, and being involved in the preparation of a projected new edition of Pole's 'Pro ecclesiasticae unitatis defensione', probably in 1554. Pole entrusted Holland with a final mission to Princess Elizabeth on 14 November 1558. He attended Pole's deathbed three days later, and was among those who were to see to the disposition of Pole's goods. Holland remained dean until at least 19 August 1559 (his replacement does not appear until 26 March 1560) although fairly shortly afterwards he must have refused the oath of supremacy and was committed to the Marshalsea in 1559. He died there before 6 March 1561, the day of his burial in St George's, Southwark. By his testament (of 1546) he left to Pates for poor English exiles Italian investments worth together about $700; these eventually came to the English colleges in Rome and Rheims/Douai. In March 1559 Holland had made contingent arrangements to transfer proceeds from the sale of these investments to England via the Buonvisi Bank. 


@@@@@


doc= 13543


Holland, Thomas, earl of Kent (c.1315-1360), soldier, was the second son of Robert Holland, Lord Holland (d. 1328) of Upholland, Lancashire, and Maud (died 1349), daughter and coheir of Alan Zouche, Lord Zouche, of Ashby, Leicestershire. He had three brothers: Robert (died 1373), who succeeded to the Holland estates in 1335 and resided at Thorpe Waterville in Northamptonshire, Alan, and Otto (died 1359), who both followed Thomas into military service; and three sisters: Isabella, mistress of John de Warenne, earl of Surrey (died 1347); Margaret (died 1349), married to John de la Warr; and Matilda, possible sometime wife of John (II) Mowbray, Lord Mowbray. 
Thomas Holland's soldiering probably began in Scotland in the early 1330s. He was in Bordeaux in 1337 with Robert d'Artois, was a knight of the royal household by 1338, served in Flanders in 1338-9 and 1340, at Sluys, and on the abortive Tournai campaign. Probably by this time he had made the considerable coup of marrying the king's cousin, Joan (c.1328-1385), known as the Fair Maid of Kent. He was a landless young knight, son of a disgraced Lancastrian lord. She had also lost her father in disgrace and was not then the heiress she would become through the deaths without heirs of her uncle Thomas, Lord Wake, in 1349 and her brother John, earl of Kent, in 1352, but it seems a surprising match and may have been a reward by Edward III to a loyal, energetic, young knight. Joan's mother, Margaret, countess of Kent, was not so favourable towards the match, and she may well have engineered Joan's marriage to the better connected William Montagu, heir to the earl of Salisbury, by February 1341, at a time when Holland was probably away on crusade in Prussia. 
Holland fought in Brittany with the king in 1342-3, then went to Bayonne with Sir John Hardeshull, and probably on to Granada with the earl of Derby in 1343. He may have returned to Brittany in 1345. At the siege of Caen, in 1346, he captured the count of Eu, constable of France. Holland's reputation was apparently a factor in the count's choice of captor. This could have made Holland very wealthy as he sold the count to Edward III for 80,000 florins, but how much of this Holland ever received is unknown. The capture enhanced his eminence as a soldier on the Crecy campaign, when he also featured at Amiens and Rouen, was wounded at a castle on the Seine, commanded the rearguard on the march from Caen, and counted casualties after the battle at Crecy. His eminence led to his institution, in 1348, along with his brother Otto, often his associate and lieutenant in his military exploits, as one of the founder knights of the Order of the Garter ['see also 'Founding knights of the Order of the Garter]. 
Holland was now also able to institute proceedings at the papal court for the restoration of his wife, Joan. Their marriage was confirmed and publicized in November 1349; their first son, Thomas, was born in 1350. Their original union was declared to have been consummated; the 'marriage' with William Montagu had been null and void from the start. Holland's fortunes soon took a further rise as Joan's brother John, earl of Kent, died childless in 1352. Joan inherited his estates, spread over some sixteen counties. Holland was now, in the right of his wife, a landed lord of significant territorial resources. He was summoned to parliament as Lord Holland from 1354, and his military career burgeoned with a series of independent commands. Captain of Calais Castle in August 1352, he travelled again to Brittany in 1353 and in 1354 was made the king's captain and lieutenant there, with custody of the young heir to the duchy and funding from local revenues. He became keeper of the Channel Islands in June 1356, at a time when Castle Cornet there was in French hands; his able lieutenant, his brother Otto, soon recaptured it. Holland was appointed custodian of Crocy Castle in Normandy in November 1357 and then governor of the Harcourt lands in the Cotentin, based on St Sauveur-le-Vicomte, in October 1358. Custody of Barfleur in the Cotentin followed in October 1359, when he was also made joint lieutenant of Normandy with Philippe of Navarre. In September 1360 he received his most important post yet, when he was made Edward III's captain and lieutenant in Normandy and France. He was now accorded the title of earl of Kent to bolster his authority and prestige. He had the delicate, diplomatic task of carrying out the provisions of the treaty of Bretigny of October 1360, but while performing this duty he contracted some illness and died at Rouen on 28 December 1360. His body was initially interred in the church of the Friars Minor in Rouen, and was later moved to the church of the Greyfriars, Stamford, Lincolnshire. 
Holland left four children: Thomas Holland, later earl of Kent; John Holland, later earl of Huntingdon and duke of Exeter; Maud (died 1392), who married first Hugh Courtenay and then Waleran, count of St Pol; and Joan (died 1384), who married John de Montfort, duke of Brittany. Holland's widow, Joan, married Edward, the Black Prince, in 1361. 


@@@@@


doc= 13544


Holland, Thomas, fifth earl of Kent (1350-1397), magnate, was the elder son of Thomas Holland, earl of Kent (c.1315-1360), and Joan (c.1328-1385), daughter of Edmund of Woodstock, earl of Kent. After an early career soldiering abroad Holland became one of the less spectacular props of Richard II's regime, established mainly on the south coast, in and around Hampshire. He had a younger brother, John Holland, earl of Huntingdon (c.1352-1400), and two sisters, Maud (died 1392), wife to Hugh Courtenay and then Waleran, count of St Pol, and Joan (died 1384), wife to John de Montfort, duke of Brittany. Perhaps most significantly, the second marriage in 1361 of his mother, Joan, to Edward, the Black Prince, meant that Holland had a younger half-brother, the future king Richard II. 
Thomas Holland's early career from 1366 was spent in military service abroad, first in Spain and then in France. He was knighted by his stepfather and godfather, the Black Prince, at Vitoria in Castile in 1367, and was made a knight of the Garter in 1376. His power and influence was restricted by the fact that his mother, Joan, held the estates of the Kent inheritance in her own right until her death in 1385. To help offset this somewhat, Thomas was married 'c'.1364 to Alice ('c'.1350-1416), daughter of Richard (II) Fitzalan, the wealthy earl of Arundel; Alice's dowry was 4000 marks, and the Black Prince enfeoffed the couple with lands worth 500 marks in three Yorkshire manors. 
Richard II's accession in 1377 meant that Holland's half-brother was now king. To reflect this, he received a gift of 100 marks and an exchequer annuity of $200 in 1378, later augmented to 1000 marks in rents. He was also given custody of the royal forests south of the Trent in July 1377, and was appointed marshal of England in March 1380. The south was becoming his base: he resided much at Talworth Manor in Surrey (given him by his mother in October 1382); he became captain of Southampton in June 1380 to repel the French threat; and he served on the Surrey and Hampshire commissions of the peace. Late in 1380 he was accorded the title earl of Kent, which his father had held only briefly. His military experience was used to help suppress the peasants' revolt in Kent in 1381, and then as captain of the English bastion of Cherbourg from November 1384. 
The death of his mother, Joan, in August 1385 brought to Holland the considerable estates of her inheritance. He was now a wealthy magnate, but played no great role in the political upheavals of 1386-9, having lost the post of marshal in June 1385. He was made constable of the Tower of London in May 1387, but then rather faded from the court scene in the 1390s, increasingly preferring his Hampshire residences at Lyndhurst and Brockenhurst. He became constable first of Corfe Castle (with his wife) in May 1391, and then of Carisbrooke Castle in July 1396, and was appointed to the Wiltshire commission of the peace in December 1390. The focus of his inherited estates lay less in the south than in the north-east midlands, especially Lincolnshire, and it was from there he dispensed his grants and patronage, yet even in the south his influence was not dominant, with no obvious nexus of Holland supporters in local posts. Thomas Holland died on 25 April 1397. He was buried shortly afterwards in Bourne Abbey, Lincolnshire, following a funeral in Westminster Abbey. According to Adam Usk, after Holland's death one of the earl's greyhounds spontaneously made its way to the king, and accompanied him everywhere, until the moment in 1399 when Richard deserted his army in Wales, whereupon the dog abandoned the king and joined the duke of Lancaster. 
Holland had nine children, whose marriages brought many magnate families into Richard II's royal kin: Thomas Holland, later earl of Kent and duke of Surrey; Richard (died 'c'.1396); Edmund Holland, later earl of Kent; Eleanor (died 1405) who married Roger (VII) Mortimer, earl of March, and then Edward Charlton, Baron Charlton of Powys; Joan (died 1434), who married first Edmund, duke of York, second William, Baron Willoughby, third Henry Scrope, Baron Scrope of Masham, and fourth Henry Bromflete, Baron Vessy; Margaret Holland, who married John Beaufort, earl of Somerset, and then Thomas, duke of Clarence; Eleanor (died 'c'.1420), who married Thomas Montagu, earl of Salisbury; Elizabeth (died 1423), who married John, Baron Neville; and Bridget, a nun. Holland's widow, Alice, remained constable of Corfe Castle until 1407 and then retired to Beaulieu Abbey; she died on 17 March 1416. 


@@@@@


doc= 13545


Holland, Thomas, sixth earl of Kent and duke of Surrey (c.1374-1400), magnate and courtier, was the son and heir of Richard II's half-brother Thomas Holland, earl of Kent (1350-1397), and Alice, daughter of Richard Fitzalan, earl of Arundel. He had two brothers, including Edmund Holland, later earl of Kent, and six sisters, among them Margaret Holland, later duchess of Clarence. John Holland, earl of Huntingdon and duke of Exeter, was his uncle. Thomas was not active in court circles until he reached adulthood, but he then became a leading supporter of Richard II. 
Thomas Holland served on Richard II's Irish expedition in 1394, and he received two royal annuities, 200 marks in 1395, and $10 the following year. He had married Joan, daughter of Hugh Stafford, earl of Stafford (d. 1386), in 1392, in spite of his uncle John's murder of her brother in 1385. His own father's death on 25 April 1397 brought the young earl into the vortex of the crises of Richard II's final years. He found the assumption of his inheritance greatly eased by royal favour. Not only was he made warden of his father's lands while they were nominally in the king's hands, but he was also granted all issues and reliefs due to his royal uncle. Moreover the earl was made a knight of the Garter in place of his father. 
The new earl of Kent was immediately summoned to Nottingham where the king was planning the destruction of Thomas, duke of Gloucester, one of the lords appellant who had challenged the king's power a decade earlier. After Gloucester was in custody, Kent and the earl of Rutland were sent to arrest another of the appellants, Kent's uncle, the earl of Arundel. When Arundel and his former colleague the earl of Warwick were brought to trial in the parliament of September 1397, the earls of Kent and Huntingdon served as two of the eight appellants who appealed the former lords appellant of treason. Kent urged Arundel's execution, which was carried out. When Warwick was exiled, Kent received Warwick Castle with the custody of Warwick's heir, as well as the earl's stud of horses and cattle. On 29 September 1397 Thomas Holland was created duke of Surrey, and John Holland was created duke of Exeter. Selden noted that the 'virga aurea' was first used on this occasion. Surrey and Exeter were two of five men elevated to dukedoms at the time, an inflation of honours which led to the derisive title of 'duketti'. 
When Henry Bolingbroke, duke of Hereford, accused his fellow 'dukettus' and former appellant colleague the duke of Norfolk of attempting to enlist him in a conspiracy to act against Richard II before the king attacked them, Hereford reported that Norfolk warned him that Surrey was one of those out to destroy them both. Surrey replaced Norfolk as marshal of England on 31 January 1398 so that he might officiate at the scheduled duel between Hereford and Norfolk. Surrey's father had held this post in 1380, but the 1398 appointment gave Surrey specific power to arrest traitors found within the realm. The duel never took place; both men were banished. The duke of Surrey became marshal for life and shared in the spoils of Norfolk's estates. After the death of Hereford's father, John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, on 3 February 1399, Surrey received on 8 May custody of two Lancastrian manors until Bolingbroke or his heir should sue for livery. Surrey was also granted (on 18 February 1398) a licence to found a Carthusian priory called Mount Grace in his lordship of Bardelby in Cleveland; further grants to Surrey from the resources of alien priories helped to endow this house. The foundation of Mount Grace may demonstrate a degree of personal piety, but patronage of the Carthusians was also fashionable in court circles in the 1390s. 
Richard II was greatly concerned to build up royal power in Ireland, and he hoped to employ Surrey in this endeavour. John Holland had had an abortive tenure as king's lieutenant in Ireland in 1382. Thomas Holland was now appointed to the office on 26 July 1398; the incumbent, Roger Mortimer, earl of March and Ulster, was ordered to have nothing to do with the office once Surrey arrived. Unknown to Richard at the time, Mortimer had been killed by the Irish on 20 July. An abstract of Surrey's indenture dated 10 April 1399 specifies that the duke was to command a retinue of 150 men-at-arms and 100 archers, including a mason and carpenter in every 20 archers. It has been argued that the indenture should be dated to 1398, but there seems no reason to assume such a scribal error so late in the regnal year. In May 1399 Surrey received 11,500 marks to support himself and his retinue in Ireland for one year. Surrey had been given wardship of the extensive Mortimer lands in Ireland; he was appointed keeper of Dublin Castle and of Drogheda; and he was given authority to present to all Irish benefices in the king's hands. On 16 May 1399, moreover, Thomas was appointed keeper of Carelogh Castle until the Mowbray heir sued for livery, and he was given the barony of Norragh while Art mac Murchada (died 1417) remained a rebel. Norragh was one of the most prized estates of mac Murchada, the self-styled king of Leinster. The Lancastrian chronicler Adam of Usk improbably speculated that Richard II intended to crown Surrey king of Ireland. Richard II arrived in Ireland for his second campaign on 1 June 1399; Henry Bolingbroke landed in Yorkshire on 4 July. 
Surrey returned with Richard to England, and he and the duke of Exeter attempted a reconciliation between Richard and Henry. Bolingbroke had no love for Surrey, and may have imprisoned him briefly at Chester, although the evidence is weak. On 20 October 1399 Surrey and other advisers of the deposed Richard II were arrested. Thomas Holland was committed to the Tower of London and then transferred to Wallingford. He was brought before parliament on 29 October where he pleaded his tender age as justification for his actions. On 6 November he and his uncle John were deprived of their dukedoms, and of the estates they had acquired after they had launched their appeal in 1397. 
Once more earl of Kent, Thomas Holland joined his uncle John, the earl of Salisbury, and others in a plot to seize Henry IV and his sons at Windsor on 4 January 1400. The king had been warned and had withdrawn. Finding an empty nest, the conspirators rode to Richard's queen at Sonning. Kent announced that Richard II had escaped and was at Pontefract with 100,000 men. The conspiracy, betrayed by the earl of Rutland, soon collapsed. The conspirators fled to Cirencester where they were overcome by the townsmen. A priest in their company tried to cover their escape by torching a house. This further enraged the townsmen, who dragged the earls of Kent and Salisbury from the abbey in which they had sought refuge and beheaded them on the night of 7-8 January 1400. Kent's head was placed on London Bridge; his body was interred at Cirencester. Cooled by its stay on the bridge, the head was reunited with Kent's body; both were buried at his foundation, Mount Grace. According to Froissart, he was 'much lamented by several knights in England and other countries. He was young and handsome, and had very unwillingly taken part in this conspiracy; but his uncle and the earl of Salisbury had forced him into it' (Froissart, 2.706). The earls' conspiracy probably induced Henry IV to do away with the imprisoned Richard II. Kent's widow, Joan, was detained at Liverpool, probably while attempting to escape to Ireland, and was taken to London, but was not harmed by Henry IV. She lived until 1442; there were no children from her marriage to Thomas Holland. There are inquisitions post mortem for Thomas Holland for Leicester, Nottingham, Derby, Lincoln, and Middlesex, recording annual incomes in these counties amounting to nearly $650. 


@@@@@


doc= 13546


Holland, Thomas (d. 1612), theologian, was born in Ludlow, Shropshire, the second son of William Holland of Burwarton in the same county. He was educated at Oxford, where he gained an exhibition at Oriel College on 23 September 1569 and graduated BA on 9 December 1570. He probably entered the Middle Temple in 1571. On 13 January 1573 he was elected 'socius sacerdotalis' or chaplain-fellow of Balliol College, where he was also college reader in rhetoric from 1575-7. He proceeded MA on 21 June 1575, and entered the faculty of theology; he graduated BTh on 13 July 1582 and DTh on 15 July 1584. 
In 1585 Holland left Oxford for the northern Netherlands to work as a personal chaplain of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, a known patron of Calvinists in England. A renowned scholar as well as a loyal evangelical, on his return to Oxford in 1589 Holland was appointed regius professor of theology, a post he held until his death. On 9 June 1590 he was made a canon of Salisbury Cathedral on recommendation of the crown. A year later he was installed as rector of St Nicholas, Rotherfield Greys, Oxfordshire. 
On 29 March 1592 Holland was elected to a fellowship at Exeter College, Oxford. In an attempt to bring religious conservatives among the fellowship to conformity, he was appointed rector of the college on the instigation of the queen and Sir John Petre. His election was disputed by the fellowship and not confirmed until 24 April, when his opponent 'who was really elected, resigned his claim at Lambeth, before Archbishop Whitgift, the Bishop of Oxford, and... the chancellor of the University' (Boase, 'Registrum Collegii Exoniensis', 84). He was noted as a skilled disputant in the university, and participated with his fellow doctors of theology at a debate in honour of Queen Elizabeth's visitation to the university in autumn 1592, and again thirteen years later during the visit of James I. 
Holland was a gifted linguist, and frequently drew on the Hebrew scriptures and the 'Talmud' in his sermons. At his suggestion John Prideaux, a good friend and protege, compiled a Greek grammar for his students. His proficiency in biblical languages and his love for the scriptures were reason for his appointment in 1605 to translate, together with six other Oxford scholars, the prophetic books of the 'Old Testament' ('Isaiah'- 'Malachi') for the Authorized Version of the 'Bible'. He left two discourses in print: an oration on the occasion of Bishop Henry Cotton's graduation, 'Oratio habita cum Henricus episcopus Sarisburiensis gradum doctoris susceperit', was published in 1599; and a panegyric on the queen preached at St Paul's Cathedral, ''Panegyris' D. Elizabethae Reginae: a sermon preached at Pauls in London the 17 of November', appeared two years later. In 1612 Thomas Thompson, of Queen's College, edited and published the notaries' account of two disputations on monastic vows moderated in 1609 by Holland under the title, 'Claviger ecclesiae: theses duae de votis monasticis'. On 2 February 1610, towards the end of his life, Holland was made an honorary member of Gray's Inn. 
Throughout his life Holland remained a stalwart opponent of Catholicism. At his funeral oration the rector of Lincoln College, Richard Kilbie, recalled that 'a common farewel when he tooke any longer journey was this, Commendo vos dilectioni Dei, et odio papatus et superstitionis (I commend you to the love of God, and to the hatred of popery and superstition)' (Kilbie, 18). Holland died at Exeter College, Oxford, on 17 March 1612, and was buried on 26 March in the chancel of the university church of St Mary the Virgin. He was survived by his wife, Susanna, and was father to two children, Anne and William. 


@@@@@


doc= 13547


Holland, Thomas (1600-1642), Jesuit, was born at Sutton Hall, Prescot, Lancashire, the son of Richard Holland, gentleman, and Anne Ewers of Sutton Hall. He was educated to 1621 in the Jesuit college at St Omer and then at the English College, Valladolid. When Prince Charles visited Madrid in 1623 Holland, at the request of his fellow collegians, addressed the prince in a Latin oration, assuring him of the loyalty and good wishes of the English students in the seminaries of Spain. He entered the noviciate of the English province of the Society of Jesus at Watten on 16 May 1624, and afterwards studied theology at the college at Liege, where he was ordained priest about 1630, and was then at the Jesuit house at Ghent. Subsequently he was appointed prefect and confessor to the scholars at St Omer. In 1635 he was sent to England, and for seven years laboured on the mission in London, sometimes assuming the aliases of Sanderson and Hammond. At length, on 4 October 1642, he was arrested and committed to the New prison, and was then transferred to Newgate. On 7 December he was indicted for being a priest at the Old Bailey before Serjeant Phesant, was found guilty, and on 12 December 1642 was executed at Tyburn in the presence of a large crowd, including Count Egmont, the Spanish ambassador, and almost all his suite. Holland's quarters were displayed on London gates. He was beatified by Pope Pius XI on 15 December 1929. A manuscript book of his theological writings at Liege is preserved at Stonyhurst College. 


@@@@@


doc= 13548


Holland, Thomas Agar (1803-1888), Church of England clergyman and poet, was born on 16 January 1803 at Poynings rectory, near Steyning, Sussex, the eldest son of Samuel Holland (1772-1857), precentor of Chichester and rector of Poynings, and Frances Erskine, eldest daughter of Thomas Erskine (1750-1823), lord chancellor. He was educated at Westminster School, London, from June 1816 to Christmas 1818, and then spent some time at Edinburgh University and later attended Worcester College, Oxford, matriculating in 1821. He took his BA in 1825, proceeding MA in 1828. He entered the church as deacon in 1826, becoming a priest the following year in Chichester. He was then instituted as vicar of Oving, Sussex (1827-38). In 1831 he married Magdaline Stewart, daughter of Major Philip Stewart. Their eldest son, the jurist Sir Thomas Erskine Holland, was born in 1835. Holland became rector of Greatham, Hampshire, in 1838 and in 1846 he succeeded his father as rector of Poynings. In the same year he was a founder member of the Sussex Archaeological Society, to which he belonged until his death. It was for the society's publication that he wrote his 'History of Poynings' in 1863. 
Holland's first publication as a poet was anonymous: 'The Colossal Statue of William Wallace: a Poem by an Undergraduate' (Oxford, 1824). His major claim to the title of poet was established by his collection 'Dryburgh Abbey and other Poems' (1826). In his preface he talks of the title-poem: 'commenced in the winter, 1820-21 which the author (being yet in his 'teens') spent in Edinburgh, attending a session of the University (whence also the Latin prize) and occasionally visiting his grand-uncle, the late Earl of Buchan, at his mansion contiguous to the ruins of Dryburgh Abbey.' These visits inspired the lengthy piece, in octosyllabics, which reflects his actively anti-Catholic stance in its attitudes to idolatry. His anti-Catholic views were often in evidence in his preaching and writing, as he campaigned against the religion's revival in England. 'Dryburgh Abbey' was a popular volume: it was issued in successive editions in 1829, 1845, and 1884. The volume was said by his son to have received the warm commendation of Sir Walter Scott, and there is evidence of Scott's influence on Holland's writing, especially in the Romantic appeal of Scottish history. The accompanying poems were rooted in the natural world and family, varying in tone from earnest to witty. Attended by his wife, Holland died at his beloved Poynings rectory on 18 October 1888 of senile decay and heart failure, leaving four surviving sons and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 13549


Hollar, Wenceslaus (1607-1677), etcher, was born in Clothmakers' Street, Prague, Bohemia, on 23 July 1607, the eldest of the three sons of Jan Hollar (died 1630), an official of the land registry in Prague, and his wife, Marketa (died 'c'.1613), the daughter of David Low of Lowengrun and Bareyt in the upper Palatinate. His father, from Horazd'ovice in southern Bohemia, was knighted by the emperor Rudolf II in 1600 and given the right to bear arms and style himself 'of Prachen'. The family were protestants connected with the evangelical Bohemian Brethren. 
Although intended for a bureaucratic or legal career, the young Hollar turned, against his father's wishes, to the arts. Beneath his etching ('c'.1649) of his portrait by Meyssens he is described as 'de nature fort inclin p[ou]r l'art de meniature principalement pour esclaircir, mais beaucoup retarde par son pere'. The few surviving early etchings and drawings, including copies after Durer and Beham, show the influence of the etcher Aegidius Sadeler, but it is unlikely that Hollar had any formal training. 
In 1627, aged twenty, Hollar left Prague, probably prompted by the edict of the emperor Ferdinand II of 31 July requiring the Bohemian nobility to convert to Catholicism or emigrate. From about November 1627 to Spring 1629 he was based at Stuttgart, from 1629 to 1630 at Strasbourg, and in 1631 at Frankfurt am Main, where he worked for Matthaus Merian. For four years from 1632 he lived in Cologne, whence he made extended tours up the Rhine to Mainz in 1632 and downstream to Amsterdam in 1634. Many drawings survive from these years, including a sketchbook now in the John Rylands University Library at Manchester. The Cologne publisher Abraham Hogenberg issued Hollar's first major productions, a set of views from Prague to the Dutch coast titled 'Amoenissimae aliquot locorum in diversis provinciis iacentium effigies' ('Delightful likenesses of some places lying in various countries') (1635) and a set of small portraits entitled 'Reisbuchlein' ('Little travel book') (1636). 
Although Hollar must have left Prague with means sufficient to maintain his standing as a gentleman and had since become an accomplished landscape artist and proficient etcher, his work cannot have been remunerative. The arrival of Thomas Howard, second earl of Arundel, at Cologne on 2 May 1636 on an embassy to the emperor Ferdinand II was to change his life. On his departure on 8 May Arundel had, as he wrote to William Petty, 'one Hollarse wth me, whoe drawes and eches printes in strong water quickely, and wth a pretty spiritte' (BL, Add. MS 15970, fol. 26; Springell, 143). For eight months Hollar travelled in Arundel's retinue -- he made a final visit to Prague and received confirmation of his father's grant of arms and the right to style himself 'Prachenberger von Lowengrun und Bareyt' from the emperor at Regensburg on 16 October -- before arriving in London on 28 December 1636. 
It was intended that Hollar, who had lodgings in Arundel House, should reproduce paintings and drawings belonging to the earl and countess of Arundel, but the project never developed, and only four prints from his early years in London are based on their collections. From the start he courted other patrons, and his first major production in England, a panoramic view of Greenwich (1637), was dedicated to Queen Henrietta Maria and proudly signed 'Coelator' ('recte caelator', engraver) to Arundel. A copy of the Wilton diptych (1639), dedicated to the king, is one of a few prints by Hollar bearing a royal privilege providing protection from copyists. At some time (according to Meyssens' portrait) he was appointed to the household of the young duke of York, presumably as a drawing master. Among Hollar's most ambitious early projects was a set of twenty-six plates of women's costumes, some deriving from Van Dyck, entitled 'Ornatus muliebris Anglicanus, or, The severall habits of English women from the nobilitie to the country woman' (1640). He also made numerous portraits of political and religious figures, such as Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, after Van Dyck (1640), whose trial and execution he also depicted (1641). 
On 4 July 1641 Hollar married Margaret Tracy (died 1653), a servant of the countess of Arundel and probably a daughter of Anthony Tracy, an agent of the earl's. She died in 1653 and was buried at St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, on 10 March. A son, James, was born on 8 April 1643 at Tart Hall, the countess's house in St James's Park. John Aubrey noted that he 'dyed in the Plague, an ingeniose youth, drew delicately' and that a daughter was 'one of the greatest Beauties I have seen' ('Brief Lives', 163). 
In February 1642 the earl and countess of Arundel left England for Antwerp. Hollar, now wholly dependent on his own means, continued to concentrate on women's costumes. A dark fur double muff was the first of nine versions of a favourite subject, and he also began work on a set of smaller female figures entitled 'Aula Veneris', or 'Theatrum mulierum'. A set of full-length female figures as the four seasons (1643, 1644) are among his most famous prints and bring to an end his first English period, for, some time in 1644 he moved to Antwerp. There he joined the artists' Guild of St Luke as a free master, and by 1648 his friend from Frankfurt, the Arundels' art curator Hendrick van der Borcht the younger, was able to write to John Evelyn that Hollar 'is very much esteemd in these parts and Especially in Antwerp where he is nouw dwelling. Many Lovers of arts make Collections of all his worckes' (Harding, 41). To meet this demand Hollar turned for inspiration to his sketchbooks and the Arundel collections, now being dispersed. He produced copies of paintings and drawings by Holbein, Adam Elsheimer, Durer, and Leonardo da Vinci, topographical and architectural prints -- including, most importantly, the 'Long View of London from Bankside' (1647) and the 'Long View of Prague' (1649) -- portraits, ships, a rare set of shells, sets of butterflies, and much more. 
In late 1651 or early 1652 Hollar returned to London, where he was to be largely dependent on two men, the publisher John Ogilby and the antiquary and herald Sir William Dugdale. Ogilby's luxury edition of Virgil, with illustrations after Francis Cleyn (1654), and 'Aesop's Fables' (1665) and Dugdale's 'Monasticon Anglicanum' (1655), 'Antiquities of Warwickshire' (1656), and 'History of St Paul's Cathedral' (1658) all have numerous plates by Hollar. 
At some time Hollar converted to Roman Catholicism. Evelyn noted that he 'was perverted at last by the Jesuits at Antwerp to chang his Religion' (Evelyn, 1.21), and Aubrey mentioned that he 'dyed a Catholique, of which religion, I suppose, he might be ever since he came to Arundel-howse' ('Brief Lives', 163). In January 1656 he was bound over in the sum of $40 at the Middlesex sessions for hearing mass at the lodgings of the Venetian ambassador. On 3 July 1656 he married Honora Roberts at St Giles-in-the-Fields. Aubrey reported that they had several children. In 1658 Hollar was living in Holborn, near Gifford's buildings, and about 1661 he wrote to Aubrey that he was lodging 'without St Clemen[t]s Inne back doore' and to ask for 'the Frenchman Limmner for they know not my name perfectly' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 12, fol. 175; Pennington, xli). 
In 1660 Hollar issued a prospectus for a large-scale map of London which he hoped would be his financial salvation, but the great fire of London in 1666 rendered his work obsolete. He quickly produced smaller maps and views depicting the damage, but he did not abandon his great map; its remains may be seen in Ogilby and Morgan's 'Large Map of London' (1677). On 31 October 1666 he successfully petitioned the king for the 'Honour & Tittle of your Majesties Scenographer; or Designer of Prospects' (Godfrey, 29). 
In March 1669 the sixty-two year old Hollar turned again to his old patrons and petitioned the king for permission to accompany Lord Henry Howard, Baron Howard of Castle Rising, on his embassy to Tangier as official artist. Some thirty-one drawings, including large panoramic watercolours, survive, and Overton issued a set of fifteen etchings by Hollar entitled 'Divers Prospects in and about Tangier' (1673). On a voyage from Tangier to Salli in December 1669 they escaped an attack by Algerian pirates, which Hollar depicted in Ogilby's 'Africa' (1670). 
During all these years Hollar produced frontispieces, portraits, and maps for the book and print publishers, but the last years of his life were again filled by work for antiquaries: Elias Ashmole's 'Institutions, Laws & Ceremonies of the Most Noble Order of the Garter' appeared in 1672 and the second and third volumes of Dugdale's 'Monasticon Anglicanum' in 1661 and 1673. Francis Sandford's 'Genealogical History of the Kings of England' and Robert Thoroton's 'Antiquities of Nottinghamshire' appeared in 1677, after Hollar's death. 
The recipe for Hollar's 'Ground for Etching in Copper or Brass; with his Directions how to use it' appeared in a number of artists' handbooks and was reprinted by Vertue (Vertue, 'Description', 133-6). The antiquary Richard Symonds 'saw Mr. Hollar etching' on 20 February 1649 and described his method of laying on the wax and acid (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.112). His friend Francis Place, an amateur artist, recalled that 'he did all by the hour, in which he was very exact, for if any body came that kep him from his business he always laid the hour glass on one side, till they were gone. he always recev'd 12d an hour' (ibid., 1.34). Hollar's only personal comments on his working methods are contained in a letter to Hendrick van der Borcht the elder in Frankfurt, on a proof of his copy of Holbein's 'Solomon and the Queen of Sheba' (1642): 'Der Herr muss aber nicht denken dass das der beste abstrukh ist, von wegen dass ich sobal[d] als ich das Etzwasser abgeschitt had, disse Probe lassen truken, und es muss noch dz gantze Stuck nach dem Principal gekorrigirt werden,... Dan was der Herr hier sihet, dass ist nur dz wass dass Etzwasser gethan hatt, es wird aber noch mitt dem grabeissen verholffen werden. (But you must not think this is the best impression, because I had it printed as soon as I had shaken off the etching fluid, and the whole thing has still to be corrected according to the master.... For what you see here is only what the etching fluid has done, and now further work will be done with the graver.)(British Museum, department of prints & drawings, 1870-6-25-39; Griffiths, 167)' Contemporaries described Hollar as 'a very friendly good-natured man as could be, but Shiftlesse to the Worlde' ('Brief Lives', 163) and 'a very passionate man easily moved' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.34-5). Aubrey reported that he 'was very short-sighted' and 'When he tooke his Landskapes, he, then, had a glasse to helpe his Sight' ('Brief Lives', 163). His portrait by Meyssens depicting him with his etching tools and an etched self-portrait (1647) show him with a neat moustache and small imperial beard. 
Hollar died on 25 March 1677 at the age of seventy at his house in Gardener's Lane, Westminster, and was buried three days later at St Margaret's, Westminster. According to Francis Place's letter of 20 May 1719 to George Vertue he died 'of a Parraletick [or Apoplextick] fitt. & before his departure. the Bayliffs came and seiz'd all that he had, which gave him a great disturbance & he was heard to say they might have stayed till he was dead' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.35). This cannot be strictly true, as an inventory of his possessions taken on 6 April valued the contents of the modestly furnished house and 'prints belonging to the decds: trade' ('Inventory of all the goods') (Westminster City Archives, inventories act book 6, no. 298) at $22. He died intestate, and administration of his estate was granted to his widow, Honora, on 25 May 1677. The date of her death is unknown, but she was apparently alive in 1701, when Sir Hans Sloane noted the purchase of a volume of Hollar's prints from her. Place said he left two daughters. 
The variety of Hollar's work, his huge output (Pennington's 'Descriptive Catalogue' runs to 2717 numbers), and his technical skill have ensured that his prints have always been keenly collected. Comprehensive collections are at the British Museum (based on Sir Hans Sloane's collection), the Royal Library in Windsor Castle (partly traceable to Queen Charlotte), University of Toronto Library (S. T. Fisher collection), and the National Gallery, Prague (Kinsky Palace). Some 400 drawings have survived, and important collections are at the British Museum, the Staatsmuseum, Berlin, the National Gallery, Prague, and the Royal Library, Windsor Castle. 


@@@@@


doc= 13550


Holles, Denzil, first Baron Holles (1598-1680), politician, was born on 31 October 1598, the second surviving son of John Holles, first earl of Clare (d. 1637), and Anne (1576-1651), daughter of Sir Thomas Stanhope. His father was a substantial landowner in Nottinghamshire who also possessed important properties in London that brought in a quarter of his income at the time of Denzil's birth -- his total income being between $5000 and $6000. His mother, daughter of another prominent Nottinghamshire gentleman, had brought a significant dowry with her. Denzil's father purchased the barony of Haughton in 1616 for $10,000 and the earldom of Clare in 1624 for $5000, but both titles passed to Denzil's older brother, John Holles, second earl of Clare. 
Denzil, like other younger sons, was educated in a way that suggests that a career in the professions was in his family's mind. Like his father he attended Christ's College, Cambridge (matriculated June 1611), but unlike him graduated BA ('honoris causa' at the time of a visit by Prince Charles in 1613) and proceeded MA in 1616 and, also like his father, attended Gray's Inn, from 1615. But a proposed grand tour was twice abandoned. And successful activity in the marriage market spared him having to work for a living: first (on 4 June 1626) he married Dorothy (died 1641), daughter of Sir Francis Ashley, a wealthy lawyer and king's serjeant. Dorothy was an only child and stood to bring a large fortune with her -- the down payment on marriage consisted of lands worth $600 per annum. He married again, on 12 March 1642. His wife was Jane (died 1666), wealthy widow of Sir Walter Covert, and eldest daughter of Sir John Shirley of Ifield, Sussex. Then on 16 September 1666 he married Esther (died 1683), widow of Jacques Richer, seigneur de Cambrernon en Normandie; she was the severely Huguenot daughter of Gideon le Lou. Even a younger son could benefit from the marriage market, and an income of $300 settled on him by his father was swollen to some $4600 a year, principally as a result of choosing the right brides. 
Holles was the angry younger son of a bitter and disappointed father. John Holles had been a gentleman pensioner under Elizabeth I but was sidelined in 1603 and despite endless attempts to draw attention to himself, not least by the extravagant purchase of peerages, he failed to get the positions at court he craved. His one big break was his appointment in 1610 as comptroller of the household of Prince Henry; no sooner had Holles settled in than the prince died and his household was dissolved. Holles attempted to tie himself to the interest of George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, in the years after 1617, but he was one of too many, and his sycophancy got him nowhere, while his pro-Spanish stance soon became a liability. His godly protestantism was going out of favour, too. His letter-books show a man whose ambition was consuming and counter-productive. He became a bitter, sour old man. It rubbed off on his son. 
Denzil was inconspicuous as MP for St Michael, Cornwall, in the parliament of 1624. He was returned in 1628 to Charles I's third parliament as MP for godly Dorchester where his then father-in-law was recorder. But although he had been privately expostulating to his brother-in-law Sir Thomas Wentworth about the miserable failures of the government to further the protestant cause -- 'every man knows, that since England was England, it received not so dishonourable a blow' as in the failure at the Isle of Re ('Earl of Strafford's Letters and Despatches', 1.41) -- he seems to have been mute in the first session. But he found a new voice and a new resolve in the second session, speaking out against the customs farmers who had seized the goods of those merchants who had refused to pay non-parliamentary customs duties. When it became clear that the king would dissolve parliament rather than let this issue be pursued Holles was one of nine members who met privately in the Three Cranes inn in the City (but not so privately that the privy council did not get wind of it) to plan 'that we go not out like sheep scattered: but to testify to the world we have a care of their safety' (Crawford, 'Holles', 20). The outcome was the infamous melee on 2 March 1629 in which Holles and Benjamin Valentine held the speaker in his chair to prevent him from rising and thus adjourning the house (Holles allegedly crying 'God's wounds, he would sit until they pleased to rise'; Notestein and Relf, 104). He also read to the house a digest of the paper denouncing as treasonous the collection of non-parliamentary customs duties and the promotion of Arminianism. Not surprisingly the nine conspirators were arrested. There followed a long struggle for bail. The king's lawyers, stymied by the petition of right, knew that they had to show cause for the imprisonment, but feared to allege that it was for words uttered and acts committed in the parliament house, lest the judges ruled that they were protected by parliamentary privilege. They therefore delayed and tried to bypass the courts by offering bail on bonds of good behaviour (which would imply an admission of guilt). In the end (29 October 1629), there was a fudge -- Holles's bail was paid by his father-in-law and by his friend William Noy (whether with or without his foreknowledge and collusion is not clear). In January 1630 the attorney-general took the plunge and accused Sir John Eliot, Holles, and Valentine of conspiracy. They refused to plead on the ground that the court had no jurisdiction of them (a deeply ironic pre-echo of the king's plea precisely nineteen years later), and were found guilty on a 'nihil dicit' and fined -- in Holles's case 1000 marks ($666 13's'. 4died). He remained on bail, his fine unpaid, until it was cancelled by the Long Parliament. 
Over the next decade Holles was a sullen country gentleman. He was living in a dower house close to Dorchester, and close to the hot-gospelling town minister, John White, whose 'Commentary upon Genesis' (1656) was dedicated by White's son to Holles 'as an acknowledgment of your great friendship, and the severall Courtesies he had received from you' (sig. A2). Holles held some of the lesser offices associated with a man of his standing (commissioner for sewers in Dorset, 1636-8, a captaincy in the Dorset militia, from 1636) but he was not placed on the commission of the peace. He resisted (briefly) the second writ for ship money in 1635, he chased off some saltpetremen who came to dig up the soil around his dovecote (1638), and he refused to pay coat and conduct money towards the king's campaign against the Scots in 1639. His truculence had been enhanced rather than stilled by the events of 1629-30. 
It is no surprise, therefore, to find that Holles was returned as MP for Dorchester in both the elections of 1640. Again he was a slow starter, playing little part in the Short Parliament or the early months of the Long Parliament -- indeed Clarendon is quite clear in his 'History of the Rebellion' that the king was planning in April 1641 to make Holles secretary of state as part of the plan for reconstructing his government with former critics. Holles's family ties caused him to take a back seat in the proceedings against Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford (indeed to work to save his life), and he backed John Pym's proposals for replacing the king's prerogative revenues with substantial parliamentary ones. But, as so often with the king, he was deterred from going the extra yard by Holles's surly puritanism. It was Holles who carried the Commons' articles of impeachment against Archbishop Laud to the Lords; it was Holles who showed most enthusiasm for a religious conformity between Scotland and England when it was proposed by the Scots commissioners in 1641 (indeed he showed himself consistently sympathetic in 1641 to all the Scots demands), and he was prominent on 9 February in supporting the London ministers' call for the abolition of episcopacy 'roots and branches'. By summer 1641 his position was largely indistinguishable from that of Pym and he shared the latter's paranoia about popish plots and the poisoning of the king's mind by evil counsellors. But there were differences. His opposition to episcopacy clearly arose not from an absolute objection to the office but from an alarm at the refusal of the existing bishops to accept a reduction of their powers -- indeed his strongest speeches on religion were on measures to disbar the clergy from all manner of secular employment -- and, unlike Pym, he showed a precocious dismay at the spread of sectarian activity: on 5 June 1641 he demanded that the houses take steps to silence 'mechanical men that preached now up and down' and to prevent 'this great disorder before it came to a higher pitch and degree' (Crawford, 'Holles', 52). Headstrong and outspoken on religious issues, and one of those first thought of whenever a message needed to be conveyed to the Lords (he was used on seven occasions in 1641), Holles was wobbling into the camp of those unwilling to accept the king's concessions as sufficient to safeguard liberties. But he 'was' wobbling: he was omitted from the powerful executive committee that managed affairs during the autumn while the king was in Scotland and parliament was adjourned. 
When the houses reconvened Holles was present, but again his role was largely one of making terse, intemperate speeches, especially on the need to remove evil counsellors (he pressed for another round of impeachments), and on the need to remove the clergy from all secular employments. Most dramatically, when thirteen bishops were impeached Sir Simonds D'Ewes wrote that on 26 October 1641 'Mr Denzil Holles... move[d] us to give a name to our impeachment of the 13 Bishops and call it treason' ('Journal', ed. Coates, 39). It is not surprising therefore that Charles (whose memory of 1629 was all too fresh, and who might have had leaked to him details of Holles's close links with the Scots over the preceding months) should exaggerate Holles's importance and intransigence, and that he should name him as one of the five members of the Commons whom he sought to pluck out and arraign on charges of treason on 5 January 1642 as the arch-incendiaries in a plot against his authority. What is more he had the evidence -- both in their role in publishing the grand remonstrance and in their secret correspondence with the Scottish committee of the estates -- to make it good in law. 
From that point to the outbreak of war in summer 1642 Holles had an enhanced status. He carried a number of peremptory requests from the Commons to the Lords, including a demand that the Lords join the Commons in a request to the king to appoint named persons to control the Tower of London and the militia: if they failed in their 'duty' he said, they would put peace at risk and 'they must not expect this House to come to them again in this business' (BL, Harley MS 162, fol. 365'v'). In February the Commons made him deputy lieutenant of Bristol and in July he was appointed to help to organize the Dorset militia. 
So there was never any prospect that Holles would leave Westminster for the king's headquarters. But there was also never a sign that he believed that the issues dividing the country needed to be settled by war. He was in 1642, and was to remain, committed to the view that a negotiated settlement was necessary and possible. In 1641 and 1642 twelve of his speeches were published and they reveal a consistent view: the king was a good but weak man misled by evil counsellors. He had been persuaded to subvert the rights and privileges of parliament and thereby to subvert the liberties of the people, which parliaments existed to defend and promote. Similarly, whenever he spoke of religion, he spoke of how the existing system had been discredited by a generation of bishops and their clerical cronies, and he accused them of introducing forms of worship and discipline evocative of the Roman Catholic church, thereby subverting true religion. He comes across as a strait-laced Calvinist internationalist. 
Holles went reluctantly but unflinchingly to war against a king who was mentally ensnared by evil counsellors. He took up his responsibilities in the west, conducting a review of the Bristol militia, and then returned to London, raised a regiment of foot in the capital, and marched out with the earl of Essex. He was one of three colonels detached to attack Sherborne Castle, but was repulsed on 6 September, with a loss of more than half his men, albeit more by desertion than death. He limped back to Westminster, recruited his regiment back to strength, and rejoined the lord general in time to play an active and courageous part in the battle of Edgehill, where his men stood their ground on the left centre, while regiments on either side of his crumbled. The parliamentary commissioners singled him out for special commendation: 'through the valour of Colonel Holles's and the Lord General's they obtained a victory' ('England's Memorable Accidents', 1649, 62). He soon encountered the bitterness of defeat. As the royalists made a push on London which was halted at Brentford on 11 November, Prince Rupert, launching a surprise attack through a thick morning fog, wiped out Holles's regiment, killing one third and taking two thirds captive, together with fifteen guns and eleven colours. Holles was absent, but his confidence was badly shaken. Although offered command of the army of the west, he declined. Henceforth he was committed to the essentially defensive strategy of the earl of Essex and to constantly seeking a route to peace. D'Ewes recorded, on 24 November, that Holles 'was much cooled in his fierceness by the great slaughter made in his regiment at Brentford' (Crawford, 'Holles', 84). He henceforth became recognized as the leader of the peace party. 
That did not mean surrender. It meant having a clear set of principles for a settlement, but endlessly probing how to achieve them by negotiation. Whenever -- as in spring 1643, winter 1644-5, summer 1646 -- the king was willing to talk Holles was prominent in formulating terms and in thinking of ways of addressing issues flexibly. The principles included: the nature of parliamentary control of those who advised the king and exercised authority in his name; those who were to be punished for their 'malignancy' and how; and the nature of the confessional state that would be established to secure the protestant interest. Thus as the negotiations on the Oxford articles ran into the sand in early March 1643, and D'Ewes feared that they would collapse, Holles 'very seasonably and fortunately' moved that they should treat on the propositions notwithstanding. He always sought to sustain or to reopen public treaties. And he opposed everything that would throw new difficulties in the way of a settlement: thus in May 1643 he opposed the proposal that the houses should have a new great seal made (the lord keeper having carried the original away to royalist headquarters). But more controversially he was willing to enter into secret treaties, using intermediaries to test the water for revised sets of proposals that he could lay before the houses. Thus in June 1643 he was clearly apprised of, and willing to go along with, the plans of Edmund Waller to seize control of the London militia using a royal commission of array, and thereby to restore royalist control of London as a prelude to the arrest of the most senior war party leaders including three of the five members attainted with Holles by Charles in January 1642, and the launch of conciliatory peace terms. When the king shortly afterwards issued a revised list of those he would exempt from pardon Holles's name was strikingly absent. Waller's plot failed, but when, in early August, Holles was teller for a motion that was defeated, to present to Charles new terms drawn up by the Lords, there is evidence that the war party contemplated his summary arrest. As about one third of the remaining Lords -- including Holles's elder brother -- departed from London for Oxford or for their estates, Holles applied for and was granted a pass to go to the continent so long as he took with him no plate and no children over sixteen. This warrant was revoked shortly afterwards, but it is a sign of the intolerable tensions within the Commons. 
For the next twelve months Holles was much less active, much less visible, much less engaged. The groups he had led disintegrated, many deserting or fleeing abroad, or at any rate ceased attending regularly. Despite his earlier enthusiasm for Scottish involvement in the English settlement of 1641 he viewed with distaste the terms of the solemn league and covenant that brought them back into England bound by a solemn oath to impose certain conditions on the kingdoms. There are, indeed, signs that his religious views were modifying. His concern was with the purity of gospel preaching and a workable alliance of godly minister and magistrate, and he was not going to let forms of church government get in the way of peace. A straw in the wind was his surprisingly passionate defence of Daniel Featley, a 'reformed episcopate' man and ally of James Ussher, whom the firebrands in the Commons wished to expel from his living in Lambeth. 
In the whole of 1644 Holles is most visible in his support for Lord General Essex against the more hawkish generals who criticized Essex's over-cautious strategy and in the long, slow thaw in his relations with the Scots. He shared their abhorrence of sectarianism and the promotion of free worship. He shared their political objectives. He was willing to abide the determinations of the Westminster assembly, subject to their open negotiation with the king when the time for settlement came. 
By November 1644 there was an apparent military impasse and the houses set out on a dual strategy: the reorganization of their armies that resulted in the self-denying ordinance and the creation of the New Model Army, and a new push for peace, initiated by the supporters of Essex and those back-bench MPs whose lands lay in royalist territory. Holles, with others, was sent to Oxford with the preliminary version of what became (two months later) the Uxbridge articles. The commissioners took part in formal meetings, but two or three of them, Holles foremost among them, also took part in secret exploratory talks, brokered by Sabran, the French ambassador. So much Holles was later to admit. But one of those also involved, Lord Savile, was later to allege that Holles undertook to send secret reports to the king revealing what was really happening behind the scenes at Westminster (to assist in the peace process) and this Holles always strenuously denied. Certainly someone sent such letters to the king in 1645, but those who investigated the affair at the time and those who have studied it since have failed to find the smoking gun. Holles may well have gone further in his attempts to broker a peace than he ever admitted; but he probably did not go that far. 
These revelations paralysed the Commons throughout June and July 1646. Savile accused Holles (and Bulstrode Whitelocke) of leaking secrets to the king; they responded by accusing Savile of being the agent of a plot masterminded by Henry Vane, Oliver St John, and Lord Saye and Sele to make their own private treaty with the king. Neither set of charges could ever be proven, for Savile could produce only an unsigned letter of disputed provenance; and the obvious explanation for the conduct of Vane, St John, and Saye was that, honestly believing that the king had a secret agent reporting to him from within the committee of both kingdoms, they were indeed engaged in following up possible ways of turning some leading royalists without the king finding out about it from disloyal parliamentarians. After weeks of investigation and mutual recrimination both sides admitted defeat, but Holles thought it best to seek leave to absent himself to the country for the high summer of 1645. 
Whatever the truth behind these murky allegations, peace was not to be procured by negotiation or treachery. And the reorganization of armies constituted a political defeat. With Essex sidelined and Independent generals in control Holles formed an uneasy alliance with the Scots (it was their evidence which discredited Savile and made his testimony against Holles worthless). Holles thus worked closely with them in the months after the end of the war to shape and proffer the Newcastle propositions. By now he had identified himself with subversion of the 'jure divino' schemes for presbyterian settlement propounded by the Westminster assembly and the embracing of a 'lame, erastian presbytery' but this was clearly not his own first choice. It represented a form he hoped and believed that both the Scots and, eventually, the king could grudgingly live with. 
Holles had fought and lost all the parliamentary battles of the war years; he was to win some parliamentary battles only to lose the war of the peace years. Weariness with war, economic and social ruin, and religious anarchy meant that most MPs wanted settlement. Holles emerged as the man to deliver it. He had a clear plan: to persuade the Scots to hand over Charles and to return to Scotland and disband; to promote a general demilitarization throughout Britain; and then to hold face-to-face talks with Charles and reach agreement. He had never been for a sell-out, only for talks with limited preconditions. His power base was in the committee for Irish affairs at Derby House, which was packed with his friends and allies and which took over effective control of the executive wing of government from the committee of both kingdoms. 
Holles's plan had an inexorable logic to it. By paying the Scots to go home and to disband it became possible to argue for the large-scale disbandment of the English army (save those who would be sent to Ireland to undertake the gradual restoration of protestant hegemony there). The reduction of the English army to 6400 men, mainly drawn from regional armies rather than from the New Model, would begin the process of restoring traditional governance in England, with the general reduction of taxation and wartime bureaucracy. It would then be straightforward to enter into a personal treaty with the king leading to his restoration with enough restraints on his freedom of action to ensure long-term peace and stability. This plan cleared the first hurdle -- sending home the Scots -- but it fell at the second, persuading the New Model Army to disband. Holles simply could not raise enough money both to pay a reasonable proportion of the more than $2 million in arrears owed to soldiers still in service, and to pay for the reconquest of Ireland. And when the army protested Holles personally, in Edmund Ludlow's words, 'drew up a resolution upon his knee' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 1.149) and had it adopted by the Commons as what became known as the declaration of dislike. This, provocatively, challenged the right of soldiers to petition and threatened to cause any who did so to be prosecuted as disturbers of the peace. Nothing demonstrates better Holles's ability to be simultaneously resolute and reckless, courageous and crass. It set off a chain reaction with the defiance of the army, its refusal to be seen as 'a mere, mercenary army', and led to the organization of the general council of officers and adjutators, and in the late summer and autumn to the evolution of a full-scale programme of constitutional and social reform in the form of the 'Heads of the Proposals' and 'The Case of the Armie Truly Stated'. As army militancy escalated over the following months Holles responded with provocation upon provocation -- for example by renewing the requirement that all remaining officers must have taken the covenant. He showed a lack of sympathy and understanding for the material grievances of the army -- their arrears, their concern for indemnity, for pensions for widows and the maimed, for future employment -- and he could not see why they would not disband on the same meagre terms accepted by men in the regional armies disbanded in 1646. Just like Charles I in 1640-42 he alternated between sullen retractions and petulant threats of force. He attempted through the early summer months to raise a large force of troops to overbear the New Model (the London militia, the northern and western armies, thousands of reformadoes, decommissioned and disbanded men in London awaiting their pay-offs). While dozens of provincial MPs, driven on by a yearning for settlement, had backed him in the spring, they became alarmed at the prospect of confrontation between two rival armies raised by the parliament, and his majorities fell. In a final desperate gamble Holles appealed to the respectable tradesmen of London who were suffering most from the trade recession and crippling levels of taxation and asked them to support his plea for the king to be brought to London for a personal treaty. When their petition was rejected by a majority of MPs angry crowds swarmed around the Palace of Westminster, and on 26 July the speakers of both houses and some fifty-seven other commoners and seven other peers fled to the army. This was Holles's nemesis. The inevitable consequence was that the New Model marched on and occupied London, scattering the coalition of military forces that Holles had imprudently trusted and demanding the arrest and expulsion of the eleven incendiaries behind the events of 26 July. Holles hid for a few days and then applied to the speaker for a pass to go abroad. It was speedily granted. Eight of the eleven left the country, most of them settling in the Netherlands. But Holles settled in Normandy where (prudently enough) he had sent his mother, his eldest son, and $2000 some months beforehand. 
Holles remained in Normandy for almost a year. And, like many political exiles before and since, he devoted his time to the composition of misleading accounts of his rise and fall. These were published in 1699, after his death, and with the slightly erroneous title (which he did not give them) of 'Memoirs'. They offer little insight into his role and are consistently more interesting in the attribution of Machiavellianism to his opponents than as a reliable account of his own actions. They do, however, confirm the central folly of his political career: that Holles 'seriously overestimated the extent to which Charles could ever be persuaded to compromise' (Woolrych, 6). 
After the king attempted to overturn the judgement of the first civil war by plunging the country into a new conflict, the vote against the eleven members was revoked (3 June 1648). Holles resumed his seat on 14 August following and worked, as ever before, for a personal treaty with the king that would limit his freedom to listen to bad advice or place trust in unreliable men, and that would secure control of the church in the hands of sound Calvinist protestants. He was central to the peace process that led to the proposal -- which he presented to the Commons -- on 4 December 1648 that the king's latest response represented a satisfactory basis for a settlement. It was action by Holles that had provoked both the king's arrest of seven members on 2 March 1629, and his attempted arrest of five members on 5 January 1642. His action had provoked the expulsion of eleven members of parliament on 1 August 1647. Now he provoked the greatest purge of all -- Pride's Purge. On 6 December the army arrested as many as forty-five members of the Commons, and prevented as many as 186 from taking their seats. The way was cleared for the removal of Charles I by enforced abdication, by deposition, or by execution. This time Holles had really miscalculated. It would seem that he was not there to see it. He was not to be found, and his house in Covent Garden soon had troopers bivouacked in it. He had fled. 
Holles's life throughout the interregnum is only sketchily recorded. He seems to have spent the early years wholly or mainly in Normandy, and his name recurs in royalist correspondence as a potential supporter. In March 1651, while he was at Caen, he received a royal summons and the offer of the post of secretary of state. He declined firmly. But within two months his servants were named as principals in the plot instigated by a group of London ministers to organize an uprising in London to coincide with the planned Scottish invasion (this was a plot that cost the leading presbyterian minister, Nicholas Love, his life). In March 1654 Lord Protector Cromwell offered an amnesty to presbyterian exiles like Holles and a free pass home, and Holles gratefully accepted. He retired to his estate in Dorset and kept himself to himself until the eve of the Restoration. 
As soon as General Monck permitted the return of men secluded at Pride's Purge to rejoin the restored Rump Parliament, Holles took his seat and within two days, on 23 February 1660, he was appointed to the council of state. When elections to the Convention were held in April he was again returned as MP for Dorchester and he was one of those who dragged Sir Edward Turner to the speaker's chair, for once a playful act. He worked hard to put the clock back to December 1648 and to admit Charles II on the terms accepted by Charles I on the eve of the purge. But the yearning for settlement upon the king's good-natured promise to leave all to parliament (since most, even of the old, parliamentarians believed that the problem of the 1640s had been a problem with Charles I, not a problem with monarchy, this is not surprising) meant that Holles was once more outvoted. The decision to send him to take the unconditional offer of Restoration to the king was intended to get him out of the way at a delicate moment -- one cavalier told Edward Hyde that he had voted for 'the old ones' including Holles to be made the messengers since 'they would not be a trouble at home and might be sweetened by his Majesty's most excellent temper' (Crawford, 'Holles', 191). It worked all too well. Holles found sweetness too, and for once accepted defeat with a good grace. His reward for his mission and for a well-turned speech was a place on the privy council, although further reward, in the form of a peerage as Baron Holles, came from the dregs of the Restoration cornucopia in June 1661. 
Holles's role in the Restoration settlement was predictably erratic. He supported the principle of the 'Indemnity Bill', but was vindictive in his role on the high court trying the regicides. He was a key figure in the shaping of the Worcester House declaration of October 1660, which sought to re-establish bishops not as diocesan autocrats but as chairs of diocesan boards of governors and which re-established the old 'Book of Common Prayer' but with freedom for individuals to dissent from the 'noxious ceremonies' that had troubled so many pre-war puritans. From early on he showed great sensitivity to the privileges of the two houses and to the full restoration of parliamentary procedures. He was precocious in supporting the restoration of the judicial powers of the houses, and especially the appellate jurisdiction of the Lords. 
From 1662 to 1665 Holles was sent to Paris as Charles's ambassador. There his obsession with protocol and his determination to be accorded an exaggerated status as representative of the imperial crown of Britain caused irritated amusement to Charles II and cold fury in the French. Holles's comment that 'ceremony is substance, and who carries it in that will carry it in the essentials' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/119, fol. 110) was simply absurd in view of the calculated informality of Charles's own court and the king's own style. It rendered his embassy useless to the king; and all important negotiations with Louis XIV were conducted either via the French king's representative at St James, or via extraordinary ambassadors sent to Paris. In 1666-7 Holles was employed to negotiate a peace settlement with the Dutch at the end of the Second Anglo-Dutch War. Although much criticized at the time and since, this exercise in damage limitation was actually quite well managed in its outcome, if not in its 'too punctilious manner' (Crawford, 'Holles', 207). 
The last decade or so of Holles's life saw the general conservative drift of his life continue. He had been an angry young man. He turned into a rather vain and querulous old man, complaining about the younger generation, forgetful of the fierce passions of his own youth. He became a respectable supporter of the established church, with a strong preference for a good sermon and an unfussy liturgy, ready to dismiss a chaplain for a sexual lapse, but increasingly intolerant of those who opted out for the sake of conscience. Those he patronized in later life included Henry Compton, who was to become bishop of London, and Gilbert Burnet, fashionable preacher and polemicist. 
Holles's house in Covent Garden became (from early 1674) an early meeting place of those who were to become the leaders of the party that sought to place limitations on the power of the crown, including the exclusion of the Roman Catholic James, duke of York, from the succession. Thus he supported the first 'Test Act' that drove hundreds of Catholics from office, but opposed Danby's attempt to bind protestants to uphold the existing structures in church and state. He wrote passionately in favour of the jurisdiction of the House of Lords during the impasse arising from the case of Shirley 'v'. Fagg (1675) and he allowed his proxy to be used in an attempt to get a majority in favour of a parliamentary petition asking for a dissolution. In 1676 he was dropped from the privy council. He was sufficiently important for Charles to reinstate him when he was trying to curry favour at the height of the furore instigated by the Popish Plot revelations in 1679, but by then his shrill and querulous speeches were of little value to Charles's more potent opponents, especially as he, unlike Shaftesbury, was tempted to take up the king's offer of a bill to place limitations upon the power of a popish successor. His biographer claims that 'in the last years of his life Holles was a man out of his time' (Crawford, 'Holles', 218) and this seems an appropriate downbeat assessment. His piety was that of the pre-war aristocratic puritan, his politics were locked into the missed opportunities of the 1640s, his sense of personal honour and refined manners made him a fuddy-duddy on the fringes of the court of Charles II. Even his will, with its fussy traditionalist proclamation of his Calvinist reliance upon the 'merits and mediation of the Lord Christ my God and my Redeemer' (ibid., 210-11), is indicative of a man out of his time. Holles died on 17 February 1680 and was buried on 21 February in Westminster Abbey. A monument to him was erected in St Peter's, Dorchester, in 1699. His only surviving son, Francis, was from his first marriage and duly inherited the title. Holles's third wife, Esther, survived him by three years, seemingly having lived out her days in France. Denzil Holles was successful in almost everything he privately undertook, and unsuccessful in almost everything he publicly undertook. In particular, his passionate parliamentarianism was constantly counter-productive. 


@@@@@


doc= 13551


Holles, Sir Frescheville (1642-1672), naval officer, was born on 8 June 1642, the only son of Gervase Holles (1607-1675), antiquary, and his second wife, Elizabeth Molesworth (died 1662). Educated at the Middle Temple, he married Jane Crome ('b'. 'c'.1632), widow, daughter of Richard Lewis of Marr, Yorkshire, in 1662 -- primarily, it was said, because of the fact that she brought $5000 to the marriage. He was a major in the Westminster militia (in 1664-7), while part owning and commanding the privateer 'Panther' in 1665. His success in her brought him the recommendation of George Monck, duke of Albemarle, for a command in the navy, and on 2 October 1665 he became captain of the 'Antelope'. Holles's conduct in the Four Days' Fight (1-4 June 1666) was widely praised and led to his knighthood, although he had lost his left arm during the engagement. He commanded the 'Henrietta' from June to September 1666 (taking part in the St James's day fight on 25 July) before taking command of the 'Cambridge', remaining aboard her until January 1667. During the Dutch attack on the Medway in June 1667 he commanded the fireships guarding the Thames. He was returned to parliament for Great Grimsby on 22 November 1667, quickly becoming a leader of the attack on the naval administration's conduct of the war, allying himself with the duke of Buckingham's faction and speaking in favour of religious toleration. These activities hardly endeared him to the court, and in 1669 he was removed both from his captaincy in Albemarle's Coldstream regiment, which he had held since 1667, and from the place as a gentleman of the privy chamber that he had held since 1664. In 1670 he attempted unsuccessfully to enter the French service, then went to Ireland, where he bought timber for the navy. On his return to England he went over to the court, becoming a close ally of the duchess of Cleveland. With the outbreak of the Third Anglo-Dutch War he returned to the navy, rejoining the 'Cambridge' on 20 January 1672 and taking part in the attack on the Dutch Smyrna fleet on 13 March. The 'Cambridge' served as part of the admiral's division of the Red squadron at the battle of Solebay, on 28 May 1672, where Holles was killed. He was given a spectacular funeral on 29 June in Westminster Abbey. 
Holles's two wills, the first dated 17 May 1665 and the second 25 April 1672, encapsulate his personality. Despite declaring in the first that he wanted no monument other 'than what my sword should raise for me of honour and fortune', the second was concerned chiefly with the planning of an impressive memorial in Westminster Abbey. He made generous legacies to his friends, notably his executors, the banker Sir Robert Clayton and John Morris, and his former lieutenant Richard Carter. This combination of generosity, bravery, and vanity can also be seen in the famous 'double portrait' by Sir Peter Lely of Holles and Sir Robert Holmes, in which a swaggering Holles, sword in hand, is shown with no evidence of the lost left arm. Another of his former lieutenants recorded Holles's bravery and contemptuous disdain for his Dutch enemies ('so base a nation which were never guilty of any brave action'), as well as his recitation of poetry during a severe storm: '
Blow winds, beat seas, in vain you spend your breath 

My fate's too great by you to suffer death. 
(Ingram, 33, 41)' Pepys's opinion of Holles was less complimentary. Virtually every reference to Holles in Pepys's diary is critical, if not abusive. Pepys described Holles's crew as 'the most debauched, damning, swearing rogues that ever were in the navy, just like their profane commander' (Pepys, 'Diary', 8.272) and the man himself as 'a conceited, idle, prating, lying fellow... as idle and insignificant a fellow as ever came into the fleet' (ibid., 8.275, 9.76). Holles wrote his wife out of his 1672 will, but her subsequent discovery of the 1665 will which named her as sole executor and beneficiary ensured that Holles's legal and financial affairs remained in a chaotic state well after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 13552


Holles, Gervase (1607-1675), antiquary, was born at White Friars, Grimsby, Lincolnshire, on 9 March 1607, the only surviving son of Freschville Holles (1575-1630) and his wife, Elizabeth (1578-1608), daughter of John Kingston of Grimsby. His education which began at Grimsby grammar school was continued for nearly three years in the household of John Holles, first earl of Clare, who read logic and philosophy to him. After his father forbade him to enlist in Lord Vere's regiment in the Low Countries he entered Middle Temple in November 1628. Shortly after his father's death Holles married on 17 June 1630 Dorothy Kirketon and returned to Grimsby where for four years he was 'indulgent to my own contentment' and 'took great pleasure in searching the records and investigating antiquities' (Wood, 228). Holles decided in September 1634 to move to Mansfield and recommence his study of the law but the sudden death of his wife the following January led him to return to Grimsby. After the death of his son George on 10 August 1635 he re-entered the Middle Temple for the Michaelmas term. He was chosen comptroller of the house and made a contribution of $200 to the Christmas festivities. As the mayor of Grimsby in 1636 and 1638 he collected ship money from the town. Holles was elected to represent Grimsby in March and October 1640. On 26 April 1641 he was suspended from the house after he attacked the Scottish proposals for peace 'as beyond all proportion' (BL, Lansdowne MS 207f, fols. 37'v'-38'v'). The order was rescinded on 2 December. In January 1642 a Commons committee investigated an incident between Holles and John Ogle in Westminster Hall and concluded that provocation had been given by Holles. After Holles ignored a summons of 18 April to attend the house he was eventually disabled from sitting and on 22 August 1642 a new writ of elections was issued ('JHC', 2.128, 404, 537, 557, 734). 
Holles who had moved to live at Newark in 1640 was appointed to the Nottinghamshire commission of the peace in March 1641. He was among the signatories of a letter in June 1642 to the Nottinghamshire MPs which warned parliament it should not conceive that their votes should be the law. In July he made a modest contribution to the appeal in Nottinghamshire to raise a troop of horse for the king. In the next month Holles was commissioned by the earl of Lindsey as a captain in the regiment of Sir Lewis Dives and when Charles raised his standard he brought 117 men to Nottingham. In September he was appointed sergeant-major of a regiment of foot and fought for the king at Edgehill. Holles was made an honorary MA by the University of Oxford and appointed to the parliament held in the town. In December he was given permission as a colonel to raise a regiment of foot from Lincolnshire which in the next month served at the seizure of Belvoir Castle and at the repulse of an attack on Newark. He joined the earl of Newcastle's troops at the battle of Adwalton Moor and fought at the first battle of Newbury. In February 1644 his regiment which was defending Muskham Bridge at Newark was broken by Meldrum's attack. Charles appointed Holles governor of King's Lynn in April 1644 but the town was and remained in parliamentary control. When Holles applied to compound in December 1645 his fine was set at $738 but it was not paid. After a proposal to raise troops for the doge of Venice failed, he enlisted in the service of the king of France. He returned to England to fight in the second civil war and was captured at the siege of Colchester and imprisoned. After his release in December 1649 Holles went to France but he eventually settled in Rotterdam. His penurious circumstances probably led to his request to compound but he failed to pay a fine of $860. Holles was impatient with the policy of waiting on events and in March 1657 he was reported to the commander of the English troops assembled for an invasion. Holles who lived in expectation of an invitation to go to England prepared a list of Lincolnshire peers and gentry who would support the king but the failure of Booth's rising prevented his return (BL, Egerton MS 2541, fol. 362'r'- 'v'). In March 1660 Holles was informed that the king thought it was high time he returned to England. He was detained by lack of money and obligation to his landlady who had subsidized him for many years. Holles eventually returned in May 1660 and was in the next month appointed a master of requests. On 8 April 1661 he was elected to represent Grimsby in the House of Commons. Though he did not play an active role in the Commons he was listed among the dependants of the court in 1669 and 1671. Holles had been granted in January 1661 an annuity of $100 but the reward for which he was admirably suited, the keepership of the records in the Tower, eluded him ('Hastings MSS', 2.313; 'CSP dom.', '1673-5', 473). Sir Frescheville Holles, his son and heir by his second marriage (on 4 October 1637) to Elizabeth Molesworth (died 1662), was killed in 1672 and this branch of the Holles family ended with Gervase's death in London on 10 February 1675. He was buried on 13 March at Mansfield. 
Gervase Holles had originally intended 'to make a relation both historical and genealogical concerning Lincolnshire' by collecting many materials out of the records, charters, and church monuments of the shire. It was 'the damned and dire rebellion' which robbed him of his leisure and the greater part of his collection. Eight volumes of this collection now survive (BL, Lansdowne MSS 207a-f; Add. MSS 5531, 6118) but though parts of the work were transported to the Netherlands, Holles judged it was impossible to continue with his work on Lincolnshire. He decided to make a discourse of his family which now survives as the 'Memorials of the Holles Family' (ed. A. C. Wood). The 'Memorials' are the history of five generations of the Holles family whose position and prosperity were established by Sir William Holles, lord mayor of London in 1540. There are also genealogical accounts of the families with whom the Holleses married. It is the use of information from his contemporaries and his own experiences which, as in his account of John Holles, first earl of Clare, transforms his account from being mere tables of descent into a vivid portrait. It is regrettable that Gervase did not extend the brief account of his early life into the civil wars and their aftermath. 


@@@@@


doc= 13553


Holles, Gilbert, third earl of Clare (1633-1689), politician, was born on 24 April 1633 and baptized at Hackney on 18 May following, the second but only surviving son of John Holles, second earl of Clare (1595-1666), and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Vere (died 1683), eldest daughter and coheir of Horace Vere, Baron Vere of Tilbury. During his father's lifetime Gilbert Holles held the courtesy title of Lord Haughton. In August 1645 he was permitted by parliament to travel overseas and he appears to have avoided formal education in England. On 12 July 1655 he was contracted to, and shortly after married, Grace Pierrepont (died 1702), daughter of William Pierrepont of Thoresby, Nottinghamshire (the second son of Robert Pierrepont, first earl of Kingston). 
In the Convention Parliament of 1660 Haughton represented Nottinghamshire; he made no speeches and was not elected to a committee. Appointed deputy lieutenant in 1660, he remained on the Nottinghamshire commission for a decade but rarely acted. He succeeded to the earldom in January 1666 and first attended the Lords the following December. A private act of 1667 enabled Clare to sell parts of his estate to pay inherited debts and raise marriage portions for his sisters. Clare came to notice in the Lords in January 1674 with his criticism of the king's attending the house and attempting to influence debates; after his second attack he had to ask the pardon of the king and the house. He was a supporter of the 1674 'Comprehension Bill' and, in the same session, of the proposal to exclude a Catholic from the succession if they married without parliamentary approval. As a result of these activities, Clare was seen by the court as one of the most 'forward' lords and an associate of Shaftesbury (Christie, 156-7). In September 1674 Clare, who admitted to being 'much addicted to a natural melancholly', was given a licence to travel abroad for his health (Newcastle deeds collection, Ne D 67). After his return to the Lords in February 1678 he fully justified Shaftesbury's rating of him as triple worthy, a rating he gave to only twelve peers. He remained a conscientious attender and consistent supporter of the country lords' policy. In December 1679 Clare joined the presenters of a petition to the king for the calling of a parliament. He supported the attempts in June 1680 of a Middlesex grand jury to indict James, duke of York, for recusancy. Clare was among the minority of thirty lords who voted for exclusion. The decision to call a parliament at Oxford saw Clare join in a protest of the leading whigs. At the parliament Clare dissented from the decision of the Lords that the legal proceedings against the informer Fitzharris should be by due course of law and not, as the whigs wanted, by impeachment. He continued a resolute supporter of Shaftesbury, standing surety at his trial in 1681, as he did for the duke of Monmouth the same year, and also spoke as a defence witness for Algernon Sidney in 1683. In the parliament of 1685 Clare joined the small group of whig lords in protests at decisions to reverse the impeachments of the popish lords of March 1679 and the attainder of Viscount Stafford, executed for his alleged participation in the Popish Plot. His last public act was to sign a petition of 17 November 1688 asking James to call a parliament. He died on 16 January 1689 at Warwick House, Holborn, and was buried at St James's Church, Haughton. 
Though fined for conventicles held in his London properties, Clare was not an active patron of dissent. His will of 1686 shows him to have been an orthodox Calvinist and a critic of Arminianism. 'In this ill world', Clare complained, he found 'nothing but trouble and vexation of spiritt', and he particularly criticized his wife's frequent absences and love of London life. Despite his complaints about his indebted inheritance, which led to the sale of some London properties, he was able to retain the bulk of the estates he inherited. At his death they descended to his son John Holles, who later became duke of Newcastle upon Tyne. 


@@@@@


doc= 13554


Holles, John, first earl of Clare (d. 1637), landowner and politician, was the son of Denzel Holles (1538?-1590) and Eleanor, daughter of Edmund, Lord Sheffield. His year of birth is unknown. He matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1579, was a fellow-commoner in 1580, and entered Gray's Inn in 1583. In April 1590 his father died, followed some nine months later by his grandfather Sir William Holles, 'by whose decease there devolved upon him a very fayre and opulent inheritance and with it the care of divers brothers and sisters' (Holles, 'Memorials', 89). Holles saw military service against the Armada in the Netherlands and Ireland where he was knighted by the earl of Essex in October 1593. He served as sheriff of Nottinghamshire in 1591-2. After his marriage in 1591 to Anne Stanhope (1576-1651), daughter of Sir Thomas Stanhope, Holles became an active supporter of his father-in-law in the latter's disputes with Gilbert Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury. Holles was twice challenged to a duel by Gervase Markham, a follower of Shrewsbury, but they did not fight until 1598. Although Markham was seriously wounded both men escaped punishment. In 1597, after he failed to appear in Star Chamber when charged with infringing a proclamation forbidding new buildings in London, Holles was fined and criticized by Lord Burghley. Holles, who never let a public rebuke or insult pass unanswered, replied to Burghley's attack on the social status of his ancestors with a similar attack on the Cecils. Holles wisely ensured he was aboard the Azores expedition when the letter was delivered. 
Elected MP for Nottinghamshire in 1604 and 1614, Holles was not a leading member of the Commons but his collection of the shire's views on the great contract consolidated his position in the county. Although he served as a gentleman of the king's privy chamber, it was not until his appointment, in the autumn of 1610, as comptroller of Prince Henry's household, that his quest for an important court office was rewarded. After Henry's death Sir John's hopes of office through his patron Robert Carr, earl of Somerset, were dashed when evidence emerged which implicated the earl in the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury. Holles was prominent in the attempts to clear Somerset. These culminated in his unsuccessful plea to Richard Weston, at his execution at Tyburn for Overbury's murder, to absolve the earl. For his temerity Holles was fined $1000 and imprisoned but it was Sir Edward Coke's stinging attack when he passed sentence which he never forgot and sought to avenge. After his release Holles hoped that appointment to office would recover his reputation. He was led to believe that $10,000 would purchase the treasurership of the king's household and a barony. By the time Holles discovered that only a barony was offered he was too deeply engaged to withdraw without dishonour. Though he complained it meant there was 'no use in me for the King and the state, then my purs' ('Letters', 1.132), in July 1616 he paid $10,000 for the barony of Haughton. 
As an adviser to Elizabeth, Lady Hatton, the estranged wife of Sir Edward Coke, Haughton seized every opportunity to attack his enemy. In 1617 he represented Lady Hatton in the negotiations for the marriage of her daughter Frances to Sir John Villiers, a brother of the earl of Buckingham. When it was discovered that Coke, who had been dismissed from the bench, also saw the marriage as a way of regaining favour, Frances was removed to the country. Coke, who accused but never proved that Haughton was responsible for his stepdaughter's seclusion, seized Frances and his terms for the marriage were accepted by Buckingham. When Lady Hatton tried to defeat her husband by claiming there was a prior contract of marriage to the earl of Oxford, Haughton advised her to concede and seek the best available terms. She made her peace but Haughton found himself out of favour with Buckingham and James I. In 1618, when Margaret Langford accused Coke in Star Chamber of forcing her to sell lands in Derbyshire to him, Sir Edward accused Haughton of inciting the action. It was not until 1623 that this charge was withdrawn, by which time Haughton, who contested every legal move of his adversary, had been twice imprisoned for defying the orders of the privy council and the Star Chamber. He did become more cautious for in 1621 his refusal to join in a Star Chamber action brought against Coke, by Lepton and Goldsmith, two aggrieved patentees, was praised in the Commons. 
In 1624 Buckingham's intermediary Bishop Williams, the lord keeper, offered Haughton an earldom for $6000. As a sign of his worth Haughton asked that office should accompany the honour. When he heard of Buckingham's 'willingness' to appoint him to the council of war, and after securing a reduction in the price, Haughton paid $5000 for the earldom of Clare (BL, Harley MS 7000, fols. 161'r'-162'r'; 'Letters', 2.296-7). Clare was not, however, appointed to the council of war and in his letters he became increasingly critical of the actions and influence of Buckingham. He joined the 'patriott' lords in their defence of the privileges of the nobility and the liberties of the subjects ('Letters', 2.321, 334). In the 1626 parliament Clare was prominent in the attempts to free the earl of Arundel who had been imprisoned on the king's orders during the session. His fears that 'we gallopp all to the overthrow of Parliament...' were intensified when the crown tried to raise a forced loan. The nobility were expected to set an example by their subscriptions but Clare refused to lend for he believed the loan was unlawful and established a dangerous precedent. Although the realization that the king supported the loan perplexed him, he resisted all strategies to make it appear that he had contributed and was removed from the commission of the peace. 
In the 1628 parliament Clare supported the attempts of the Commons to 'settle the propriety and liberty of the subject' and then to grant in subsidies a 'most bountifull retribution' for this was 'a better way' than 'either King or people be driven to extremes...' ('Letters', 3.380). Clare played a leading role in the House of Lords debates, frequently arguing for accommodation with the Commons and the acceptance of the petition of right. In November 1629 Clare was imprisoned for possessing a pamphlet which urged the king to bridle the impertinency of parliaments and raise taxes by military force. It was eventually established that the proposals, which had been given to Clare by Somerset, had been rejected by James I and that the original was in Sir Robert Cotton's library. The charge that the pamphlet scandalized Charles I's government was now difficult to substantiate and the Star Chamber proceedings were withdrawn in May 1630. Clare believed he was prosecuted because of his opposition to the king's policies and his son Denzil Holles's opposition in the Commons during the session of 1629. After a submission to the king, Clare was eventually restored to the commission of the peace and asked, in June 1630, to investigate the complaints of the town of Misterton. He continued to oppose what he believed were illegal proceedings and in his last year Clare was contesting his fines for building in London and enclosures in Nottinghamshire. 
In 1629 Clare claimed he was unsuccessful in his search for court office because he was 'planted on the north side, where no court sunn shone, my nature advers to flatter greatnes, or to serve turns with base offices' ('Letters', 3.390). This explanation forgets his successes: the comptrollership of Prince Henry's household, and, though it proved unlucky, his alliance with Somerset. As the years 1615-19 showed it was his combative temperament which led him to obstruct legal proceedings, and into unwise actions and his vendetta with Coke that undermined his search for office. It is no surprise that in 1618 James was reported to have 'no manner of liking to him in any sort' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.133) and his career never recovered from his actions in these years. His independence and determination to defend a cause did enable Clare in the years 1626-9 to make an important contribution to the principled opposition to the attacks on the liberties of the subjects. 
From 1591, when he succeeded his grandfather, to his death in 1637 Clare spent at least $22,362 on the purchase of land in Nottinghamshire and Middlesex and $15,000 on the acquisition of peerages. In Nottinghamshire he concentrated on the consolidation of the properties he inherited around Haughton, the family seat. In Middlesex he followed a similar policy, adding to and improving his properties in and around the parish of St Clement Danes. As the profits from the lucrative London property market increased they came in the 1630s probably to amount to approximately half his rental income, which was about $4000 at his death ('Letters', 1.xvii-xxiii). He died on 4 October 1637 at Thurland House, Nottingham, and was buried three days later at St Mary's, Nottingham. His son and namesake John Holles succeeded to the earldom. 
Despite the disappointments of his search for office Clare could console himself that though he became a 'chapman' to purchase titles, he had settled his house in honour ('Letters', 1.135), and by his careful stewardship they had a more than sufficient income to maintain their status. 


@@@@@


doc= 13555


Holles, John, second earl of Clare (1595-1666), aristocrat, was born at Haughton, Nottinghamshire, on 13 June 1595, the son of John Holles, first earl of Clare (d. 1637), and Anne Stanhope (died 1651); Denzil Holles, the politician, was a younger brother. Holles attended Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1611 and was admitted to Gray's Inn in February 1612. He lived in Paris in 1615-16. His 1621 election for Gatton, Surrey, was annulled by the House of Commons; when returned for both Mitchell, Cornwall, and East Retford in 1624 he chose to represent the latter, a Nottinghamshire borough. He was re-elected for East Retford in 1625 and 1626, when he was known as Lord Haughton following his father's elevation to the earldom of Clare, and on 24 September 1626 married Elizabeth Vere (died 1683), daughter of Horace Vere, Baron Vere of Tilbury; he joined his father-in-law at the siege of Bois-le-Duc in 1629. He succeeded to the earldom in 1637. 
Clare lacked political ambition and was accepted by the king to have 'no manner of relation to the Court' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.142). In 1639 he claimed financial difficulties prevented him from producing the required equipage to attend on the king, then engaged against the Scots in the First Bishops' War. He joined the Lords in the 1640 Short Parliament, who voted that redress of grievances should precede supply. At the great council of peers held in September 1640 illness prevented him from acting as a commissioner to raise a royal loan from London, but he was appointed to advise the counties on the lending of money to the king. With the Long Parliament's 1641 impeachment of his brother-in-law, the earl of Strafford, Clare tried to counter the prosecution through his questioning of Secretary Vane over what Strafford had said at the crucial council meeting of 5 May 1640. When on 6 May 1641 the attack proceeded to voting on a bill of attainder against Strafford, he was excused for being absent from the upper house. 
Thereafter Clare's stance showed some affinity with that of the 'popular' peers. He joined with five peers in September 1641 to protest at the Lords' decision to reissue their order of January 1641 upholding established church services, in opposition to the Commons' resolution ordering the removal of Laudian 'innovations'. In December 1641 his apprehension about the appointment of the royal nominee, Thomas Lunsford, to the sensitive military post of lieutenant of the Tower was recorded and in the next month he was among a substantial minority of the Lords who protested at the rejection of the Commons' proposal that parliamentary control of the militia was absolutely necessary. After these protests he was the obvious parliamentarian appointee as lord lieutenant of Nottinghamshire but he took no action to implement the militia ordinance. Instead, by June 1642 he had joined the king at York and signed a declaration that Charles had no intention to make war on parliament; Clarendon remembered that at this time he 'was looked upon as a man not only firm to the principles of monarchy but of duty to the person of the King' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.153). Having learned of the king's resolution to raise his standard for war, however, Clare was among three peers who left York, having failed to persuade the king against this step. He returned to the residue of the Lords at Westminster in August when he was thanked for his carriage at York which 'tended to the preservation of the peace of the kingdom' ('JHL', 5.284). 
In the following month Clare was appointed to the committee for the safety of the kingdom and attended the Lords until August 1643. It was after the rejection of the Lords' peace propositions by the Commons that he followed the earls of Holland and Bedford to the king's court at Oxford. He was received by Charles at the siege of Gloucester, fought with the royalists at the battle of Newbury, and was admitted to the councils of war, yet royalist hostility to the peace proposals, in turn, opened his eyes and, 'undeceived', he left Oxford and eventually returned to London. In a letter of April 1644 to Essex which gives an explanation of his action he claimed it was 'the cause only and no other particular By-respects hath brought me back' ('JHL', 6.495-6). Though the sequestration of his estates was rescinded and he took the covenant in April 1645, attempts to secure his readmission to the Lords failed. After his return Clare's political affiliations showed a consistency which had previously been absent. In June 1645 parliament appointed him to the Nottinghamshire committee of the northern association and in March 1646 warden of Sherwood Forest. After the first civil war he tried to restore order to Sherwood and continued during the Commonwealth and protectorate in his attempts to apply forest law and preserve the woods. He retained throughout these years his recordership of Nottingham. 
It was not until April 1660, when he was reported to be ready to follow the earl of Bedford and take his seat in the Lords, that Clare again began to consider taking a part in national politics. It needed a letter from the Lords asking him to attend before he took his seat on 5 May 1660 and he was a conscientious member of the Convention Parliament during its first few months and attended irregularly the Cavalier Parliament. The earl was more successful in persuading the king of his loyalty than the Nottinghamshire royalists. He was appointed to the standing council to consider the future regulation of the colonies but it needed the intervention of Charles II and Clarendon to defeat the attempts of the Nottinghamshire corporation commissioners to remove him from the recordership of Nottingham. Clare, they insisted, was a person whose 'good affection and zeale to our service we have no cause at all to doute' (U. Nott. L., MS Pw V 4, 286-7). 
Clare had been taught by his father to be a careful steward of his inherited estates. They were concentrated in north Nottinghamshire and the parish of St Clement Danes, Middlesex, which was part of the rapidly growing London property market. He was purchasing land before his father's death and continued until the civil war the family's policy of seizing every opportunity to consolidate and enlarge its estates. He claimed in 1639 that his income was not near $4000, but his rental accounts showing $4069 0's'. 2died for that year prove that this estimate had been exceeded. During the interregnum Clare's major project was the improvement of and erection of new properties in and around St Clement Danes parish, for which he paid a fine in the protectorate of $1500 and spent $12,299 4's'. 4died before 1661. In 1657 he was given permission by parliament to hold a market and this privilege was confirmed in 1661. The last recorded rentals from Michaelmas 1664 to Lady day 1665 totalled $6626 3's'. 1died After Clare's death on 2 January 1666 the estate, which was encumbered by provision for dowries for his daughters and debts, descended to his son Gilbert Holles, third earl of Clare. Clare was buried at St Mary's Church, Nottingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 13556


Holles, John, duke of Newcastle upon Tyne (1662-1711), landowner and politician, was born on 9 January 1662, probably in Nottinghamshire, the eldest son of Gilbert Holles, third earl of Clare (1633-1689), and his wife, Grace (died 1702), daughter of William Pierrepont of Thoresby, Nottinghamshire. From his father's accession to the earldom in 1666 he was known as Lord Haughton. Nothing seems to be known of his education beyond that he enjoyed 'all the advantages of education at home and abroad' (Collins, 178). He was the dedicatee of John Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar' in 1681, but there is no evidence that he was at court at this period. 
In November 1688 Haughton waited on William of Orange as a representative of the supporters of the risings at York and Nottingham. He was elected to the Convention Parliament as a member for Nottinghamshire on 14 January 1689, but two days after his election his father died and he became fourth earl of Clare and inherited the Holles estates, mainly in Nottinghamshire and London. In the Lords he voted for the transfer of the crown to William and Mary, and was rewarded with the offices of gentleman of the bedchamber to William and lord lieutenant of Middlesex. Soon afterwards his mother suggested to her sister Frances, wife of Henry Cavendish, second duke of Newcastle, that he marry Newcastle's third but favourite daughter, Margaret (1661-1716). The marriage took place on 1 March 1690. By his will of May 1691 Newcastle left his estates, which were mainly in the east midlands and Northumberland, to Margaret and the heirs of her body, provided the estates remained undivided in the blood of the Cavendishes and that Margaret's descendants took the name of Cavendish in honour of the first duke of Newcastle. Clare vigorously defended the settlement in the court of chancery against Ralph Montagu, first earl of Montagu, who had married Newcastle's eldest daughter, Elizabeth, and Thomas Tufton, sixth earl of Thanet, who had married Newcastle's fourth daughter, Catherine. Chancery rejected all attempts to invalidate the will; the duel which Thanet and Clare fought on 13 May 1692 saw both wounded and did nothing to change the issue. 
Clare, supported by his father-in-law, applied for a dukedom on 18 April 1691, but William III refused. The death of the duke on 26 July 1691 brought him the Newcastle estates, where he was able to pay an outstanding mortgage of $80,000. Disappointed at not receiving the dukedom he sought, Clare resigned as gentleman of the bedchamber and (in 1692) lord lieutenant of Middlesex, and retired to his estates, where he proved an informed and careful steward. On the death of his unmarried kinsman Denzil Holles, third Baron Holles of Ifield, on 25 January 1694, he succeeded to his property scattered throughout southern England. Clare also spent about $200,000 adding to the Nottinghamshire properties, re-creating the Holles interest in Lincolnshire, and acquiring substantial estates in Cambridgeshire, Bedfordshire and Huntingdonshire. 
Clare was an informed and careful steward of his estates. He was, in the estimation of Bishop Burnet, 'the richest subject that had been in England for some ages' ('Bishop Burnet's History', ed. Burnet and Burnet, 2.579), and on 14 May 1694 he was created marquess of Clare and duke of Newcastle upon Tyne. The next month he became lord lieutenant of Nottinghamshire. In October 1695 he reportedly spent $5042 on entertaining William III at Welbeck Abbey, inherited through his wife, which became his principal residence instead of the Holles family seat of Haughton. As long promised he was installed KG on 7 July 1698. His support for the junto ministry was rewarded in August 1699 with the lieutenancy of the East Riding of Yorkshire and the wardenship of the New Forest. 
Newcastle became one of the leading electoral patrons of his day. At the core of his interest were East Retford in Nottinghamshire and Dorchester in Dorset, where he became high steward in January 1701. He purchased control of Aldborough, Yorkshire, and in neighbouring Boroughbridge his acquisitions in alliance with one of its leading families enabled him to significantly influence the return. In the first years of Anne's reign Newcastle voted with the whigs but, as before, he had little interest in major political office, until in March 1705 his friend Robert Harley persuaded him to join the Godolphin-Marlborough administration as lord privy seal. He was also sworn of the privy council and became lord lieutenant of the North Riding of Yorkshire, and from 1706 to 1707 was a commissioner for the union with Scotland. In the last two sessions of the parliament of 1705-8 Newcastle had a tight personal following of ten members, 'nearly all of whom were either mainly or entirely indebted' to him for their seats (Holmes, 225). His wealth and influence enabled him to act independently and he remained lord privy seal after the reconstruction of the ministry and tory victory in 1710. He was rewarded with more local offices, becoming chief justice in eyre, north of Trent, from September 1710, and lord lieutenant of Middlesex in July 1711. Newcastle seemed set to enjoy his extended influence; he was trusted by Queen Anne and by Harley, although his adherence to the ministry had shaken his whig friends and was regarded with misgiving by some tories. However, on 13 July 1711 he fell from his horse while stag-hunting at Welbeck, and died there on 15 July. He was buried on 9 August 1711 at Westminster Abbey, 'under a sumptuous monument' (GEC, 'Peerage'). 
Newcastle's will of 29 August 1707 was the object of much critical comment by contemporaries, but underlines the priorities which governed his life. He attempted to keep the majority of his estates undivided and perpetuate his family's name. The bulk of his estate was left to his nephew, Thomas Pelham ['see 'Holles, Thomas Pelham-, duke of Newcastle upon Tyne and first duke of Newcastle under Lyme], the son of his sister Grace who had married Thomas Pelham, first Baron Pelham of Laughton. The duchess of Newcastle received her jointure. Their only child, Henrietta (1694-1755) ['see 'Harley, Henrietta Cavendish, countess of Oxford and Mortimer], was given a marriage portion of $20,000 and the former Cavendish properties in Staffordshire, Northumberland, and Yorkshire provided she did not enter upon or sue for any other parts of her father's real estate. The duchess and her daughter, who in 1713 married Edward Harley, later second earl of Oxford and Mortimer, contested the will, claiming that Newcastle had no right to dispose of the Cavendish estate. After protracted litigation and the death of the duchess a settlement was agreed and given statutory form in 1719. Henrietta now received, with the exception of Nottingham Castle, all the properties that Newcastle had inherited from his father-in-law, the last Cavendish duke, in 1691, including Welbeck and Bolsover, and the acquisitions Newcastle had made since making his will in 1707. Henrietta had succeeded in increasing her share, but Newcastle had succeeded in keeping the majority of his possessions together which went, with the Yorkshire parliamentary boroughs, to Pelham. 


@@@@@


doc= 13557


Holles, Sir William (1471?-1542), mayor of London, was one of three sons of Thomas Holles, yeoman, of Stoke. He was born at Stoke in Warwickshire, on the outskirts of Coventry. One brother, Thomas, became a priest. Holles was apprenticed to Robert Kervile, citizen and mercer of London, on 13 July 1493. He was admitted to the freedom of the Mercers' Company on 17 September 1499, entered the livery in 1507, was warden in 1518-19, and became master of the company in 1529. He married, before 1509, Elizabeth (died 1544), daughter of John (or Thomas) Scopeham of London, and had sons John (who died young, possibly at the Guild of the Holy Trinity, Coventry), Thomas, William, and Francis, and daughters Anne and Joan. Holles was elected sheriff of London by the commonality in September 1527, and alderman for Aldgate ward on 31 March 1528; in August 1534 he transferred to Broad Street ward. A merchant of the staple and a supplier of fine imported cloth to Henry VIII, he attended the baptism of Princess Elizabeth on 10 September 1533 and was knighted the following month. 
Considered to be London's most religiously conservative alderman, Holles was prevented from being selected as lord mayor in 1536, and the protestant Ralph Warren was elected instead. This led the city to petition the king to permit its accustomed free election, but royal intrusion again prevented Holles's selection in 1537 and 1538. He was allowed to assume the mayoralty on 13 October 1539. During his year in office Holles caused the moor ditch to be cleaned, and received Anne of Cleves in great state on 3 January 1540, but he was best known for the steadfast persecution of protestant heresy within the city. In July of 1540 as many as 500 Londoners were arrested and interrogated under the provisions of the 'Act of Six Articles' (1539). This proved to be so divisive that restraints on the city's enthusiasm were imposed by the state. 
Holles was also known for his sharp business practices. In 1536 he alienated Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, when he conspired to transfer a long-disputed Somerset estate to Sir Edward Seymour by offering Lisle a short-term loan and then foreclosing on the estate. In a similar manner, Holles acquired property in Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, and Derbyshire for the inheritance of his younger son William by foreclosing in 1537 on his loan to Sir Ralph Langford. He purchased manors from, among others, William Fitzwilliam, earl of Southampton, Thomas Manners, earl of Rutland, and Sir Thomas Elliot, leased crown property, and speculated in the lands of the dissolved religious houses, as he built up landed estates for each of his three adult sons. On his deathbed he observed that he had: 'hughly and singulerly preferred and set forthe my three sones in my lyfe tyme and have given and assured unto every of theym Manors landes tenements and heredytamentes And whiche of them that hath least cost me foure Thousande markes [$2666 13's'. 4died] and above. (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/29, sig. 110)' The eldest son, Sir Thomas of Newstead, Lincolnshire, and Flitcham, Norfolk, married Catherine Payne, a maid of honour to Katherine of Aragon. The second, Sir William (died 1591), established a notable family seat at Haughton, Nottinghamshire, on property purchased for him from John Babington, married in 1535 Anne, daughter and coheir of John Denzel, and served as sheriff of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire under Mary I and Elizabeth I; his grandson and heir, John Holles (1564-1637), was created earl of Clare in 1624. The youngest son, Francis, of Hainton, Lincolnshire, esquire, married Katherine, daughter of John Heneage of Hainton, but died in 1543 without heirs. Anne, who predeceased her father, married Sir John Whiddon, serjeant-at-law and later judge of queen's bench. The extent of Holles's wealth is suggested by his assessment for the royal subsidy of 1541; at $4000, the mercer was rated second in the entire city. 
Holles died in London, in the parish of St Helen, Bishopsgate, on 20 October 1542; his remains were interred in St Helen's. By his will, dated 25 December 1541 and proved on 18 December 1542, he requested requiem masses for twenty years at the churches of St Thomas Becket and St Helen, Bishopsgate, and in the mystery of the Mercers' Company. He completed payment of $200 to the city of Coventry for the erection of a 57-foot-high city cross at Cross Chipping, which stood until 1771. His son and heir, Thomas, was granted livery of his lands on 26 April 1543. Through improvidence he was said to have wasted an inheritance estimated to be worth $10,000 per annum and, according to family tradition, died in prison. Dame Elizabeth Holles died on 13 March 1544. By her will of 17 February 1544 she endowed almshouses for six aged men or women beside the church of St Helen, Bishopsgate (later called Sir Andrew Judd's Almshouses), and bestowed the residue of her estate upon deeds of charity at the discretion of her executors, Andrew Judd and Thomas Scopeham. 


@@@@@


doc= 13558


Holliday, John (1730/31-1801), barrister and writer, about whose birth and parents nothing is known, entered Lincoln's Inn on 5 May 1759 and was called to the bar on 23 April 1771. By August 1789 he married Elizabeth, daughter and sole heir of Elizabeth Harrison, widow, of Dilhorne Manor, Staffordshire, with whom he had an only child, Elizabeth Lydia. As well as acquiring Dilhorne through marriage, Holliday purchased nearby Cheadle Park from Sir Joseph Banks, and one or both properties incorporated working coalmines. He also built a successful legal practice, specializing in conveyancing, and engaged in charitable occupations, becoming a governor of the royal hospitals Bridewell and Bedlam, and the Foundling Hospital. Holliday also found time to indulge his eclectic interests. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 9 March 1786, and he was an active member of the Society of Arts and Manufactures, winning the society's gold medal in 1792 for having planted 118,000 mixed timber trees on his estates. 
Holliday cultivated his modest literary talent over many years. He is said to have composed a translation of Virgil in hexameter verse in his youth. Towards the end of his life he published 'The British Oak' (1800), a rambling poem, in couplets, which celebrates selected episodes of local and national history during the life of an ancient oak tree planted in Cheadle Park. The poem was dedicated to Nelson in gratitude for his victory at the Nile (1798). Holliday's most significant prose publication is 'The Life of William Late Earl of Mansfield' (1797), a well researched biography of his friend and patron William Murray, the controversial judge and eminent politician. Holliday had been in awe of Murray since the latter's appointment as lord chief justice in 1756. Murray's vigorous toryism probably indicates Holliday's politics also. Holliday personally gathered some of his materials for his biography from among the most eminent lawyers of his day, confirming his acceptance within the highest circles of the legal profession. He sat to George Romney, in London, between 1791 and 1793. At the end of the nineteenth century the painting hung in Lupton House, Brixham, Devon, which burnt down on 8 March 1926. The 'Torquay Times' for 12 March disclosed that a Romney had been destroyed in the blaze. Pictures and books which were salvaged from the fire were subsequently stored on the first floor of a stable block which also burnt down, on 23 February 1928. The portrait survived, much damaged, and after restoration was sold to a private buyer. 
At the very end of his life Holliday wrote a brief memoir of Owen Salusbury Brereton, a past vice-president of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce, which appeared posthumously in the society's 'Transactions' for 1801. By a curious irony Holliday was expected to be selected for the same office but he died at his house in Great Ormond Street, London, on 9 March 1801, a week before the election was due to take place. According to an obituary he died 'in his seventy first year' ('GM', 71/1). In addition to his immediate family members, Holliday made Charles Abbot, future lord chief justice, one of the beneficiaries of his will. He also directed that mourning rings should be sent to, among others, Nelson's former commander in the Mediterranean Admiral John Jervis, Earl St Vincent, and his wife, his neighbours in nearby Meaford, Staffordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 13559


Hollings, Edmund (c.1556-1612), physician, born in Yorkshire, matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, in 1573, when he was aged seventeen, and was admitted BA on 7 February 1575. Renouncing protestantism, he moved to France, and on 14 May 1579 was received into the English College of Douai, then temporarily located in Rheims. On 21 August of the same year he left the college to travel on foot to Rome, in company with five other students, who were admitted into the English College there in the following October. Hollings, however, does not appear to have become a member of the college, though he certainly lived there for several years, and became an intimate friend of John Pits the biographer. An English spy, in his report to the government, stated that Hollings was one of the pope's scholars in the college in 1581 (Knox). 
From Rome Hollings moved on to Ingolstadt in Bavaria, where he was created MD and appointed professor of medicine. He was 'highly venerated for his great knowledge, and the success he obtained in that faculty' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.'). 
All Hollings's works were published in Ingolstadt. They cover various aspects of medicine. The first was 'De chylosi' (1592); the other works include 'De salubri studiosorum victu' (1602), 'Medicamentorum et oeconomia nova' (1610), and 'Ad epistolam quandam a Martino Rulando, medico caesario, de lapide bezoar' (1611). There were also collections of poems, orations and letters. Hollings died in Ingolstadt on 26 March 1612. 


@@@@@


doc= 13560


Hollings, John (bap. 1682, d. 1739), physician, was baptized at St Chad, Shrewsbury on 14 November 1682, the son of John Hollings (1635?-1712?), a physician of that town, and his wife, Anne. After attending Shrewsbury School, he entered Magdalene College, Cambridge, as a pensioner, on 27 March 1700, and graduated MB in 1705 and MD in 1710. He was admitted a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 25 June 1725, and became a fellow on 25 June 1726, having on 9 March previously been elected FRS. 
Hollings rose to be physician-general to the army and physician-in-ordinary to the king. With his wife, Jane, he had two sons, John (died 1739), a physician, and Richard (died 1741), solicitor-general to the prince of Wales from 1736 to 1741, and two daughters. Hollings died at his home in Pall Mall, London, on 10 May 1739. 
Hollings's reputation for classical scholarship and general culture was considerable among his contemporaries. His only publication was the Harveian oration for 1734, entitled 'Status humanae naturae expositus in oratione coram medicis Londinensibus habita' (1734), of which an English translation appeared the same year. 


@@@@@


doc= 13561


Hollingworth, Richard (1639?-1701), royalist writer, was born in Lincolnshire, perhaps the son of Simonde Hollingworth of Stewton, near Louth, and baptized on 6 October 1639. He entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, as a sizar on 5 February 1655 and graduated in 1659; he proceeded MA in 1662 and DD in 1684. He was ordained by Robert Sanderson, bishop of Lincoln, and in 1663 was licensed to a lectureship in London by Gilbert Sheldon, bishop of London, on the recommendation of John Dolben, archbishop of York. On 18 April 1672 he became vicar of West Ham, Essex, and between 1673 and 1681 he published several sermons attacking nonconformists as well as one at the execution of John Marketman at Chelmsford gaol (1680). In 1682 Hollingworth resigned West Ham to become curate to James Adern, rector of St Botolph, Aldgate, London, where he officiated at the marriage, by special licence, of Daniel Defoe on 1 January 1684. Following Adern's resignation Hollingworth succeeded to the living, but he was ejected after an action by Samuel Brewster, the impropriator, in 1693. Hollingworth may have been involved in the trade of clandestine marriages, and was summoned before the ecclesiastical commission on 2 October 1686 for marrying people without licences. From 22 January 1691 he was also vicar of Chigwell, Essex, where he moved in 1693 on his ejection from St Botolph. 
Hollingworth is remembered for his part in the complex and heated exchange of pamphlets between 1691 and 1693 debating the authorship of 'Eikon basilike: Pourtraicture of his Sacred Majestie in his Solitudes and Sufferings'. Doubts over the authorship of 'Eikon basilike', popularly ascribed to Charles I, had been expressed since its appearance in 1649, but were rekindled in 1690 by the insertion of the 'Anglesey memorandum' in a new edition of John Milton's 'Eikonoklastes', asserting that the work had been written by John Gauden, later bishop of Worcester. This claim was supported by Anthony Walker of Bocking, Gauden's former curate. The following year an anonymous republican pamphleteer, using the name of the regicide Edmund Ludlow, published 'A Letter from Major-General Ludlow to Sir E[dward] S[eymour]', in Amsterdam, which criticized Charles I, comparing his tyranny with that of James II. Hollingworth was incensed by these claims and attacked both Walker and Ludlow in equally intemperate terms in 'A Defence of King Charles I: Occasion'd by the Lyes and Scandals of many Bad Men of this Age', in December 1691. (Another work on the same subject, 'Vindiciae Carolinae', published in 1692 and once attributed to Hollingworth, is now ascribed to John Wilson, author of 'A Discourse of Monarchy'.) Anthony Walker responded to Hollingworth's attack with modesty and obvious sincerity in 'A true account of the author of a book entitled 'Eikon basilike'... proved to be written by Dr. Gauden... with an answer to all objections made by Dr. Hollingsworth and others'. Edmund Ludlow responded in less measured terms with 'A Letter from General Ludlow to Dr. Hollingworth' (1692), accusing him of hypocrisy in defending a cause he had formerly reviled. 
Walker died before his book appeared in May 1692, but nevertheless Hollingworth returned to attack him with 'Dr. Hollingworth's defence of K. Charles the First's holy and divine book... against the rude and undutiful assaults of the late Dr. Walker'. Likewise he responded to Ludlow with 'A second defence of King Charles I by way of reply to an infamous libel called Ludlow's letter to Dr. Hollingworth'. This work called forth another largely scurrilous reply entitled 'Ludlow no lyar, or, A detection of Dr. Hollingworth's disingenuity in his second defence of King Charles I... together with a reply to the false and malicious assertions in the doctor's lewd pamphlet' (1692); it was addressed to Luke Milbourne, described as a minister of Great Yarmouth and 'Assistant to Dr Hollingworth in his mighty undertakings', who later achieved notoriety as a satirist and for his high-church sermons. The Ludlow pamphlets have since been variously attributed to Slingsby Bethel, John Phillips, Thomas Percival, and more recently John Toland, the editor and biographer of Milton. Hollingworth again responded in kind with 'The character of King Charles I from the declaration of Mr. Alexander Henderson... with a further defence of the king's holy book: to which is annex'd some short remarks upon a vile book, call'd Ludlow no lyar'. Late in 1692 Thomas Long, prebendary of Exeter, joined the debate with 'Dr Walker's true, modest and faithful account... strictly examined, and demonstrated to be false, impudent and deceitful'. Both of these works were answered by an anonymous work 'The plain dealer: an essay wherein are some remarks upon Mr. Thomas Long, but more particularly upon Dr. Hollingworth's book'. Ludlow also responded with 'Truth brought to light, or, The gross forgeries of Dr. Hollingworth, in his pamphlet intituled, The character of King Charles the First... detected, being a vindication of Mr. Henderson and Dr. Walker, from the Aldgate chaplain's vile scandals', which appeared early in 1693. 
Hollingworth attempted to reply yet again in a sermon commemorating the anniversary of the execution of Charles I, entitled 'The Death of King Charles I Proved a Down-Right Murder', which was published in February 1693, but thereafter he appears to have withdrawn from the continuing pamphlet war, possibly due to his ejection from his London living. 
Hollingworth died at Chigwell in October 1701, and his widow, Margaret, was granted the administration of the estate on the 28th of that month. The controversy over 'Eikon basilike' had the effect of bringing to light a range of conflicting evidence and the testimonies of several surviving witnesses (details of which are discussed in an appendix to Madan, 126-63), but without resolving the matter. Hollingworth's heated and outspoken language and unsubstantiated accusations against his enemies did not endear him to contemporaries. According to Richard Baxter, some of the accusations in his sermons were 'a meer fiction' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.180). 


@@@@@


doc= 13562


Hollins, John (1798-1855), portrait and subject painter, was born in Birmingham on 1 June 1798, the son of a glass-painter in that town. He showed an early artistic talent, and sent two portraits to the Royal Academy exhibition in 1819 and three more in 1821. In 1822 he moved to London, where he produced oil paintings and occasionally miniatures. He travelled to Italy in 1825 and studied art there for two years. On his return in 1827 he resumed practice in London, and became a frequent exhibitor at the Royal Academy and the British Institution. Besides portraits he painted numerous historical subjects from the works of Shakespeare, Goethe, and other writers. Later in life he applied himself to landscapes and figure subjects. He was successful in his colour and grouping, and his portraits were considered good likenesses. Hollins was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1842. Between 1836 and 1838 he had painted an important memorial picture, now in the National Portrait Gallery's collection, called 'A consultation previous to an aerial voyage from London to Weilburg in Nassau on November 7th, 1836'. In this composition Hollins introduced portraits of various people of note, namely W. Prideaux, the lawyer and poet; W. M. James; T. Monck Mason, the musician and writer; Charles Green, the balloonist; Robert Holland, lawyer and MP for Hastings from 1837 to 1852; Sir William Milbourne, lord justice of appeal; and himself (exh. RA, 1838; Bodelwyddan Castle, Flintshire). In 1854 he painted and exhibited (in conjunction with F. R. Lee RA) 'Salmon Fishing on the Awe', in which he also portrayed several people notable at the time (exh. RA, 1854). Another painting by Hollins in the collection of the National Portrait Gallery is a portrait of Charles Abbott, Lord Tenterden, copied by Hollins in 1850 from a portrait by William Owen (originally exh. RA, 1819). Hollins died unmarried at his home, 47 Berners Street, London, on 7 March 1855 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. William Hollins (1763-1843) (architect and sculptor) and Peter Hollins (1800-1886) ['see under 'Hollins, William] were his cousins. 


@@@@@


doc= 13563


Peter Hollins (1800-1886), sculptor, was born on 1 May 1800 at 17 Great Hampton Street, Birmingham, the fourth surviving son of William Hollins, an elder Peter having died in infancy. He took drawing lessons at J. Vincent Barber's academy in Newhall Street, and trained in his father's studio until about 1822, when he went to work under Sir Francis Chantrey before returning to assist in his father's practice. While his father was employed at Alton Abbey, Peter carved much of the marble statuary and other ornamental work in the gardens, including a bust of Charles Talbot, fifteenth earl of Shrewsbury. About 1831 he established a London studio in Old Bond Street, before finally returning to Great Hampton Street following William's death in 1843. He restored the tower front of St Philip's Church (now the cathedral) in his father's memory. For thirty-seven years he was vice-president of the Royal Birmingham Society of Artists. 


@@@@@


doc= 13564


Hollins, William (1763-1843), architect and sculptor, was born at Shifnal, Shropshire, on 18 March 1763, the son of John and Mary Hollins. He married 'c'.1783 Catherine (1764-1831), daughter of Peter and Betty Holbrook of Middlewich, Cheshire, with whom he had sixteen children. They settled at 17 Great Hampton Street, Birmingham, which remained William's, and then his son Peter's, home and studio until 1886. Originally a journeyman stonemason, William Hollins taught himself drawing and perspective, learned the rudiments of classical architecture in the London office of George Saunders, and in 1792 assisted Saunders with the working drawings for the rebuilding of the Birmingham Theatre Royal. 
Hollins had established his own practice in Birmingham by 1798, when he designed the old buildings of the Union Street Library. In 1808 he built the old Dispensary, also in Union Street; and in 1813 the Birmingham Proof House, Banbury Street. Other Birmingham buildings by Hollins survive only in prints: the earliest parts of the public offices and prison in Moor Street (1805), the Institute for Promoting the Fine Arts, and the Egyptian Conduit in the Bull Ring (1807). Though Hollins's architecture is predominantly Greek revival in style, he experimented with Gothic, notably in the restoration of Handsworth parish church ('c'.1819), and additions to the earl of Shrewsbury's Staffordshire residence, Alton Abbey, including ornamental stone carving; in 1817 he was working on a new Gothic entrance hall at Alton, and the installation of a steam heating system. Hollins's ideas of architectural style were associational ones. When building the Egyptian Conduit at Birmingham, he justified the placing of a pyramid at the side of the Gothic church of St Martin's by arguing that the pyramid was the Egyptian symbol of the deity. 
As a sculptor, Hollins was outshone by his son Peter, though he exhibited at the Birmingham Society of Artists and the Royal Academy. Several of his buildings included carved figures, and he designed memorials for a number of churches in the Birmingham area. His studies of Roman lettering were used to formulate a set of rules for their construction: 'The British Standard of Capital Letters Contained in the Roman Alphabet' (1813). In addition he prepared drawings for the new royal mint at St Petersburg, having declined, it is said, an invitation from the empress Catherine II to join her team of imperial architects. Hollins died at his home on 12 January 1843 and was buried in the churchyard at St Paul's, Birmingham. A memorial inside the church incorporates a portrait bust carved by his son Peter. 


Hollins's best work is considered to be equal to that of Chantrey, fine examples being his monuments to Sophia Thompson at Malvern Priory, Worcestershire (1838), and to the countess of Bradford at Weston under Lizard, Staffordshire (1842). He produced over sixty major works including several exhibited at the Royal Academy. Crippled with rheumatism in later years, he died at 17 Great Hampton Street on 16 August 1886 and was buried in the family plot in St Paul's churchyard, Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 13565


Hollinworth, Richard (bap. 1607, d. 1656), Church of England clergyman, son of Francis Hollinworth (died 1657) and his wife, Margaret Wirrall or Worrall (died 1642), was born at Manchester and baptized on 15 November 1607 at Manchester collegiate church. He was educated at the Manchester grammar school and Magdalene College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1627, and proceeding MA in 1630. His Cambridge contemporaries included other future Lancashire and Cheshire puritan ministers -- John Angier, Christopher Hudson, and Samuel Torshell. 
Hollinworth's first clerical appointment after his ordination was to a curacy at Middleton, Manchester. He had moved to the new chapel at Salford by 1636 (having preached at its dedication service on 20 May 1635) and remained there until the 1640s. He succeeded William Bourne as fellow of the collegiate church, Manchester, in 1643. During the suspension of the corporate body of the college by the parliament he officiated, along with Richard Heyrick, the warden, as a 'minister' and dropped his title of fellow, although the college was not actually dissolved until 1650. The protestation of the people of Salford in 1642 had been taken before him as minister of the town. In 1644 he was named in an ordinance of parliament for ordaining ministers in Lancashire. During an outbreak of plague in Manchester in 1645 he worked unstintingly among the people, his duties being increased through Heyrick's absence in London at the Westminster assembly. 
Hollinworth, as a staunch presbyterian, was vocal both in preaching and in print in his opposition to the idea of religious toleration and to the Independents of the Manchester region in particular. 'An Examination of Sundry Scriptures alleadged by our Dissenting Brethren' (1645) and 'Certain Queres Modestly (though Plainly) Propounded to such as Affect the Congregational Way' (1646) were two such products of this pamphlet warfare, and Samuel Eaton and Timothy Taylor of Dukinfield were their principal targets. He corresponded on this subject with Thomas Edwards who incorporated Hollinworth's disclosures in his 'Gangraena' (1646, 3.67, 166). 
Hollinworth and Heyrick played a prominent part in ensuring that the presbyterian experiment in Lancashire, established by parliamentary ordinance on 2 October 1646, was much more vigorous than that enacted elsewhere. Held in high esteem by his co-religionists -- Henry Newcome, for instance, sang his praises and was still invoking his memory in the 1670s -- Hollinworth readily assumed the role of a local leader. His name is the second of those appended to the harmonious consent of the Lancashire ministers with the ministers of London, in 1648, in which toleration is strongly condemned. He evidently assisted in preparing the Lancashire answer to the Levellers' 'Agreement of the People' in 1649, and in that year also he wrote a popular work in favour of the presbyterian system, entitled 'The main points of church government and discipline plainly and modestly handled by way of question and answer'. The short introductory epistle was signed by Christopher Love. 
After the battle of Worcester in September 1651, Hollinworth, along with Heyrick and Angier, was imprisoned on suspicion of 'some correspondence with the King his going through the country' ('Autobiography of Henry Newcome', 1.33), but he was soon released and returned to Manchester. He was centrally involved in the discussions which lay behind a succession of collective statements by the Lancashire presbyterian ministers in the 1650s. Along with Newcome and Angier he took a leading part in local debates on the taking of the engagement oath. In the Manchester classis he generally acted as moderator during Heyrick's absence. He was named in the parliamentary ordinance of 29 August 1654 as a commissioner for ejecting scandalous and ignorant ministers and schoolmasters in Lancashire. 
When Humphrey Chetham drew up his will for the foundation of the public library known by his name, he nominated Hollinworth one of his feoffees and as one of his chosen instruments for the setting up of smaller libraries in outlying churches and chapels in the Manchester area. Hollinworth continued to publish and to confront the destabilizing errors of the Quakers and other sects. 'The Catechist Catechised' and 'The Holy Ghost on the Bench' appeared in 1653 and 1657 respectively. In a modest way he was also a historian. He compiled 'Mancuniensis', a history of the town in which he had been born and with whose leading commercial families -- the Mosleys, Chethams, Nugents, and Hollands -- he was connected. Unfinished at the time of his death, it was belatedly published in Manchester in a very inadequate edition in 1839. 
Hollinworth died suddenly in Manchester on 3 November 1656, aged forty-nine, and was buried two days later in Manchester collegiate church, where his wife, Margaret, had been interred two years before. Of his five children only one, Ann, survived him. His own father, however, lived to be over 100 and died in 1657. At the meeting of the Manchester classis on 11 November 1656 it was agreed that a day of fasting should held on 3 December with sermons from Edward Gee and John Tilsey 'upon the occasion of the sad breach made in the congregation by the death of Mr Hollinworth, late minister there, to desire the Lord's guidance in the election of a minister to succeed him' (Shaw, 2.253). 


@@@@@


doc= 13566


Hollis, Aiskew Paffard (1764-1844), naval officer, entered the navy in 1774, under the protection of Captain Parry, and in 1778 was present on the 'Vigilant' in Keppel's action off Ushant. In January 1781 he was promoted lieutenant, and, continuing in active service during the peace, was appointed in July 1793 to the 'Queen', flagship of Rear-Admiral Gardner. In her he took part in the battle of 1 June 1794, where he was seriously wounded in the head by a splinter, and the encounter off Lorient on 23 July 1795. In November 1796 he was promoted to command the 'Chichester' (44 guns), employed as a storeship. On 10 November 1797, at the Cape of Good Hope, he was ordered to take temporary command of the 'Jupiter' and bring in the frigate 'Crescent', then in a state of mutiny at Robin Island. This delicate service was well performed, and the 'Crescent' towed into Table Bay, under the batteries. Six days afterwards he was given an acting commission as captain of the flagship 'Tremendous' (74 guns), from which he was shortly moved to the frigate 'Vindictive' and sent home in charge of an East Indies convoy. On his arrival his commission was confirmed by the Admiralty. 
In June 1801 Hollis was appointed to the frigate 'Thames' (32 guns), and commanded her in the action in the Gut of Gibraltar on 12 July, and in the operations on the coast of Egypt. The 'Thames' was paid off in January 1803, and in the following autumn Hollis was appointed to the 'Mermaid', in which he served in the West Indies under the flag of Sir John Duckworth. He returned to England in 1807, and in March 1809 joined the 'Standard' (64 guns), forming one of the fleet up the Baltic under Sir James Saumarez, and in which he was detached in command of the squadron which in May occupied the Isle of Anholt. Early in 1811 the 'Standard' went out to Lisbon in charge of a large convoy, and for a short time assisted in the defence of Cadiz. In April Hollis was moved into the 'Achilles' (80 guns), attached to the fleet before Toulon, and later employed in the Adriatic, returning to England in the summer of 1813. After the peace Hollis commanded the 'Rivoli' (74 guns) from 1816 to 1817, and the 'Ramillies' from 1818 to 1821, as guardships at Portsmouth. He saw no further service, though he became in course of seniority rear-admiral in 1825 and vice-admiral in 1837. He died at his residence, Highfield, Southampton, on 23 June 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 13567


Hollis, George (1793-1842), engraver, of whose parents nothing is known, was born at Oxford and from about 1807 until about 1815 was apprenticed to George Cooke in London. He worked mainly on topographical subjects, the earliest of which to attract notice, in 1818, were six views of Chudleigh, Devon, drawn before the destructive fire of 1807 by Henry Francis de Cort. Further views appeared in works on Greece (1819), Hallamshire in the West Riding of Yorkshire (1819), Cheshire (1819), Wiltshire (1824), Shrewsbury (1825-6), and Glastonbury (1826). J. Hakewill's 'Picturesque Tour of Italy' (1818-20) contained some engravings worked up by J. M. W. Turner from the author's drawings. In 1821 W. B. Cooke held his first exhibition of engravings at 9 Soho Square, London, which included six plates by Hollis (whose address was given as Oxford) -- two of Rome after Turner, two architectural studies in Oxford and Edinburgh, and two landscapes. Engravings done by him for the publications of the Society of Dilettanti and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' were admired, and he also engraved views of Oxford colleges and halls, some after his own designs. From about 1830 to 1834 he lived in Montmartre, Paris, where he probably obtained the commission to engrave on steel two plates for L. Bechstein's 'Thuringen' (vol. 4 of 'Das malerische und romantische Deutschland', 1836). These were two of his few engravings on steel, probably a reflection of his master's extreme dislike of the metal; other engravings using steel appeared in J. H. Caunter's 'Scenes in India' (vol. 1 of the 'Oriental Annual', 1834), and a single plate after G. Pickering, dated 1835, was published in E. Baines's 'History of the County Palatine and Duchy of Lancaster' (1836). Some engravings by G. and T. Hollis were done for 'Cumberland's British Theatre', 6 (1834). In 1837 Hollis engraved Turner's 'St Mark's Place, Venice -- Juliet and her Nurse' on copper, signed, as usual, 'G. Hollis'; exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1838, it remained unpublished at his death, but was issued by Agnew in 1842. Hollis etched some drawings by his son Thomas for 'Monumental Effigies of Great Britain' in 1839 (continuing an earlier work by Charles Stothard), the first part of which was published in 1840. Only five parts were completed at his death, which occurred on 2 January 1842 at Gloucester Buildings, Walworth, London, at the age of forty-nine. 




@@@@@


doc= 13568


Hollis, Thomas (1720-1774), political propagandist, was born in London on 14 April 1720, the only child of Thomas Hollis (died 1735) and the daughter of a Mr Scott of Wolverhampton, in whose household he lived until he was four or five years old. His great-great-grandfather had been a Baptist whitesmith in Rotherham, Yorkshire, and his great-grandfather established a London branch of the cutlery business. Hollis was educated at the free school in Newport, Shropshire, until the age of nine or ten, then in St Albans, and for fifteen months in Amsterdam, where he learned Dutch, French, writing, arithmetic, and accounts in preparation for a business career. He lived with his father, who died in 1735, and then under the guardianship of John Hollister, and was trained to public service partly by John Ward of Gresham College, London. He took chambers in Lincoln's Inn, though without reading law, from February 1740 to 1748. By then he was rich, having inherited from his uncle as well as his father and, in 1738, his grandfather. In 1748-9 he toured Europe with his friend Thomas Brand (later Brand Hollis), and, during 1750-53, largely on his own, meeting many leading French 'philosophes' and several Italian painters. Back in England he was an ardent member of the Society of Arts, for a time chairing its committee on the polite arts. A member himself, he proposed Piranesi for membership of the Society of Antiquaries, gave numerous commissions to Cipriani, and, as one of Canaletto's best friends in England, commissioned six paintings from him. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1757. Sometimes accused of being an atheist, Hollis was a rational dissenter who supported Caleb Fleming's ministry at Pinners' Hall. In common with many contemporaries he was rabidly anti-Catholic and campaigned vigorously against popery; he became convinced that he was the intended victim of a Catholic plot. He had many connections, among them liberal churchmen such as Francis Blackburne and Theophilus Lindsey, John Wilkes, several peers, and especially the elder William Pitt (though this friendship was suspended when Pitt accepted a peerage in 1766 and resumed only about 1771). 
Hollis believed citizenship should be active: individuals had an important role to play in public life. He partly fulfilled this responsibility by charitable work as a governor of Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals, and a guardian of the asylum and Magdalen Hospital. Applauding Wilkes's cause privately, he deplored political bribery and declined to stand for parliament at Dorchester in 1761. He believed that legitimate government was contractual, and that the people as constituent authority were entitled to replace tyrants by new governments. As a republican Hollis provided material for Catharine Macaulay's 'History of England'. Yet he was also a patriotic Englishman and warm supporter of the house of Hanover. His heroes were Elizabeth I, Oliver Cromwell, and Pitt, all of whom extended England's international standing, as well as John Milton, his particular hero. 
Convinced of the decadence of his own times but hopeful for the future, Hollis's principal contribution to public service was the protection and advancement of English liberty by circulating appropriate books on government, for he argued that 'if government goes right, all goes right' (Robbins, 'Library', 8). From 1754 onwards he reprinted and distributed literature from the seventeenth-century republican canon, thus keeping the cause of parliamentary reform alive during a difficult period. Among the works were Toland's 'Life of Milton', tracts by Marchmont Nedham, Henry Neville, and Philip Sidney, and John Locke's 'Two Treatises of Government'; they were elegantly bound to give them greater effect and tooled with libertarian ornaments such as the liberty cap and owl. He also designed and distributed medals based on Greek and Roman models and prints as part of his plan. Initially the tracts were directed towards libraries throughout Britain and continental Europe; later he turned his generosity to America. 
Continuing his great-uncle Thomas's practice, Hollis was a great benefactor to American colleges, especially Harvard, sending donations and numerous books, often decorated with libertarian symbols. From 1755 his principal American correspondent was Jonathan Mayhew of Boston, and, after his death in 1766, Andrew Eliot. He also followed worsening Anglo-American political relations during the 1760s. Declining to participate directly in politics he published short pieces in the newspapers and printed and circulated colonial tracts in Britain, frequently subsidizing the printers to ensure their appearance. In particular he contributed to the successful campaign against the appointment of an American bishop by reprinting sermons by Mayhew and others. He also compiled 'The True Sentiments of America' in 1768; it incorporated John Adams's 'Dissertation on the Canon and the Feudal Law', which he greatly admired. But he denied inciting the colonies to independence. 
Horace Walpole considered Hollis 'as simple a poor soul as ever existed' (Robbins, 'Strenuous whig', 409). Cipriani, who described him as over 6 feet tall, Herculean in size and strength, and possessing bright brown eyes, a short nose, and laughing mouth, remarked on his gentleness and sweetness of manner. His diet was eccentric, but he kept himself fit by walking, riding, and fencing. Exhausted by the effort of what he originally intended as only a ten-year campaign to disseminate libertarian tracts, Hollis retired in 1770 to Urles Farm, at Corscombe, Dorset, where he owned about 3000 acres. He died there suddenly on 1 January 1774, and was buried in one of his fields and the grave ploughed over. He was unmarried, and after minor legacies left his estates to Thomas Brand, who added Hollis's name to his own. 


@@@@@


doc= 13569


Thomas Hollis (1818-1843), George Hollis's only son, was born in London and about 1830 moved with his family to France. As a schoolboy he sketched scenes around Montmartre, Paris, and in 1832 copied paintings in the Louvre. At the age of sixteen he helped his father to produce some engravings for 'Cumberland's British Theatre', 6 (1834). A self-taught artist, he continued his studies in the British Museum and National Gallery on his return to England, and in April 1836 was admitted as a student at the Royal Academy, where he trained to become a historical painter. He was later a pupil of the portrait painter H. W. Pickersgill. Hollis is known as the painter of many landscape views around Dulwich. On his father's death he tried to provide for his widowed mother, and etched as well as drew a few more plates for 'Monumental Effigies of Great Britain', but as a result of overwork he died of consumption on 14 October 1843 at Apollo Buildings, Walworth, aged only twenty-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 13570


Hollond, Ellen Julia (1822-1884), salon hostess, philanthropist, and author, was born at Madras on 28 September 1822, only child of the lawyer Thomas Teed (1797-1843) and his Scottish wife, Julia Jane Jordan (1800-1866), afterwards Lushington. Sent to England at an early age, she was later joined by her parents, who in 1835 bought Stanmore Hall at Great Stanmore, Middlesex. On 18 March 1840 she married at Great Stanmore 
Of an Anglo-Indian background like herself, Robert Hollond was born in London on 5 January 1808, fourth son of William Hollond (died 1836), a wealthy Bengal civil servant, and his wife, Harriet Pope. He graduated from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1831 and was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1834, but became absorbed by aeronautics and financed the 'Great Nassau' balloon voyage from London to Weilburg on 7-8 November 1836; undertaken with Charles Green and Thomas Monck Mason, this was logged by himself at the time, described scientifically in Mason's 'Aeronautica' (1838) and more flippantly in R. H. Barham's 'Ingoldsby Legends' (1840), and celebrated in a painting by John Hollins at the National Portrait Gallery. In 1837 Hollond was elected to parliament as a 'Reformer, pledged to support the ballot'. During his fifteen years there he made only one speech (on balloon-conveyed projectiles) and uttered some sentences of protest when the cleanliness of Hastings was impugned, but both he and his wife became known as unsparing benefactors to local and national causes, including the welfare of children. 
The Hollonds made a handsome pair, he dark and aristocratic in appearance, she tender-looking, with glossy brown hair and splendid large blue eyes. They resided chiefly at 63 Portland Place and counted W. M. Thackeray among their intimates, but after the revolution of 1848 they wintered increasingly in Paris, in the rue Basse-du-Rempart and later in the rue d'Astorg. Among their earliest French friends was Ary Scheffer, who painted a graceful portrait of Ellen (1852) and used her as a model for a copy (1854) of his 'St Augustine and St Monica'; both pictures are in the National Gallery. Before the 'coup d'etat' of December 1851 Ellen Hollond had started to host gatherings of democratic figures such as Odilon Barrot and Charles de Remusat who, together with other eminent if disparate representatives of the 'ligue liberale', including Prevost-Paradol, Lanfrey, Mignet, Laboulaye, Dufaure, and the Catholic but Stanmore-born comte de Montalembert, later formed in her salon a tacit opposition to Napoleon III, the common ground of which, according to her obituarist Edmond de Pressense, was 'love of freedom and hatred of empire'. 
Another distinguished guest was the philosopher Victor Cousin, who delighted in Ellen Hollond's company at Cannes, where Robert purchased in 1864 the pretty Villa Allegria, with a magnificent sea view, to enjoy the winter seasons and rest Mrs Hollond's weak constitution. There too she secured her greatest prize, Prosper Merimee. Though at first suspicious of this bluestocking with Britannic prejudices, he came to respect her mind and warmly admired her books. The first two of these had appeared anonymously in Paris. In 'Channing: sa vie et ses oeuvres' (1857) she presented the views of the Unitarian philosopher with an ecumenical intent seen also in the chatty but charming 'La vie de village en Angleterre, ou, Souvenirs d'un exile' (1862), which eulogized various aspects of protestant English life, including cricket. Under her own name she published in London in 1864 'A Lady's Journal of her Travels in Egypt and Nubia', and in Paris in 1870 'Les Quakers', a short but well-written plea for religious tolerance. 
Meanwhile Robert Hollond, whose great wealth permitted the childless couple to commute among five desirable addresses, to buy paintings including a Boucher, and to entertain on an unusually grand scale, was perplexed by the conversation in his drawing-room and kept to himself and his whisky. He is said to have had little French; where English could be spoken, participation was easier. This would have been so in the quiet, Anglophile Paris home of the emigre Russian historian Nikolay Turgenev, where the Hollonds met the novelist Ivan Turgenev, or even in the more famous salon of Julius and Mary Mohl, which Mrs Hollond had to some extent been emulating. Mary Mohl herself was quite attached to her, but felt uncomfortable at her receptions as French politics always predominated. Less sympathetic critics attacked Mrs Hollond's taste for the new and fashionable, saying that she used her beauty and charm to attract anyone with talent or a name. It is true that, unlike Mary Mohl, she was an informed listener rather than a compelling conversationalist, but she doubtless preferred brilliant minds to speak to each other rather than to herself. Moreover, her generosity was never in question, and received its best practical expression in the home that she founded for English nurses at Cannes. 
In 1877 Robert Hollond was taken ill while they were staying at the Turgenevs' at 97 rue de Lille, Paris, and he died there on 26 December; he was buried at Great Stanmore on 3 January 1878 in the imposing family mausoleum that he had built in the ruins of the old church. He left most of his estate of some $350,000 to or for the lifetime use of his widow, including properties in Devon and the south of France, the lease of 1 Upper Berkeley Street, and Stanmore Hall, which he had acquired in 1847. In broken health and aged beyond her years, Ellen Hollond retained Villa Allegria but spent the warmer months at Wonham in Devon or at Stanmore Hall, where she died from pneumonia on 29 November 1884; she was buried at Great Stanmore on 5 December. From her estate of some $60,000 she left benefactions for this parish which she loved and for her dozen servants, as well as $5000 to continue her work of providing English nurses for invalids in France. 


@@@@@


doc= 13571


Hollond, John (fl. c.1624-c.1661), naval official, was from an obscure background, but may have originally come from London or the surrounding areas. He first entered the navy about 1624 in the humble capacity of a clerk at Chatham. In 1626 and again in 1627 he was recommended, unsuccessfully, for a purser's place and also failed to obtain the position of clerk of the check at Portsmouth, which would have amounted to a significant promotion. The position went to his long-term rival, John Brooke, much to Hollond's annoyance. Hollond was argumentative but undoubtedly competent and by 1635 had risen to become paymaster of the navy, probably through the patronage of Kenrick Edisbury, surveyor of the navy. In this position he was directly responsible to the navy treasurer and wielded considerable influence, which he used to secure the dismissal and short-term imprisonment of Brooke for malpractice. 
In 1636 the earl of Northumberland, the admiral of the ship money fleet, presented a document to Charles I containing thirteen articles outlining current abuses in the navy. Hollond was implicated for his refusal to pay the wages of men transferred from one ship to another unless they could produce tickets as proof of service. These tickets often proved impossible to obtain, and many seamen were defrauded of legitimate wages. He had also allegedly accepted gratuities for payment on such tickets. He was, however, found guilty only of the offence of charging 2's'. in the pound for the practice of stopping slops money (for clothing) out of the seamen's wages, his defence being that this had been common practice for the previous thirty years. He was ordered to stop the practice and it appears that no further action was taken. 
In his manuscript entitled 'A discourse of the navy' of 1638 (published in 1896) Hollond examined in detail, and in a rough style, the navy's endemic material abuses, inefficiencies, and corruption. The emphasis of the 'Discourse' was on the administration of wages, victuals, stores, and personnel. There is no definite reference to Hollond between the publication of the 'Discourse' and the defection of the fleet to parliament in 1642, but he was an active partner in the timber trade and was probably the same John Hollond who sold timber to the navy in 1639. In 1642 he became one of parliament's six professional navy commissioners, at a salary of $100 p.a. He was particularly active as a commissioner in this early period of hostilities when administration at the senior level was being radically reorganized, but his abrasiveness soon brought him into conflict with the other commissioners. 
In February 1644 Hollond was nominated as a commissioner for the sale of prize goods, another potentially lucrative position, but this was balanced by the loss of his place as a navy commissioner in late 1645. He was said to have absented himself from this post for fourteen months in 1644-5, while he, in turn, alleged that differences with colleagues obliged him to stay away from his duties, and it seems impossible to establish the truth of the matter. One of the main causes of friction was the hire (or freight) by parliament of vessels for service in the navy, owned or part owned by members of the navy's administration. The freight rate established after the outbreak of hostilities of $3 15's'. 6died per man per month (allowing thirty men per hundred tons) was more complicated than the previous arrangement of a set amount per ton, and was particularly susceptible to exploitation. A significant number of vessels owned by naval administrators and officers (up to and including the earl of Warwick, lord admiral) received freight and it was to become a focus of Hollond's criticism of the navy commissioners. He named Giles Green, chairman of the navy committee, as the chief culprit in this abuse, though navy commissioners such as Samuel Vassall, Richard Crandley, and Alexander Bence also owned shares in vessels hired by the state. The sums involved can best be judged by the freight record of the 'Mayflower', the owners of which (including Vassall) received $22,947 19's'. 2died over a three-year period. While it was only natural that those with a maritime background should form the nucleus of the navy commissioners it would also appear that they used their positions to unfair advantage. Hollond's replacement, Thomas Smith, was yet another shipowner whose vessels received freight. 
Although this marked a temporary end to Hollond's administrative career he returned to naval affairs following the execution of the king and the reorganization of naval administration. In January 1649 he was appointed to the committee of merchants established to remodel the navy and the customs, and in February as navy surveyor in place of Sir William Batten, and again as a commissioner. He resigned in December 1652 following charges against him by his colleagues, which he vigorously denied, and in the wake of a clash with the powerful Pett clan. He later denounced the committee of merchants, asserting that the 'welfare of the English navy was of no more concern to them than was the navy of the great Turk, unless it were to settle a brother and a friend in two or three of the best places thereof' (Capp, 50), though his criticisms cannot be taken at face value. Following his departure from office he moved from his official residence at Tower Hill to Deptford and resumed his timber trade. 
Hollond did not completely disappear from public life for in August 1654 he was appointed one of the commissioners to resolve problems in the allocation of land among the adventurers for Ireland. He appears to have invested in the adventure himself on such a scale as to secure an allocation of 2666 acres in King's county. Alongside these duties he maintained his interest in the timber trade and was engaged in the preparation of his second 'Discourse'. Although written largely before 1658 it finally appeared with a dedication to the duke of York (perhaps with an eye to future employment), which dates it to about 1661. (Again, it remained unpublished until 1896.) The second 'Discourse' attracted some attention. Longer, more polished, and more systematic than the first, it covered a range of new topics, particularly with regard to victualling. It was highly regarded by Pepys, who used it as a source for his ideas on naval administration, and by Sir William Penn. In November 1660 Hollond's proposals to allow for the immediate discharge of the Commonwealth fleet, hampered by lack of ready money, were considered by the Admiralty but not implemented. He appears to have died shortly afterwards, though his widow may have survived until 1692, residing at Deptford where two of Hollond's daughters are recorded as having died, Mabel in 1666 and Mary in 1670. 
Hollond had sought to pursue his dual callings as state servant and businessman without overt political commitments, and avoiding conflicts of interest. In the second 'Discourse' he stood upon his professional integrity, noting that he had avoided supplying timber to the navy while acting as a commissioner. Instead he denounced profiteering through contracts for victuals and ships and, though some comments in the second 'Discourse' targeted the 'godly', thus playing to a Restoration audience, the focus of Hollond's criticisms remained the structures which bred corruption within the administration of the navy. 


@@@@@


doc= 13572


Holloway, Benjamin (1690/91-1759), religious controversialist and Church of England clergyman, was born at Stony Stratford, Buckinghamshire, the son of Joseph Holloway (died 'c'.1720), a maltster. Holloway was educated under Dr Thomas Knipe at Westminster School, where he was a bishop's boy, and matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, on 4 February 1708, aged seventeen. In 1713 he graduated LLB and on 5 July was ordained deacon by William Wake, bishop of Lincoln. He was appointed vicar of Willington and of Renhold, both in Bedfordshire, and was ordained priest on 27 May 1716. By this time Holloway had made the acquaintance of John Woodward. In 1715 he began work on a translation from Latin into English of a reply to Elias Camerarius, who had criticized Woodward's ideas about the geological history of the earth. From Bedford, where he was also acting as tutor to a noble family, Holloway wrote to Woodward on 6 July 1723 about a visit that he had made to the fuller's-earth pits at Wavendon, near Woburn. In this letter, which was subsequently published in the 'Philosophical Transactions', he provided evidence for Woodward's theories concerning the laying down of rocks and minerals in strata. With the support of Sir Hans Sloane, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 30 November 1723. 
Holloway's translation of Woodward's answer to Camerarius was published as 'The Natural History of the Earth' in 1726. In this volume, which was translated into French by Jean Pierre Niceron in 1735 and into Italian in 1739, he also printed several of Woodward's letters and papers, concerning ancient mythology, biblical history, and the importance of the blood for sustaining life. On 17 March 1726 Holloway was presented by the crown to the second portion of the rectory of Waddesdon, Buckinghamshire, which he held together with the rectory of Middleton Stoney, Oxfordshire, where he had taken up residence in 1725. He resigned the living of Waddesdon on his preferment by Charles Spencer, third duke of Marlborough, to the rectory of Bladon in March 1736. In 1739 he handed the care of Bladon on to one of his sons, also called Benjamin Holloway. 
From Middleton Stoney, Holloway composed an account of the pits at Headington, near Oxford, which he sent to the Royal Society in 1729, but he was prevented from attending the society's meetings by the distance that he lived from London. In the early 1730s he wrote annotations to 'Ecclesiastes' 'in which there is a good deal that is Philosophical' (BL, Sloane MS 4051, fols. 105-6) and tried unsuccessfully to persuade Sloane to publish parts of them in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. By this time Holloway had begun to espouse some of the views of John Hutchinson about the interpretation of the Hebrew 'Bible' and its implications for an understanding of nature. In particular, he now distrusted the use made by many divines of the 'Septuagint' (the Greek 'Old Testament'). In 1727 Holloway had published a work of controversial divinity, 'An after-Commendation of the New-Lutheran's Answer', and during the following decade he continued to write critically about contemporary theology. 'The Commemorative Sacrifice', a sermon that he preached at Woodstock on 8 October 1736, was based on his unpublished criticisms of Benjamin Hoadley, to whom he also addressed 'Some Remarks' in 1741. 'The Nullity of Repentance without Faith' (1739), which published three of his sermons, replied to the ideas of the deist Thomas Chubb. In a supplement to this work, Holloway deployed some of the ideas of Hutchinson and his followers about the significance of figurative language in the 'Old Testament', in particular suggesting that Melchizedek was a manifestation of Christ before the incarnation. Unable to print it at Oxford because of the opposition of the vice-chancellor, Theophilus Leigh, Holloway published 'The True Doctrine of Repentance Vindicated' ([1739]) in London. Towards the end of 1744 he lived in the house of John Spencer, Marlborough's younger brother, acting as tutor to Spencer's son, John, afterwards first Earl Spencer. He became increasingly involved in the academic controversies that were developing over Hutchinson's theories, criticizing Thomas Hunt, Laudian professor of Arabic at Oxford, and his allies, who argued that knowledge of Arabic might help to explain the true meaning of obscure terms in the 'Old Testament'. In 1750 his 'Marginal Animadversions on Mr. Costard's Two Late Dissertations' appeared, followed in 1751 by 'Remarks on Dr Sharp's Pieces on the Words Elohim and Berith', to which both Thomas Sharp and George Kalmar replied, and in 1754 by 'The Primaevity and Preeminence of the Sacred Hebrew'. Holloway's own version of Hutchinsonian biblical criticism, 'Originals Physical and Theological Sacred and Profane', was composed during the 1740s with the encouragement of Duncan Forbes and published in two volumes in 1751, with a dedication to John Carteret, second Earl Granville, to whose mother Holloway had been chaplain in the 1720s. This work was largely concerned with the exposition of the meaning of the Hebrew text of 'Genesis', as was 'Letter and Spirit' (1753), in which Holloway again relied on Hutchinsonian principles for the interpretation of the roots from which Hebrew words were derived. The reflections on the allegorical and spiritual interpretation of scripture that Holloway included in 'Letter and Spirit' were a response to the work of the French critic Charles Francois Houbigant. 
Holloway's links with the Hutchinsonians and their ideas, which were generally hostile to contemporary Judaism, may also help to explain his opposition to the 'Jewish Naturalization Act'. Because of this, he voted against the whig candidate supported by his patron, the duke of Marlborough, at the Oxfordshire election in 1754. By this time, however, Holloway was in poor health and he died at Middleton Stoney on 10 April 1759. He was buried at the church there on 13 April. George Horne, who had been encouraged by Holloway during his studies for ordination, afterwards sorted through Holloway's unpublished papers and remarked on 'the example of his indefatigable industry & primitive devotion' (CUL, Add. MS 8134, A/2, p. 90). 


