@@@@@


doc= 13573


Holloway, Sir Charles (1749-1827), army officer, was born on 17 April 1749; nothing is known of his parents. On 7 February 1764 he entered the drawing room of the Board of Ordnance at the Tower of London and in 1773 he went to Portsmouth to assist the commanding royal engineer with the plans of the new fortifications. There, on 17 January 1776, he was commissioned second lieutenant of engineers, and in 1777 he was sent to Gibraltar. When the great siege began in 1779, the chief engineer, Colonel (later Sir) William Green (1725-1811), appointed Holloway his staff officer, and on Green's promotion to brigadier in 1781, his brigade major. Holloway's diaries, of which there is a partial transcript among the Conolly papers at Chatham, describe the siege and his role in it. Having been promoted first lieutenant on 1 January 1783, he was wounded by a shell splinter three days later, and in June, after Gibraltar's defence had been successfully concluded, he was publicly thanked by the governor, General Sir George Augustus Eliott. 
On 1 October 1784 Holloway joined Major-General William Roy and for three years assisted him in his survey triangulations in Kent. He married, on 15 December 1785, Helen Mary (died 11 April 1798), daughter of his former commanding officer General Sir William Green; they had six children. From 1788 onwards Holloway superintended fortification work at Landguard and Yarmouth, Gravesend and Tilbury, and Woolwich. On 16 January 1793 he was promoted captain-lieutenant and, after succeeding as commanding engineer Thames division, was promoted captain on 31 December 1795. His company of artificers was roughly handled when a riot broke out among the artillerymen at Woolwich in May 1797. 
In October 1798 Holloway was chosen as second in command, with the local rank of major, of a military mission under Brigadier-General G. F. Koehler to assist the Turks in repelling the French invasion of Egypt. After arriving at Constantinople in March 1799, Holloway was sent to report on the Dardanelles fortifications. In June 1800 he went with the mission to Jaffa in Syria where the Ottoman army was regrouping after being repulsed from Egypt. News of the arrival in the eastern Mediterranean of a British army under General Sir Ralph Abercromby -- coincidental with the death from plague of General Koehler on 29 December 1800 -- meant that the urgent task of ensuring that the Turks returned to Egypt in support of Abercromby's expedition now fell to Holloway. Despite the ravages of the plague, the lack of supplies, and the chronic indiscipline of the Ottoman army, Holloway spurred his hosts forward, and in March 1801, organized in three divisions as he had suggested, the army began its slow advance from Gaza across the desert. On 16 May the Turks encountered the French under General Belliard at al-Khanka, outside Cairo. Holloway, knowing the British army on the Nile was approaching, had wished the Turks to avoid combat, but the French were unable to defeat the masses of horsemen swirling about them and after seven hours they withdrew. The surrender of the French in Egypt, first in Cairo and then Alexandria, followed within months. 
Although in his dispatches Holloway, who on 1 January 1801 was promoted major with the local rank of lieutenant-colonel, modestly played down his own contribution, the ambassador in Constantinople, Lord Elgin, informed the government that the successful advance of the Turks, and their victory at al-Khanka, were due to Holloway's influence. On his return to England Holloway received a knighthood (2 February 1803) to add to the five pelisses of honour and a gold medal already awarded him by the Turks. 
In March 1803 Holloway was appointed commanding royal engineer (CRE) at Cork where, to secure the defences of the harbour, he constructed a large new fort on Spike Island. On 20 July 1804 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel and a year later was one of a committee of military engineers appointed to recommend a system of defence for Ireland. He returned to Gibraltar as CRE in 1807. He reported on the defences of Cadiz, Algeciras, and Ceuta in 1809, and in 1810, with Spanish agreement, he demolished by mines the old forts and lines to the north of the neutral ground of the Gibraltar isthmus to prevent their use by the French. In October 1813 one of the recurrent outbreaks of fever at Gibraltar killed Holloway's son Charles, an artillery lieutenant, and a daughter, Helen Smith, wife of an officer in the garrison. Holloway was promoted colonel on 1 May 1811 and major-general on 4 June 1814, and in September 1817 he left Gibraltar for England. He retired by sale of his commission on 17 July 1824 and died at his home at Stoke Cottage, Stoke Damerel, Devonport, Devon, on 4 January 1827. His will instructed that he be buried near his daughter Augusta Jane in Exeter Cathedral. 
Holloway's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 13574


Holloway, James (d. 1684), conspirator, learned the linen trade as an apprentice to the iconoclast Walter Stephens of Bristol. On 17 September 1677 Holloway married Martha Stevens, possibly a kinswoman of his former master. As an established linen draper and merchant, he saw an opportunity to expand England's linen production when trade with France was embargoed in 1678. He travelled to London in the hope of persuading parliament to establish linen manufactories that would employ the indigent. Although he founded such an establishment in Warwickshire, hiring hundreds, the effort failed because his linen was not competitive with foreign imports. Holloway returned to London in the spring of 1679 to renew his quest for parliamentary backing. On 8 May, Bristol's common council approved his plan to erect a workhouse for 500 spinners from the city's Bridewell prison, but it had second thoughts after Sir John Knight, MP for Bristol, warned that the French embargo would expire in March 1681. About June 1680 Holloway told the earl of Essex about his vision of linen manufactories spread over 40,000 acres, employing 80,000, and providing $200,000 p.a. to royal coffers. Essex sent him to Laurence Hyde, the lord treasurer, who introduced Holloway to Sir Edward Dering; he received money and advice to attend the next parliament. He did so, displaying some of his linen in the speaker's chamber, but members were preoccupied with the succession issue. At the Oxford parliament, the earl of Clarendon and others suggested he draft a bill to implement his plan, which he did, though once more his plans fell victim to the succession struggle. 
Throughout this period, political fears had troubled Holloway. Allegations of the Popish Plot prompted him to worry that Englishmen might be enslaved if James, duke of York, became king. Allegations of a Catholic threat continued to trouble him at the time he attended parliament. A member of the whig Horseshoe Club in Bristol, Holloway brooded about the treatment of Stephen College in his trial at Oxford, the controversy surrounding Slingsby Bethel's efforts to empanel pro-whig jurors in London, Charles's desire to recall London's charter, and the disputed election of Dudley North and Peter Rich as sheriffs of London in July 1682. 
Shortly after the London election, the Bristol clothier Joseph Tiley told Holloway about Shaftesbury's scheme for an insurrection in the autumn to rescue Charles from his 'evil' counsellors. Confirmation came when Holloway met the Bristol attorney Nathaniel Wade in August; they concluded that 350 men, including 150 from the Taunton area, were needed to secure Bristol. To clear the streets, Holloway offered small ordnance from his shipping yard. However, the uprising was postponed. On 3 March 1683 Holloway went to London, where Wade informed him that planning was in the hands of Essex, Lord Howard of Escrick, Ford, Lord Grey, Lord William Russell, Algernon Sidney, John Hampden, John Wildman, and Francis Charlton. Before Holloway left London on the 6th, Wade introduced him to another plotter, Colonel John Rumsey. When Holloway returned to London on 5 April, he met the attorney Robert West. Swearing Holloway to secrecy, West outlined the plot to assassinate Charles and James as they returned from Newmarket. After his arrest in 1684, Holloway insisted he had condemned assassination as dishonourable and cowardly. On the 6th, the Bristol merchant John Row took Holloway to the house of Zachary Bourne, where he met Robert Ferguson. The latter apprised Holloway of current plans for a general insurrection, including the arrival of key Scottish dissidents in London. The same day Holloway conferred with Rumsey, who reputedly indicated he knew of the assassination scheme; after Holloway's execution in 1684, Rumsey denied this allegation. Holloway returned to Bristol on the 7th, but in early May he travelled to London, where he conferred again, independently, with West, Rumsey, and Ferguson, still professing, he later insisted, his opposition to assassination. Later the same month, Holloway participated in strategy sessions with West, Rumsey, Wade, Richard and Francis Goodenough, Edward Norton, and Thomas Walcott to enlist 3000 men in the London area. In the last meeting Holloway attended, he reiterated his objections to killing the royal brothers, pledging instead to support an uprising in Bristol. On his return there, he and others planned a surprise attack utilizing 350 men, scheduling it for 4 a.m. to avoid bloodshed. Some ninety men would suppress the mayor's guards while the rest secured strategic posts. 
Holloway's difficulties commenced before Josiah Keeling disclosed the plotting to the government on 12 June. Holloway had fallen into substantial debt and feared incarceration. Moreover, about 1 May, Ralph Ollive, mayor of Bristol, had falsely accused him of attending a conventicle of open-membership Baptists and had him arrested and bound over to the Gloucester quarter sessions. Following Keeling's disclosure, Holloway disguised himself as a wool merchant and travelled through Somerset, Gloucestershire, and Oxfordshire. On 12 July a grand jury indicted him for high treason, the state having three witnesses against him. In mid-August he returned to Bristol, where, with his wife's assistance, he hired a small ship to take him to France and the West Indies. He sailed on 23 August, stopped at St Ives to repair a broken mast, and reached La Rochelle on 17 September. With a cargo of brandy and other merchandise, he left for the West Indies on 4 October, arriving at Barbados on 11 November. Using the alias John Milward, Holloway conducted his business in Antigua, Montserrat, Nevis, St Kitts, St Eustatius, and Anguilla. Reported by his own factor, he was apprehended in January 1684 and returned to England in chains, his ship reaching Bristol on 4 April. Upon his arrival he wrote a jeremiad in verse form, warning England of its sins and wondering, '
Who could have thought in seventy eight that we 

Soe much enslav'd by eighty four should be. 
(TNA: PRO, SP 29/437/91)' If he were now to die, he thought, he had done his part to free England from Catholicism. Examined by the privy council on the 10th, he was ordered to compose a narrative of his involvement, but he failed to convince the government he was confessing everything he knew. An appeal for mercy to Sir Leoline Jenkins on the 14th was unsuccessful, and Holloway appeared in the king's bench a week later. Although a trial was unnecessary because he had been attainted by outlawry on an indictment of high treason, the attorney-general offered him one. Holloway refused, throwing himself on the king's mercy. He appealed to Charles and Sidney Godolphin, telling the latter that had the king 'not been Mercifull to popish Plotters I had never been a Plotter' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/437/127). On the scaffold at Tyburn on 30 April he proclaimed himself a member of the Church of England, insisted he had made a full confession, and averred he had never favoured assassination. He gave the sheriffs an account of the plotting dated 26 April, lamenting that he had brought ruin on his wife and children, censure on his friends, and great losses to his creditors. (After his death, officials in the West Indies discovered debts owed to Holloway of between $400 and $500.) Holloway also left a statement condemning reputedly illegal actions in recent years to establish arbitrary government and Catholicism. On 5 May the government ordered that his head and quarters be sent to Bristol for display on the city gates. Almost to the end Holloway had hoped for mercy, in return for which he promised to pursue his proposal to establish linen manufactories in England. He also offered a new plan to resettle hundreds of dissidents on an island in the West Indies. 


@@@@@


doc= 13575


Holloway, Sir Richard (bap. 1627, d. 1699), judge, was baptized on 21 October 1627 at St Aldates, Oxford, the second son of John Holloway BCL (died 1675) of Oxford and Susan Anyan (died 1685) of Sandwich, Kent, sister of Dr Thomas Anyan. Holloway's father was an official to the archdeacon of Berkshire and a 'covetous civilian and public notary' ('DNB'). Holloway matriculated at New College, Oxford, in March 1643; he was expelled by the parliamentary visitors in 1648 and is not known to have taken a degree. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1646 and called to the bar on 24 November 1658. His name does not appear in any law reports, and he probably practised locally in Oxford, where he lived opposite the Blue Boar in St Aldates parish. On 10 November 1659 he married Alice (died 1672), daughter of John Smith MP, of Kennington, Berkshire. 
In February 1666 Holloway was elected recorder of Wallingford. Having been called to the bench of his inn in 1670 he was made a serjeant-at-law in October 1677. He was one of the counsel for the prosecution of Stephen College at Oxford in 1681 on a charge of high treason. On 18 April 1683 he was made a king's serjeant, and was knighted on 24 May. On 25 September 1683 he was made a judge of king's bench, and in November was one of the judges before whom Algernon Sidney was tried. In January 1684 the earl of Danby described Holloway as being particularly under the influence of Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys. Holloway's judicial patent was confirmed on the accession of James II. He also concurred in the sentence on Titus Oates and on the earl of Devonshire for assaulting Colonel Thomas Colepeper in the royal presence. Holloway was in favour of the dispensing power, and appears to have given the king advice on the way to proceed over the Magdalen College affair. However, he resisted James II's attempts to have martial law imposed on the army in time of peace without the consent of parliament. Further, during the trial of the seven bishops in June 1688 he defended the right of the subject to petition the monarch and believed that the bishops were not guilty of seditious libel as there was no intent to be seditious. As a consequence of his actions at this trial he received his quietus on 2 July 1688. Following the revolution he was summoned before the House of Lords to explain his judgments in the Oates and Devonshire cases, and before the Commons to explain why he was turned out of office. He was excepted from the 'Act of Indemnity' in 1690 because of his support for the dispensing power. Holloway lived in retirement in Oxford until his death in 1699, his will being proved in 1700. 


@@@@@


doc= 13576


Holloway, Thomas (1748-1827), engraver, was born at 74 Broad Street, London, the eldest child of the two sons and two daughters of Thomas Holloway ('c'.1727-1759), ironmonger, and his wife, Ann (1724-1776). His brother, John, achieved some fame as a lecturer in animal magnetism. Since his mother's portrait was painted by John Russell (1745-1806), it is possible that Thomas Holloway was encouraged by him. In due course he was articled to a seal engraver named Stent, and then in 1773 enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools. From the family home, between 1773 and 1777, he exhibited a variety of works at the Royal Academy, including seals, engraved gems, and portraits in crayon and oil. From 1781 to 1784 he lived at 88 Fleet Street and then from 1784 to 1792 at 11 Baches Row, City Road, Hoxton. In 1793 and 1795 he engraved Shakespearian paintings by Robert Smirke and Gavin Hamilton for Boydell's 'Shakspeare Gallery'. 
Holloway's largest project, however, was the English edition of J. C. Lavater's 'Essays on Physiognomy', translated by Dr Henry Hunter and published in five volumes (1789-98). This work was illustrated with about 800 plates, executed by Holloway himself (about 300), Francesco Bartolozzi, William Blake, Daniel Chodowiecki, and others under the direction of Henry Fuseli. However, Holloway had overall control of the engravings, illustrated by his observation in an inscription to his engraving of J.-P. Bouchardon's bust of Charles XII of Sweden: 'The English artist has endeavoured... to excel the French original... but felt himself obliged to copy it correctly enough to support the ingenious Author's remarks' (Lavater, 1.229). His tailpieces reveal a lively imagination: one depicts seven human skulls, representing the ages from young to old, arranged in a circular group in a grassy plot. His skill in surface textures is seen in his engraving of John Brown's drawing of the marble head of Homer found at Baiae in 1780, also in the 'Essays'. 
In 1800 -- with three young ex-pupils -- Holloway commenced a folio edition of engravings after the seven cartoons of Raphael then at Windsor (now in the Victoria and Albert Museum); as a result of his initial work he was appointed historical engraver to the king. In 1820, with four plates completed, the group moved to Coltishall, near Norwich; Holloway lived to see the fifth plate finished in 1824. He died, unmarried, at Coltishall on 19 February 1827. His nephew, John Holloway, wrote of him that he 'never [lost] the art of expressing himself gracefully and of reading elegantly... a person of short stature, and rather muscular form, he was yet graceful and dignified' (Holloway, 9). 
The last plate of the Raphael cartoons, issued in 1839, sold for 10 guineas (the price for each of the first four had been 3 guineas), but even in 1848, when the value of the set was much higher, there was little demand. This was not the only ambitious artistic project to founder in this period of change. 


@@@@@


doc= 13577


Holloway, Thomas (1800-1883), manufacturer of patent medicines and philanthropist, was born on 22 September 1800 at Devonport, the eldest of six children and elder of two sons of Thomas Holloway (died 1836), a baker formerly in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Mary (died 1843), daughter of John Chellew, a carpenter of Lelant, Cornwall. He was educated at Camborne and later at Mr John Spasshat's school in Penzance, to where the family moved in 1816. After leaving school, he assisted his mother in a grocer's shop, his father by then keeping a public house. He did not leave home until 1828, when he began a mercantile career in northern France. 
After Holloway's return to Britain, in 1836 he set up unsuccessfully as a merchant in London, supplementing his meagre earnings by acting as interpreter at a nearby hotel. There he met Felix Albinolo from Turin, hawking his St Cosmas and St Damian ointment. After having obtained testimonials from a number of eminent London medical men, Holloway offered to go into partnership with him, but failed to provide the needed capital. In October 1837 he began advertising Holloway's Universal Family Ointment in the 'Sunday Times' and other London newspapers. Hostile accounts written soon afterwards charged him with having stolen Albinolo's formula, or at least the idea and the testimonials. 
For more than a year in 1838-9, the enraged Albinolo and Holloway battled in the advertising columns of 'The Times' and elsewhere, each bankrupting himself in the process. Holloway was committed to a debtors' prison, being released with his mother's financial assistance. He thereafter paid his debts -- including wages -- on the day of incurring them. Albinolo was also gaoled, and subsequently vanished from the scene. During 1839 Holloway began to make digestive pills, and moved to large premises at 244 Strand. On 12 January 1840 he married Jane Pearce (1814-1875), elder daughter of John Driver, a shipwright of Rotherhithe. A plain-faced but cheerful and robust young woman, fifteen years his junior, she was expected to work very long hours, which he later claimed to have been from 4 a.m. to 10 p.m. By chance or design they had no children, and indeed during the years of struggle, Jane could scarcely have been spared for child-bearing. In later life he refused to have any children in his home, preferring the less rumbustious company of dogs and horses. 
Holloway's success as a businessman lay in his grasp of the power of publicity in an era when newspapers were springing up in Britain and throughout the world. He therefore spent on advertising all the money he could spare, this expenditure rising, according to his own publicity, from $5000 in 1842 to $20,000 in 1851. He regularly visited the London docks to bring his products to the notice of ships' officers and passengers, and to gain information about overseas markets. Similarly, he wrote thousands of letters to missionaries and other foreign residents, to discover the names of overseas papers in which to advertise. 
Although Holloway freely quoted figures showing how his advertising outlay rose steadily to $50,000 in 1883, no figures survive to show the proportion spent overseas or the value of his sales there. He apparently did well in the colonies. However, an attempt to manufacture in the United States, effective for a while (notably during the civil war of 1861-5), ultimately failed through poor and sometimes corrupt local management and pertinacious counterfeiting by Americans, so that by 1883 he no longer had any sales there. According to the revenue stamps he bought, home turnover rose from $18,000 in 1851 to about $60,000 in the 1860s, dipping slightly to $57,000 in the 1870s, then rising to no higher than $65,000 on average in his four final years. He scarcely troubled to overhaul his products as the years passed. Technology was backward in the absence of steam machinery, pill masses and ointment being inadequately mixed, and the advertising copy seemed dated. 
With no sons to succeed him, Holloway made up with his brother, Henry, manager of the factory, despite having taken out an injunction in 1850 to prevent his selling separately made brands of Holloway's pills and ointment. When the Strand premises were demolished to make way for the new law courts in 1867, the business removed to New Oxford Street. After the death of Henry in 1874, Thomas's brother-in-law, Henry Driver, took over as manager. The workforce grew from twenty-nine in 1851 to about a hundred in 1883. 
Holloway's second career was as a financier. Once money poured in regularly from his medicines, he strove to make it work for him. There was never a Holloway's Bank as such, but he did in some ways operate as a banker. He regularly advanced money to private individuals in need of cash, against life-insurance policies which he held, disregarding pleas from dependants who found themselves penniless when the debtor died. Although he had an account with Coutts's Bank from 1845 onwards, every afternoon he arranged for all surplus funds in his possession to be lent out on the money market overnight. He was also famous for his skilful investment in British and overseas stocks and shares. 
Holloway, his wife, and some close relatives moved to Tittenhurst Park, Sunninghill, Berkshire, in the 1860s. There he devoted many hours a day to poring over the daily returns from the firm and his stock and share papers. Afternoons were spent on carriage rides or billiards and the evenings on piano playing or reading aloud. An abstemious man, he drank only claret and water; the days of his earlier impromptu suppers and sing-songs were long gone, as was his urge to travel. He had no interest in organized religion or in politics. 
Holloway's third career was as a philanthropist. He offered to set up a charitable foundation at Devonport, only to be cold-shouldered by the town fathers. With the advice of Anthony Ashley Cooper, seventh earl of Shaftesbury, he planned a sanatorium at Virginia Water for 240 middle-class mental patients, costing $300,000. This was opened by the prince and princess of Wales (later Edward VII and Queen Alexandra), in June 1885; it closed in 1981. Jane Holloway, who had lived in gilded idleness ever since the firm had become prosperous, put on much weight and died of heart trouble and bronchitis in 1875, aged sixty. Holloway, in memory of his wife, decided to endow a college for women, to house 250 students. The exotic building, of white marble and red brick, comprised a double quadrangle with two lofty parallel blocks, and was of French Renaissance design, largely modelled on the Chateau de Chambord in France. Costing $700,000, it dominated the skyline at Egham Hill. Holloway closely supervised every aspect of construction, remarking that he worked harder to spend his money than to generate it. Queen Victoria opened what she dubbed Royal Holloway College in 1886. Holloway also spent $83,000 on building up a collection of paintings, some by Turner and Constable but most reflecting the best (and worst) of high Victorian artistic taste. 
Holloway died of congestion of the lungs at Tittenhurst, on 26 December 1883, and was buried at St Michael's, Sunninghill, on 4 January 1884. He left a personal estate of $596,335, plus a considerable amount of freehold property. His patent medicine business gradually declined and in 1930 was taken over by the rival Beechams Pills Ltd. 


@@@@@


doc= 13578


Holman, Francis (bap. 1729, d. 1784), marine painter, was born in Ramsgate and baptized there on 14 November 1729 at St Laurence-in-Thanet, the eldest son and second of six children of Francis Holman ('bap'. 1696, died 1739), master mariner, and his wife, Anne Long ('bap'. 1707, died 1757). His paternal grandfather was a Ramsgate cooper; he believed that his ancestors had come from Dorset to St Nicholas-at-Wade in Thanet in 1564. A younger brother, Captain John Holman (1733-1816), to whom Francis evidently remained close, continued the family shipping business. In a letter of 1800 Captain Holman included the reference 'in 1758 by Francis Holman Herald Painter', indicating that his brother may have begun his career in that branch of painting (MS Letter, priv. coll.). By then Francis Holman lived in Wapping, the main base of Ramsgate's merchant shipping families; all his five known addresses are in or around what are now Wapping High Street and Wapping Lane. Surviving records of St George's-in-the-East document his wife, Elizabeth, and son John ('b'. 1757), and two more sons, both named Francis, who died in infancy. Holman was a widower by 1781, when on 7 May he married Jane Maxted ('c'.1736-1790); the Maxteds of Ozengell Grange were a Thanet landowning family. He was apparently childless when he wrote his will in 1783. 
Holman's earliest pictures are ship's portraits, often commissioned for ships' masters, a genre in which he continued to paint throughout his career. 'The 'John and Mary' and the 'Three Sisters' off the Coast of Dover', inscribed under the lining 'The John & Mary and 3 Sisters. Painted by Francis Holman of Wappen. 1763 for Capt Maudbe', is a good example (Sotheby sale catalogue, 16 July 1993, p. 12, lot 10). Many paintings show the distinctive landmarks of the Kentish coast, especially the distinctive profile of the line of cliffs around Dover and Deal, that he knew well. From 1767 to 1772 he exhibited eleven pictures at the Free Society of Artists, showing an increasing interest in capturing the mood of the sea in different weathers. The first painting he sent for exhibition was entitled 'A Sea Convoy in a Storm' (exh. Free Society, 1767); his later 'A Sudden Squall, with Ships Sailing through the Narrow Channel Near Reculver in Kent' (exh. RA, 1777) was described in 1906 by H. Wilson Holman, to whom it then belonged, as a masterly treatment of sea and sky. By 1773 Holman had taken on an apprentice, Thomas Luny, who exhibited from his master's address in Johnson Street, St George's, Wapping. 
In his later years Holman switched to patriotic themes. Between 1774 and 1784 he sent seventeen pictures, mostly of the Royal Navy or sea battles, for exhibition at the Royal Academy. He painted all the important naval engagements of the American War of Independence, most notably a dramatic moment, 'The Moonlight Battle off Cape St Vincent, 16th January 1780' (exh. RA, 1780; NMM) and 'The Battle of the Saints, 12th April 1782' (exh. RA, 1783). He also depicted the shipbuilding programme engendered by that war, one of his best-known paintings being the striking 'Blackwall Shipyard from the Thames' (exh. RA, 1784; NMM). Holman died in Wapping on 29 November 1784. Captain Holman brought his body back to Ramsgate for burial on 4 December in the Maxted family vault at St Laurence, where the vicar recorded his death as due to lethargy. 
Since Sir Lionel Cust wrote in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' that Holman's work had 'met with unmerited neglect' several of his paintings have surfaced in sales and been acquired by museums, and his reputation as a major marine painter has consequently grown. Holman knew his subject matter intimately and approached his chosen profession as a craftsman. His skilful depiction of the seafaring trade in which he grew up provides an entrancing record of many aspects of eighteenth-century naval life. 


@@@@@


doc= 13579


Holman, James (1786-1857), traveller, was born in Exeter, Devon, on 15 October 1786, the fourth child of John Holman, a chemist and druggist of Fore Street, Exeter. Like his brother William he entered the navy, as a first-class volunteer on the 'Royal George' on 7 December 1798. From September 1799 to April 1805 he served in the 'Cambrian' on the home and North American stations and then on the 'Leander' and the 'Cleopatra', of which last frigate he was appointed lieutenant on 27 April 1807. From October 1808 to November 1810, when he was invalided, he served on the 'Guerriere' off the coast of North America. He was invalided out at the age of twenty-four, after it had become clear that his severely incapacitating rheumatism recurred each time he was exposed to cold wet conditions. He became totally blind not long afterwards for reasons which are not clear. 
On 29 September 1812 Holman was appointed a naval knight of Windsor, which provided him with a modest stipend but required his residence with other disabled lieutenants at Windsor and his attendance at twice daily services. Finding life at Windsor tedious, he managed to convince the authorities that the terms of the endowment allowed leave of absence both for study (he attended lectures of the University of Edinburgh from 1813 to 1818) and for travel to recruit his health. His first trip, from 1819 to 1821, took him to familiar parts of Europe, and set a pattern for later journeys. He travelled largely alone and inexpensively, often walking alongside a wagon or carriage to which he tied himself with a string for security. His amiable manner elicited kindness from strangers, friends, and acquaintances, and he was received in well-to-do households. On his return he published in 1822 an account of his journey, which attracted considerable notice because of his blindness. 
Holman's subsequent journeys were ever more adventurous and increasingly taxed the patience of the Windsor authorities. His second journey, from 1822 to 1824, was intended as a circuit of the globe, an achievement he resolved on when he first went to sea. He reached Irkutsk in Siberia, but was thence hustled westwards and dumped outside Russia's western borders, perhaps because the authorities did not want him to see the extent of Russian activity on the Siberian and American north-west coasts. After recovering from this ordeal and publishing an account in 1834, he determined to complete his circuit of the globe and reached Africa, Asia, Australasia, and America, describing his travels in a four-volume work. His last journeys were through Iberia, the Balkans and into Turkey, and, separately, to Scandinavia. In 1826 he was elected fellow of the Linnean Society of London and founding fellow of the Raleigh Club, the forerunner of the Royal Geographical Society, and the next year of the Royal Society. 
While preparing his autobiography and remaining travel notes for publication Holman died at his lodgings, 11 Crutched Friars, near the Minories, London, on 28 July 1857. He left his manuscripts to a literary friend, Robert Bell, who had helped him compile his earlier works, but they were never published. 
Holman was particularly vulnerable to the charge levied against all travellers, namely that his works were the product of the imagination. Not only was he, being blind, dependent on others for information about what he visited, he habitually wrote only very brief notes while travelling (using a writing aid called a noctograph), committing much material to his memory, which Jerdan described as 'indelible' (Jerdan, 263). He tried to turn his disability to his advantage claiming, 'I am compelled to adopt a more rigid and less suspicious course of inquiry [than sighted travellers], and to investigate analytically, by a train of patient examination, suggestions, and deductions, which other travellers dismiss at first sight; so that, freed from the hazard of being misled by appearances, I am the less likely to adopt hasty and erroneous conclusions' ('Voyage round the world', 5). John Dundas Cochrane, the pedestrian traveller, who attacked him in print in the 'Monthly Magazine' of 1824, was unpersuaded, but was probably actuated by the wish to undermine competition from a rival travel writer. Roberts claims him as 'the world's greatest traveller' because of the distances he covered and the remoteness of the places he reached. Contemporary documents, however, make clear that he was elected to learned societies not so much for the contribution his travels made to learning, but because he was a 'most cheerful and agreeable companion' ('Zoology', xxx). Nonetheless his works have recently been republished in print and electronically because of interest in the remote parts he reached, particularly in China and Africa. 


@@@@@


doc= 13580


Holman, Joseph George (1764-1817), actor and playwright, born in August 1764, was the son of John Major Holman of the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, Middlesex, an officer in the British army, who died when his son was two years old. He was sent by his uncle to Dr Barwis's school in Soho Square, where annual theatrical productions were popular. He matriculated on 7 February 1783 at the Queen's College, Oxford, but took no degree. On 26 October 1784, at Covent Garden, he made his first appearance on the stage, as Romeo. An occasional address, the opening lines of which were '
From Isis' banks just wing'd his daring flight 

A College Soph presents himself to-night, 

' was spoken by Thomas Hull, who played Friar Lawrence. Holman performed a number of other leading roles in his first season, including Richard III, Hamlet, and Lothario. His original characters during his first spell at Covent Garden included Harry Thunder in John O'Keeffe's 'Wild Oats' (16 April 1791). At the end of his third season Holman left Covent Garden owing to a dispute over salary, and acted in Dublin and in the principal English and Scottish towns; but he soon returned to his former theatre. 
In the season of 1799-1800 a serious quarrel took place between the proprietors of Covent Garden and eight of the principal actors. A pamphlet entitled 'A statement of the differences subsisting between the proprietors and performers of the Theatre-Royal, Covent-Garden...' was published in 1800, and went through several editions. The authorship of the pamphlet, which printed correspondence and memoranda between the proprietors and the actors, was attributed to Holman. The grievances of the actors were submitted to the lord chamberlain, the marquess of Salisbury, whose verdict went against them. Some newspaper correspondence and disturbance in theatrical circles followed. Seven actors accepted the decision and remained at Covent Garden, but Holman either resigned or was dismissed. He appeared a few times at the Haymarket, where he produced his 'What a Blunder', a comic opera in three acts, in which he acted Count Alphonso d'Esparza. He then went to Dublin, where he had sufficient success to take for a time a share with Frederick Edward Jones in the management of Crow Street Theatre. After a while, however, he resigned, and took up farming. On 31 July 1806 he played in Dublin for his benefit Antony in Dryden's 'All for Love'. On 22 August 1812 he reappeared at the Haymarket, after eleven years' absence, and played a few parts. 
In 1798 Holman had married Jane, the youngest daughter of the Hon. and Revd Frederick Hamilton; she died on 11 June 1810. No mention of a previous marriage is traceable, but, when Holman went to America in 1812 he took with him a daughter old enough to play Lady Townly in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband' in New York to his Lord Townly; she supported him throughout his American career. In a letter of introduction he took out he was erroneously described as a fellow of Queen's College. In 1813 Holman and his daughter performed at the Chestnut Street Theatre, Philadelphia. He undertook the management of the Walnut Street Theatre in that city, but was unsuccessful. In 1815 he managed a theatre in Charleston. In 1817 he married a Miss Lattimer, a singer 'of great talent and distinguished beauty and merit'; she afterwards married C. W. Sandford, and died in 1859. Holman himself died, probably of apoplexy, at Rockaway on Long Island, New York, on 24 August 1817. 
Several of Holman's theatrical works were performed; the earliest, the comic opera 'Abroad and at Home', was among the best known. His reputation as an actor was established when he was a young man, and remained high throughout his lifetime. W. C. Macready, in his 'Reminiscences', described him as 'remarkably handsome, though inclined to obesity, his tendency to which he endeavoured to combat by a chicken diet' (1.58). 


@@@@@


doc= 13581


Holman, William (bap. 1669, d. 1730), county historian, was baptized on 15 December 1669, at Whitchurch Canonicorum, Dorset, the son of William Holman. He had migrated to London by 1690, when he was received into the Stepney Independent meeting, as 'chaplain to Mr Fletcher' ('Holman's Halstead', vii). In 1700 he became pastor of the Old Independent Chapel, Parsonage Street, Halstead, Essex, where he ministered successfully until his death. His congregation, which in 1716 numbered 500, including 39 county voters and 13 gentlemen, built a new chapel in 1718. 
From 1708 to 1728 Holman lived in the Chantry House, High Street, Halstead, formerly part of Bourchier's chantry or college (founded 1412; dissolved 1551), a fitting home for an antiquary. About 1711 he began compiling a history of Halstead and the surrounding hundred of Hinckford, under the patronage of John 'Carcase' or 'Merchant' Morley of Munchensies (now Blue Bridge House), Halstead, butcher, land-jobber, and agent to Robert Harley, earl of Oxford. 
Holman entered into the labours of earlier Essex antiquaries, particularly Thomas Jekyll, a king's bench official with a country house at Bocking, Essex, who had collected from the public records many references to Essex, Norfolk, and Suffolk. Most of Jekyll's manuscript notes had passed to his grandson Nicholas Jekyll of Castle Hedingham, Essex, who put them at the disposal of John Ouseley, rector of Panfield, and later of Springfield and Little Waltham, all in Essex. Ouseley planned a history of Essex, which by 1695 was said to be well advanced, but it never appeared. His death opened the way for a younger historian. Holman, encouraged and helped by Nicholas Jekyll, acquired much of Thomas Jekyll's Essex collection, and also that of Ouseley. With financial backing from John Morley, and also, it seems, from Lord Oxford, he extended his studies to the whole of Essex, undertaking fieldwork as well as documentary research, and corresponding with the antiquaries Peter Le Neve and Thomas Wotton, and in Essex with Thomas Cox, William Derham, Charles Gray of Colchester, and Anthony Holbrook, Ouseley's son-in-law. Humfrey Wanley, Lord Oxford's librarian, gave Holman advice and hospitality, receiving in return original documents and gifts of oysters. Holman's principal assistant over many years was the apothecary and physician Samuel Dale, who sent him manuscripts, pedigrees, and notes from parish registers, and toured the country on horseback, recording monumental inscriptions. 
Holman planned a history of Essex consisting mainly of brief histories of each of the 400 parishes, arranged under hundreds. His friends urged publication, but this had not begun when he collapsed and died on 4 November 1730 in the porch of Colne Engaine church, near Halstead. He had been hampered by gout, and, it seems, by lack of experience in writing and publishing, by preoccupation with the details of inscriptions, and by a stubborn refusal to be rushed. He left behind, besides many letters and papers, a set of manuscript booklets containing annotated histories of nearly all the parishes in the county, in each of which is given the 'Domesday' references, the descents of the manors, the parochial charities, and the history of the church and its monuments. The set does not, however, include the ancient borough of Colchester, then the largest town in Essex. 
Holman was buried in the chapel where he had ministered, and where his wife, Rebekah (died 1727), already lay. Their son William (died 1748) and his wife, Francis (died 1770), are also buried there. All four are commemorated by a stone tablet in the present United Reformed church in Parsonage Street. 
Holman's Essex collection was later used by the antiquaries Nicholas Tindal, Nathanael Salmon, and Philip Morant, whose 'History and Antiquities of the County of Essex' was based mainly on Holman's parish booklets. Holman's history of 'Halstead' was published finally in 1902, with a memoir by T. G. Gibbons. 


@@@@@


doc= 13582


Holme, Benjamin (1683-1749), Quaker minister, was born of Quaker parentage at Penrith, Cumberland, in January 1683 NS and brought up as a Friend. In his autobiography he says that 'he grew up in wildness' ('Collection of the Epistles') but that when he was about fourteen years of age he prayed, and that somewhat later he testified at Quaker meetings for worship. While still very young he was recognized as a minister and travelled to 'visit Friends'. In 1699 he made a journey with Leonard Fell and Joseph Kirkbride, an American Friend, through the north of England. Two years later he visited a number of meetings in the east and west of England and in Wales, and in 1703 he went to Scotland, where he was imprisoned for a night at Glasgow for travelling on the sabbath. The following year he visited Ireland for the first time. 
In April 1706 Holme went to live at York, where he appears to have been engaged in business, but he continued to spend a large part of each year in ministerial journeys. In 1712 he again visited Ireland; he was imprisoned at Longford for holding a Quaker meeting, and was ill-treated at Londonderry. In the following year he published 'A Tender Invitation and Call to All People, to Embrace the Offers of God's Love'. In 1714 he visited the Friends in the Netherlands, and in the following year those in New England, travelling thence down the eastern colonies to the Carolinas. While in America he debated in public with various ministers but he escaped persecution; he also wrote a tract against mixed marriages, which were then common among American Quakers. In 1719 he visited the West Indies for a few months and was received with kindness by the governors of various islands. He returned to England via Ireland in 1720. 
In 1722 Holme took an active part in obtaining from parliament a less objectionable form of affirmation than that then prescribed for Quakers. During the following year he again went to the Netherlands and while there he visited the Baptists and wrote 'A Serious Call', a treatise giving a succinct account of Quaker principles, which was first printed in Dutch and published in 1723; it was subsequently reprinted twenty-four times in English and translated into Latin, French, and Welsh. The following two and a half years were chiefly spent in a minute investigation of the Quaker meetings in Ireland. In a letter to David Bull of Tottenham, dated December 1725, Holme states that he was arrested at Letterkenny for refusing to make a declaration of fidelity in a form that was unacceptable to Quaker thinking, but that he was released after some time at the instance of the bishop of Raphoe. After his return from Ireland, Holme was chiefly occupied in ministerial journeys in England and Scotland. He visited Ireland again in 1734 and once paid a visit to Jersey, where a small meeting was much oppressed by the magistrates, and sought to obtain redress for their grievances. 
It is not known whether Holme married. He died at Swansea on 14 April 1749 NS, following an illness brought on by attending a meeting when in bad health, and was buried there. He was widely esteemed, plain, simple, and charitable. His writings are extremely practical and broad in tone, while their style is pleasant and lucid. An autobiographical work, 'A collection of the epistles and works of Benjamin Holme, to which is prefixed an account of his life and travels in the work of the ministry, through several parts of Europe and America, written by himself', was published posthumously in 1753 and reprinted in 1754. 


@@@@@


doc= 13583


Holme, Edward (1770-1847), physician, son of Thomas Holme, farmer and mercer, was born at Kendal, Westmorland, on 17 February 1770. After attending Sedbergh School he spent two years at the Manchester Academy, from 1787 to 1789, and then went on to study at the universities of Gottingen and Edinburgh. He graduated MD at Leiden in December 1793, with a thesis entitled 'De structura et usu vasorum absorbentium'. 
Early in 1794 Holme began in practice at Manchester and he was elected one of the physicians to the infirmary there in April that year. He joined the Literary and Philosophical Society on settling in Manchester and was one of its vice-presidents from 1797 to 1844, when he succeeded his friend John Dalton as president. He became a member of the Linnean Society in 1799. Holme was one of the founders of the Portico Library, and its president for twenty-eight years. He was also a founder and the first president of both the Manchester Natural History Society and the Chetham Society. He was the first president of the medical section of the British Association at its inaugural meeting at York in 1831, and he presided over the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association in 1836. 
Holme struggled to build up his practice for many years, but it was not until after the death of John Ferriar that he became a leader in the medical profession in Manchester, and the recognized head in all the local literary and scientific societies. He was well known for his extensive learning, which earned him the sobriquet, 'the walking dictionary', from Thomas Percival ('The Lancet', 637), and he possessed a large and valuable library at his house on King's Street. Nevertheless, though he was known to 'get 'impetuously warm' in discussions with some of his friends', he found expressing himself in writing difficult (Brockbank, 195). Of the fourteen essays contributed to the Literary and Philosophical Society on a range of antiquarian and literary topics, he published only one, the short 'Note on a Roman inscription found at Manchester' ('Memoirs of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Manchester', 2nd ser., 5, 1831), refusing to allow the publication of the others. Another essay, 'On the history of sculpture to the time of Phidias', was printed after his death. 
Holme died unmarried on 28 November 1847 at Manchester, and was buried at Ardwick cemetery on 13 December, leaving property worth over $50,000. The greater part of this he bequeathed, together with his large library, to the medical department of University College, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 13584


Holme, Randle (1570/71-1655), herald, was born in Chester, son of Thomas Holme (died 1610), a blacksmith descended from a prosperous gentry family from Tranmere, Cheshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Devenett of Kinnerton, Flintshire. He was the first of four generations, all named Randle, who were members of the Chester Company of Painter-Stainers, Glaziers, Embroiderers, and Stationers and who worked as herald painters and genealogists. Holme was apprenticed to Thomas Chaloner (died 1590), deputy to William Flower (1498?-1588), Norroy king of arms, in 1587. His first act as a herald came in 1591 when he made additions to Chaloner's 1580 visitation of the city of Chester. He had been admitted to the company by 1593, when he served as steward, and was elected as an alderman of the company in 1598. In the same year Holme married Chaloner's widow, Elizabeth (died 1635), 'nee' Alcock; they raised three children, William, Randle ['see below'], and Elizabeth, in a house on the Bridge Street corner of Castle Lane, St Mary's on the Hill, Chester. 
Holme was elected an alderman by 1604 and was appointed as a servant to Prince Henry by May 1607, when he gained his own arms. More importantly, on 1 March 1600 and again on 20 May 1606 Norroy appointed Holme deputy herald in Cheshire, Lancashire, and north Wales. A change of rules governing deputies in 1618 effectively annulled his office, but in 1619 after persistent lobbying he was reappointed deputy to the College of Arms for Cheshire and north Wales. 
Besides his main role of arranging funerals of those entitled to bear arms, Holme made money painting hatchments and marshalling funerals, about which he made detailed notes, completing 121 heraldic and genealogical funeral certificates and collecting the fees payable to the heralds, earning 2's'. in the pound for his trouble. However, as his grandson once wrote, 'gentlemen... will order their own concerns' (Earwaker, 143) and Holme certainly had great difficulty overcoming their reluctance to pay -- it took twelve years to collect Sir Thomas Ireland's fee -- and this led to frequent discord with his masters in London. 
From the early 1620s, when he suffered from a rupture that made long journeys painful, Holme delegated the annual Easter trips to report to the College of Arms to his son Randle. Thus he was fined for not attending Charles I's coronation, and for refusing a knighthood in 1631. Holme was sheriff of Chester in 1615-16 and 1628, alderman in 1629, and in October 1633 he was elected mayor. On 19 July 1634 he was so busy overseeing the Saturday market that he failed to attend the arrival of the earl of Arundel; the earl summoned Holme, berated him furiously, and fined him. On 11 September 1635 Holme married his second wife Catherine Browne (died 1672), formerly Ellis, daughter of Ralph Allen, alderman of Chester. 
Holme remained in the city during the siege of Chester, from September 1645 to February 1646, and the ensuing plague of 1648. Sir William Brereton, who captured the city for parliament, called him a 'friend of trust' and, having taken the covenant in 1645, he became a commissioner of the peace and oversaw the repair of the city walls. Despite this, the committee for compounding fined him $160 on the strength of a petition submitted, apparently without Holme's authority, by his nephew Thomas Alcock. Claiming he had 'never acted against Parliament', Holme disputed the fine and produced testimony from Brereton and others, which seems to have led to his being let off. 
Holme remained an active member of his company well into old age, serving as an officer, maintaining a busy workshop. His portrait of Sir Roger Mostyn of Mostyn Hall, Flintshire, still at Mostyn, which was signed by Holme and dated 1621, shows him to have been an accomplished portraitist, and helps to explain his attracting of a number of talented apprentices who went on to have successful careers of their own. These included the herald painter and Holme's stepson Jacob Chaloner (taken on in 1601 or 1602); the important regional portrait painter John Souch (in 1607); Holme's sons William and Randle (both in 1617); Edward Bellin (in 1624); and probably (in 1630) the engraver Daniel King (who may possibly have been apprenticed to the younger Randle Holme). Bellin and Souch, and perhaps others, made use of their master's heraldic connections to the gentry of Cheshire, Flintshire, and south Lancashire to find patrons for their own portrait work. In the 1620s Holme served William Stanley, sixth earl of Derby, as keeper of his portrait collection of the barons of the Exchequer. 
Holme died on 16 January 1655 at the age of eighty-four and was buried on 30 January 1655 at St Mary's on the Hill, Chester, where he and his family are commemorated by memorials, leaving a house in Eastgate to his wife and the rest of his estate, including the manuscript collection he had inherited from Chaloner and to which he had added voluminously, to his son Randle. 


Holme worked closely with his father, becoming deputy herald for Lancashire in 1627. He was city treasurer in 1633, clerk to the Stationers' Company in 1641, and mayor for a year from October 1643, working with the royalist governor to defend the city from parliamentarians under Sir William Brereton. Following the city's fall to Brereton, parliament dismissed him from his offices of alderman and JP. Permission for him to compound for his estate was withdrawn in November 1651; there is no record of whether he paid his fine. He worked latterly as a genealogist, admitting he had insufficient learning to compile proper pedigrees. He was buried at St Mary's on the Hill on 1 September 1659. 
In their effort to learn the new, polite, and formal styles of figure painting being introduced from continental Europe -- and presumably to use them as teaching devices -- the elder Randle Holme and his son collected drawings and prints of the sort of polite, formal imagery that was still largely unfamiliar and inaccessible to native English regional painters. Many of these survive today, each marked with the initials of father or son, in the British Library (Harleian MS 2001). John Souch's work in particular shows the influence of both heraldic traditions and the continental prints and drawings that he undoubtedly saw in his master's workshop. In all of these respects Randle Holme the elder spawned a wide and influential circle of painters and herald painters in Chester's three-county cultural hinterland. 


@@@@@


doc= 13585


Randle Holme (bap. 1601, d. 1659), herald, was baptized on 15 July 1601 at St Mary's on the Hill, Chester; he married in the same church on 29 September 1625 Catherine (died 1640), a granddaughter of his future stepmother and daughter of Mathew Ellis of Overleigh: their eldest son, Randle Holme (1627-1700), followed his father as a herald. Other children who survived infancy were William, Elizabeth, Amy, Alice, and Ralph. He married secondly, in September 1643, Elizabeth Martyn (died 'c'.1671), daughter of Thomas Dodd of Chester. They lived at Elizabeth's house in Watergate Street, Holy Trinity, from 1643 until Randle Holme the elder's death, when they returned to Castle Lane. 


@@@@@


doc= 13586


Holme, Randle (1627-1700), herald painter, was born on 24 December 1627 and baptized on 30 December at St Mary's on the Hill, Chester, the son of Randle Holme (bap. 1601, d. 1659) ['see under 'Holme, Randle (1570/-1655)], herald, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Ellis (died 1640). He married on 23 August 1655 Sarah ('bap'. 1629, died 1665), daughter of the Revd Henry Soley; they had five children, Randle ['see below'], Sarah, Elizabeth, Katherine, and Rachel. On 31 July 1666 he married Elizabeth (1643-1685), daughter of George Wilson of Chester, with whom he had eight more children, George (died 1667), George, William, Raphe, Thomas, John, Amy, and Alice. In 1689 he married Ann (Birkenhead?). 
Holme was steward to the Stationers' Company in 1656 and alderman from 1659, when he moved to Bridge Street, Chester. In 1664 Charles II granted him a sinecure, the position of sewer of the chamber in extraordinary, but he worked as an unlicensed herald painter, incurring the wrath of Dugdale, who tore down the hatchments he had made and sued him for $20. However, by 1675 he was taking funeral certificates for Dugdale, and by 1678 he was deputy herald for Chester, Lancashire, and north Wales, apparently only for a couple of years, after which he continued to be a herald painter. A freemason, he made records of a lodge in Chester about 1665. 
Holme wrote 'The Academie of Armorie' (anagramatizing his name as 'Lo Mens Herald'), 'a fascinating encyclopaedia masquerading as a book of heraldry' (Wagner, 240). In 1688 he printed books 1 and 2 and part of book 3 at his house, giving up owing to expense and 'Gentlemen's coldness of zeal' ('Academie', conclusion). The remainder of book 3 and book 4 were published by the Roxburghe Club in 1905. Holme died on 12 March 1700 and was buried at St Mary's on the Hill, Chester, on 15 March. 
Holme's son 


@@@@@


doc= 13587


Randle Holme (c.1659-1707), herald painter, married Margaret (died 1733), daughter of Griffith Lloyd of Llanarmon, Denbighshire, about 1687 and had five children who all died young. Holme worked in partnership with his father; he seems not to have been a deputy herald but was sheriff of Chester in 1705. He died on 30 August 1707 and was buried at St Mary's on the Hill on 2 September, leaving benefactions of $300. The family manuscript collection of 261 volumes is catalogued as Harley MSS 1920-2180 in the British Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 13588


Holmes, Abraham (d. 1685), army officer and conspirator, was perhaps from co. Durham, though it has been suggested that he was related to a Holmes family of Sussex. Nothing definite is known of his background. He first appears during the early years of the civil war as a lieutenant in Robert Lilburne's regiment of arquebusiers in the parliamentarian army of Ferdinando, Lord Fairfax, in Yorkshire. In 1646 Holmes was a captain in Lilburne's foot regiment in the New Model Army and in the following year was prominent as one of its regimental agitators. From August 1648 to March 1650 Holmes served with the regiment, now under the command of Sir Arthur Hesilrige, at Newcastle and Tynemouth. In June 1650 Holmes's foot company formed part of the new regiment under George Monck, and by August, Holmes, who was reputedly a Baptist by faith, had risen to the rank of major. He fought in Scotland that same year and was eventually appointed JP for Edinburgh and Haddingtonshire. 
In December 1654 Holmes was approached by the ringleaders of what became known as Overton's plot, who expected him to mobilize those disaffected with the protectorate among Monck's officers. Instead Holmes revealed their plans to Monck, who sent him to London for further interrogation. Convinced of his loyalty, Cromwell returned Holmes to Scotland. In July 1659 the restored Rump promoted Holmes to lieutenant-colonel of Roger Sawrey's regiment stationed at Ayr. In December of that year, in anticipation of Monck's purge of unreliable officers, Holmes joined Sawrey in a futile attempt to hold Ayr for the army in England. Holmes eventually fled to Carlisle, but was displaced from the army in early 1660. 
Holmes remained an outspoken republican and nonconformist following the Restoration, keeping company with London's disaffected. In 1664 he was arrested at a tavern near the Exchange for his alleged involvement in a plot to raise a rebellion with Dutch arms. He was imprisoned without trial in Windsor Castle for at least three years. The date of his release is unknown, but he was active in whig circles in the early 1680s. In 1681 Holmes hid the earl of Argyll, who had escaped from Edinburgh where he was being held for high treason. In August 1682 Argyll fled to the Netherlands, and Holmes remained his agent in London, passing ciphered letters between Argyll and the whig lords active in the Rye House plot. In June 1683 Holmes was arrested and committed to the Gatehouse, charged with treason. Argyll's encoded letters along with some of their keys were found in his possession. On 29 June Holmes confessed that the letters concerned negotiations between Argyll and the whig leaders, including Monmouth and Lord Russell, to raise an insurrection in Scotland. Holmes, whose wife was granted permission to visit him in gaol, was not brought to trial, nor is it clear whether he escaped his imprisonment or if he was released. 
Holmes was in the Netherlands by 1684, however, consorting with the whigs and dissenters gathered around Monmouth and Argyll. He sailed to Lyme Regis with Monmouth in 1685 as lieutenant-colonel of the Green regiment. His son, Blake, who joined him from London, was made a captain. Both fought at Norton St Philip, where Abraham's arm was shattered and Blake was killed. On 6 July Holmes valiantly led the Green regiment into action at Sedgemoor. He was captured on the battlefield, stripped, and carried to the house of a JP. There he amputated his own mangled arm with a carving knife in the justice's kitchen. He was sent back to London and interrogated on 20 July, mentioning only Captain Foulkes and Major Thomas Venner. James II attended his interrogation and offered Holmes his life if he would promise to live in peace. Holmes reportedly replied, 'I am an aged man and what remains to me of life is not worth a falsehood or a baseness. I have always been a republican; and I am still' (Macaulay, 2.636). 
Holmes was tried on a charge of high treason by Judge Jeffreys at Dorchester on 10 September 1685; he pleaded guilty and was hanged at Lyme Regis on 12 September. According to whig martyrologists, writing after the revolution, onlookers at his execution were amazed as the horses that were first to pull the sledge of prisoners refused to stir and their replacements broke it to pieces. Holmes and the others walked to the gallows. There Holmes sat at the foot of the ladder and addressed the spectators, asserting that he had joined Monmouth because he 'believed the Protestant religion was bleeding, and in a step towards extirpation'. He continued that while God had not appointed them to be 'the instruments in so glorious a work; yet notwithstanding he... doubted not but that God would make use of others that should meet with better success' (J. Tutchin, 'The Western Martyrology', 1705, 170-71). 


@@@@@


doc= 13589


Holmes, Alfred (1837-1876), violinist and composer, was born on 9 November 1837 in London, the son of Thomas Holmes of Lincoln and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Sutch. He was given his first, and perhaps only, violin lessons by his father, concentrating on the study of Spohr's 'Violin School', followed by the practice of works by Pierre Rode, Pierre Baillot, and Rodolphe Kreutzer. It is reported that this intensive study made him a finished player before he was twenty. In 1847 he was principal boy soprano at the oratory, King William Street in the Strand, and on 13 July of the same year he and his younger brother, Henry Holmes (1839-1905), also taught by his father, and Alfred's apparent equal in talent, gave their debut performance at the Haymarket Theatre for Benjamin Webster's benefit in a duet arrangement of the overture to Auber's 'Masaniello' ('La muette de Portici'). In 1852 they played duets by Spohr for the composer when he visited London, and the latter was delighted by their renderings. 
However, their formal introduction to the public as violinists was delayed until 5 May 1853, when the brothers appeared at the Beethoven Rooms. Their performance of J. W. Kalliwoda's double concerto and of solos by various composers (including Vieuxtemps's 'Fantasie caprice') won high praise. In 1855 they made the first of a series of concert tours on the continent, beginning in Brussels, where they greatly impressed C. A. de Beriot and Hubert Leonard. In 1856 they visited Germany, and in Kassel were once again heard by Spohr. His recognition of the outstanding quality of their playing was so thoroughly confirmed that he dedicated to them his three grand duos for two violins, opp. 148, 150, and 153. It is also thought that Spohr's own Guadagnini violin of 1780 was later owned by Alfred and Henry in turn. The brothers went on to visit Vienna (1857), Sweden (1857-9), Denmark (1860), and Norway and Holland (1860-61). 
After some successful concerts in Paris in the autumn of 1864 the two men parted. Alfred Holmes settled in Paris and, early in 1866, under the auspices of the ministry of public education, established a series of Sunday fortnightly concerts. The following year he toured through Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, and finally, Russia. Perhaps encouraged by Berlioz, Holmes had already decided to devote himself chiefly to composition, and the first performance of his first symphony, 'Jeanne d'Arc', was produced in April 1867 at St Petersburg. He then returned to Paris, where this work, scored for solo voices, chorus, and orchestra, was enthusiastically received at the Theatre Italien in 1870. Two other symphonies, 'The Siege of Paris' and 'Robin Hood', were given in Paris in the same year. During one of Holmes's occasional visits to London the concert overture 'The Cid' was performed at the Crystal Palace (21 February 1874), and the first symphony was given at the same venue (27 February 1875). Another symphony, entitled 'The Youth of Shakespeare', formed part of the programme at a concert populaire in Paris, though his opera 'Inez de Castro' (1869, five acts, libretto by Louis Uhlbach) was accepted but never staged at the Grand Opera. Other works include a further two programmatic symphonies, 'Charles XII' and 'Romeo and Juliet'; a concert overture, 'The Muses'; and pieces for violin and piano (1857), solo piano, and songs. 
Holmes died in Paris on 4 March 1876. A sympathetic notice of him by D. Nisard, a member of the Academie Francaise, appeared in 'La Patrie' on the 7th of the same month. 


@@@@@


doc= 13590


Holmes, Charles (bap. 1711, d. 1761), naval officer, fourth son of Henry Holmes, governor of the Isle of Wight, and his wife (and cousin), Mary, the illegitimate daughter of Admiral Sir Robert Holmes, was baptized at Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, on 19 September 1711. In 1727 he entered the 'Captain' as an ordinary seaman. He was made lieutenant on 18 June 1734. Four years later he was serving in the 'Sunderland', and in 1740 in the 'Pembroke', one of the Mediterranean Fleet, under Nicholas Haddock. He then went to the West Indies as a lieutenant of the 'Tilbury' and there moved into the 'Princess Caroline', Edward Vernon's flagship. On 24 February 1741 he was promoted to the command of the fireship 'Stromboli', and he served with the fleet in the expedition to Cartagena (March-April 1741). 
On 9 June 1741 Holmes was moved into the 'Success'; he returned in her to England and was, on 20 February 1742, posted to the 'Sapphire', and employed during the next two years in cruising against Spanish privateers. In December 1743 he was moved into the 'Cornwall', and in the following June into the 'Enterprise', which he commanded for the next three years in the West Indies. In May 1747 he was transferred to the 'Lennox' (70 guns) which, in September 1748, sailed from Jamaica in charge of the homeward trade. In the Gulf of Florida, on 29 September, they fell in with the Spanish squadron under Reggio, on which Holmes directed the convoy to make the best of their way while he went himself in the 'Lennox' to give the news to Rear-Admiral Charles Knowles, whom he believed to be off Havana, and to reinforce him, in case of an action. On the following evening he fell in with Knowles, and at daylight on 1 October the Spanish squadron came in sight. 
In the action that ensued the 'Lennox', by reason of her reduced armament, was stationed to windward of the line as a frigate. Knowles afterwards complained that several captains had been prone to error, and that Holmes especially had been guilty of disobedience and neglect of signals. From these events there came a series of courts martial, from which Holmes alone came out clear, the court not only acquitting him of the charges laid against him, but also passing a warm eulogium on his conduct and zeal in joining Knowles before the action. 
In January 1753 Holmes was appointed to the 'Anson', guardship at Portsmouth, and in 1755 to the 'Grafton', one of the squadron sent out with Rear-Admiral Francis Holburne as a reinforcement to Edward Boscawen in North America. In the following year he was again on the coast of North America, this time with orders to prevent reinforcements from reaching Louisbourg. He arrived off Nova Scotia on 26 June, just after Richard Spry, who had wintered in Halifax harbour with several ships, was forced off the station owing to sickness in his crews. A month later Holmes failed to prevent four French ships under Louis-Joseph, Comte Beaussier de l'Isle, from entering Louisbourg harbour. An indecisive action lasting three hours was fought, when the French squadron came out, forcing Holmes to retreat to Halifax for repairs. Thereafter he confined his squadron to attacking defenceless French fishing craft and settlements in the Gulf of St Lawrence. 
Holmes returned to England for the winter, and sat as a member of the court martial on Admiral John Byng, but in the summer of 1757 he was again in the 'Grafton' on the North American station, and was with Holburne off Louisbourg when the fleet was shattered by the storm of 24 September. In addition to the loss of her masts the 'Grafton' lost her rudder, and being obliged to bear away for England she fitted a jury rudder made of a spare topmast. Early in the following year Holmes in the small frigate 'Seahorse', in company with the 'Stromboli', was sent to the coast of Friesland, where the French and Austrians had taken possession of Emden with a force of 3000 men. On 18 March these two little vessels took up a position in the Ems that cut the enemy's communications. The French and Austrian forces at once decided that the place was no longer tenable, and evacuated it the next day. 
On his return to England Holmes was appointed to the 'Warspite' for a few months, and on 6 July he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue. The following year, with his flag in the 'Dublin', he was third in command of the fleet in the St Lawrence, under Sir Charles Saunders, in the expedition to capture Quebec. In August he commanded a small force which raided extensively and forced some of the French troops guarding the town to march after him. On 6 September General James Wolfe came aboard to reconnoitre the shore upriver from Quebec. When he selected the Anse au Foulon landing site it was Holmes's task to guarantee the army's safe landing, a task he described as 'the most hazardous and difficult task' he had ever attempted. Late in September Holmes returned to England. 
In March 1760 Holmes was appointed commander-in-chief at Jamaica. He arrived there in May, and during the next eighteen months seized all vessels leaving Monte Christi and the French ports of Hispaniola, major termini for American illegal trade. He died at Jamaica on 21 November 1761. There is a monument to his memory in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 13591


Holmes, Edward (1797?-1859), music critic, was probably born in London in 1797, though his death certificate gives his age in 1859 as fifty-nine. At John Clarke's school, Enfield, he became friends with Keats, whose respect he won first as a fighter but subsequently for his literary taste. He was in turn influenced by the headmaster's son, Charles Cowden Clarke, who introduced them both to the music of Mozart. After a brief apprenticeship to the bookseller R. B. Seeley he lodged in Vincent Novello's house as a music student; there he met Shelley, Hazlitt, Leigh Hunt, and Charles and Mary Lamb, and musicians including Mozart's pupils Thomas Attwood and Hummel, as well as Mendelssohn and Liszt. 
On the foundation of the weekly 'Atlas' in November 1826, Holmes became its music critic, and in the following year he set off on a continental tour that led to his first book, 'A Ramble among the Musicians of Germany' (1828). Somewhat influenced by the work of Hazlitt and the Lambs, this is an individual, entertaining, and sharply observed account of his travels, which included encounters with famous musicians, such as the singers Henriette Sontag and Luigi Lablache, as well as elderly members of the Prague orchestra who had played in the first performance of 'Don Giovanni'. There are also detailed specifications of the organs Holmes was able to examine. Holmes contributed to various other journals, especially the 'Foreign Quarterly Review' (1829-31), the 'Monthly Chronicle' (1838-9), the 'Musical World' (1838-9), 'The Spectator' (from 1843), 'Fraser's Magazine' (from 1848), and, from its foundation in 1845 by Novello, over many years to the 'Musical Times'. From 1833 he was organist of All Saints' Church, Poplar, and later of Holloway Chapel; he also taught the piano. 
A second continental journey led to 'The Life of Mozart' (1845). The first adequate account of Mozart in English, this still valuable book was based on such printed sources as existed in German, together with Holmes's own researches and those of Vincent Novello, as well as close study of the music. Holmes's admiration for Mozart was based on what he saw as an ideal artistic balance between elegance of form and originality of feeling, and some of his judgements (for instance, his view of 'Idomeneo' as 'an opera of the first magnitude and complexity') were far ahead of their time. For some time his 'classical' response to Mozart excluded appreciation of the new Romantic music, and he was reserved about Weber, resistant to some of Beethoven, and hostile to Meyerbeer. However, he lived up to his principles of empirical criticism by allowing his prejudice against Berlioz's 'Symphonie fantastique' to be overcome by the experience of hearing the work at the composer's first London concert on 7 February 1848, and wrote candidly of being won over by 'the original and poetic effects of the music' ('The Atlas', 12 Feb 1848). He became a friend of Berlioz, for whom he was a 'savant amateur de musique de mes amis' ('a knowledgeable music-lover among my friends'; undated letter of 1855), and whose reputation he did much secure in England, both with articles and with practical support. 
Holmes's writings were based on sound technical knowledge, and, particularly in his essays on the masses of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven, he supported his arguments with copious use of music examples. However, he resisted what he saw as some of the more limiting attitudes of the musical academics of his day, and lost few opportunities to attack 'the crowd of heavy professors'. He saw himself as a mediator between composer and public, in particular in fighting British insularity, in gaining a hearing for unfamiliar music, and in arousing his countrymen to an awareness of the greater richness of German musical life. However, he also struck blows for his contemporaries John Field and George Onslow, and was one of the first critics to argue a case for Purcell (whom he regarded as worthy of comparison with Mozart), for Restoration composers, and for the madrigalists. His style, at its best lively, colourful, and vigorous, helped to give English music criticism new intellectual respectability. 
In 1849 Holmes visited America, returning in the following year. On 15 July 1857 he married Louisa Sarah Webbe, granddaughter of the composer Samuel Webbe. He published a few original compositions, in particular songs. He died in London on 28 August 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 13592


Holmes, George (d. 1721), organist and composer, may have been related to the cathedral musicians John Holmes (died 1629) and Thomas Holmes (died 1638). In 1698 he was organist to the bishop of Durham, and in 1704 succeeded Thomas Allinson as organist of Lincoln Cathedral. His surviving music includes two settings of the 'Magnificat' for five voices, and two anthems, 'Arise, shine, o daughter of Zion' (composed on the union of England with Scotland), and 'I will love thee, o Lord'. These latter are in Tudway's collection in the British Library (Harleian MS 7341). His setting of the burial sentences was in use in Lincoln Cathedral as late as 1937, and was republished by Novello, edited by G. J. Burnett. Holmes's 'Ode for St Cecilia's Day' has been dated by its contents to between 1703 and 1713. He also published several songs: 'Tell me, little wanton boy' and 'Celia's Invitation' have been ascribed to him. The catches by a George Holmes in Hilton's 'Catch as Catch can' (1652) are possibly by his father. Holmes died at Lincoln in 1721. 


@@@@@


doc= 13593


Holmes, George (1661/2-1749), archivist, was born at Skipton in Craven, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, to unknown parents. He was for many years a protege of William Petyt (1641?-1707), keeper of the records in the Tower of London from 1689 to 1706. Both were educated at Skipton grammar school, and about 1691 Holmes was appointed one of Petyt's clerks at the Tower; until about 1705 he lodged in his house. Petyt bequeathed him $200 in 1707. In 1699 Holmes married Elizabeth Marshall (died in or after 1749), the daughter of a Fleet Street sword-cutter; they had one son, George. 
Petyt's successor as keeper, Richard Topham, made Holmes his chief clerk in September 1706, and six months later appointed him his deputy. Holmes was reappointed by Topham's successor, Polhill. As deputy keeper, Holmes effectively was head of the office, and thus was in charge of most of the older records of the chancery and parliament; in 1731 he was formally appointed keeper, and he retained this office until his death. For a time his son was clerk under him, but he predeceased his father. 
In 1704 Holmes acted as secretary of a House of Lords subcommittee that prepared a scheme for housing, sorting, and calendaring certain of the records in the Tower; the final report of this committee (1707) was followed a few months later by Holmes's permanent appointment to methodize and digest -- in other words, to calendar -- the Tower records, at a yearly salary of $200. 
Holmes's professional competence was displayed in the compilation of a general calendar of the Tower records (of which a copy is perhaps identifiable as BL, Stowe MS 543, fols. 1-38), and in his revision of the first seventeen volumes of Thomas Rymer's 'Foedera'. For the second edition of this enormous collection of historical texts he collated the printed versions with the originals in the Tower and made many hundreds of corrections. The revised volumes were published between 1727 and 1729; in addition he issued a separate listing of his corrections as 'The Emendations in the New Edition of Mr Rymer's Foedera' (1730). He also made some of the transcripts, and certified others, for an intended edition of the rolls of parliament, which was finally published in six volumes as 'Rotuli parliamentorum' (1767-83). He was always highly regarded for his helpfulness to historical researchers. 
Holmes was a sociable man, with a wide circle of friends in the antiquarian world. In 1698 the palaeographer Humfrey Wanley encountered him at the Cotton Library: 'we never saw one another before, and yet he was pleas'd to entertain so good an opinion of me at first sight, that he would needs have me dine with him, which I did: his lodgings being not 200 yards from mine: there he entertain'd me very kindly, &c. ('Letters', 90)' He was a member of the Society of Antiquaries from almost its beginning, being brought to its third meeting, in January 1708, by Peter Le Neve, and he was a founder member when it was revived in 1717. He was also elected a fellow of the Royal Society (1741). 
Holmes was a keen numismatist, and in 1722 undertook to catalogue the Saxon coins of John Hill, as part of a project planned by Le Neve for catalogues of all the ancient coins relative to Great Britain; the project never came to fruition, however. Holmes himself in 1692 had shown some Dutch medals of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries to a group of friends at the Mitre tavern. 
Holmes died, aged eighty-seven, on 16 February 1749, and was survived by his wife. He was buried in the chapel of the Tower of London. His library, consisting of books and some manuscripts and books of prints, and his collection of coins and medals were both sold by auction in December 1749. In tribute to his memory a portrait of him was engraved by George Vertue in the same year, at the charge of the Society of Antiquaries; the painting on which this was based, by R. van Bleeck, was itself presented to the society in 1766 by his friend James West. 


@@@@@


doc= 13594


Holmes, James (1777-1860), miniature painter, was 'born in a humble sphere of life', the son of a dealer in precious stones in Clerkenwell, London, who died when James was about seven (Story, 3). At school he showed a talent for drawing, and a master gave him a copy of Aesop's fables, from which he copied woodcut illustrations. His mother, a Catholic, sent him to the Abbe de la Touze to learn French, and had him apprenticed to the engraver R. M. Meadows, with whom he remained until he was twenty-one. Aged '191/2' he entered the Royal Academy Schools on 19 March 1796 to study engraving. He engraved Richard Westall's 'Storm in Harvest' and Sir Thomas Lawrence's portrait of the duke of Leeds. In 1800 he engraved in stipple a portrait of the radical author and bookseller Thomas Clio Rickman, after W. Hazlitt. He became friends with his fellow apprentice Thomas Heaphy and also with the painters Richard and William Westall, the engraver Luke Clennell, and the miniature painter Henry Richter, who showed him how to use small clay or wax models to arrange a composition and from whom he learned colouring techniques. In the early part of his career Holmes, who was a good draughtsman, assisted Richard Westall, whose works were then popular, with acquatints after his drawings, and worked especially on the heads of figures. 
His apprenticeship completed, Holmes gave up engraving and turned to watercolour painting. He received several portrait commissions in Worcester, where he also taught drawing, for which he charged 1 and then 2 guineas an hour, and returned to London as a popular instructor in watercolour painting. As his miniatures gained in popularity he gave up teaching. He became a member of the Associated Artists in Water Colours and exhibited with them twenty-two works, of which six were portraits from 1808, until 1812, when the society was dissolved. At the last exhibition he showed 'The Doubtful Shilling', which was much admired and acquired for the duchess of York by Beau Brummell, with whom Holmes became friends. The work was reproduced by Holmes in acquatint and finished by hand, and was very popular. In 1813 Holmes became a member of the Society of Painters in Water Colours, which had recently changed its rules to admit painters in oil, and sent two works -- 'Hot Porridge' and 'The Married Man' -- to their exhibition that year, and further small subject pictures and a few portraits to their exhibitions until 1821, when the society's rules reverted to admitting only painters in watercolour. 'The Michaelmas Dinner' (exh. 1817; Royal Collection), which 'allied [him] to the Dutch school', Holmes regarded as among his best works (Story, 86). In 1824 he was a founder member of the Society of British Artists, of which he was president in 1829, and exhibited with them for nearly thirty years. 
In 1814 Holmes moved from 9 Delancey Place, Camden Town, where he had lived for some years, to 1 Upper Titchfield Street, Fitzroy Square, a change that was probably the result of his marriage at that time. In 1815 he moved again, to 9 Upper Titchfield Street, and then in 1817, to 9 Cirencester Place, where he remained until his move to 15 Wilton Street, Belgrave Square, in 1828. Holmes, whose wife's identity is unknown, had three surviving sons: George Augustus and Edward, who became painters -- the former of figure and animal subjects, the latter of portraits in miniature and landscape -- and Henry, who emigrated to Australia. (His first son, James, died young.) Holmes and his family enjoyed a lifelong friendship with the Leigh family -- George Augustus was the godson of Augusta Leigh, half-sister of the poet Lord Byron. Holmes painted a miniature portrait of Augusta (priv. coll.) and several of Byron, with whom he was intimate. 
Princess Esterhazy, of whom Holmes painted about twelve portraits, introduced him to her cousin George IV, of whom he painted four portraits, including in 1828 a reduced-size copy of a whole-length by John Hoppner (oils; Temple Newsam, Leeds), which was subsequently engraved; his reduced-size copy in oil of a portrait of George III after James Northcote is also at Temple Newsam. He also made a portrait of the duke of Clarence, later William IV, in uniform as lord high admiral, and miniatures of the Princess Sophia. His miniature of Princess Mary of Russia, grand duchess of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenbach, signed and dated 1821, is in the Royal Collection. Holmes was invited to the coronation of George IV and later made a sketch of this from a pencil drawing that he had made on the spot. He painted three or four portraits of Maria II, queen of Portugal, and in 1828 the duc d'Orleans sat to him in Wilton Street. 'Holmes's suavity of manners and invariable good humour, joined to his talents as an artist and as a miniaturist had rendered him a great favourite at Court, and he became a frequent guest at His Majesty's evening parties' (Story, 90-91). A talented flautist (he had been encouraged by Novello, founder of the well-known music publishing firm, to give up painting for music), Holmes was often invited to play for the king; Marquess Conyngham commented that 'Mr. Holmes had become the King's hobby' (ibid., 91). He was also patronized by the brewer Sir Henry Meux and the society hostess Lady Sarah Sophia, countess of Jersey, of whom he painted a whole-length portrait in oil (1834; priv. coll.). Other sitters included Charles John Gardiner, first earl of Blessington (NPG), Thomas Grenville (exh. Society of British Artists, 1837), and F. J. Robinson, first earl of Ripon ('c'.1844). At the height of his career Holmes was earning in excess of 2000 guineas a year but his temperate nature led him always to be short of funds. 
In 1835 Holmes made a two-month visit to Italy with the painter F. Y. Hurlstone, with whom he became acquainted in 1823-4. He accompanied Hurlstone as far as Milan and then went on separately to Venice, where in 1818 Byron had invited him to paint portraits of his mistress and his natural daughter, Allegra. In later years Holmes stood surety for the builder of his studio, whose firm subsequently went bankrupt, and at seventy he was financially ruined. He gave up his home in Wilton Street and moved to Hendon. In 1853 his wife died, and he passed several years visiting friends in Shropshire and Worcestershire, before living with his sons George and Edward. He died in London on 24 February 1860. 
Holmes was 'comparatively short of stature and inclined to spareness of figure'; he was 'very strongly built', 'quick of motion', and noted for his 'vivacity of temperament' and 'perpetual good spirits' (Story, 107-8). Basil Long commented that although he was more successful with his watercolours than in oil 'the few miniatures by Holmes which I have seen were not such as to justify the reputation he appears to have enjoyed' (Long, 217). Daphne Foskett noted the large amount of gum arabic Holmes used to obtain a varnish-like finish to his miniatures in watercolour but commented more favourably that his miniatures signed 'J. Holmes' or 'Js Holmes Pt' or 'J. H.', followed by a date, 'are well-drawn and expressive' (Foskett, 568). Holmes was much in demand, and his sitters commissioned from him many copies of miniature portraits that he had painted from life. The quality of his work varies greatly, depending on whether the status of a miniature is that of a prime version or a copy after a studio template. (George Augustus Holmes is also known to have made copies of miniatures painted by his father.) At his best -- for example, in the prime versions of his portraits of Lord Byron of 1813 and 1815-16 -- Holmes's work shows great sensitivity in rendering the sitter's facial expression as well as his physical appearance. Byron wrote that 'Holmes made ('I think the very best') one of me in 1815 -- or 1816 -- and from this there were some good engravings taken... I prefer that likeness to any which has been done of me by any artist whatever' ('Byron's Letters and Journals', 10.175). 


@@@@@


doc= 13595


Holmes, John (d. 1629), musician, is of unknown parentage. Although the archival sources are fragmentary, it is certain that Holmes spent the early part of his adult working life at Winchester Cathedral. He is first mentioned on 18 December 1599, in circumstances which suggest that he may have served from the outset as organist, when he was admitted a lay vicar. Holmes served as organist at installation ceremonies in January 1611, June 1613, and August 1621; and further confirmation is found in an indenture dated 20 January 1616, relating to the lease of a house in Kingsgate parish, Winchester. 
Holmes's association with Salisbury Cathedral is first attested in August 1613, when he took two of his Winchester choristers to augment the choir during James I's visit there; but in 1621 Holmes accepted a probationary lay vicar's place at Salisbury, and was also appointed instructor of the choristers, a post in which he was shortly afterwards confirmed. He is first styled 'M[aste]r of the Choristers' on 25 July 1622, in the baptismal record of one of his sons, James. His wife's name was Dussabella. 
Probably an able teacher as well as an accomplished composer, Holmes had as his most famous pupil the composer Adrian Batten, once a chorister of Winchester. A manuscript known as the Batten organ book states that its copies of Holmes's anthems, some of which are dated between 1602 and 1610, were 'prict [i.e. copied] from his owne hand prickinge [that is, Holmes's autograph] in the yeare: 1635' (Tenbury MS 791, fol. 400'r'). His second protege was the Salisbury chorister Edward Lowe, subsequently organist of Christ Church, Oxford, and professor of music there. 
Sadly, Holmes's church music (comprising full-choir settings of the preces and 'Psalm 89' and two evening services, and seventeen verse anthems) is now incomplete; but the surviving fragments reveal a competent technique and a love of rich sonorities, and his verse compositions are some of the earliest provincial examples of the type. Holmes's other works (which include an untexted five-part anthem, perhaps intended for viols, a madrigal, and a short keyboard pavan) are less significant. 
Holmes made his will on 27 January 1629 and died soon afterwards, probably at his home (thought to have been the choristers' house) in the close, Salisbury. His burial at Salisbury Cathedral on 30 January 1629 was followed by a bitter dispute as to whether he should be succeeded as the choristers' instructor by his son Thomas or by Giles Tomkins; the latter triumphed, and on 5 November an order of the court of chancery had to be produced to secure possession of the choristers' house from Holmes's widow. 


Holmes's extant compositions include five verse anthems, music for three viols, and a single song; but it is for his three-part catches and canons, published between 1651 and 1680, that he is best known. 
His most unusual work, however, is the solo bass song 'Oberon, or, The Madmans Songe, sung in a comedy at Cambridge before the king & queene by the author'. Preserved in British Library Add. MS 11608, fol. 18'r', and beginning 'Newly from a Poatcht Toad & a broyl'd Viper', it begins with strikingly athletic vocal leaps, seasoned with florid ornamentation, and concludes in a smooth and melodious triple metre. 


@@@@@


doc= 13596


Holmes, Sir John (1639/40-1683), naval officer, was the son of Henry Holmes of Mallow, co. Cork, and a younger brother of Admiral Sir Robert Holmes. The reference to him as a 'land officer' in the duke of Albemarle's letter-book for 1665 (NMM, LBK-47) suggests that, like Robert, he probably served as a mercenary in the late 1650s. In 1664 he was lieutenant to his brother in the 'Jersey', taking part in her expedition to Guinea, and he served as lieutenant of the 'Centurion' in the 1665 campaign, including at the battle of Lowestoft on 3 June. In September 1665 he was made captain of the 'St Paul', commanding her at the Four Days' Fight on 1-4 June 1666; Holmes was wounded and the ship disabled and subsequently burnt by her own side in that action. He moved shortly afterwards to the 'Bristol', serving under his brother in the St James's day fight on 25 July, and again served under Sir Robert in the raid on the Dutch shipping in the Vlie in August. He remained in command of the 'Bristol' until October 1667; an elevation to the second-rate 'Triumph', referred to in several accounts, was in fact only a temporary command for three days at the tail end of the Four Days' Fight. He briefly commanded the 'Falcon' and 'Kent' in 1668, and in 1669-72 he commanded successively the 'Nonsuch', 'Bristol', and 'Diamond' in the Mediterranean Fleet, engaged in the war against the Algerine corsairs. In January 1672 he took command of the 'Gloucester', one of the ships which took part in his brother's attack on the Dutch Smyrna convoy, and was badly wounded by a shot in the chest, although his ship successfully took the 'Klein Hollandia', killing the Dutch flag officer Aert van Nes. His reward for this service was a knighthood and command of the 'Rupert', in which he served in all the major engagements of the Third Anglo-Dutch War. On 14 August 1673, thanks largely to the patronage of Prince Rupert, he became rear-admiral of the blue, flying his flag in the 'Royal Charles', and remained aboard her until October. 
Following the end of the war Holmes exploited his brother's governorship of the Isle of Wight by obtaining the reversion of that office in December 1675, purchasing the governorship of Hurst Castle for $500, serving as mayor of Yarmouth in 1678-9, and becoming MP for Newtown (Isle of Wight) in his brother's interest, first at a distinctly dubious by-election in 1677 and then in the elections for the three Exclusion Parliaments. Regarded at the time as a strong supporter of the court, although both he and Sir Robert went into opposition in the final session of the Cavalier Parliament, he was denounced by his political opponents as a syphilitic coward who had won his seat on the vote of one burgess, cast in the middle of the night. He returned to sea as commander-in-chief in the Downs, flying the union flag at the main in the 'Mountague', from April 1677 to May 1678, and escorted William of Orange on his return to Holland after his marriage to Princess Mary. He became rear-admiral of the fleet sent out in the French war scare of 1678, flying his flag in the 'Charles'. His final seagoing command was that of the 'Captain', again as commander-in-chief in the Downs, from September 1678 to September 1679. In June 1679 he fought a duel with his fellow MP for Newtown, John Churchill, later duke of Marlborough, over Holmes relating to the king a story about Churchill 'beating an orange wench' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 473); Holmes successfully disarmed the future victor of Blenheim. 
Holmes married Margaret ('b'. 'c'.1648, died after 1692), daughter of Alderman Robert Lowther, draper of London, in April 1668. Pepys noted that the marriage was: 'by stealth; which I was sorry for, he being an idle rascal and proud, and worth little I doubt, and she a mighty pretty, well-disposed lady, and good fortune... but the sport is, Sir Rob. Holmes doth seem to be mad too with his brother and will disinherit him, saying he hath ruined himself, marrying below himself and to his disadvantage. (Pepys, 9.157)' In the event, however, Sir Robert ultimately became guardian of Sir John's six children, and in his will bequeathed annuities to the three survivors, Robert, John, and Elizabeth, and to their widowed mother. Sir John Holmes died at his brother's house near the Horse Guards in London on 28 May 1683 and was buried on 23 June at Yarmouth church. 


@@@@@


doc= 13597


Holmes, John (1800-1854), antiquary, son of Nathaniel Holmes (1761/2-1840), was born on 17 July 1800 in Deptford, Kent. He was brought up in the house of a bookseller, John Lepard, 108 Strand, London, and for a short time had his own business in Derby. Catalogues of manuscripts that he prepared for the bookseller John Cochrane in 1829 attracted the notice of Lord Bexley and Lord Glenelg, and through their influence he was appointed temporary assistant in the department of manuscripts at the British Museum on 15 January 1830. On 8 September 1832 he married Mary Anne, eldest daughter of Charles Rivington (1754-1831), publisher ['see under 'Rivington family], of St Paul's Churchyard, and sister of the publisher Francis Rivington; she died at Highgate on 8 February 1870. They had five children, one of whom, Richard Rivington Holmes, became librarian at Windsor Castle. Their eldest son, the Revd Charles Rivington Holmes, was father of Sir Charles John Holmes, director of the National Gallery. 
Holmes was promoted to senior assistant in the manuscripts department in April 1837, and to assistant keeper on 6 May 1850. His most valuable official work was the 'Catalogue of Maps, Plans and Topographical Drawings', of which the first two volumes were published in 1844. The third volume was printed in 1861 with a preface, additions, and corrections by Sir Frederic Madden, the keeper of manuscripts, but the trustees of the museum refused to sanction publication, as Madden's corrections might have been thought to imply some inadequacy in the previous volumes: Sir Antony Panizzi, the principal librarian, told Madden that he 'must not cry 'stinking fish'' (Madden, 12 June 1861). The whole impression, already bound, was almost entirely destroyed in a bindery fire in 1865, but some surviving sheets were published lithographically as volume 3 in 1961. Descriptions made by Holmes for a fourth volume have since disappeared. He began a classified index to the manuscript collections, of which a specimen was submitted to the trustees in 1836. It was evident, however, that the project could not be pursued until the collections were adequately catalogued, and the idea came to fruition only in the keepership of Sir E. A. Bond (1866-78). He gave evidence to the royal commission on the British Museum which reported in 1850. After the British Museum had failed to purchase the manuscripts of Guglielmo Libri in 1846, he negotiated their purchase for Lord Ashburnham; a transaction of doubtful propriety, as it was already suspected that many of them were stolen. Holmes was elected FSA in 1832. He published little original work apart from articles in 'The Athenaeum' and 'Quarterly Review', but he produced new editions of George Cavendish's 'Life of Cardinal Wolsey' (1852) and Christopher Wordsworth's 'Ecclesiastical Biography' (1853), and contributed notes to the 1854 edition of Lord Braybrooke's 'Diary and Correspondence of Samuel Pepys' and to Samuel Wilberforce's edition of John Evelyn's 'Life of Mrs. Godolphin' (1847). 
Obituarists described Holmes as a learned and kindly man, generous in his help to scholars. Madden, however, thought that he was lazy and neglected his duties in favour of social climbing, a view no doubt coloured by his subordinate's close friendship with Panizzi, whom Madden detested. Holmes tried, unsuccessfully, to effect a reconciliation between the two men in 1852. After Holmes's death Madden nevertheless welcomed the appointment of Holmes's second son, Richard, as junior assistant in his department, 'a proper and gracious act on the part of the Trustees in consideration of Mr. H.'s period of service' (Madden, 5 April 1854). Holmes died suddenly at his home, 4 Park Terrace, Highgate, Middlesex, on 1 April 1854. His library was sold by Puttick and Simpson on 15 June 1854. The British Museum bought his antiquarian papers from his widow in 1855 (BL, Add. MSS 20751-20777). 


@@@@@


doc= 13598


Holmes, John Beck (1767-1843), Moravian bishop, was born at Copenhagen on 3 November 1767. In 1780 he was sent to the academy at Nisky in Silesia, and subsequently attended the Moravian Academy at Barby in Wittenberg. In 1791 he was appointed a teacher at the Seminary of the United Brethren, Fulneck, near Leeds, where he remained until 1799, also serving as minister to the single men of the community. He then became minister of one of the small churches of the district at Wyke, and about this time he married. In 1812 he was appointed minister of the congregation at Dublin, and then on 18 August 1825 he was ordained a bishop of the church at Herrnhut in Saxony, being stationed at Fulneck and serving there as minister to the Moravian church's most significant congregation in the north of England. He presided at the 1835 British provincial synod of the church. While he was in Dublin he studied the history of the Moravians, and several of his works, including 'Historical sketches of the missions of the United Brethren for propagating the gospel among the heathen' (1818) and 'History of the Protestant Church of the United Brethren' (2 vols., 1825-30), became standard accounts. He died at Fulneck on 3 September 1843, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 13599


Homes, Nathaniel (1599-1678), Independent divine, was born in Wiltshire, the son of the Revd George Homes of Kingswood. He matriculated as a fellow-commoner at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 11 April 1617, but wishing to study with John Prideaux (later bishop of Worcester), took his BA at Exeter College, where he graduated on 19 October 1620. He received his MA from Magdalen on 18 June 1623, his BD from Exeter on 27 June 1633, and the DD on 28 June 1637. During the period 1631 to 1642 he was rector of Whipsnade, Bedfordshire, and subsequently, in 1642, became rector at St Mary Staining in London, where he also held a lectureship at St Michael Bassishaw. By 1633 he had married Elizabeth (died 1666), with whom he baptized at least two daughters at Whipsnade. 
In co-operation with Henry Burton, Homes founded one of the first Independent gathered churches, which by 1643 was refusing to celebrate Easter. This came to the attention of John Vicars, who, in 'The Schismatic Sifted', accused Homes of excluding 'all his foresaid loving parishioners from Christian communion in their own parish church, except they would enter into a covenant with him' (Tolmie, 110). According to the well-known controversialist Thomas Edwards, Homes was active outside London and regularly attended to the needs of parishes between London and Dover 'going twice or thrice a year to visit' (Edwards, 72). He was nominated by the House of Lords on 30 October 1643 to be a member of the Westminster assembly, but he never sat in the assembly. 
During his lifetime Homes maintained an avid interest in the last and final days of the world and produced a wealth of material containing his interpretations of the prophetic texts. His main concern was predicting the imminent downfall of the antichristian forces and the expected future glorious state of the church on earth. He adhered closely to Joseph Mede's millenarian interpretation of a spiritual reign of Christ through his saints, rather than the more radical interpretations that expected Christ to reign in person for a thousand years. His vision of a new world was forcefully expounded in his fast sermon before parliament in 1641, published as 'The New World'. It was here that he linked his vision of a renewed society with a theory of congregationalism. As he declared, 'we, therefore, by new heavens and a new earth understand a new form of worship, religion in the expression thereof reformed, brought more close to the rule of the gospel, made more spiritual and heavenlike' (N. Homes, 'The New World', 1641, 7). Homes was very knowledgeable in Hebrew thought and his eschatological outlook was informed by the ancient Jewish doctrine that the world would last six thousand years and the seventh thousand would be the eternal sabbath. In a tract published in 1650 an opponent, Thomas Hall, denounced Homes's eschatological views and accused him of bringing 'forth the malignant fruit of Schisme in the Church, and Sedition in the State', and branded him 'Chiliastorum Achilles' (Hall, sig. *4'v'). 
Between 1650 and 1666 Homes's output of eschatological material was immense and in 1653 his tract 'The Resurrection Revealed' was ordered to be presented to the council of state for its judgment. Joseph Caryll, who read the tract on behalf of the council before publication, subsequently qualified Homes's interpretation of the thousand-year reign of Christ upon earth by upbraiding those who expected a state of 'carnal liberty and worldly glory' and praised Homes for showing 'the exceeding spiritualness and holiness of this state, to which, as none but the truly holy shall attain' (Homes, 'Resurrection', sig. A3'v'). Such an interpretation of the future millennium stands in stark contrast to that elaborated by, for example, the Fifth Monarchy Men, who desired significant changes to the economic, political, and social structures of society. During this time Homes's fear of social and political unrest is reflected in his attacks on precisely these radical religious sects and his calls for laws to be implemented against judicial astrology. The appearance of these 'wicked agents of Satan' convinced Homes that the final days were imminent (Homes, 'Daemonologie', 24). During the interregnum he continued to find favour with the government and in 1659 was appointed preacher to the council of state with lodgings in Whitehall. 
After the Restoration, Homes continued in his ministry and in 1661 he is found together with George Cockayne holding weekly meetings in an alehouse in Ivy Lane. Their congregational activity attracted the attention of the authorities and it was suggested, in a communication from a Mr Ashmole to Secretary Nicholas that it was likely that 'if their studies were searched papers of consequence might be found' ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 128). Because of his adherence to congregationalism Homes did not comply with the provision of the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662 and was subsequently ejected from his living at St Mary Staining. His wife died on 29 July 1666 and a son, Nathaniel, was buried on 29 August. The following year on 28 October, Homes married Sarah Lander at St James's, Duke's Place, London. On 16 May 1672 he took advantage of the declaration of indulgence and was granted a licence as a congregationalist to hold meetings at his house in Horseshoe Alley, Upper Moorfields. He died in June 1678 at St Giles Cripplegate, leaving bequests to Sarah and a daughter, Bithiah, and was buried at St Mary Aldermanbury on 2 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 13600


Holmes, Sir Robert (c.1622-1692), naval officer, was the third son of Henry Holmes of Mallow, co. Cork. His grandfather, a Lancastrian, had been an officer in Elizabeth I's Irish wars. By 1643 he was a cornet in Prince Maurice's regiment of royalist horse, helping to rescue the prince when he was briefly captured, and subsequently fought at the battle of Roundway Down. He seems to have entered the service of Maurice's brother, Prince Rupert of the Rhine, by the mid-1640s, and was certainly in the English force which Rupert commanded in the French army in 1647. He suffered a serious leg wound in a skirmish in July, during the attempted Spanish relief of La Bassee. In 1648 part of the parliamentarian fleet revolted and defected to the royalists in the Netherlands. Rupert took command of the royalist squadron towards the end of the year and sailed to Kinsale in January 1649; Holmes was almost certainly with him at this time, and during the squadron's subsequent series of escapades. On 29 February 1652 he was given command of a prize, the 'John', which had been taken in the Gambia River, and later commanded the four prizes which Rupert's last remaining warship, the 'Swallow', brought back to France in March 1653. He handled the disposal of the ships and goods for Rupert, but his movements from then until the Restoration are obscure. It was reported in 1658 that he had obtained a commission for a Spanish privateer; his monument in Yarmouth church hints at military service in France, Flanders, and Germany, perhaps as an imperial mercenary. 
By early 1660 Holmes was active as a royalist agent, serving as an intermediary with Edward Mountagu, general-at-sea, during April, and after the Restoration he was granted $600 for unspecified services rendered. From June 1660 to November 1660 he commanded successively the Medway guardships 'Bramble' and 'Truelove' before taking command of the 'Henrietta', intended for a voyage to Guinea to search for a 'mountain of gold' which Rupert had learned of in the 1650s. Holmes would also command a squadron containing four other ships, with orders to assist the new Royal African Company's trade in the region. He sailed from Portsmouth on 25 January 1661, reaching the Gambia on 4 March. On 18 March he forced the surrender of the Dutch fort of St Andreas, and after an unsuccessful attempt to find the legendary store of gold, he returned to the Downs on 28 July. The cruise made a loss and brought a storm of diplomatic protest from the Dutch, but it led to Holmes's elevation to captain of the 'Royal Charles', the flagship of the expedition intended to bring Catherine of Braganza from Lisbon. However, he was dismissed in November for failing to make a Swedish vessel strike her colours in salute. At much the same time he first became well known to Samuel Pepys: 'he seems to be very well acquainted with the King's mind and with all the several factions at court... being a cunning fellow, and one (by his own confession to me) that can put on two several faces and look his enemies in the face with as much love as his friends. But good God, what an age is this, that a man cannot live without playing the knave and dissimulation. (Pepys, 2.169)' Their relations were soon marred by an apparent attempt by Holmes to seduce Mrs Pepys (Pepys, 2.237, 3.4), and by Samuel Pepys's consequent suspicion of Holmes's easy charm and liking for fine clothing. 
Holmes became captain of the new third-rate 'Reserve' on 9 August 1662, taking her on a voyage to the Mediterranean before returning to Chatham in March 1663. His contempt for his ship's master, Pepys's protege Richard Cooper, exacerbated his feud with the diarist: Pepys feared for days that his attempt to defend Cooper would lead Holmes to run him through in a duel. The matter was glossed over, and Holmes took the 'Reserve' back south, calling at Lisbon and Tangier before finally paying her off in September. Two months later Holmes received a commission for the 'Jersey' and instructions for another voyage to Guinea. Although ostensibly intended to protect the African Company's trade, the real purpose of the expedition was to disrupt that of the Dutch and to seize Dutch possessions on the Guinea coast. Holmes sighted Cape Verde on 25 December 1663 and two days later captured the 'Brill', a Dutch West Indiaman, off the Isle of Goree. The next few weeks were spent in preparations for the inevitable local war with the Dutch. On 21 January Holmes attacked Goree, sinking two ships and taking two others, and the island surrendered on the following day. Sailing on to Sierra Leone and Cape Palmas, he took the thirty-gun Dutch vessel 'Walcheren' on 28 March, arriving at Takoradi on 9 April and taking the Dutch fort of Anta on the following day. He attacked Cape Coast Castle on 20 April, although it did not surrender until 1 May, and then took a number of other Dutch positions along the Gold Coast before sailing for England on 16 June. The 'Jersey' reached Plymouth on 6 December and the Downs on the twenty-seventh. By the time of his return, a substantial Dutch fleet under De Ruyter had retaken virtually all of his conquests, and, in turn, a large English fleet under Rupert was fitting out to oppose it. The African Company was baying for compensation, there was a widespread feeling that Holmes had exceeded his instructions, and he was committed to the Tower from 9 to 23 January 1665, and then from 14 February to 6 March. He was examined twice (on 14 January and 3 March), but his final release and eventual pardon on 23 March can be attributed to the fact that due largely to his activities in Africa, England had gone to war with the Netherlands on 22 February. Holmes's command of the 'Jersey' was also notable for its trial of two sea-going pendulum clocks, commissioned by Alexander Bruce, second earl of Kincardine, in search of a solution to the 'longitude problem'. On his return, Holmes considerably overplayed the usefulness and accuracy of the clocks, though the voyage does represent the first sea trial of devices successfully developed in the following century. 
Before Holmes's pardon was finalized, he was appointed captain of the third-rate 'Revenge' (14 March 1665). At the battle of Lowestoft on 3 June 1665, the 'Revenge' was immediately astern of Rupert's flagship of the White squadron. The death of the rear-admiral of the white in the battle created a vacancy which Rupert requested for Holmes, but the duke of York gave it instead to his own flag captain, John Harman. Holmes bitterly resented the slight and gave up his commission, with Pepys believing that he was 'a rash, proud coxcomb' who was 'rich, and hath, it seems, sought an occasion of leaving the service' (Pepys, 6.129). He returned to the fleet for the 1666 campaign, when Rupert was one of the joint admirals. On 27 March he attended the launch at Deptford of his new command, the 'Defiance', and was knighted on that day. On 29 May Rupert was detached to counter an imaginary French threat from the west, and Holmes became rear-admiral of the red, playing a leading role in the four days' battle that followed. He moved his flag to the 'Henry' on 9 June, fighting in her during the St James's day fight (25 June). On 8 August Holmes was detached from the main fleet, flying his flag in the 'Tiger', with orders to attack the islands of Vlie and Schelling, along with Dutch shipping in the Vlie anchorage. On the following day his force attacked with longboats and fireships, burning between 110 and 160 Dutch vessels, together with the town of Westerschelling: the action became known to posterity as 'Holmes's bonfire'. The fleet returned to harbour in October, and Holmes immediately resumed his feud with the duke of Albemarle's leading naval client, Sir Jeremy Smith, over their respective conduct in the St James's day fight. The submissions made to the king on 21 October were resolved largely in Holmes's favour. In April 1667 Holmes became commander-in-chief of a squadron operating from Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight, sailing west in June to escort homeward-bound merchantmen from the Mediterranean before paying off in October. During this period he was loaned a prize ship, the 'Saint George', as a privateer for three months, but got into trouble with the prize commissioners for keeping her to windward of his squadron in order to seize prizes off the coast of Ireland, 'even in sight of the King's ships under your command' (BL, Harleian MS 1510, fol. 193). 
During 1668 Holmes commanded the 'Cambridge' (from March to September) but also became more heavily involved in politics ashore. In January he acted as second to the duke of Buckingham during the latter's duel with the earl of Shrewsbury, receiving a pardon for his part in the earl's death. His quarrel with Smith was carried over into the House of Commons, forming a part of the house's inquest into the naval miscarriages of the war (October 1667, February-March 1668). By December 1668 Pepys believed that 'Holmes and [Sir Edward] Spragge now rule all with the duke of Buckingham, as to sea-business, and will be great men' (Pepys, 9.382). In September of the same year Holmes agreed to purchase the governorship of the Isle of Wight from Sir John Culpepper, assuming the position on 28 December. He had been governor of Sandown Castle since 1660, and on 26 October 1669 he was elected MP for Winchester, serving there until 1679. On 16 January 1672 he became captain of the 90-gun 'St Michael', sailing with his squadron in March to cruise in the channel with orders to seize Dutch merchantmen. On 13 March he sighted the inward-bound Dutch Smyrna convoy and summoned them to surrender. When the Dutch refused, a general engagement began. The English ships came off badly, with Holmes having to move to the 'Cambridge' because the 'St Michael' was disabled. The action resumed on the next day, but despite being reinforced (by, among others, the 'Gloucester', commanded by Holmes's brother John) the English were unable to prevent most of the Dutch vessels escaping. The attack on the Smyrna convoy signalled the beginning of the Third Anglo-Dutch War, but also provided ammunition for Holmes in his quarrel with another of his rivals for high command, Sir Edward Spragge, whom he accused of deliberately not bringing his independent squadron to support him. For the remainder of the 1672 campaign, Spragge was a flag officer and Holmes a mere captain. He served at the battle of Solebay (28 May), where the duke of York briefly flew his flag in the 'St Michael' before she became as disabled as his previous flagship, the 'Royal Prince'. Although the ship was repaired and Holmes commanded her for the remainder of 1672, he was overlooked for a flag post and did not serve at sea at all in 1673, despite persistent attempts by the then admiral of the fleet, Prince Rupert, to secure his services. The duke of York, Spragge's patron, steadfastly refused to employ Holmes, and also rejected his candidacy for the governorship of Tangier in 1673. York's removal from the Admiralty and Spragge's death (11 August) came too late to revive Holmes's naval career, and he never served at sea again. 
For the rest of his life Holmes concentrated on his governorship of the Isle of Wight. His wealth from prize money, from rents, his flag officer's pension of $500 a year, and the perquisites due to him as vice-admiral of Hampshire and the Isle of Wight, attracted much comment, as in the famous jibe of 1677 often attributed to Andrew Marvell: 'Sir Robert Holmes, first an Irish livery-boy, then a highway-man, now Bashaw of the Isle of Wight, got in boons and by rapine $100,000. The cursed beginner of the two Dutch wars' (Ollard, 14-15). On several occasions he was censured for over-zealous attempts to secure the cargoes of ships wrecked on the island, especially if they were carrying wine. In the spring of 1684 Holmes was threatened with a court martial for making false musters in his regiment, a charge brought by one of his captains, Joseph Brent, and plans were made for the duke of Grafton to succeed him as governor. Holmes attempted stalling tactics, enlisting the support of William Blathwayt, the secretary of war, but the court met at Horse Guards on 27 May under the presidency of the earl of Craven. Holmes was accused of drawing pay illicitly for his steward, two of his gardeners, his coachman, and for men who had been at sea when allegedly present at musters; although the verdict is not recorded, it was almost certainly favourable, as Holmes retained the governorship. There were also positive aspects to his governorship: throughout the 1670s and 1680s he was chiefly responsible for a gradual upgrading of the defences of the island's forts. He moved from Winchester to the parliamentary seat of Newport, Isle of Wight, in March 1679, did not serve in the second or third Exclusion Parliaments, represented Newport again in 1685, Yarmouth in 1689, and Newport once more in 1690-92. Holmes had been a staunch supporter of the court until the mid-1670s, but in 1676 he publicly disagreed with Pepys in parliament over the projected dimensions of thirty new ships, and in 1678 he went over to the opposition, making an ill-judged attempt to reconcile the king and the duke of Monmouth in 1682. Holmes was soon reconciled to the legitimate royal family, and entertained the king when he visited the Isle of Wight in 1684. In August 1687 Holmes was granted a commission to command a squadron to suppress piracy in the West Indies, but the ill health which had dogged him for years prevented him assuming the command. He spent the summer of 1688 preparing the Isle of Wight against an expected Dutch invasion, and was at Bath recovering from gout on 27 September when he received an urgent letter from the king ordering him to return to his post. On 4 November Holmes watched William of Orange's fleet pass the island, and over the next few days he sent a rapid succession of reports to the secretary of state, Preston, recording Dutch movements (including his mistaken opinion that they had to be bound for France) and his pessimism about the state of the island's defences: 'I shall not be able to oppose these people... part of the militia is grown mutinous already... Yarmouth and Hurst I put my stress upon, and will defend both to the last' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 1.414). The king's flight, and Lord Dartmouth's subsequent surrender of the fleet at Spithead to William, meant that Holmes had no alternative other than to draft the surrender of the island (17 December). 
Holmes continued to hold the governorship after the revolution, despite unjustified charges of Jacobitism against him. In parliament he opposed the offer of the crown to William and Mary and campaigned vigorously for the removal of Irish troops which had been billeted on the island before being shipped to Germany. Throughout the summer of 1689 Holmes made repeated requests to go to Bath for his health -- 'I only go to refresh my limbs and get strength to serve him [William III]... I am now so ill of my limbs that I have not been out of my chamber these two days' (Isle of Wight RO, GW 10/49, Holmes to Blathwayt, 22 July 1689). He was finally given leave for a month on 25 November 1689. In January 1690 he had the additional stress of having to entertain the queen of Spain (at considerable personal expense). No sooner had he obtained another spell of leave and crossed to the mainland (24 June 1690) than he had to hurry back to the island to defend it against Tourville's French fleet, which he could see clearly from his headquarters at Appuldurcombe both before and after the battle of Beachy Head (30 June). Holmes was increasingly ill during 1691, and died at Yarmouth on 18 November 1692. He was buried at Yarmouth church, where a grand monument was erected to him; the marble statue was allegedly intended to be of Louis XIV, taken from a ship bound for France but wrecked on the island, with Holmes's head substituted for that of 'le roi soleil'. By his will, dated 28 October 1692, Sir Robert made over most of his lands and property to his nephew Henry, the son of his brother Thomas Holmes of Kilmallock, co. Limerick, on condition that Henry married Sir Robert's illegitimate daughter Mary ('b'. 'c'.1678). The condition was met, and their eldest son was eventually created Lord Holmes of Kilmallock in 1760. Smaller bequests were left to the sons of another brother, Admiral Sir John Holmes (1639/40-1683), although it was a sign of the chaotic nature of Sir John's finances that Sir Robert was still owed many debts from his estate, some of them dating back twenty years. Inventories were made of Holmes's many properties: two houses at Yarmouth (the newer being now the George Hotel, next to the castle), another at Park, Isle of Wight; one at Inglefield Green, Surrey; another at Bath; and the grandest of all, a house in Whitehall which fully reflected the extravagant tastes which Pepys had attributed to Holmes years before. 
Holmes's image in history suffered over the years, primarily because of his clashes with Pepys and his reputation as the begetter of two wars. The old canard that he had been responsible for capturing New Amsterdam in 1664, and renaming it New York, took many years to scotch, and was even repeated in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Holmes's reputation was finally rehabilitated by Richard Ollard in his biography 'Man of War' (1969). Undoubtedly brave and passionately loyal to his monarchs, despite propensities for quarrelling, exceeding orders, and self-aggrandizement, he tended to excite strong opinions: Sir William Coventry thought that he possessed 'an understanding fit to make a war' (Longleat House, Coventry MS 102, p. 6), but Clarendon, in many ways Holmes's antithesis, thought him 'a very bold and expert man' (Ollard, 14). 


@@@@@


doc= 13601


Holmes, Robert (bap. 1748, d. 1805), biblical scholar, was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 30 November 1748, the son of Edmund Holmes of the parish and his wife, Mary. He became a scholar of Winchester College in 1760, and matriculated from New College, Oxford, on 3 March 1767. In 1769 he won the chancellor's prize for Latin verse, the subject being 'Ars pingendi'. He graduated BA in 1770, was elected fellow of the college, and graduated MA in 1774, BD in 1787, and DD in 1789. 
Holmes was appointed to the college rectory of Stanton St John, Oxfordshire, and held the post until his death. He became prebendary of Lyme and Halstock in Salisbury Cathedral on 23 May 1790, prebendary of Moreton-with-Whaddon in Hereford Cathedral on 12 August 1791, prebendary of the seventh stall in Christ Church, Oxford, on 28 April 1795, and dean of Winchester on 20 February 1804. In addition to these positions, Holmes was professor of poetry at Oxford, 1783-93. He was the Bampton lecturer for 1782, and gave a fast-day sermon to parliament on 9 March 1796. On 14 December 1797 he was elected FRS. 
Holmes's works are wide-ranging: he published 'Alfred: an Ode' (1778) and an ode for the duke of Portland which was set to music by Philip Hayes (1793), as well as his Bampton lectures (1782), the fast-day sermon (1796), a sermon on the resurrection (1777), and various tracts. In 1788 he began his weightiest work: the collation of the manuscripts of the 'Septuagint'. The work was intended to draw on all the known manuscripts of the Greek text, including oriental versions, and for seventeen years, despite the difficulties caused by the wars, he managed to collate various readings from manuscripts in libraries throughout Europe. The delegates of the Clarendon Press allowed him $40 a year for three years on condition that he exhibited his work annually, and deposited it in the Bodleian Library. He received additional support from annual subscriptions for the project, which attracted financial contributions from academia, the clergy, and the aristocracy. Major donors in 1789 included the universities of Cambridge and Dublin, Beilby Porteus, and nineteen other members of the bishop's bench. Annual accounts of the progress of the work, with lists of subscribers, were published from 1789, and in 1795 Holmes published specimens of the 'Septuagint' together with Latin letters to Shute Barrington. Part of 'Genesis' was published in 1798. Holmes's last volume (numbered 142) of collations was deposited in the Bodleian Library in 1805. Following Holmes's death at his home in St Giles', Oxford, on 12 November 1805 the work was continued by James Parsons, and completed in 1827. It was not published, despite attempts by Oxford University Press to raise funds for its publication in 1816. 


@@@@@


doc= 13602


Holmes, Robert (1765-1859), barrister, was born in Dublin, the son of Hugh Holmes, a miller from Belfast. He was taught at a school in Belfast, where the family was living, and was then sent to a public school. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 4 November 1782, and graduated BA in 1787. Despite an early interest in medicine, he was called to the bar in 1795. In the same year he married Mary Emma, 'nee' Emmet, the sister of Robert Emmet. They had one child before Mary died, allegedly of a brain fever after hearing of her brother's execution in 1803. 
Holmes was an opponent of the union, and in 1798 he withdrew his membership of the lawyer corps of yeomanry. He feared that the placing of the corps under the military authorities might result in violence towards civilians. He was imprisoned for three months for having challenged a barrister who made imputations of cowardice against him. In 1799 he published a satirical pamphlet, 'A Demonstration of the Necessity of the Legislative Union of Great Britain and Ireland', and he was imprisoned for some months after the rising of his brother-in-law, Robert Emmet, on 23 July 1803. Despite the fact that he had had no connection with the rebellion his association with radicalism and scandal slowed his professional progress. 
Holmes declined to receive any favours from the government, refusing in succession the offices of crown prosecutor, king's counsel, and solicitor-general; he never took silk, not wanting to receive a compliment through William Plunket, who had led the prosecution against Emmet. Despite his refusal to accept favours from the government, his was for many years the largest practice of any member of the Irish courts. He was renowned as a fine lawyer and his arguments were always learned. He was a powerful and impressive advocate, and several of his speeches to juries -- particularly his speeches in 'Watson v. Dill', in defence of the 'Nation' newspaper, and his oration on behalf of John Mitchel, tried for treason-felony on 24 May 1848 -- earned him a good deal of professional respect. During the course of his practice he was said to have made over $100,000. Nor did he refrain from continuing to write about his political opinions on Ireland: he published 'An Address to the Yeomanry of Ireland, Demonstrating the Necessity of their Declaring their Opinions upon Political Subjects' and in 1847 'The Case of Ireland Stated', on the repeal of the union. When old age prevented his continuing on circuit, the members of the north-east bar presented him with an address and presented a bust to the bar mess-room. Holmes retired formally in 1852, choosing to live in London with his only child, Elizabeth, who had married George William Lenox-Conyngham, chief clerk of the Foreign Office. Holmes died at 37 Eaton Place, Belgrave Square, London, on 30 November 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 13603


Thomas Holmes (bap. 1606, d. 1638), organist, singer, and composer, was baptized in St Swithun's parish, Winchester, on 11 April 1606, a son of John and Dussabella Holmes. While it is reasonable to assume that he was a chorister at Winchester under his father, there is no proof of this, and he first appears in the records relating to the dispute over his father's successor at Salisbury Cathedral in 1629, which Thomas Holmes appears to have lost. He was admitted lay vicar and organist at Winchester on 5 April 1631, at the dean's special request, and on 17 September 1633 was appointed a gentleman of the Chapel Royal. His royal duties may by the following month have made him the subject of a dispute, when they were apparently causing him to be absent from Winchester, much to the chapter's annoyance. Apparently the archbishop of Canterbury had taken Holmes's side in the matter, and the chapter would have written 'to his Grace and to represent the necessity our church had of his presence' (Shaw, 296) had not the king intervened to prevent such a petition. The situation was probably rectified, for two years later one visitor to the cathedral praised Holmes as 'one of the rarest Organists... that this Land affoords' (Hammond, 46). Meanwhile, his court connections probably qualified him to take part, as a bass singer, in James Shirley's masque 'The Triumph of Peace' on 13 February 1634. Perhaps this was the occasion of his meeting with the composer John Jenkins, who reported a story about his having 'one false Eye of Glasse' and his bizarre sense of humour in accommodating it (Ashbee and Lasocki, 582). Holmes died in Salisbury on 25 March 1638 and was buried in the close there later that month. 


@@@@@


doc= 13604


Holmes, William (1689-1748), college head, was born in the parish of St Swithin London Stone on 5 April 1689, the son of Thomas and Margaret Holmes of London. He was admitted into Merchant Taylors' School, London, on 12 September 1701 and was elected to St John's College, Oxford, on 11 June 1707, whence he matriculated on 2 July. He was admitted fellow in 1710, graduated BA on 16 May 1711, and proceeded MA on 9 April 1715. After filling the office of proctor in 1721 he took the degree of BD on 13 April 1722 and that of DD on 5 March 1725. He held in succession the livings of North Leigh, near Oxford (1725-6), and of Henbury, Gloucestershire (1726-8), and was elected president of St John's College on 3 June 1728. On 24 September he was appointed rector of Boxwell, Gloucestershire, and to the college living of Hanborough, Oxfordshire. From 1731 to 1737 he was proctor for the clergy of the diocese of Oxford in convocation. 
From 1732 to 1735 Holmes was vice-chancellor of Oxford University and, as such, was appealed to by John Wesley to allay the fears of critics of the Holy Club. In 1734 he was appointed one of the king's chaplains. In the same year, as vice-chancellor, he presented addresses from the university on the occasion of the marriage of the princess royal to the prince of Orange, who during his time at Oxford had been partly under Holmes's care. From 1736 to 1742 Holmes was an energetic regius professor of history. As president of St John's he had printed, so that it might be given to every scholar on entry, the last letter of Sir Thomas White, founder of the college, in which he urges the fellows to live at peace with each other and bids them 'take a coppye of yt for my sake'. Holmes is ridiculed as time-serving in an imitation of the first satire of Juvenal, printed in London in 1740, and in a letter purporting to be written from Oxford and published in 'British Champions, or, The Impartial Advertizer' (10 January 1743); 'that ornament of learning and politeness H -- es' is given as an example of those who 'steer judiciously between all extremes'. He was certainly the first president to be loyal to the house of Hanover. He seems to have supported sound learning and was civil to Thomas Hearne, the antiquary, who wished to see a plan adopted for printing Oxford manuscripts. While vice-chancellor Holmes revived, on 9 July 1733, the ceremony of 'the act', which had been discontinued, and invited Handel to play before and after the ceremony. He offended Hearne and probably other traditionalists, however, by allowing Handel to perform on his own account in the Sheldonian Theatre on several occasions and to charge 5's'. for admission; Hearne refers scathingly to 'Handel and (his lousy crew) a great number of foreign fiddlers' ('Reliquiae', 778). On the other hand Holmes prohibited a company of players from visiting Oxford. On 4 June 1742 he was nominated by the crown to the deanery of Exeter. Two months earlier, on 15 March, he had married Sarah England, widow of Robert England, at St Sepulchre's, London. 
The only work ascribed to Holmes is 'The Country Parson's Advice to his Parishioners... of the Younger Sort', published anonymously in 1742; other editions, with slightly different titles, were published in 1764, 1769, and 1783. Holmes died on 4 April 1748, at the age of fifty-eight, leaving considerable property (two farms and $200 a year) to St John's College, and was buried in the college chapel. He was survived by his wife, Sarah; she died on 3 December 1750. She was also a benefactor to the college, where her portrait still hangs, in St Giles's House. A monument was erected to Holmes in the college chapel, at her direction. 


@@@@@


doc= 13605


Holmes, William (1779-1851), politician, was the fifth son of Thomas Holmes, a rich brewer in co. Sligo, and his wife, Anne; and of a family long settled in King's county, Ireland. He was born in Sligo, and graduated BA of Trinity College, Dublin, in 1795. He entered the army, served in the West Indies, and was there military secretary to Sir Thomas Hislop. He later developed his West Indian connections as agent for Demerara from 1820 to 1833. He left the army in 1807 upon his marriage on 27 October that year to Helen, Lady Stronge, widow of the Revd Sir James Stronge, bt, and daughter of John Tew of Dublin and Margaret Muswell. He entered parliament for Grampound, Cornwall, in March 1808, and sat for that place until 1812, then for Tregony, Cornwall (1812-18), Totnes, Devon (1818-20), Bishop's Castle, Shropshire (1820-30), Haslemere, Surrey (1830-32), and Berwick upon Tweed (1837-41). From 1832 to 1837 he was not in parliament, though in 1835 he unsuccessfully contested Ipswich. In 1841 he stood for Stafford, but was not elected, and he then quitted parliamentary life. 
For thirty years 'Black Billy' Holmes was the adroit and dexterous whip of the tory party, and his great knowledge of the tastes, wishes, idiosyncrasies, weaknesses, and family connections of all the members on the tory side of the house made him a most skilful party manager and dispenser of patronage. His position was of especial importance as Peel, the tory leader in the Commons, took little interest in party business. His Charles Street headquarters developed into the Carlton Club and the 'Charles Street fund' was an important precedent in the development of party organization. Very unusually for a whip, Holmes was not a lord of the Treasury, but was treasurer of the ordnance from 1818 to 1830. He was classed as an 'ultra-tory' but reported on the ultras to the party leadership. Though often violently attacked, his personal honour remained unquestioned in the midst of a life of intrigue, and he was not unpopular with his opponents. A fanatical protestant, by special permission from the duke of Wellington he was allowed in 1829 to vote against the ministerial 'Roman Catholic Relief Bill'. He died at his home in Grafton Street, London, on 26 January 1851, leaving one son, Thomas Knox Holmes. 


@@@@@


doc= 13606


Holmes, William Anthony (1782-1843), Church of Ireland clergyman, was born in Drogheda, co. Louth, the son of Joseph Holmes. He was educated privately, and then entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 7 January 1799 and was elected a scholar in 1801. He graduated BA in 1803 and BD and DD in 1834. Having been ordained a priest in 1806, he became incumbent of Holywood, co. Down, in 1810. While there he played an important part in establishing an institute for beggars in Belfast by publishing the tract 'A Plan for a Mendicity Institution' ('c'.1817-1819). In 1818 he was promoted to the rectory of Ballyroan in the diocese of Leighlin; for some years he was preacher of Cashel Cathedral, and in 1822 became rector of Hore Abbey in the diocese of Cashel. On 22 May 1832 he was collated to the chancellorship of Cashel, and in 1837 to the rectory of Templemore. He was described by a contemporary archdeacon as 'an eloquent preacher, and a person of active mind and literary habits'. 
Besides sermons and contributions to periodicals, Holmes published several works including 'The Time of the End; being a Series of Lectures on Prophetical Chronology' (1833) and 'The Queen's Declaration Against Popery, and the Coronation Oath Discussed' (1843). He was married to Caroline (died 1838), daughter of John Bond, of Newbridge House, near Bath, and they had two sons. He died at the rectory, Templemore, on 30 December 1843, and was buried in St John the Baptist's churchyard, Cashel. 


@@@@@


doc= 13607


Holroyd, Sir George Sowley (1758-1831), judge, was born on 31 October 1758 in York, the eldest son of George Holroyd and Eleanor, 'nee' Sowley, of Appleby, Westmorland, and a distant relative of John Baker Holroyd, first earl of Sheffield. His comfortable expectations as a boy were shattered by his father's losses from speculation. Instead of going to university, in April 1774 he had to be removed from Harrow School and articled to a London attorney, Mr Borthwick. Having determined on a career at the bar he entered Gray's Inn in 1777 and two years later set himself up as a special pleader. In eighteenth-century common law, the drawing of pleadings was an ancillary but significant craft and Holroyd seems to have been well fitted to its recondite niceties. With Samuel Romilly, Edward Christian, and John Baynes, Holroyd formed a mooting group where each argued a problem case for one party or gave a reasoned judgment. This exercise in mutual training must have been particularly useful at a time when formal legal education scarcely existed. 
By 1787 Holroyd was in a position both to be called to the bar and, on 10 September that year, to marry Sarah Chaplin ('bap'. 1768) at St Paul's Covent Garden. Baptized a Roman Catholic, she was the daughter of Amos Chaplin of Brydges Street, Covent Garden, and his wife, Maria Anna. They had fourteen children, six of whom lived to survive their father. His career prospered; according to Foss 'his fee-book shows the rapid increase in his practice, proving also the advance of his reputation by the number and importance of the cases submitted to his direction' (Foss, 'Judges'). It was an advance built upon a quiet, judicious temperament, a fund of knowledge, and a natural ability for putting things in convincing perspective. Chief Justice Campbell would later proclaim Holroyd's 'genius for the law' (Campbell, 356) and Lord Brougham, for once in agreement, described him (on his memorial in Wargrave church) as 'one of the most able, most learned, and most virtuous men that ever... adorned the profession of the law'. 
A rather shy man, Holroyd did not seek appointment as king's counsel, but his skills were well enough appreciated, notably by Edward Law, first Baron Ellenborough, the domineering chief justice of king's bench. In 1812 the democrat Sir Francis Burdett published what the Commons decided was a libel upon it, and it ordered his arrest. Holroyd appeared for Burdett in a subsequent action against Speaker Charles Abbot for damages, and argued the case for the absence of such a power in the Commons alone by an exhaustive survey of precedent and practice from the thirteenth century onwards. Ellenborough, while clearly determined to uphold what had been done, treated the counter-arguments with great attention. Four years later, on 14 February 1816, he secured Holroyd's accession to his court. 
Holroyd served as one of the three puisne judges of king's bench with, first, Ellenborough and then Charles Abbott, first Baron Tenterden, as his chiefs. Sitting with Sir John Bayley and Sir Joseph Littledale, both men of notable learning, the court enjoyed a decade of strong reputation. At this period king's bench continued to have a much greater flow of causes laid in it than either of its rivals, the courts of common pleas and of exchequer. This preference, which turned upon a number of factors, was certainly enhanced in those periods when the bar and attorneys placed their trust in the membership of the court. 
Holroyd can be seen in typical form in the case of 'Blundell v. Catterall' (1821); holding that a member of the public has no directly enforceable right to cross the foreshore in order to bathe in the sea, his display of legal learning is notable both for its depth and its analytic dissection. Many similar instances of decisions on matters of private right could be given. Occasionally Holroyd was also drawn back into political dramas. In 'Redford v. Birley' (1822) he had to try a civil action for assault by one of the victims of the Peterloo riots against the yeomanry members who mowed him down. He directed the jury at York assizes with calm persistence and secured a verdict exonerating the defendants that clearly he thought justified. The full bench upheld his conduct of the proceedings, as to which nice questions arose about the admissibility of evidence, and the jury's verdict. 
Holroyd remained in office until the age of seventy, when ill health forced his retirement, on 17 November 1828. He died at his home, Hare Hatch, Wargrave, Berkshire, on 21 December 1831, leaving his widow in less than comfortable circumstances, and was buried at Wargrave parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 13608


Holroyd, John Baker, first earl of Sheffield (1735-1821), politician, was born on 21 December 1735, the second son of Isaac Holroyd (1707-1778), a lawyer, and his wife, Dorothy Baker (died 1777). A later birth date of 1741 was given in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1821), and Holroyd was said in one source to be aged twenty-five at the time of his first marriage in May 1767 (quoted in GEC, 'Peerage', 11.665); however, the 1735 date is confirmed by his memorial inscription. Holroyd's father was from a Yorkshire family which had settled in Ireland in the seventeenth century. Holroyd was educated at Dr Ford's school in Dublin and may have contemplated an army career, since he was a cornet in the 21st dragoons in 1760 and captain by the end of 1761. His prospects changed when his elder brother Daniel was killed in 1762, and after the war he began a long continental tour. In 1768 he succeeded to the estates of his mother's brother, the Revd Jones Baker, and took the name Baker before Holroyd. The following year he purchased Sheffield Park in Sussex for $31,000. Much of his fortune he devoted to the improvement of his estate: he employed James Wyatt to rebuild the house in gothick and Capability Brown and Humphry Repton to lay out the park. On 26 May 1767 he married his first wife, Abigail Way ('bap'. 1746, died 1793), the daughter of Lewis Way of Richmond, and the sister of Benjamin Way MP. 
Holroyd's friendship with Edward Gibbon commenced at Lausanne in September 1763. Gibbon's first impression was that his new acquaintance was 'tres suffisant' ('very self-important'), but soon he took to him ('Le journal', 21). They remained fast friends and were both buried in Fletching church, near Sheffield Park. Gibbon leaned heavily on Holroyd's business acumen, in return offering Holroyd sensible advice (rarely taken) on political questions. Holroyd was a small, restless, ambitious man. His wide circle of friends included William Eden (later Lord Auckland), John Foster (later Lord Oriel), a prominent member of the Irish House of Commons, and Alexander Wedderburn, later lord chancellor. Despite lecturing his friends on their political blunders, Holroyd remained on good terms with most of them, and a stream of visitors made their way to Sheffield Park. 
Holroyd's first attempt to enter parliament was in 1774 for Sussex. Gibbon advised against: 'I cannot yet think you ripe for a county member... Five years are very little to remove the obvious objection of a 'novus homo'' ('Letters of Edward Gibbon', 2.26). Holroyd put forward his name but was obliged to withdraw. He remained anxious to play a public role, and when the American war broke out raised a regiment of light dragoons (the 22nd or Sussex regiment) and became colonel. A posting to Coventry made him familiar with the politics of that turbulent borough, and he resolved to stand at a by-election in February 1780. Once more Gibbon advised caution: a general election was due and holding the seat would be difficult and expensive. Holroyd was returned unopposed and entered parliament determined to make his mark, 'indefatigable and eager' ('Letters of Edward Gibbon', 2.241). Perhaps he overdid it. Having been returned on 15 February, on 17 March he moved that Temple Luttrell's attack on Lord North for corruption at Milborne Port was 'ill-founded and injurious' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 21, 1780, 292). Although his motion was carried, so prominent an action from a brand new member was unbecoming, and in his next speech Holroyd admitted ruefully that 'the part he had taken in the Milborne Port business' (ibid., 21, 1780, 335) had been held against him. But before the general election his stock had risen dramatically. When Lord George Gordon's monster petition was presented to parliament in June 1780, with the protestant mob howling outside, Holroyd dogged Gordon, prevented him from inciting his supporters, and threatened to run him through if any attempt was made to storm the building. In the savage rioting in London that followed, Holroyd, 'among the flames with the Northumberland militia' ('Letters of Edward Gibbon', 2.243), defended the bank from assault. 
The contest for Coventry which Gibbon had predicted took place at the general election in October 1780, when North's government found $2000 towards Holroyd's expenses. The campaign was riotous, the poll interrupted, but Holroyd was seated on petition. The reward for his exertions, political and military, was an Irish peerage -- he became first Baron Sheffield of Dunamore in January 1781 -- that allowed him to retain his Commons seat. He was acquiring a reputation also in economic questions: his attack upon Pitt's proposal to relax the navigation laws ('the palladium of Britain') against the new United States of America was widely reported and issued as a pamphlet. Sheffield supported the Fox-North coalition and was granted a new Irish barony in September 1783 with succession to his two daughters, since his only son had died aged five. His attitude was always quasi-independent, but in the tense spring of 1784, when the coalition's majority was melting, he wrote to Eden to deny any intention of ratting: 'you seem to be a little suspicious of me, but it is exactly the moment... when according to my nature, it is impossible to be off' ('Journal and Correspondence of... Auckland', 1.71-2). Pitt's government sponsored an attack upon his position at Coventry at the general election, and he lost his seat, 'swept away in the general unpopularity' ('Letters of Edward Gibbon', 2.405). 
Out of parliament from 1784 until 1790, Sheffield gave independent support to the opposition. He attacked Pitt's commercial propositions in a pamphlet, 'Observations on the Manufactures, Trade and Present State of Ireland' (1785). His precocious daughter Maria wrote in March 1786: 'I went last Thursday to my first play... Papa was too busy importing and exporting to think of such things' (Holroyd, 'Girlhood', 12). His strong opinion that black slavery was essential for the cultivation of Britain's sugar islands suggested a possible political home at Bristol, which had grown rich on the slave trade. In the spring of 1790 he published 'Observations on the Project for Abolishing the Slave Trade' and at the June general election was returned after only a token contest. 'The duties of a Bristol member', wrote Gibbon, 'which would kill me in the first session, would supply your activity with a constant fund of amusement' ('Letters of Edward Gibbon', 3.192). 
Like most of the remaining Northites, Sheffield gravitated towards government as the French Revolution unfolded. Its violence agitated him greatly -- France was 'the vilest of all nations' he told the Commons in 1792 (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 80, 1792, 81) -- and he and his wife spent much time helping French refugees. In 1793 the government found employment for him on the new board of agriculture and as chairman of the commission to issue exchequer bills. But he pined for greater recognition. Wedderburn, now Lord Loughborough, reported to Eden that Sheffield was convinced that 'until he is more consulted things will always go wrong'. 'He is of a very active, bustling temper and turn of mind', wrote Sylvester Douglas, 'but I fear he has mistaken that turn for genius' (HoP, 'Commons'). 
In 1796 Sheffield was returned top of the poll at Bristol and resumed his idiosyncratic support of government, for he disliked many of its financial proposals. His opinion of the proposed union with Ireland fluctuated, but on 22 April 1799 he spoke strongly in favour of the principle, publishing his speech as another pamphlet. After the sudden death of his first wife, on 3 April 1793, he married twice more into political families. On 26 December 1794 he married Lucy Pelham (1763-1797), the daughter of Thomas Pelham, first earl of Chichester, and Anne Frankland, and the sister of Thomas Pelham, a Sussex neighbour and chief secretary for Ireland. His third wife, whom he married on 20 January 1798, was Lady Anne North (1764-1832), one of the daughters of Lord North and Anne Speke; they had two children, including the much wanted son. After Gibbon's death in 1794, Sheffield began the task of editing his 'Miscellaneous Works', among them the autobiography (1796), treating the text with great freedom. 
Sheffield's campaign for promotion continued unabated. In 1801 he asked for the presidency of the Board of Trade, observing that 'I have some reputation with the public from John o' Groats to the Land's end on several subjects' (HoP, 'Commons'). Importunity triumphed in 1802 when Addington recommended a United Kingdom peerage, and he was created Baron Sheffield of Sheffield, in the county of York. The following year he was made president of the board of agriculture, a post he held until 1806. His ambition merely whetted, he pressed for an Irish earldom, which he obtained in 1816. In 1806 he begged Grenville to appoint him to the Board of Trade. Eden's comment was deadly: 'Though he is friendly, honourable, well-informed and sedulous... those qualities alone are not sufficient to facilitate the business of a Board which is in danger of being overwhelmed by the variety of applications crowding into it. That business can only be kept down and efficiently discharged by quiet consideration and enquiry such as to authorize prompt decisions, without being exposed to eternal discussions about the navigation laws, and long reasonings (and 'rechauffees') from pamphlets. ('Fortescue MSS', 8.29)' In 1809 Sheffield was at last admitted to the privy council and the Board of Trade, and he held office until his death. His stream of pamphlets continued to the end, one on the corn laws in 1815, another on the poor laws in 1819. His last intervention in the Lords was in November 1820, and he died at his home in Portland Place, London, on 30 May 1821, aged eighty-five. He was buried in the family mausoleum at Fletching church, near Sheffield Park, the following month. 


@@@@@


doc= 13609


Holt, Francis Ludlow (1779-1844), legal writer, was born at Watford, Hertfordshire, the son of the Revd Ludlow Holt, author of some sermons published in 1780-81, and his wife, Jane. He was elected a king's scholar of Westminster School in 1794, matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1798, and was admitted to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1807. He did not graduate at either university. He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple on 27 January 1809. In the early part of his professional career he went on the northern circuit, but after a few years he resigned the circuit practice altogether, confining himself thereafter to an extensive chamber practice. He became a king's counsel (on Henry Brougham's recommendation) and bencher of the Inner Temple in 1831, and treasurer of that inn in 1840. He was for some time an exchequer-bill loan commissioner. He succeeded Sir Giffin Wilson as vice-chancellor of the county palatine of Lancaster in 1826 and held the post until his death. He married a niece of John Bell, proprietor of 'Bell's Weekly Messenger', of which he was for many years the principal editor. 
Holt was the author of several law treatises and also produced a set of 'nisi prius' reports between 1815 and 1817. He was the author of 'The Law of Libel', one of the first treatises on its subject, written at a time when the libel laws were under much criticism for hindering the freedom of the press. His work merely summarized the existing law in a superficial way, however, and was seen by critics of the law, such as James Mill, as work of a tory lawyer. It was largely superseded by that of Thomas Starkie. His other main treatise was 'A System of the Shipping and Navigation Laws of Great Britain', published in 1820. Although it was comprehensive and well-written, it was superseded by the work of Charles Abbott, later Lord Tenterden. He also wrote a treatise on the bankruptcy laws, and on 'The Law and Usage of Parliament, in Cases of Privilege and Contempt' (1810). In addition to his legal writings Holt wrote some plays, publishing in 1804 a comedy, 'The Land We Live In'. Though successful as a literary work (reaching a third edition by 1805), it was unsuitable to the stage, the author having sacrificed plot to dialogue; it was performed at Drury Lane on one night in 1805. Holt died at his residence, 13 Earl's Terrace, Kensington, on 29 September 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 13610


Holt, Sir John (d. 1418/19), justice, is of obscure origins. He trained as a lawyer, and from 1 October 1375 was paid as a king's serjeant, even though he did not formally become a serjeant-at-law until Hilary term 1376. His pleadings are often recorded in the year-books. He formed other important connections at court. By the mid-1370s he was involved in the property affairs of William, Lord Latimer, the king's chamberlain, and he also entered the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, who in 1377 appointed him steward of his lordship of Higham Ferrers, Northamptonshire, an office he held at least until October 1382. By 20 February 1376 he had married a woman named Alice, probably the heir of the Islip family; on 28 March property in Islip, Aldwincle, Grafton by Cranford, and Woodford, all in Northamptonshire, was quitclaimed to them, and the manor of Sacombe in Hertfordshire, which Holt had purchased, was conveyed to the couple jointly. Other acquisitions made by Holt were the manor and advowson of Brampton, Huntingdonshire, property in Lincoln, and an inn in Southwark, the Angel in the Hope. On 21 May 1382 he was granted the wardship of John Stonor, a minor who was heir to estates in Oxfordshire, but soon relinquished it to the chief justice of the common pleas, Sir Robert Bealknap. 
On 4 November 1383 Holt was appointed to the common bench, and by 3 May following he had been knighted. He was a trier of petitions in the parliaments of 1384, 1385, and 1386. In August 1387 he was one of the justices who responded to Richard II's questions about the legitimacy of proceedings in the previous year's parliament, which had placed royal authority under conciliar control, by declaring that they were derogatory to the king's prerogative, and that those responsible for them were traitors. When the earls of Derby and Nottingham rose in arms against Richard II's favourites in December 1387, they detained Holt while he was holding sessions at Newmarket Heath. In January 1388 he was among the justices deprived of office at the instigation of the two earls and their fellow lords appellant, and on 2 March he was one of six of them who were brought before parliament, to be impeached by the Commons for the opinions to which they had subscribed in 1387. Holt claimed that he had complied as a result of dire threats from Archbishop Alexander Neville, Robert de Vere, duke of Ireland, and Michael de la Pole, earl of Suffolk, and that because of his hesitancy he was physically assaulted. The Lords were divided on sentencing the former justices, but on 6 March they were condemned to hanging and forfeiture, then granted their lives at the supplication of the bishops. At the end of parliament their banishment to Ireland was agreed upon. Holt (like Bealknap) was to stay in Drogheda or its vicinity: in July arrangements were made for his transportation from Chester with two of his servants, the first instalment of his annuity (to be raised from what had been his own lands) of $26 13's'. 4died, sufficient raiment, and a bed. On 7 July 1390, with the great council's assent, his forfeited properties were sold for $500 to his eldest son, John. The latter and his brothers Hugh and Richard (a cleric) experienced difficulties in making the annual payments: in 1395 the debt was rescheduled. 
Then in the first parliament of 1397 the former justices' banishments were rescinded, and in January 1398 parliament reversed their sentences. Holt was back in England that year. In Henry IV's first parliament, in 1399, the sentences were reinstated. The new king disregarded the Commons' pity for the surviving offenders' old age and poor health. However, on 20 February 1400 Holt was licensed to live in England, and his petitions to parliament in 1401 and 1402 (made jointly with his former colleague and fellow exile William Burgh) resulted in his receiving royal permission to sue for his former estates. Sir John Holt died in either 1418 or 1419. His eldest son, John, had predeceased him, as had his wife, and his second son, Hugh, succeeded to the recovered estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 13611


Holt, Sir John (1642-1710), judge, was born at Thame, Oxfordshire, on 30 December 1642, the first son of Sir Thomas Holt and of Susan, daughter of John Peacock of Chawley, Berkshire. Holt's father, a barrister of Gray's Inn, was recorder of Abingdon as well as its member of parliament during the 1650s. The younger Holt attended the free school in Abingdon. He was admitted to his father's inn in November 1652 when he was not yet ten years old. On 31 July 1658 he matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, where he took no degree. Though reportedly a dissolute youth, he was called to the bar in February 1664. 
By late 1664 Holt had begun to plead in king's bench, the court where he made his greatest mark, and by 1668 he had begun to earn mention in the law reports. On 28 June 1675 he married Ann ('c'.1657-1712), daughter of Sir John Cropley. From the late 1670s Holt's prominence in his profession was underscored by his regular appearance as counsel in suits before the House of Lords. 
Unlike many leaders at the bar in the late 1670s and 1680s, Holt defies easy labelling as a whig or tory. He represented clients such as the Norwich alderman who lost his office after allegations that he had not observed the terms of the 'Corporation Act' and the Ipswich justices of the peace who would not support collecting fines from dissenters, suggesting Holt's sympathy for nonconformity. But he also provided advice to the leaders of Leicester who wanted to understand better the actions they could take to enforce the conventicle acts. He provided counsel in 1679 to the king's adviser, the earl of Danby, and in 1683 to the accused traitor Lord Russell. Holt performed a supporting role in crown prosecutions, appearing in trials for seditious libel in 1680 and against Slingsby Bethel in 1681 for his alleged assault at Southwark's parliamentary election. On the other hand, Holt represented the whig leader Lord Grey of Warke during his trial for debauching his sister-in-law, Lady Henrietta Berkeley. Holt also joined prominent whig lawyers Francis Pollexfen, William Williams, and Sir Francis Winnington in their unsuccessful defence of Thomas Pilkington, Samuel Shute, Lord Grey, and others for their riot at the election of London's sheriffs in 1682. 
While Holt supported these whigs in court in the 1680s, he just as consistently promoted royal authority in the crown's legal battles with the urban corporations. He did not appear in the 'quo warranto' trial against London's corporation, but was among those consulted by the City about how it should respond after judgment came down against it in June 1683. Though Holt advised surrender, the City followed other counsel and ultimately forfeited its charter. Holt likewise advised Berwick to surrender its charter after the town initially decided to fight a 'quo warranto'. In both instances Holt premised his advice on the idea that all franchises -- including corporations -- derive from the king and would thus survive in royal hands if seized after judgment or upon surrender. The same view of regal power over franchises appeared in Holt's arguments in the East India Company case, in which he found Pollexfen, Williams, and Sir George Treby arrayed against him. In a learned argument, drawn not only from statute and law reports but from scripture, Grotius, John Selden, and other treatise authors, Holt justified the company's privileges by justifying the king's power to grant them a monopoly by royal charter: 'by the law of the land, no subject of England can trade with infidels without license from the king' ('State trials', 10.373). 
Holt was made serjeant-at-law in February 1684, at which time he was again advising Danby in his effort to win release from the Tower. Though he aided the former royal minister and had just received the crown's favour, in the same period Holt joined Pollexfen to defend William Sacheverell and other alleged whig rioters from Nottingham, without success. In February 1686 James II knighted Holt and made him recorder of London, the City's charter being still in abeyance and its officers acting by the king's nomination. He was promoted to king's serjeant in April. Holt's reported reluctance to accept the recorder's place only grew when he sat in the Old Bailey in the trial of a soldier accused of desertion. Of nine judges hearing the matter, Holt alone contended that the soldier could not be executed when the kingdom was not at war. Later, in his absence, judgment was given and the soldier was indeed executed. Holt asked to be dismissed from the recordership and in May 1687 the king obliged. 
Holt remained a king's serjeant and thus refused to appear as counsel in court against the king throughout 1687 and 1688. But he continued active before the bench, right through the autumn of 1688. In October he was among those convened to investigate whether the prince of Wales, born the previous June, was indeed the queen's child. After James II fled in December Holt was one of the legal counsel consulted by London's leaders and later by the provisional government about how to summon a parliament in the king's absence. 
When the convention met in January 1689 the House of Lords asked Holt to serve as one of its legal advisers. Hinting that government was by contract, not 'jure divino', he was among those who suggested that James II had abdicated because his departure was a violation -- and thus a renunciation -- of his trust as king. On 31 January Bere Alston returned Holt to the Commons, where he spoke often, served on two dozen committees, and helped to manage the conference with the Lords about the crown -- in which he promoted William of Orange's claim to the throne independent of any right by his wife, Mary. During the November debate on the 'Bill of Rights' Holt also argued that the king possessed the authority to grant 'non obstantes' -- a dispensing power -- though he added that this power did not permit making exceptions to the 'Test Act'. Holt also supported the new monarch's right to collect revenues granted by parliament to the previous king. In short, while he accepted that a king like James might forfeit the throne by breaking his trust, Holt continued to accord the monarch significant authority as a matter of law. 
Holt's brief Commons career was ended by his appointment as chief justice of king's bench on 17 April 1689. As a jurist Holt exercised greater sway over the law than any judge between Hale and Mansfield. Unlike Hale, he extended this influence exclusively through his reported opinions rather than by authoring legal treatises, which perhaps explains Holt's concern about the accuracy of most reports. In criminal law Holt was notable for the attention he gave to how evidence was presented before him, though perhaps William Holdsworth's pronouncement that Holt 'established the modern attitude of the judge to the criminal' (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 6.518) overstates the matter. Holt's summation of the case against Richard Hathaway at Surrey assizes for giving false evidence of witchcraft shows his scepticism of those who sought convictions by questionable means. Similarly Holt refused to countenance evidence of a defendant's character prior to the events in question, though he carefully applied this rule when such evidence might have helped a defendant as well as when it might not. 
Holt's care with evidence reveals the precision of his mind in applying law, not a peculiar sensitivity for the accused. This was apparent in his handling of the treason case against Sir William Parkyns. Parkyns complained that he had not had sufficient time to gather his witnesses. None the less, Holt denied his request for a delay, saying that Parkyns had had ample time, even though he had received notice of trial just six days earlier and had been delayed in meeting with his solicitor. Parkyns next asked for counsel in court, pointing to a statute providing for counsel in treason trials due to take effect the day following his arrest. Holt again refused: 'we are to proceed according to what the law is, and not what it will be'. Parkyns responded that the preamble to the new law noted that the change thereby enacted was simply 'declarative of the common law' because it was a provision that was 'always just and reasonable'; Parkyns reasoned that 'what is just and reasonable tomorrow, sure is just and reasonable today'. Holt stood firm: 'We cannot alter the law till lawmakers do it... it is not a law till the time comes that the parliament hath appointed' ('State trials', 13.72-3). Holt denied Robert Charnock the same request. 'We are not here in a court of equity, but must proceed according to the rules of law' (ibid., 12.1382). Both men were executed. 
Holt proved as ready as most of his contemporaries on the bench to chastise jurors when he disagreed with their verdicts. When the jury hearing one of the first actions of criminal conversation -- brought by the duke of Norfolk against John Germaine for adultery with his duchess -- Holt approved the jury's finding of adultery but berated them for fining Germaine only 100 marks with costs. In 1700, in another adultery action, Holt rejected the jury's first verdict and scolded them again when their second verdict was little better. 
Holt's judgments in a few slavery cases have traditionally been celebrated as much as his conduct of criminal cases, though again the legacy appears more mixed upon closer analysis. Holt proclaimed in 1701, 'as soon as a negro comes into England, he becomes free: one may be a villein in England, but not a slave'. While this applied to England itself, Holt by no means negated laws elsewhere that made chattel slavery legal. As he put it, 'the sale was in Virginia, and, by the laws of that country, negroes are saleable; for the laws of England do not extend to Virginia; being a conquered country their law is what the king pleases' (91 ER 566). Holt recommended that the plaintiff simply amend his declaration in order to make good on his plea of debt for the sale of a slave. 
Holt's rulings were less ambiguous in three other areas: commerce, corporations, and administrative law. His impact on commercial law was made largely in the area of negotiable bills of exchange. Posterity has judged him harshly for his judgments in 'Clerke v. Martin' (92 ER 6) and in 'Buller v. Crispe' (87 ER 793), condemning his unwillingness to countenance the same procedures for disputed promissory notes as were available for bills of exchange. But Holt's reluctance to accept the imposition of bankers' innovations on the common law arose not only from his precise application of common law, but also from his sense that providing the same remedies in both instances would be to conflate non-commercial with commercial money transfer and lending practices. Holt feared this would give undue power to creditors by sweeping away the old law of debt with all its procedural protections for debtors. His unwillingness to accept alleged mercantile custom in the handling of notes also arose from his hesitance to innovate from the bench in a matter that would have such important implications for law and commerce. He felt that such innovation could only be made by statute, thus revealing the respect he accorded acts made by king-in-parliament. It has been suggested for this reason that Holt himself promoted the statute of 1704 governing the law of notes and bills by which they came to be handled in a similar fashion. 
Elsewhere, Holt clarified principles concerning employer liability, declaring in 1697 that when a servant did some damage, 'it shall be intended, that the servant had authority from his master, it being for his master's benefit' (91 ER 1073). Holt carried this broad vicarious liability into the commercial setting, noting that 'the master at his peril ought to take care what servant he employs; and it is more reasonable, that [the master] should suffer for the cheats of his servant than strangers' (ibid., 91.797). In his judgment in 'Coggs v. Barnard' of 1703, Holt separated problems associated with bailment from contract and tort by outlining clear categories by which to assess bailees' obligations. 'It is of great consequence, that the law should be settled in this point.' In a rather rare display of modesty, he added, 'I don't know whether I may have settled it, or may not rather have unsettled it' (ibid., 92.114). 
In corporation law, Holt's pronouncements built upon extensive experience. Both before and after he rose to the bench he consistently viewed all franchises, including corporate ones, as deriving only from the king. As such, where the liberties granted by the king were injurious to others or were abused by those holding them they could be seized by the king, by judgment either on 'scire facias', or, more commonly and controversially in the 1680s, on 'quo warranto'. As Holt put it in 1692, 'a corporation is a trust reposed in several persons for the better ordering and managing the affairs of the city or town which is incorporated, and if that trust be broken, it incurs a forfeiture' (BL, Add. MS 35982, fol. 23). 
Holt's 1683 advice that London should surrender its charter arose from this position. Holt reiterated this view of the royal origin of franchises -- and thus of the legality of charter surrenders -- in the parliamentary debates of 1689-90 concerning London and the other corporations that had lost their charters, and again in Sir James Smith's case of 1691-2. Though politically suspect after 1689 for their use in the 1680s to control the corporations, 'quo warranto' was thus preserved by Holt for future use to constrain arbitrary behaviour in corporations. With the Hertford 'quo warranto' of 1698-9, Holt made clear what would be the practice in the years ahead: that individuals rather than the corporation as a whole would be liable for misdeeds. Since corporation members acted according to privileges granted by the king, it would continue to be the role of the king's principal court to inspect -- by 'quo warranto' -- the use of those privileges and to oust or punish those who used them wrongly. 
Holt's view of individual accountability for wrongs committed by corporations points to the active role he accorded his court in supervising other jurisdictions. In 1699 he grandly proclaimed: 'it is by the common law that this Court will examine if other Courts exceed their jurisdictions' (91 ER 1212). He reinforced the point in the case of 'Cardiff Bridge': 'wherever any new jurisdiction is erected... they are subject to the inspections of this Court by writ of error, or by certiorari and mandamus' (91 ER 135). Holt strengthened his court's broad power to review the work of other tribunals by clarifying procedure in the use of 'certiorari' and 'mandamus', by vigorously imposing fines and attachments on those who were slow to return these writs, and by speaking forcefully to questions about where these writs lay. In particular, Holt largely resolved the question about the rationale for granting 'mandamus', a question on which the court had vacillated throughout the previous century: namely whether it was granted to help gain restitution to office conceived as a type of private property, or whether restoration to office and other uses of 'mandamus' should arise from the public quality of office and official actions. Holt was clear: 'mandamus' lay only where the matter in question concerned the public. By stressing this aspect of local office-holding, he sharpened the distinction between private property and public duties and justified the broad authority over other jurisdictions he accorded his court. For Holt, only parliament acting legislatively stood above such review. No other agencies or courts had 'a sovereign power. Therefore all their acts... are subject to the review of the king's courts, which [acts] are so far valid as they are agreeable to law and right reason' (Hamburger, 2140). Agreement with law and reason were for Holt and his judicial peers to determine. 
Though Holt held statutes made by king-in-parliament as the highest law, he was never shy about challenging arbitrary commands of the separate houses when not acting legislatively. Thus he quashed a murder indictment against Charles Knollys after Knollys argued that he was the earl of Banbury and that he had thus been misnamed in the indictment. Knollys's claims to the earldom had been rejected by the House of Lords. The Lords thus considered it a contempt that Holt had dismissed the charge against Knollys on grounds that he was a peer. But when the house demanded an explanation for the decision, Holt grandly refused, stating that 'I gave my judgment according to my conscience' ('State trials', 12.1179) and that he owed an account to no one for what he did judicially. Rumours circulated that Holt might be imprisoned for this further contempt, but the matter was silently dropped. 
The case of 'Ashby v. White' occasioned a similar conflict with the House of Commons. Matthew Ashby had been denied his vote at Aylesbury's parliamentary election, so he sued Mayor William White and won the verdict. White then appealed to queen's bench, where all the judges, except Holt, reversed the initial result, contending that the Commons alone determined rights of election. Ashby next turned to the House of Lords on a writ of error in 1703-4. Holt's view -- that this concerned rights of Englishmen for which only the courts could provide relief, and that the Lords, as the highest court, could proceed on a writ of error -- now prevailed. The Commons responded by declaring that by pursuing the matter in the House of Lords Ashby had committed a breach of their privilege. 
Disputes only intensified as five more Aylesbury voters sued White too. The Commons summoned all five, examined them, and then imprisoned them for breach of privilege. The Aylesbury voters now resorted to queen's bench for writs of habeas corpus. Again, three of the court's justices refused to bail them because they stood committed by the Commons, which commitments they said were beyond their review. Again, Holt disagreed: 'Neither House of Parliament hath power, no, not both together, to dispose, limit, or diminish the liberty or property of the subject, because by law (which is superior to the actions or determinations of either House) that liberty or property is established, and cannot be diminished or infringed by a less[er] authority than the legislature of the kingdom, which is the Queen, the Lords, and Commons assembled in Parliament. (Hamburger, 2145)' Holt always recognized that statute made by queen-in-parliament stood above judicial review. But the pronouncements of each house when acting otherwise than by legislation were not beyond the law applied in his court. Holt had challenged both the Commons' claim to determine all rights of election and their power to imprison. Such bold assertions, consistent with his other views as a jurist, failed to sway his contemporaries. 
Holt's commitments as a jurist in no way diminished his political commitments to the revolution settlement and to the king, who made him a privy councillor -- on 26 September 1689 -- as well as a judge. While he presided in numerous treason trials and investigated various plots, his reports to the privy council often served to constrain those in government who hoped to stretch legal principles or practices to ensnare as many of the regime's enemies as possible. But like justices of previous generations, Holt often used his place on the bench to defend the crown from its critics. As he noted during the 1704 trial of John Tutchin for seditious libel: 'To say that corrupt officers are appointed to administer affairs, is certainly a reflection on the government. If people should not be called to account for possessing the people with an ill opinion of the government, no government can subsist. ('State trials', 14.1128)' It is a sign though of Holt's concern for the precise application of law that he then agreed to quash a guilty verdict of which he clearly approved once it was seen that the writ on which Tutchin was tried had been misdated. 
The king asked Holt to be lord chancellor in April 1700. He refused, saying he did not know enough of equity to hold the office, though he did serve for one month as one of the commissioners of the great seal until Sir Nathan Wright became lord keeper. In the years following, Holt was troubled by occasional bouts of illness, though this did not prevent his continuing to ride the assize circuits. In 1708 the queen herself shared fears for his health and implored him to rest. A brief spell in Bath may have helped, and Holt was soon back in his post. Rumours now circulated that he might receive a peerage, but by the winter of 1710 his health declined sharply. He died on 5 March 1710 at his house in Bedford Row, London, and was buried on 20 March in the church at Redgrave, Suffolk, the manor of which he had purchased from Sir Robert Bacon. He was survived by his wife; common report suggested that neither enjoyed the union. Having no children, Holt left the bulk of his estate to his brother Rowland, reserving a $700 per annum rent charge for his widow's maintenance. Throughout, Holt had shown great loyalty to his brother, appointing him as master of king's bench -- which occasioned a battle with the duchess of Grafton over the right of appointment -- and helping him gain the post of comptroller of the customs. 
Holt never lacked confidence in his opinions, which permitted him to hold out against the threats of both houses of parliament at different times. When the countess of Anglesey came to Holt and showed him the bruises inflicted by her husband, Holt imposed a bond of $8000 on the earl to keep the peace. A man of Holt's confidence was also quick to protect his dignity, as in 1696 when he ordered the arrest of the bookseller Brabazon Aylmer for his account of Sir John Friend's trial, which had offended Holt. Holt likewise reprimanded three clergymen in 1699 for their criticism of his condemnation of a coiner at Kingston assizes. No less a figure than Daniel Defoe felt it necessary to publish an apology in 1706 when Holt imposed a $200 bond on him after Defoe wrote a piece that was generally understood to reflect negatively on the chief justice. 
A monument in the church at Redgrave, carved by Thomas Green, shows Holt seated in his robes, flanked by Justice and Mercy. For twenty-one years on the bench he had served both virtues, though perhaps in less perfect balance than later hagiographers have ascribed to him. But this is not to diminish his accomplishments. Holt's rulings contributed significantly to the development of the law of commerce, of corporations, and of public administration. His collisions with both Lords and Commons highlighted the dangers of peremptory parliamentary behaviour as parliament moved increasingly to the fore in the constitution. Though he wrote no great treatises, his opinions -- available in printed reports as well as in his manuscripts in the British Library and the Harvard law school -- show his erudition, the neatness of his mind, and the force of his ideas. Holt not only possessed a comprehensive knowledge of the statutes and reports from which common law was constructed, he also read deeply in the civil law and was well acquainted with the ideas of John Locke and other natural law theorists. Presiding over the kingdom's leading court for two decades after the political transformations wrought in 1688-9, Holt was peculiarly positioned by learning and experience to make a deep and lasting imprint on the law. 


@@@@@


doc= 13612


Holt, John (bap. 1743, d. 1801), author, was born at Hattersley, near Mottram in Longdendale, Cheshire, where he was baptized on 24 May 1743, the son of John Holt. He was educated with a view to becoming a dissenting minister, but changed his beliefs and became a member of the Church of England. About 1757 he settled at Walton on the Hill, near Liverpool, where for many years he acted as parish clerk, highway surveyor, and master of the free grammar school. He married in 1767 Elizabeth France, with whom he set up a girls' school. They had no children. He published in 1786-8 'Characters of Kings and Queens of England', in three volumes. A few years later he made the agricultural survey of Lancashire, and published his report, a 'General View of the Agriculture of the County of Lancaster, with Observations on the Means of its Improvement', in 1794. It was reprinted with additions in 1795. A paper 'On the curle in potatoes' procured him the medal of the Society of Arts. He compiled a few books for the use of schools, wrote one or two novels, and collected materials for a history of Liverpool, which he bequeathed to Matthew Gregson. He contributed many papers to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and for a long period communicated the monthly 'Meteorological diary' to that periodical. He died at Walton on 21 March 1801. 


@@@@@


doc= 13613


Holt, Joseph (1756x9-1826), Irish nationalist, was born in Ballydonnell, co. Wicklow, the second eldest of six children of John and Mary, of a Church of Ireland farming family of English ancestry. His tombstone records his date of birth as 1756, yet he was baptized in Castlemacadam in July 1759 close to Ballymoneen, where the family moved in the 1780s. His brothers, William, Thomas, and Jonathan, joined him in the ranks of the republican United Irishmen in 1797. When a youth Joseph Holt worked in Bray as a gardener for a magistrate named Sweeney and later received agricultural training in the north of Ireland. From his earliest days Holt professed an interest in military affairs and he was briefly a member of the 32nd foot until recalled home by his parents about 1779. He then joined a patriotic 'volunteer' unit raised in Arklow. 
Holt's marriage to the widowed Hester Long in 1782 occasioned a shift to her small but well-appointed farm at Mullinaveigue (Roundwood). He gained work as a wood ranger, bailiff, and billet master; his most important appointment was as deputy aulnager, or cloth assessor, in a county undergoing a massive textile boom. Attendance at fairs and travel throughout adjacent counties gave Holt a reputedly unrivalled knowledge of regional geography which he put to good use during the 1798 rising. He served as a baronial constable, primarily in his native Ballinacor North district, but also in Dublin in the early 1790s. In August 1794 he captured the notorious gaolbreaker Patrick Rogers and his fame as a zealous 'thief taker' was soon unsurpassed in the province of Leinster. 
The Holts were heavily engaged in the building industry and Joseph Holt procured several grand jury contracts in the 1790s for road maintenance and bridge building near Roundwood. Financial irregularities embroiled him in disputes with county officials which proved dangerous when Wicklow society became disturbed by political ferment. Contrary to the false impression given in his disingenuous memoirs, Holt was an early, willing, and prominent United Irishman and an elected captain prior to the close of 1797. He may well have come to resent the prevailing barriers to social and commercial advancement. Wicklow activists like Holt succeeded in disaffecting 'protestant, catholic and dissenter' in an area that boasted the largest, rural non-Catholic population outside Ulster. He evidently used his cover as a cloth assessor to recruit in the Wicklow mountains and liaise with city-based committees that later supplied his forces with munitions. Information regarding his activities reached the authorities in early May 1798 and Holt became an armed fugitive in the mountains after his farm was burnt on 10 May. 
Holt's first known act as a rebel commander took place on 29 May 1798 when he led 300 men to burn the home of loyalist magistrate Thomas Hugo. They were dispersed by cavalry and did not reform in time to participate in the failed attempt to capture Newtownmountkennedy the following day. This check stalled the rising in the north of the county and Holt was one of several Wicklow militants who ventured south into Wexford to avail of more propitious circumstances. His men were supplied by the commissary of the forces that attacked New Ross on 5 June but evidently did not participate in that mismanaged assault. Holt returned to his native county to await the breakthrough at Arklow on 9 June and, when this failed to materialize, launched a highly destructive attack on loyalist properties around Roundwood on the 14th. 
Mountain skirmishes with yeomanry and Reay Highlanders ensued for several days in which both sides enjoyed minor victories of little strategic consequence. Holt's flair for guerrilla-style fighting consolidated his position as the principal leader of insurgent forces in north Wicklow. They joined the more substantial forces from south Wicklow and north Wexford on 24 June and attacked Hacketstown on the 25th. Holt's horse was shot under him in the course of this pyrrhic victory. Much greater success was enjoyed on 30 June, however, when Holt laid a highly effective ambush at Ballyellis in which a large cavalry patrol sustained forty-nine fatalities. 
Holt fought again on 2 July at Ballyrahan Hill, co. Wicklow, where nineteen yeomen officers and men were killed, after which he withdrew his faction to the north of the county. This evinced Holt's independent frame of mind and stemmed from his opposition to campaigning once more in Wexford, where terrain, logistics, and enemy strength militated against the insurgents' success. His judgement was soon vindicated and from 5 July harried parties of insurgents made their way towards his camp at Whelp Rock above Blessington. By then the vast majority of active insurgents were availing themselves of a liberal amnesty offered by the newly instated viceroy, Lord Cornwallis. A much diminished hard core of about 4000 relocated to the remote Wicklow mountains. 
It was with great reluctance that Holt agreed on 8 July to accompany an expedition from the mountains into the exposed lowlands of Kildare and co. Meath. Insurgent commanders hoped to reignite the virtually dormant rising in the midlands and locate other small fugitive bodies presumed to be hiding there ahead of an attempt on Dublin. A costly repulse at Clonard on 11 July and assault on the camp at Rynville Hill on the 12th put paid to this gambit. Holt singularly distinguished himself by organizing a rear guard action, in which he sustained two minor wounds to his head and arm. Left for dead by the rump mainforce that was defeated at Knightstown on 14 July, he was guided through Dublin city to Wicklow by United Irish sympathizers. 
Following the midlands debacle Holt was the only leader of note willing to fight on. From mid-July he led up to 2000 men in one of the first guerrilla campaigns in Europe and held off vastly superior forces until November. His tactical skill and innovation during this period were remarkable and he took pains to discipline his irregulars to the greatest degree possible. They burnt over 400 loyalist-owned houses and premises to punish local enemies and to deny the army the use of strategic stone buildings. While attrition, factionalism, and the amnesty steadily sapped Holt's ranks, the critical mass necessary for meaningful resistance was sustained by their ideological commitment and expectation of French military assistance. Losses were compensated for by 150 or so militia and army defectors who rallied to Holt in the autumn of 1798. 
A major upsurge of fighting in Wicklow in late August coincided with French army landings in Mayo but continued long after their surrender on 8 September. Fatal clashes occurred near Coolgreany, Clone Hill, Mucklagh Hill, Blessington, Greenan, Keadeen, and Glenmalure. In a rare feat Holt's men captured the defended town of Aughrim on 19 September and occupied it overnight. Their depredations and the political instability they engendered troubled a government that was keen to usher in the 'Act of Union' while presenting a confident face to the French. Illness, wounds, and the prospect of a difficult winter campaign with a price on his head clearly disposed Holt to contemplate capitulation in October 1798. He ultimately accepted a deal brokered by the La Touche family of Delgany after Dublin United Irish leaders informed him that there was no prospect of further French aid. On 10 November 1798 he surrendered to Lord Powerscourt on the understanding that his life would be spared, a concession that outraged many Irish conservatives. 
When held in Dublin Castle Holt made statements implicating associates who had engaged in brigandage but refused offers to act against fellow United Irishmen. He was consequently obliged to finance his family's passage to New South Wales on the convict ship 'Minerva'. His infant daughter, Marianne, was left in the care of Ann La Touche's school and a second son, Joseph Harrison, was born on board the transport in early 1799. Much to the concern of the colonial authorities, Holt arrived in Sydney as a free man in January 1800. He accepted work as an overseer on Captain William Cox's Brush Farm and evidently enjoyed his considerable status in the sizeable community of Irish political prisoners. Hester Holt, meanwhile, obtained a land grant of 100 acres in her own name and this property was subsequently increased by a number of purchases and exchanges. 
Holt frequently ran foul of the colonial administration and was strongly suspected of involvement in the rebellious 'Irish plots' of September and October 1800 which were nipped in the bud. Cox's influence and a short hunger strike in Sydney gaol, however, enabled him to escape severe punishment. Holt was also cleared in December 1803 of plotting to kill Judge-Advocate Richard Atkins but soon afterwards entered into the planning stages of the Castle Hill revolt. On being warned of betrayal Holt pulled out of the plot and fended off rebel efforts to conscript him at Brush Farm on the night of 4 March 1804. He was, nevertheless, deemed culpable and was banished to the feared penal outpost of Norfolk Island. Holt was allowed back to the mainland in March 1806 after a short stay on Van Diemen's Land and from that point his avoidance of sedition paved the way for success as a colonist. 
Holt received an absolute pardon in January 1811 and upon settling his affairs he and his family took passage home on the 'Isabella'. The ship was wrecked in the Falkland Islands in February 1813 and its passengers marooned until rescued by an American ship, 'Nannina', on 4 April. The ship was almost immediately made a prize of by HMS 'Nancy' and it was not until February 1814 that the Holts reached Liverpool, arriving in Dublin on 5 April. Resettlement in Wicklow was out of the question in view of Holt's notoriety and he instead opened a pub in Kevin Street, Dublin. By 1819 police harassment and allegations from rivals that he was an informer became intolerable. Holt sold the business and moved to the coastal suburb of Dun Laoghaire, where he apparently built several houses in York Street. He died there on 16 May 1826 and was buried in a family plot in Carrickbrennan cemetery, Monkstown. He was survived by his wife. 
Holt's manuscript autobiography passed from his friend Sir William Betham to the noted folklorist Thomas Crofton Croker, who edited it for publication in 1838. The work proved unpopular with nationalists, who were unaware that Croker had gentrified and censored Holt's narrative and, most seriously, interpolated passages which portrayed its ostensible author as a loyalist apologist. This badly damaged Holt's reputation and that of the Wicklow theatre of the 1798 rising until the 1980s, when his historical importance was reassessed. 


@@@@@


doc= 13614


Holt, Thomas (1577/8-1624), carpenter, was born in Yorkshire. He was one of the group of northern craftsmen, including the Halifax masons John Akroyd and John Bentley, who were invited to Oxford by Sir Henry Savile, warden of Merton College, at a time when the university was in dispute with the city building crafts, and who undertook some of the most prestigious projects of the first two decades of the seventeenth century. Despite the assumption that he came from Halifax, Holt's birthplace in Yorkshire is unknown and it is likely that he first became associated with Akroyd during building work in the 1590s at either Methley Hall or Howley Hall, Yorkshire, both of which were owned by the Savile family. In May 1609 he was appointed master carpenter for the Fellows Quadrangle at Merton, where Akroyd and Bentley were already engaged on the masonry. Building was completed in 1610 and later that year the team moved on to build the arts end of the Bodleian Library. In August 1611 Holt was working with another group of masons who had come from Somerset to build Wadham College under the direction of William Arnold. He subsequently rejoined Akroyd and Bentley to work on the Schools Quadrangle of the Bodleian which had been commenced in March 1613. In 1618, aged forty, following the deaths of his former partners, he took over the direction of the works and was still engaged on the site after 1621 when he was working on the gates. His other commissions within the university included unspecified contracts for Jesus College and Hart Hall for which payments were outstanding at the time of his death. 
Holt's wife, Margaret Facer, probably came from Britwell Salome near Watlington, Oxfordshire, and they established their home and workshop in Oxford at 17 Holywell Street at a house leased from Merton College. Holt died there, comparatively wealthy, on 9 September 1624. He left instructions in his will that his two eldest sons, Thomas and John, should be apprenticed 'as soon as may be' and made provision for three younger children. He was buried in St Cross churchyard, Holywell, where Anthony Wood recorded a monument erected by Margaret which described him as 'Scholarum publicarum architect[us]' (Wood, 'Survey', 190). This has led to claims that he designed both the Schools Quadrangle and Wadham College, neither of which can be substantiated. Holt was not an architect in the modern sense but rather a skilled and successful carpenter. When he was registered a privileged person of the university in 1618 it was as 'faberlignarius Coll. Novi' ('Reg. Oxf.', 2/1.404). The reference is to the new college of Wadham, and the conservative hammerbeam roof in the hall can be considered his most visible achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 13615


Holt, William (1545-1599), Jesuit, was born on 28 September 1545 at Ashworth, Lancashire. He was privately educated before attending Oxford between 1562 and 1572. He took his BA and MA degrees at Oxford, and then converted to Catholicism. He was at Douai in 1574 to study theology. After his ordination he continued his studies in Rome until 8 November 1578, when he entered the Society of Jesus. 
Robert Persons sent Holt in the summer of 1581 to minister to the Catholics of northern England, and subsequently asked him to meet a secular priest, William Watts, for discussions with Catholic lords at Edinburgh in December. Over the next six months Holt learned of the ambitious plans of Lennox and a group of Catholic peers, which required his return to London to brief the Spanish ambassador, Mendoza, in February 1582. He then travelled north to Dalkeith in March to meet Lennox and a Scottish Jesuit, William Crichton. In April the two Jesuits went to France to see William Allen, the duke of Guise, Persons, and other Catholic exiles. At this stage the leaders, hoping for the conversion of the young James VI, were presuming strong financial backing from the pope and Philip II for foreign troops, and an active role for the Catholics of Scotland and England in a vague 'enterprise' in the north to secure their own freedom. Since many problems remained to be resolved, Holt went back to Scotland in June 1582 to visit recusants in safe areas. He was initially assisted by Alexander Gordon, twelfth earl of Sutherland; later he turned to George, fifth Lord Seton, to minister to families in the south-east. William Allen was impressed by this early success. 
Aware of Holt's priesthood, the English ambassador, Robert Bowes, arrested him at Leith in March 1583 and brought him to King James, who was at Edinburgh Castle in the hands of the 'Ruthven raiders'. For months a tug-of-war went on between the king and the ambassador, who insisted that Holt be handed over to be tried in England. Since James refused Bowes asked to interrogate him 'intensely' -- a euphemism for torture if needed -- at which the French ambassador, the sieur de Mainville, protested. Asserting his independence, on 27 April James assured Henri III: 'William Holt will not receive any harm... nor be transported into England, nor placed under any other authority... but mine' (Hicks, 202 n. 5). After James's liberation from the raiders, he adroitly connived at Holt's escape from the castle, to the chagrin of Bowes. Equally valuable for Holt was the personal safe conduct from King James, which enabled him to prolong his stay in Scotland. In June 1584 Persons wrote: 'Holt is very well in Scotland, secured against the ministers by the public protection of the king', and still hopeful for a conversion 'of this young man' (Hicks, 213). 
From then on Holt looked for a friendly Scottish peer as a patron, although upon his release Seton advised him to return to France. Instead, Holt went north with George Gordon, sixth earl of Huntly, visiting other Catholic enclaves, and later toured Dumfriesshire with help from John Maxwell, earl of Morton. This itinerary sheds light on the survival of recusancy in Scotland despite the kirk's hostility. As there was no clear leader of the Catholic minority Holt sought a peer with local influence who could protect him. He was convinced of the staunch belief of the peers he met, although some, such as Huntly, practised occasional conformity. Similarly, his personal encounters with James led him to expect a tolerance of Catholics, but the king found it expedient to change this policy. In March 1586 Holt left Scotland for good since Persons required his diplomatic skill in Rome. 
For the next year and a half, as rector of the English College, Holt tried to appease a student faction critical of Allen and Persons for their Hispanophile preference and neglect of the imprisoned queen of Scots. Since Holt was well aware of the Scottish scene no quarrels erupted. Then in early 1588 Holt and Joseph Creswell were called to Flanders to serve as chaplains in Parma's army. After the failure of the Armada, Creswell went back to Rome but Holt stayed in Flanders as a military chaplain for ten years. Assisted by Henry Walpole in 1590-91 he paid visits to companies of English, Irish, and Italian soldiers deployed in the siege warfare against the Dutch forces. During these years in service Holt saw the morale of the entire army plummet, due to the failure to provide back pay and vital supplies, so that scattered mutinies occurred as well as desertions. Holt also regularly visited the court of the governor-general in Brussels to seek the arrears of pensions due to English exiles, who were paid from a near empty treasury of the army. At length, in 1596, Holt with two others prepared a list of the names of known pensioners, citing their years of service and the arrears due to them, and commenting on their loyalty to the crown; this was sent to Madrid. However, the crown's bankruptcy, the illness of Philip II, and greater problems elsewhere prevented relief at that time. 
Meanwhile Holt wrote, probably at the request of his friend Richard Barret, president of Douai College, a lengthy advisory essay in Latin, entitled 'How the Catholic religion was maintained in England'; it chronicled the survival of the Catholic clergy since 1559 and suggested how their lot might be improved. He stressed that new leadership was needed by appointing an English prelate in Rome, with a second in England to provide confirmation for the faithful, guidance for the clergy, and chrism for the sacraments. However, Clement VIII did not consider it then prudent to nominate prelates from the English clergy, subsequently preferring an archpriest. For those preparing for ordination in the colleges Holt urged closer scrutiny both before admission and during studies, which seemed to aim at reducing the disruptive factions. Lastly, because of the higher numbers of priests and students travelling in Flanders, he advised that a priest should be designated to assist them in their needs, but none could be spared to do it. 
Since Holt had become prominent as a leader among the exiles and at the court of Archduke Albert by this time, Charles Paget, widely known as an indefatigable opponent of the Jesuits, sent an accusation with thirty-six charges of abuses of power by Holt to the archduke and the pope. When visiting Rome, Barret was astounded when Clement VIII asked about 'a certain Jesuit father who dominates there and tyrannizes', so that he returned at once to Douai to gather a large number of signatures in support of Holt. The career of Paget, as an informant of the court of Elizabeth and a troublesome divisive presence in Flanders, was familiar to many Catholics, but not to the unsuspecting archduke, who conferred with Oliver Mannaerts, the Jesuit superior, and Juan Baptista de Tassis, a veteran diplomat. After close questioning they exonerated Holt of all charges, but he later commented: 'I never lost even one hour's sleep in the midst of all that tumult'. He continued to serve as a military chaplain with the additional post of vice-prefect of the English Jesuits in Flanders after April 1598. In November he set out for Spain but first visited Milan in January 1599 to meet Archduke Albert. This proved to be his final discussion of the problems of the English in Flanders, for he died about 25 May 1599, probably during an epidemic, at Barcelona, where he was buried, probably that month. 


@@@@@


doc= 13616


Holtby, Richard (1552-1640), Jesuit, was born at Fryton, Yorkshire, the second son of Lancelot Holtby of Fryton and Ellen Butler of Nunnington in Ryedale. He went to the University of Cambridge, studying first at Christ's College and then at Gonville and Caius. In 1573 he moved on to Oxford where he studied at Hart Hall, whose principal favoured the old religion. Alexander Briant, the future Jesuit, was there at the time. His next stop was the English College in Douai, where he arrived in August 1577. There he was received into the Roman Catholic church. He was ordained a priest at nearby Cambrai on 29 March 1578. The next year he went on the English mission and he laboured with good results in his home county. In 1581 Edmund Campion paid him a visit. It was Holtby who provided Campion with a suitable place where he could write his 'Decem rationes'. 
The following year Holtby felt that despite his many years of schooling he needed more expertise in theological controversy. He thought that joining the Jesuits would solve this problem. After Lent 1582 he travelled on horseback to London to find the Jesuit superior. When his search was fruitless he sold his horse and bought a passage to the continent. He was admitted to the Society of Jesus in Verdun on 5 October 1582. After finishing his noviciate he was sent to Pont-a-Mousson to study theology and serve as superior of the Scots College there. He also worked with victims of the plague. He was sent to England in late 1588 or early 1589. By January 1590 he was back in the north, and from that time until his death in 1640 he was one of the bulwarks of the English Catholic church. Holtby was then in his late thirties and a brilliant apostolic career lay ahead of him. He never used his extra years of training to write books of controversial theology, but he was an enthusiastic admirer of the controversial writings of Robert Persons as was apparent from the annual report he sent to Rome in 1609. 
Holtby worked closely both with the secular clergy and with the lay Catholics of northern England. With their help he was able to find places where new priests for the English mission could disembark on the Tyne. He also supplied many of these new recruits with horses, cash, and a place to stay. On one occasion he met Henry Garnet, the superior of the mission, and Nicholas Owen in order to devise a way to make better priest's holes. Holtby himself was an excellent carpenter and fashioned many hiding places. He also used a number of aliases to avoid arrest, including Andrew Ducket, Robert North, and Richard Fetherston. 
In 1603 Holtby professed the four Jesuit vows. After the arrest of Henry Garnet in 1604 he succeeded him as superior of the Jesuits on the English mission, and when Garnet was executed in 1606 Holtby was named his successor. He held the office until he was succeeded in 1609 by Robert Jones. A government spy described Holtby as 'a little man with a reddish beard', and he has the reputation for having been one of the toughest missionaries in England. He once escaped some would-be captors by lying quietly in the grass for two days and nights. Holtby also appreciated the key role that Catholic women played in evangelization. He was a close friend of Dorothy Lawson, whose house at St Anthony's near Newcastle was built 'as a centre for the Jesuits in the far north-east' (Bossy, 157). It all began when Lawson, whose husband spent most of his time in London, asked Holtby to give her and her maid an eight-day retreat. Holtby was also a spiritual adviser of Mary Ward, who later founded a religious order for women. 
One of Holtby's hobbies was needlework. He made not only vestments and altar cloths, but jerkins and everyday wear. He also wrote two long memoranda concerning the persecution of Roman Catholics in the north of England. He was one of the few priests on the English mission in the early seventeenth century who died in his bed. Not only did he escape the death penalty, he was never gaoled. He died in the Durham district between 15 and 25 May 1640. 


@@@@@


doc= 13617


Holt, John (d. 1504), schoolmaster and grammarian, was the son of William Holt (or Smyth), sometime mayor and tradesman of Chichester, Sussex, and, apparently, his first wife, Joan. His schooling may have taken place in Chichester, but he is first recorded being admitted as a probationary fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, on 27 July 1490, becoming a full fellow one year later. He graduated MA in 1494, and by Michaelmas of that year was employed as usher or second master of Magdalen College School, then in its heyday as a pioneer centre of humanist Latin teaching. Holt left this post at Easter 1496 (having been ordained priest in the previous year) to become grammar master of the boys and youths of Archbishop Morton's household at Lambeth Palace. There he wrote his surviving grammatical work, 'Lac puerorum'. 
In 1498 Morton rewarded Holt with the valuable rectory of Smarden, Kent, and after the archbishop's death in 1500 Holt appears to have withdrawn to this parish. In September 1501, however, he accepted a new full-time teaching appointment from the dean and chapter of Chichester Cathedral as master of Chichester prebendal (or cathedral) school. The school had been endowed two years previously by Bishop Story of Chichester with the cathedral prebend of Highleigh, providing the master with a salary to teach without charging fees. Holt held the post for only about a year before leaving, by the end of 1502, for a fourth scholastic appointment as grammar master to Prince Henry (later Henry VIII), in succession to John Skelton. In 1502 he was also presented to the rectory of Week St Mary, Cornwall, by Sir Edmund Arundell, possibly through the influence of Arundell's relative the bishop of Exeter, a colleague of Morton and Story. This benefice (which he held with Smarden by papal dispensation) made him a wealthy man, but by 21 March 1504 he had fallen sufficiently ill to make his will at St Paul's, London, and he was dead by 14 June. 
Holt was one of a group of schoolmasters associated with Magdalen College School, including John Anwykyll (died 1487), William Lily (died 1522), and John Stanbridge (died 1510), who were influential in spreading the teaching of humanist Latin to schools in England through the publication of school textbooks. His own published work, 'Lac puerorum', subtitled 'Mylke for Chyldren', survives only in editions printed after the author's death, the earliest about 1505, but it contains a dedication to Morton, then dead, and verses by Holt which state that it was written with the archbishop's approval in the hall of Lambeth Palace: evidently between 1496 and 1500. It was prefaced and concluded by complimentary Latin verses by Thomas More (died 1535), whose earliest surviving letter was also written to Holt in 1501. 'Lac puerorum' is an elementary textbook in English, introducing pupils to Latin accidence, grammatical definitions, and syntax. Though traditional in form, it tries to help children in the first stages of learning Latin by the novel practice of using pictures to present the declensions of nouns and by employing simple words ('showing', 'asking', 'bidding', and 'wishing') to explain the moods of the verb. The work had a modest success, being published at least five times before about 1511 in London and Antwerp, before it lost the field to grammars like those of Stanbridge and Lily. 


@@@@@


doc= 13618


Holt, John (d. 1540), bishop, was probably a member of the Holt family of Bury St Edmunds, though he does not appear in its heraldic pedigree of 1561. In his will he styled himself 'Master', suggesting that he had graduated from a university, but it is not known which. Although he may have been the 'Master Holte of London' recorded in September 1526 as supplying money to Thomas Cromwell for works on Cardinal College, Oxford, the first certain reference to him comes from 15 June 1528, when as bishop of Lydda 'in partibus' he laid the foundation stone of Cardinal Wolsey's projected college at Ipswich, as the stone itself, preserved in the chapter house of Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, records. Holt's episcopal style is puzzling, for there was already a bishop of Lydda active in England, namely Thomas Bele, who was suffragan in the diocese of London from no later than September 1521 until at least 17 December 1529. And Bele's tenure of the 'diocese' overlapped with that of Roger Smith, abbot of Dorchester, who was papally provided to it in 1513 and may have held it until his death 'c'.1535. Probably neither popes nor bishops were particularly careful about the titles borne by English suffragans. 
Holt was most likely employed as suffragan in East Anglia, as is suggested by his role at Ipswich and again by his performing ordinations at Norwich on 22 May 1535. His will, which he drew up on 11 August 1540, shows that he was then living in Bury and had property at Great Barton near by. Still styling himself bishop of Lydda, he made a traditional bequest of his soul to God, the Virgin, and the heavenly host, and requested burial in St Mary's parish church, Bury, 'in our Ladys Ile next unto the hedde of John Holt gent' (will). The latter, who must have been the John Holt whose memorial stone in that church records his death on 13 July 1539 and his interment in its south chancel aisle, is the only man of that surname referred to in the will. Bishop Holt's most substantial bequests, including his property in Great Barton, were to two servants. He also left money to three parish guilds, and disposed of chimere, mitre, and rochets, largely to pay for his funeral and for a distribution of alms to the poor. He had died at Bury St Edmunds by 19 August, when his will was proved. 


@@@@@


doc= 13619


Holte, Sir Thomas, first baronet (1570/71-1654), landowner and royalist sympathizer, was the eldest surviving son of Edward Holte (died 1592) and his wife, Dorothy Ferrers (died 1594). At the time of his birth the Holtes had been in possession of estates at Duddeston and Aston in Warwickshire for over a century. On 9 February 1588 Holte matriculated, aged seventeen, at Magdalen College, Oxford, but did not apparently graduate. He was, however, later described as 'a gentleman well read in most parts of learning, and versed in several languages' (Dugdale, 2.872). In 1590 he was admitted to the Inner Temple. 
Succeeding his father upon the latter's death on 3 February 1592, Holte substantially increased the family estates through his marriage to Grace, daughter of William Bradburne of Hough, Derbyshire, perhaps in 1598 or 1599. In 1598 he bought the rectory of Aston and its appended properties for $1870. The following year he served as sheriff of Warwickshire. On 18 April 1603 he was knighted by James I during his passage from Scotland to Westminster. In addition to his estates in Warwickshire, Holte acquired or rented a house in Islington, Middlesex, where he baptized a son, Richard, in 1604 and buried a daughter, Katherine, in 1605. In 1606 he was accused of brutally murdering a man employed by him as a cook. Neither he, nor anyone else, was brought to trial, and the victim has remained nameless. Yet the Victorian historian of the family of Holte reluctantly concluded that there is 'a very strong degree of probability' that Sir Thomas was guilty of the killing, which took place at Duddeston, and reconstructed the likeliest sequence of events thus: 'Sir Thomas, when returning from hunting, in the course of conversation, laid a wager to some amount as to the punctuality of his cook, who most unfortunately, for once was behind time. Enraged at the jeers of his companions, he hastened into the kitchen, and seizing the first article at hand, avenged himself on his domestic. (Davidson, 24-5)' Holte afterwards reportedly sought to conceal the deed, and sued for slander William Ascrick or Ascherig of Birmingham, whom he charged with publicly claiming on 20 December 1605 that: 'Sir Thomas took a cleaver and hit his cook with the same cleaver upon the head and clave his head that one side there fell upon one of his shoulders and the other side on the other shoulder; and this I will verify to be true. (Davidson, 25)' At the Warwick assizes in July 1608 Ascrick was found guilty and damages of $30 were awarded against him. Ascrick fought back and launched an appeal in king's bench that autumn. There the judges found for him, concluding that, whatever the implication of his words, Ascrick had not actually directly accused Holte of murder but merely of splitting the cook's skull in two, and the man might have recovered from his wounds: 'it is not averred that the cook was killed, but argumentative slander ought to be direct... notwithstanding such wounding, the party may yet be living; and then it is but trespass. Wherefore it is adjudged for the defendant' ('Reports', 184). By this device the court, faced with a dispute between two pillars of Warwickshire society, was able simultaneously to acquit Ascrick and avoid ruining Holte, who was himself a JP. The cook's failure to demonstrate the remarkable recuperative powers on which the eminent judges based their decision seems not to have caused any further legal difficulties for Holte (though it may explain why he took the precaution of obtaining a blanket pardon from Charles I in 1626 for offences committed in the previous reign). Local tradition had it that Holte was forced, in a symbolic punishment for his crime, to wear a blood-red hand on his coat of arms. The truth is less edifying. Holte was created a baronet on 25 November 1612 for the standard price of $1095, a sum supposedly intended towards the defence of Ulster; all baronets, accordingly, wore the red hand of Ulster on their shields. The emblem was a badge of honour, not of shame. 
Holte prospered exceedingly and his income has been estimated as in excess of $1000 per annum. In 1618 he began the building of Aston Hall. The architect John Thorpe had a hand in the elaborate design of a house which 'for beauty and state much exceedeth any in these parts' (Dugdale, 2.872); the building was occupied in 1631 but was not completed until four years later. The portrait of Holte which survives at Aston Hall duly portrays him the lord of his domain, in the deer park created out of enclosed open fields in 1621, with the house in the background. Holte continued to act as a JP in his local division, served as a subsidy commissioner in the 1620s, and was a commissioner for the distraint of knighthood in Hemlingford hundred in 1630-32. He served as a deputy lieutenant in 1638-9. In religion he was a moderate Calvinist. 
Holte's marriage to Grace Bradburne produced fifteen children, of whom only a daughter, Grace (died 1677), who married Sir Richard Shuckburgh, survived him. After the death of his first wife Holte married Anne (died 1697), daughter of Sir Edward Littleton of Pillaton Hall, Staffordshire; they had no children. In his dealings with his eldest son Holte acted the part of an implacable patriarch. When Edward (1600-1643) fell in love with Elizabeth King, the daughter of John King (d. 1621), bishop of London, Holte forbade the match, and when the couple married anyway, he threatened to disinherit Edward. It took the intervention of Charles I to make Holte withdraw his threat: in August 1627 the king wrote to Holte urging, 'The interest we have in all our subjects, and especially the families of the best quality, giveth us cause to interfere in this, while a severe proceeding against your son would endanger the overthrow of your house' (Colville, 424). Charles further promised to make provision for Edward if his father provided poorly for him, and it is reported that he later kept his word by appointing the young man as a groom of his bedchamber. Henry King, Elizabeth's brother, recalled in 1653 that 'the unnatural usage of an implacable father denied them competent means whereby they might subsist' (Davidson, 22). Typically Holte proved able to have the last word by outliving his heir. Edward was wounded at the battle of Edgehill and, though he recovered sufficiently to take part in the defence of Oxford, he died there of a fever on 28 August 1643. Sir Thomas, in his will of 1650, left not a penny to the widow. He was somewhat more mellow towards his granddaughter Katherine, to whom he left $300, 'although she hath undone herself by her marriage without consent which her husband shall have nothing to do with' (Hughes, 38). 
At the outbreak of the civil war Holte himself was at first uncommitted in the struggle for allegiance in the west midlands between the parliamentarian Lord Brooke and the royalist earl of Northampton in the summer of 1642. By late August, however, he was reported to have joined other royalists at Lichfield. In mid-October, just before the battle of Edgehill, the king stayed at Aston Hall for two days. On 12 December 1643, at Holte's request, a royalist garrison was put into the house; on 28 December it fell to an overwhelming parliamentarian force. 
Holte was sequestered by the county committee but discharged by the Lords and Commons in December 1646. The following March, however, he was threatened with renewed sequestration and in October 1648 this was put into effect. In 1650 Holte applied to compound for his sequestered properties, pleading that 'having had houses in Birmingham worth $1000 burned by the king's horses, all his goods taken, so that he had neither a bed nor a shirt left, to the loss of $6000 and being 80 years old his fine may be set at 1/10th' (Green, 4.2556-7). The committee for compounding were perhaps aware that in 1647 the bedless and shirtless Holte had acquired from Viscount Hereford the manor of Erdington, Warwickshire. On 3 February 1652 his fine was set at $4492 2's'. 4died, which was paid within three weeks and the estate discharged. Holte died in mid-November 1654 but was not buried until 14 December at Aston. By his will he assigned $300 for the building and endowment of an almshouse at Aston for the maintenance of ten aged poor, five of each sex. He also provided for a monument to the memory of himself and his second wife in Aston church. His baronetcy and the bulk of his estate passed to Edward's eldest son, Robert. 


@@@@@


doc= 13620


Holtzapffel, Charles (1806-1847), mechanical engineer and technical writer, was the son of a German immigrant, John Jacob Holtzapffel, who, in 1787, settled in London as a tool and lathe maker. In addition to a thorough training in workshop practice, Holtzapffel received a good general education and, by assiduous study and practice, became a skilled mechanical engineer. He was married and had children. In 1838 he published his 'New system of scales of equal parts applicable to various purposes of engineering, architecture and general science', followed by 'List of Scales of Equal Parts' suitable for his system. His principal work, 'Turning and mechanical manipulation, intended as a work of general reference and practical instruction on the lathe', was designed to fill five volumes, but only three, published in 1843, were completed. The final two volumes were completed by his son, John J. Holtzapffel. The family business was Holtzapffel & Co., 64 Charing Cross Road, London. They made lathes and other machines, and published a number of works in connection with woodworking. They also marketed an amateur printing press, about which they published a number of booklets. 
In his writing, Holtzapffel throughout displayed a masterly knowledge of technical art and of the scientific principles underlying it. He was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers and a member of its council. He was for a time chairman of the mechanics' committee of the Society of Arts. He died on 11 April 1847. He was survived by his wife and family. 


@@@@@


doc= 13621


Holwell, John (b. 1649, d. in or after 1686), astrologer and mathematician, born in London on 24 November 1649, was probably the John Holwell, son of Thomas and Catherine Holwell, who was baptized at St James's, Clerkenwell, on 28 November 1649. According to a family tradition he was descended from the Holwells of Holwell House, near Tavistock, Devon; his father and grandfather were allegedly engaged in Penruddock's plot in 1655, fell in the royalist cause, and forfeited the family estates. His namesake, a John Holwell of Sampford, was indeed sequestered in 1655, and in 1652 a Captain John Holwell, perhaps the same person, appears as giving information against alleged papists to the officers of the Commonwealth. The connection between this John Holwell and John Holwell the astrologer is unclear. 
Holwell studied astrology under Henry Coley, and achieved considerable notoriety through his bold political predictions. His first work in this vein was 'A New Prophecy... of the Blazing Star' (1679), in the form of a letter on the comet that had appeared in April 1677. Holwell put forward a Paracelsian view of comets as 'composed by the Spirits of the Air', at God's command, 'to forewarn this Evil World'. His text hinted at another great fire of London, 'by the hands of an Enemy' (ibid., 4), and the overthrow of the French monarchy. In his major astrological work, 'Catastrophe mundi, or, Europe's many Mutations until the Year 1701' (1682), he explored the likely effects of the triple conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the fiery trigon in 1682-3. Holwell explained that the two great planets entered the fiery triplicity (the three 'hot' houses of the zodiac), where their conjunctions had the greatest effect, only after intervals of 794 years. Extraordinary results might therefore be expected. His work drew on Richard Edlin's study of the 1663 conjunction, and also borrowed heavily from William Lilly and from the 'De mundi catastrophe' (1625), by the Italian astrologer Giovanni Spina. Sheltering behind these authors Holwell felt free to publish sensational prophecies with an apocalyptic flavour. Some were provocative, including one (borrowed from Lilly) that God would curb 'Monarchical Pomp'. Holwell explained that the tyrannical behaviour of rulers, from kings to justices of the peace, would drive their subjects to rebel and call them to account, an inflammatory comment in the wake of the exclusion crisis. These remarks led to his indictment for seditious libel before the Middlesex quarter sessions in May 1683. Abandoning an initial plea of not guilty he confessed the charge at his trial on 9 July, and was fined. 
The 'Catastrophe' also promised that popery could never triumph in England, and included highly dramatic prophecies on the Ottomans, a controversial subject in the context of their invasion of Austria. Holwell predicted that the Ottoman armies would sweep through Germany, France, Spain, and Italy, capturing the emperor and toppling the pope. After years of upheaval and misery a 'great Conquerour' would suddenly appear in 1699 ('Catastrophe', 90), bringing universal peace and paving the way for the conversion of both Turks and Jews. In 'An Appendix', published six months later, he printed a nativity of Louis XIV, predicting that the French king was likely to die soon or be driven out by the Turks or his own enraged subjects. Holwell's predictions made him a highly controversial figure. His claims on the Turkish threat were answered in print by several rivals, including John Gadbury, John Merrifield, and Henry Krabtree. 
Holwell was married, and had a son and a daughter. When he published his 'Catastrophe' in 1682 he was living on the east side of Spitalfields, near the Red Lion, by Dorset Street, and he advertised his services and tuition there in 'astronomy, navigation, dyalling, surveying, geography, perspective, and gunnery'. He achieved considerable prominence in these less febrile activities, especially in surveying. In 1678 he published 'A Sure Guide to the Practical Surveyor', dedicated to John Wildman, politician and one-time leveller, which gave detailed instructions on surveying land, roads, and rivers. He used the instruments of Walter Hayes, the foremost instrument maker of the time. Earlier, he had been one of the team working with John Ogilby on his pioneering surveys of English roads, and he used some of this material in his book. In pressing his credentials as a surveyor he confidently asserted that he had 'the most experience of any man in England' (ibid.). In 1684 he was employed to survey disputed property in Wapping for Thomas Neale, and gave evidence in the celebrated trial that followed between Neale and Lady Ivy, heard by Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys. He also published 'Trigonometry Made Easie' (1685), referring readers to the works of Henry Gellibrand and Isaac Newton for more advanced studies. His 'Clavis horologiae, or, A Key to the Whole Art of Dialling' was issued in 1686, by public subscription; the subscribers included the diallist and surveyor Robert Baker and the king's hydrographer, John Seller, who also shared Holwell's radical politics and had been implicated in the republican Tong plot of 1662. 
Holwell's skill as a practical mathematician commanded respect; he could refer in 1686 to Edmond Halley as his very good and very loving friend. However, he was never far from controversy. In the month of James II's accession, February 1685, an anonymous correspondent warned the privy council of rumours circulating among the 'fanatics' of an imminent great battle on a Yorkshire moor between the duke of York (James II) and Monmouth, which would result in James's death. The report implicated Holwell with these predictions, hinting that he had calculated the nativities of both Charles II and James II, and had surveyed the Yorkshire moor in question, and made cryptic statements about it. According to a family tradition published in 1799, James II's government sent Holwell to America late in 1685 (thus after Monmouth's execution) to survey and map New York, with secret orders that he was not to be allowed to return. He is said to have died there very suddenly, after drinking poisoned coffee, soon after completing the work. Holwell has not been traced after 1686, and it is quite possible that he died about that time while on a surveying mission in the New World. 

'Holwell's Predictions' (1690), published in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and 'John Holwell's Strange and Wonderful Prophesies' (1696), both drawn from his 'Catastrophe mundi', show that his name lived on. Holwell left a widow whose name is unknown, a son, and a daughter, and his estate was divided equally among them. His son Zephaniah (died 1729), a London timber merchant, was the father of John Zephaniah Holwell, scholar and governor of Bengal. 


@@@@@


doc= 13622


Holwell, John Zephaniah (1711-1798), East India Company servant, was born on 17 September 1711 in Dublin, the son of Zephaniah Holwell (died 1729), timber merchant of London, and his wife, Sarah Bott, and grandson of the astrologer John Holwell. He was educated at Richmond Green, Surrey, and Iselmond, near Rotterdam, and was then employed as a clerk by a banker and ship's husband in Rotterdam. His enthusiasm for this work waned and he left for Ireland before being summoned to London by his father, where he embarked upon a career in surgery and was apprenticed to a surgeon in Southwark. He was later placed under Andrew Cooper, senior surgeon at Guy's Hospital. In 1732 he sailed for India as surgeon's mate on an Indiaman. Following his arrival in Calcutta he travelled to the Middle East, serving as surgeon on ships sailing to the Persian Gulf and to Jiddah and Mocha. In Bengal he acted briefly as surgeon to the East India Company's factory at Dacca before settling more permanently in Calcutta in late 1736. There he became assistant surgeon to the hospital in 1740 and principal physician and surgeon to the presidency in 1746. During this period he also became involved in civic affairs, being elected as an alderman in the mayor's court and as mayor in 1747 and 1748. Intellectually Holwell found much stimulation in India; his travels gave him the opportunity to learn Arabic, in which he became quite fluent, and he acquired knowledge of other languages. He also began to research Hindu theology. 
In 1750 Holwell left India, but he was back in Bengal by early July 1752. During his brief stay in England he had drawn on his knowledge and experience to convince the company's directors of the need to reform the post of 'zamindar' in Calcutta. The 'zamindar', appointed by the company since 1698, was responsible for revenue collection and law and order, and Holwell had been nominated to that office by the directors, who had placed him twelfth in the Fort William council with the stipulation that he rise no higher. Following his arrival in Bengal Holwell enquired into the state of the revenues and investigated the activities of Govindaram Mitra, who had been involved in the management of the revenues for over thirty years and who was suspected of having committed frauds. His efforts were warmly praised by the directors, who applauded the increase in revenues which had been achieved without the introduction of new duties, and the restriction on his promotion within the council was removed. Holwell's work was, however, met with much less enthusiasm by other members of the council, who were slow to act on his findings. 
In June 1756 the nawab of Bengal, Siraj ud-Daula, attacked Calcutta, and Fort William was abandoned by Governor Drake and other senior company servants, leaving Holwell and others to their fate. It was agreed that Holwell should take charge, and he proceeded to lead the defence of the fort, but was eventually compelled to surrender to the nawab's forces and, along with the remnants of the garrison, was placed under arrest. On the night of 20 June he and others were incarcerated in a cell within the fort known as the Black Hole; this event was to become infamous, mainly as a result of propaganda put about by Holwell. Two years later an account by him was published which claimed that 146 individuals were crammed into the cell and that of these 123 died ('A genuine narrative of the deplorable deaths of the English gentlemen and others, who were suffocated in the Black Hole'); research has, however, suggested that those imprisoned numbered sixty-four and that twenty-one survived. Some years later Holwell erected an obelisk in Calcutta in memory of those who had died. After his release from the cell Holwell was taken with three others to Murshidabad, where they were held prisoner until the middle of July; he then rejoined Drake (whose authority as governor he eventually accepted) and other council members, and plans were made for the recapture of Calcutta, which was achieved by Robert Clive in January 1757. 
Holwell remained in Bengal until February 1757, when he returned to England. Before he left he wrote the directors a lengthy narrative of events in which he was critical of the conduct of Drake and the other senior company servants during the attack on Calcutta; such remarks were the product of his own ambition and did nothing for his personal popularity in Bengal. He referred to his incarceration in the Black Hole as 'a night of horrors I will not attempt to describe, as they bar all description' (Holwell to directors, 30 Nov 1756, ed. Datta, 1088). Once in England he was able to provide the directors with first-hand accounts of events in Bengal, to advise them on the reorganization of their affairs there, and to cultivate a following among them which included John Payne, the chairman of the company. In November 1757 he was appointed to fourth place in the council and governor by fourfold rotation, but after two revisions of these arrangements his interest suffered when, at the election of directors in April 1758, his supporters lost power. In consequence he was reduced to ninth place in the council and was therefore distanced from the governorship. 
In November 1758 Holwell, having returned to Bengal, took his seat in the council, which was now presided over by Clive, whose victory over Siraj ud-Daula at Plassey over a year earlier had been followed by the accession of Mir Jafar as nawab of Bengal. He was again involved in administrative reform, being appointed to a committee which considered orders from the directors which dealt with various matters including the post of 'zamindar'. His position in the council was altered dramatically by the departure of a large number of councillors, and when Clive resigned the governorship in January 1760 it was Holwell who succeeded him until Henry Vansittart became governor in July of that year. Holwell's administration coincided with growing dissatisfaction with Mir Jafar and he devised a plan whereby the nawab would surrender power to his son-in-law Mir Kasim but retain his title; this scheme was implemented by Vansittart in October 1760 with the result that Mir Jafar resigned completely and Mir Kasim became nawab. It is likely that Holwell was motivated by a desire for personal financial reward in his dealings with Mir Kasim; he was certainly promised $20,000 by him at some point, of which at least $5000 was paid. Some claimed he was worth $96,000 upon his departure from office. 
Holwell returned to England in 1761; for a time his country residence was Chilton Lodge, near Hungerford, Berkshire. The rest of his life was taken up with literary pursuits; during the 1760s he published several defences of his conduct in India, notably 'Important Facts Regarding the East India Company's Affairs in Bengal from 1752 to 1760' (1764). Of greater significance were his historical and theological works, whose importance lay in their popular appeal rather than their content; his 'Interesting Historical Events, Relative to the Provinces of Bengal and the Empire of Indostan' (3 vols., 1765-71) was translated into German and French and earned him praise from Voltaire. A Christian with eccentric beliefs and an advocate of vegetarianism, Holwell also issued writings on other subjects including smallpox inoculation and crime prevention. 
Holwell was twice married and three children survived him. He died at his home in Pinner, Middlesex, on 5 November 1798. 


@@@@@


doc= 13623


Holwell, William (1725/6-1798), Church of England clergyman and writer, was baptized on 11 May 1726 in Exeter Cathedral, the elder son of William Holwell ('bap'. 1699) of Exeter and his wife, Ann (died 1783), daughter of Bishop Ofspring Blackall (d. 1716). Holwell's father died early; his mother remarried on 26 December 1738. 
On 26 June 1740 Holwell was nominated to a canoneer studentship at Christ Church, Oxford, by his stepfather Peter Foulkes (1676-1747), canon of that house; he matriculated on 17 December 1741, aged fifteen, and took his BA in 1745 and MA in 1748. He became a lecturer, a tutor, censor, librarian, and catechist at Christ Church, and was university proctor in 1758; he took his BD in 1760. His pupil William Petty (1737-1805), future earl of Shelburne, patronizingly called him 'a narrow-minded tutor', but 'not without learning' (Fitzmaurice, 17, 18). Holwell's learning was first published in editions of Aristotle's 'Rhetoric' (1759) and of selected literary essays by Dionysius of Halicarnassus (1766). 
Holwell was instituted as vicar of Thornbury, Gloucestershire, a Christ Church living, on 11 January 1762. By the early 1770s he was married to a woman named Martha; by 1775 he was a chaplain-in-ordinary to King George III; he became a prebendary of Exeter on 26 June 1776. Horace Walpole describes his encounter, in August 1774, with the obsequious Holwell and his lean wife, suckling a child, after he had mistaken the vicarage for the sexton's mean cottage, but Walpole probably improved the tale, for, according to Holwell's own account, the living in 1778 was more than $150 and improvable; according to his successor in 1800 it was worth $250; and Holwell was able, in his will of 12 December 1796, to dispose of over $5300 together with evidently valuable household goods. 
At Thornbury, Holwell became a compiler and popularizer, with a selection of 'beauties' from Homer's 'Iliad' (1775), a corresponding selection from Alexander Pope's Homer translation (1775), and a 'Mythological Dictionary' (1793), extracted from Bryant's 'New System... of Ancient Mythology' (1774-6) and rearranged alphabetically for the benefit of 'the young beginner' (preface). Holwell later contributed to Ralph Bigland's 'Historical... Collections' on Gloucestershire, and in 1789-90 read and corrected proofs of John Wilkes's edition of Theophrastus's 'Characters'. His letters to Wilkes unconvincingly imply that Holwell too was a radical. Holwell died on 13 February 1798 at Thornbury. He was survived by his wife and two children, Edward Ofspring Holwell (1773/4-1832) and Charlotte Eleonora. William Holwell Carr (1758-1830) was his nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 13624


Holworthy, James (bap. 1780, d. 1841), watercolour painter, was baptized in Market Bosworth in Leicestershire on 26 December 1780, the son of James Holworthy, a monumental stone mason, and his wife, Mary. As a young man Holworthy moved to London where he lived at 4 Mount Street, Berkeley Square; Joseph Farington recorded in his journals that in May 1804 another Leicestershire artist, John Glover, was lodging with Holworthy and instructing him. Holworthy also taught drawing; in a self-portrait as a young man entitled 'The Drawing Master' in the Paul Mellon collection he sits sketching out of doors between two female pupils. He exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1803 and 1804, and showed five drawings at the first exhibition of the recently formed Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1805. Holworthy continued to exhibit with the society until 1813. In the National Art Library there are papers relating to his membership, including a letter of 13 February 1815 from Copley Fielding stating that other members 'could not divest themselves of the idea that Mr Holworthy was only an absent and not a 'ci devant' member'. In all he showed only twenty-nine drawings, mostly Welsh views and castles, and priced up to $9. His work is similar to Glover's. Martin Hardie called him the 'least significant' of the first members of the society. Monkhouse, a contemporary critic, described Holworthy as 'an elegant artist, very skilful in the use of Indian Ink but not venturing far in the colour process' (Hardie, 2.134). The Victoria and Albert Museum has two watercolours and three sketchbooks by him. Holworthy's low output as a painter must in part have been as a result of defective eyesight but he was sufficiently wealthy not to have to earn a living. 
On 15 October 1821 Holworthy married Anne Wright (1777-1842) in Hastings; she was the daughter of Richard Wright, a doctor with a considerable practice in Derby and elder brother of the artist Joseph Wright of Derby. They lived at Greenhill House in Derby with Anne's elder sister Hannah. However, Holworthy was ambitious to be a country gentleman and, according to a notebook kept by him (now in Derby Local Studies Library), Holworthy decided after a visit to the Peak District in autumn 1823 that he wished to move into the country: 'I have often decided that there are only two places to live -- one in London and the other in the country far from the hurry of the world'; in 1824 he bought the Brookfield estate at Hathersage in Derbyshire, 'a district uncultivated and uncivilised', with 1401 acres, a grouse moor, farm houses, and a substantial house, which he rebuilt. 
Holworthy was a close friend of J. M. W. Turner, some of whose most intimate surviving letters are to Holworthy. Turner stayed at his house at 29 York Buildings, New Road, in St Marylebone, when his own was being repaired in 1820. Two drawings, 'Mountainous Landscape' and 'Coast Scene Sunrise', given by Turner in 1824, a 'Liber Studiorum', and a snuff box 'made out of Lava from Mount Vesuvius' used by Turner as a pallet are listed in the Brookfield sale catalogue of March 1868; the catalogue also includes 5000 engravings, 4000 books, and paintings by Watteau (formerly in the collection of Sir Joshua Reynolds), Chardin, and Joseph Wright, as well as oil and watercolour landscapes by Holworthy and a watercolour by Glover. 
Holworthy was appointed a justice of the peace for Derbyshire in July 1827, but in May the following year in 'R. v. Holworthy', held in Westminster Hall, he was accused of irregularities in the conviction of three men for poaching partridges; the lord chief justice dismissed the case. Towards the end of his life Holworthy brought an action against the 'Sheffield Iris' over an alleged libel in an anonymous letter. He died from bronchitis at 3 St John Street, Gray's Inn, London, on 13 June 1841 aged sixty-one, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 19 June. His wife died on 28 November 1842 aged sixty-five, and was buried among the Wright family graves at St Alkmund's Church, Derby. There were no children. Brookfield continued to be occupied by Hannah Wright until her death in 1867 after which the estate was sold. 


@@@@@


doc= 13625


Holyday, Barten (1593-1661), Church of England clergyman and poet, was born in the parish of All Saints, Oxford, the son of Thomas Holiday, a tailor. He was educated at St Paul's School, London, before going to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1605, perhaps as a chorister, matriculating on 13 December. He graduated BA on 14 May 1612 and proceeded MA on 15 June 1615, already being recognized as a gifted orator and poet. He was ordained and given two benefices in Oxford diocese. In 1616 he published his well-received verse translation of Persius's 'Satires', noted for its smoothness; by 1650 it had reached its fifth edition. From 1617 to 1621 he served as praelector in rhetoric and philosophy and, while a student of Christ Church, he produced 'Technogamia, or, The Marriages of the Arts', which was acted in the hall on 13 February 1617 and published in 1618. It was intended to be a comedy in which characters representing the range of studies in the university argue for their positions, but the wordy laboured speeches included allusions that were not always grasped by the audience. 
In 1618 Holyday made a more favourable impression when he went to Spain as chaplain to Sir Francis Stewart, who accompanied Count Gondomar on his return home after many years as ambassador. Three years later, on 26 August 1621, 'Technogamia' was performed before James I at Woodstock, Oxfordshire, but the king was not impressed. He found it tedious and had to be persuaded to stay to the end. Some epigrams on the Woodstock performance were circulated by Cambridge wits, and Holyday's Oxford friends, including Henry King, later bishop of Chichester, had to come to his support. 
In 1623 Holyday became vicar of Ashleworth, Gloucestershire, and Brize Norton, Oxfordshire, and in 1625 archdeacon of Oxford. Sermons preached at Paul's Cross on 5 August 1623 and 24 March 1625 and three sermons delivered in Oxford on the passion, resurrection, and ascension of Christ were published in 1626. These were the first of many that appeared in his lifetime, their subjects ranging from examinations of texts taken from the 'Old and New Testaments' to considerations of motives for a godly life and the nature of faith. On 14 August 1628 Holyday married Elizabeth Wickham at Garsington, Oxfordshire; they had three sons and two daughters. In 1633 his 'Philosophiae polito-barbarae specimen', a Latin tractate, was published, and he continued to write verse, typical being his commendatory verses prefixed to the 1640 edition of Jonson's poems and his comic epitaph on the death of the proctor Edward Wood in 1655. By 1638 he was rector of Emmington, with Iffley and Littlemore, Oxfordshire. 
Holyday remained in Oxford when it became the royalist headquarters in the autumn of 1642, and it was probably about this time that he became a chaplain to the king. On 1 November he was created DD by royal command. According to his later account, he was sequestered in 1646; on 17 June 1647 the committee for plundered ministers referred articles against him to the committee for compounding. He apparently remained in Oxfordshire, and on 9 August 1649, as a widower, married at Radley, just over the border in Berkshire, Margaret, 'nee' Sheppard (died 1661), widow of Francis Dewey, minister of Chippenham, Wiltshire; they had a son, Barten, and a daughter. By 1652 Holyday was curate of Iffley, and on 31 October 1655 he was admitted to the rectory of Chilton, Berkshire. Continuing his writing, he published an edition of Horace in 1652, 'Of the Nature of Faith' (1654), and 'Motives to a Good Life' (1657). 
In 1660 Holyday returned to Oxford and the position of archdeacon, living in Iffley. He might well have become a bishop had he not been thought to have had too great a sense of his own importance. In 1661 his 'Survey of the World', a substantial poetic work in ten books, possibly drafted earlier in his life, was published in Oxford. In his preface and elsewhere, taking an overview of the world and using iambic pentameter couplets, Holyday reveals an alertness to the beauty of a landscape through the combination of nature and art. He died at Iffley on 2 October 1661 and was buried three days later in Christ Church, Oxford. His widow survived him for only a few weeks, dying on 16 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 13626


Holyman, John (1495-1558), bishop of Bristol, was a native of Cuddington, near Haddenham in Buckinghamshire. He was admitted a scholar at Winchester College in 1506, aged eleven, and then went to New College, Oxford, where, in 1512, he became a fellow. He graduated BA in 1514, MA in 1518, and BTh in 1526. He left his college about 1526, and became rector of Colerne, Wiltshire, but for the sake of books and literary society settled in Exeter College, Oxford, where he was charged for the rent of a room in 1525-6 and 1534-5. There he soon acquired a great reputation for learning and sanctity, and was university preacher on Easter day in both 1527 and 1530. In 1530 he took the degree of DTh. A letter of December that year from Hugh Farindon, abbot of St Mary's, Reading, in support of Holyman's supplication that a sermon preached by him at Paul's Cross, London, might count in place of a statutory sermon preached in St Mary's, Oxford, was misunderstood by Anthony Wood as suggesting that Holyman had become a monk of that abbey. He opposed the divorce of Henry VIII from Queen Catherine, advocating the validity of their marriage by writing and preaching and being described as 'an enemy to the King's cause' in a letter of Richard Croke to Thomas Cromwell of 26 January 1534 ('LP Henry VIII', 7, no. 101). He was obliged in consequence to remove to Handborough, near Woodstock, of which he was rector, living partly there and partly in Exeter College. He became vicar of Wing, Buckinghamshire, on 3 May 1546. 
Following Mary's accession Holyman was promoted to the bishopric of Bristol, and was consecrated in the chapel of the bishop of London on 18 November 1554. The temporalities were restored ten days later. Little is known of his episcopate, from which no register survives, but Holyman, who was firmly committed to the Catholic cause, appears to have been a satisfactory bishop. He was included with John White and James Brooks in a commission to try Ridley and Latimer for heresy, and took part at Oxford in the disputation with Cranmer (1554) and in the trial of Bishop Hooper. He appears to have shown no great zeal for prosecuting heretics, and few burnings took place in his diocese. He is not mentioned by Foxe as present when William Dalby, his chancellor, sent three men to the stake at Bristol for their religious beliefs. Anthony Wood attributes a number of works to him, including 'Tractatus contra doctrinam M. Lutheri' and 'Defensio matrimonii Reginae Catharinae cum Rege Henrico octavo'. These are not known to have survived. 
Holyman died on 20 December 1558 and was buried not in his cathedral but in the chancel of Handborough church. By his will, dated 4 June 1558, and proved on 16 February 1559, he bequeathed $20 to New College, Oxford, and to Winchester College the writings of St Augustine, St Jerome, St Cyprian, and other works of church history, which were afterwards chained in the library. 


@@@@@


doc= 13627


Holyoake, Francis (1566x73-1653), Church of England clergyman and lexicographer, was born at Nether Whitacre, Warwickshire. He was admitted to Queen's College, Oxford, as a commoner in 1582, but is not recorded as being admitted to a degree. Wood claims that he had been a schoolteacher. However, Holyoake commenced study at Cambridge as a sizar at Emmanuel College on 1 April 1594, and moved to Peterhouse in Lent 1596. He was admitted BA in 1599 and was ordained priest on 29 June 1601, when he was noted as aged twenty-eight. 
In 1604 Holyoake became curate of Thames Ditton, and then rector of Southam, Warwickshire, a living in the gift of the crown, where he lived until his death. At some point he married Judith, the daughter of Edmund Dalby of Brookhampton in Combrook, Warwickshire. A son, 
Holyoake's first venture into lexicography, 'Riders Dictionarie, Corrected and Augmented' (1606), was a revision of John Rider's 'Bibliotheca scholastica' (1589). Holyoake took Rider's Latin index and created a genuine double dictionary by borrowing freely from Thomas Thomas's successful 'Dictionarium linguae Latinae et Anglicanae' (1587). The rights to Rider's dictionary had recently passed from a London stationer, Cuthbert Burby, to a powerful London book-trade syndicate, and the work immediately became embroiled in the ongoing tussle between the Cambridge University printer, John Legate, and the Stationers' Company in London, since Thomas's dictionary had been published in Cambridge. A 'reprehensible agreement' (McKitterick, 119) was struck over the production of these competing works; editions of both dictionaries were published in 1606. 
Holyoake's second work was entitled 'A Sermon of Obedience Especially unto Authoritie Ecclesiasticall', preached and published in 1610. The work was dedicated to Sir C. Throckmorton, and was reprinted in 1613. Holyoake's next version of Rider, entitled 'Riders Dictionarie Corrected, and with the Addition of about Five Hundred Words Enriched', only slightly augmented, appeared in 1612. It included an etymological component, largely taken from Ambrogio Calepino's 'Dictionarium'. The next edition of the dictionary, in 1617, added some Greek terms, many again from Thomas. 
Holyoake was elected to the southern convocation in 1625. His dictionary was again published in 1626 as 'Dictionarium etymologicum Latinum', but this time with augmentation and many improvements by Nicholas Gray. Undeterred by the grant in 1621 of a new patent for the Thomas dictionary to the Cambridge publisher John Legate junior, Holyoake himself produced a new edition in 1627, and further editions during Holyoake's lifetime appeared in 1633, 1639, and 1648. He was granted a fourteen-year patent for his dictionary in 1635. 
Holyoake's life was, however, abruptly disrupted in his old age by the civil war. Royalist sympathies led to his home being raided by parliamentary forces in 1642. A roundhead subaltern, Nehemiah Walton, describes Southam as 'a very malignant town, both minister and people', relating that 'we pillaged the minister, and tooke from him a drum and severall armes' ('Archeologia', 316). Holyoake was also described as of 'very evill and dissolute conversation' (Tennant, 36). His son's petition at the Restoration for compensation claimed that a servant was killed and the death of his mother hastened, and that the family was reduced to living on charity. 
Holyoake had his estate, valued at $300 per annum, sequestrated on 22 April 1647 for inciting his parishioners and keeping arms in his house; he was permitted to retain one-fifth of his income, as was normal in cases of deprivation, in view of his age. There were also disputes with parishioners and sequestrators over the felling of timber on the glebe in 1646, and an action for trespass in 1648. Nevertheless, a new edition of the dictionary duly appeared in 1648. At this time Holyoake also presented a manuscript to Queen's College Library entitled 'Hugguccionis, seu Huguitionis, Pisani, ep. Ferrariensis, lexicon alphabeticum'. 
Francis Holyoake was buried in St Mary's, Warwick, in 1653, when his age was given as eighty-six, and his monument was placed in the north transept. His character is suggested both by his staunch royalism and by his refusal to desist from blatant and repeated plagiarism of Thomas's dictionary. 
Holyoake's son Thomas went to Coventry grammar school and then Queen's College, Oxford; having commenced in Michaelmas term 1632, he graduated BA in 1636 and MA in 1639. He became a chaplain of Queen's in 1637, and in 1641 was presented to the living of Birdingbury, Warwickshire. At the outbreak of the civil war he was commissioned to lead an infantry company consisting largely of scholars. The king rewarded him for his services with a doctorate of divinity, a title used in his will. Holyoake was licensed by the university in 1647 to practise medicine following the surrender of the garrison at Oxford in 1646. 
On 27 July 1660 Holyoake petitioned the king for restitution of the harm done by the sequestration of his father's estate, and asked to be presented to the rectory of Tatenhill, Staffordshire, pointing out the family's difficulties, and that he had had to care for his aged father. Another petition followed, requesting confirmation of the grant of the living of Nuneaton, in which he complained about the anti-royalist sermons of the incumbent, Richard Pyke. He petitioned a third time in October 1660, requesting presentation to both parishes. However, he was presented to Whitnash, near Warwick, and was also made a prebendary of the collegiate church of Wolverhampton. In 1674 he received the donative of Breamore, Hampshire. He died there of a fever on 10 June 1675. His will, which was proved on 5 June 1678, provided amply for his family since he had acquired property in both Warwickshire and Breamore, which he left to his wife, Anne, and his sons. He was also able to leave $200 to both his daughters. Thomas Holyoake revised and enlarged his father's dictionary, but the work was published posthumously by his own eldest son, Charles, in 1677. 


@@@@@


doc= 13628


Holyoake, Henry (1657-1731), headmaster, was probably born in Warwickshire, the son of Thomas Holyoake (1616-1675) ['see under 'Holyoake, Francis], physician and former clergyman, and Anne his wife; his grandfather was Francis Holyoake (1566x73-1653). In 1672 he was elected to a choristership at Magdalen College, Oxford; he matriculated on 12 March 1674 at the age of seventeen. From 1676 to 1681 he was a clerk and sub-librarian there. He graduated BA on 22 October 1678, proceeded MA on 4 July 1681, and was chaplain of his college from 1681 notionally until 1690, although he left with the fellows ejected by James II and did not return. 
On 7 February 1688 Holyoake was appointed headmaster of Rugby School. Despite the smallness of his salary and other disadvantages, he was credited with 'recovering the creditt and reputation of the schoole' (Rouse, 377), and was the first to engage an assistant master. Among his pupils was Edward Cave, whose precocity led to his becoming a general scapegoat, until eventually even the headmaster turned against him and (allegedly) sent him away. Cave, however, would recall Holyoake as 'universally esteem'd for his singular learning and humanity' ('GM', 126). Meanwhile Holyoake was instituted successively to the Warwickshire rectories of Bourton upon Dunsmore on 30 June 1698, Bilton on 31 August 1705, and Harborough Magna on 9 November 1712. 
Holyoake died unmarried at Rugby on 10 March 1731 and was buried in St Mary's Church, Warwick, where he had erected an inscription written by himself to his own memory and that of his father and grandfather. His domestic establishment had been managed by his cousin Judith Holyoake, to whom he left a legacy on the express ground of her having been 'very serviceable and seemingly kind' to the boys. He bequeathed $30 to the daughter of Widow Harris, his 'tripe-woman', the interest on $200 to the poor of Rugby after the death of his cousin Elizabeth Holyoake, and all his books and family portraits (none of either being extant) to Rugby School (Colvile, 430). 


@@@@@


doc= 13629


Thomas Holyoake (1616-1675), was born on 26 December 1616, probably at Stoneythorpe Hall in Long Itchington, and baptized by his father on 12 January 1617 at Southam. 


@@@@@


doc= 13630


Holywood, Christopher (1559?-1626), Jesuit, was probably born in 1559 at Artane, near Dublin, the son of Nicholas Holywood, a landowner in counties Dublin, Meath, and Wexford, and his wife, Elizabeth Plunkett, granddaughter and heir-general of Robert Plunkett, fifth Baron Dunsany. He studied at the University of Padua and in 1584 became a member of the Society of Jesus at Verdun, entering the noviciate at Dole in France. He was ordained at Pont-a-Mousson in 1593, and over the next few years taught theology there and at Dole, and philosophy and scripture in Italy, at Ferrara and Padua, where he met the influential Cardinal Bellarmine. On 26 September 1598 he was appointed to the mission of the Jesuits in Ireland. Disguised as a merchant he sailed for England, but was arrested on landing at Dover. He declined to take the oath of supremacy, was examined before Robert Cecil, the secretary of state, and was detained in custody at the Gatehouse, London. From February 1600 he was detained at Wisbech, where he occupied himself with literary work and theological disputation. After the death of Elizabeth I he was transferred to Framlingham in Suffolk and then banished to the continent. 
Holywood spent time in the Spanish Netherlands and northern France in 1603-4 and arranged for the publication of two works of theology, which appeared under the name a Sacro Bosco, a Latin form of his name in traditional use in his family. His 'Defensio decreti Tridentini et sententiae Roberti Bellarmini, S. R. E. cardinalis, de authoritate Vulgatae editionis Latinae, adversus sectarios, maxime Whitakerum' (1604), re-issued with additions in 1619, was a defence of Bellarmine's views on the 'Vulgate' in reply to William Whitaker and other protestant controversialists. He also wrote 'De investiganda vera ac visibili Christi ecclesia libellus' (1604) and the unpublished treatise 'Opusculum de virtutibus' (1619). There is some evidence that he was the author of a work of natural philosophy entitled 'De meteoris tractatus lucidissimus in quinque partes distinctus', apparently also an early work, but revised in 1612 and published in Paris in 1613 under the pseudonym Johannes Geraldinus. 
In Ireland from March 1604 until his death, Holywood acted as superior of the Jesuit mission. He spent his time in Dublin and the surrounding areas actively promoting the Jesuit mission and normally lived with relatives, including his cousin Sir Christopher Plunkett in Dublin, and members of the Holywood family in co. Meath. Wise reported that Holywood was 'generally in and about the court of Dublin' (Hogan, 'Distinguished Irishmen', 459) and was no stranger to political controversy, though he insisted the society focus on its spiritual mission. Though he spent time in co. Meath to avoid persecution in Dublin and Drogheda he regarded it as a 'remote' place and was reported to have rarely travelled beyond the pale because he spoke little Irish and did not enjoy good health. As provincial he corresponded regularly with fellow Jesuits, usually signing his name as John Bushlock before 1618, and after that date regularly using the alias Thomas Lawndrie (Lawndaeus); elsewhere his name was recorded by contemporaries as Holividus or Holivodius. During his time as superior the Jesuit presence in Ireland grew considerably, both numerically, with more than forty Jesuits in the country, and geographically, with the establishment of a network of residences and an Irish mission to the western isles of Scotland. He died in Ireland on 4 September 1626. 


@@@@@


doc= 13631


Sacrobosco, John de (d. c.1236), mathematician, was probably of British extraction, but the tradition that he came from Halifax in Yorkshire is unsupported. Contemporary records are silent about him and various accounts of his life rest only upon the arbitrary surmises of Leland, Bale, and later antiquaries. The date of his birth is unknown, and the only certainty is that he worked in Paris. He is not mentioned in the records of the university which, however, provided his tomb in the church of St Mathurin, with a monument on which an astronomical instrument was engraved, together with four lines of verse commemorating his fame as a 'computista', or calendar expert. These were copied before the monument was destroyed at the time of the French Revolution. In this situation the only clue to his life and achievement lies in his writings. In the course of time many works have been wrongly ascribed to Sacrobosco, but the following four books are authentic. 
The 'Algorismus' (in some manuscripts called 'Algorismus vulgaris' or 'Algorismus de integris') has the incipit 'Omnia quae a primaeva origine rerum', and is a brief introduction (same 5600 words) to the new 'Arabic' numerals and the positional system of numbers. It explains all the elementary procedures of calculation from addition and subtraction to the extraction of square and cube roots. It is written in a dry and precise style, and demonstrates clearly the superiority of the new methods over the ancient Roman system. It was widely used and gave rise to several revised versions and commentaries, among which the great commentary by Peter Nightingale from 1291 occupies the first place. There were several printed editions between 1488 (Strasbourg) and 1582 (Antwerp). More recent printings by Halliwell (1838) and Curtze (1897) are now superseded by the critical edition by F. Saaby Pedersen (in 'Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi', 10/1, 1983). 
The 'Tractatus de spera', with the incipit 'Tractatum de spera quattuor capitulis distinguimus' is a longer work (some 9000 words) on elementary cosmology and astronomy. It is well organized in four chapters, describing respectively the general structure of the universe, the circles of the celestial sphere, the phenomena caused by the diurnal rotation of the heavens, and planetary motions and eclipses. The style is elegant and pleasant and, in the manner of the twelfth century, there are many quotations from both literary and scientific classical sources. Although it appears that the author was not familiar with the 'Almagest' itself, he clearly aimed at making his students familiar with the elements of Ptolemaic astronomy, breaking away from the earlier tradition derived from Macrobius and Martianus Capella. No scientific work from the middle ages has ever enjoyed a similar popularity. The 'Spera' is still extant in hundreds of manuscripts spread over all the major libraries of Europe, and there were at least 160 printed versions, from the 'editio princeps' of 1472 (Ferrara) until 1673 (Antwerp). The Latin text is now available with an English translation in ''The Sphere' of Sacrobosco and its Commentators' by Lynn Thorndike (1949). 
Twice as long (some 19,000 words) is the 'Compotus', also called 'De anni ratione'. It has the incipit 'Compotus est scientia considerans tempora', and deals with all aspects of time reckoning and calendaric problems. It is written in the same style as the 'Spera', but with even more references to earlier writers, and is of the same scope and importance as Bede's 'De temporum ratione', written 500 years earlier. Of particular interest is the discussion of the errors of the Julian calendar and Sacrobosco's proposal for eliminating them by methods essentially similar to those employed in the Gregorian reform of 1582: that is, by dropping ten days once and for all, and then leaving out one day with regular intervals. The 'Compotus' was printed at least thirty-five times from Melanchthon's edition at Wittenberg in 1531 to the last edition at Antwerp in 1673. A modern, critical version is still a desideratum. 
A fourth, brief treatise (about 2000 words) is usually called 'De quadrante' and has the incipit 'Omnis scientia per instrumentum operative'. It describes the construction of the so-called 'old Quadrant' and its application as a sundial, and was critically examined by J. B. J. Delambre in 1819 ('Histoire de l'astronomie du moyen age', 243 ff.). Comparatively few manuscripts are preserved and no printed version seems to exist. For no obvious reason it has sometimes been reckoned among Sacrobosco's spurious works. 
The dating of these works presents a very difficult problem. There is no evidence of when the 'Algorismus' and the quadrant treatise were written. The 'Spera' and the 'Compotus' must be earlier than 1240, when they were both included in the same codex which is now in the Kongelige Bibliotek in Copenhagen (GKS 277, 2 degree ). Internal evidence seems to indicate that the 'Spera' is earlier than the 'Compotus', which is self-described as written in 1235; but in several manuscripts this year is given as 1232. The latter also ends with some verses pointing to the year 1234. In consequence it is natural to conclude that Sacrobosco's activity came to an end about 1235, in agreement with a notice in Miraeus that Sacrobosco died in 1236. 
Sacrobosco's three principal works were often copied or bound together. Supplemented by a work on planetary theory and a set of astronomical tables, they formed the kernel of a 'corpus astronomicum' on which the elementary teaching of astronomy was based for more than 300 years. This shows their inherent qualities, as does the fact that they were the subject of numerous later commentaries. They were brief, to the point, and contained very little that a student could afford to forget when passing on to a more advanced stage. It is also worth noticing that they were completely free from explicit astrological association. Despite their narrative form they contributed more than most other works to preserving the notion of science as the study of mathematical relationships between natural phenomena, in contradistinction to the Aristotelian view of science as a metaphysical quest for causal explanations. 


@@@@@


doc= 13632


Sir Alexander Hume of that ilk (d. 1461), who succeeded his father in 1424 and began a policy of steady expansion in the south-east, starting from a base in the territory of the Merse, north of Berwick. By his marriage to Marion Lauder, granddaughter of Sir Robert Lauder of the Bass, some time before 11 April 1426, Hume eventually acquired lands in Berwickshire and Linlithgowshire. He stepped into the gap created by the forfeiture of Patrick Dunbar, earl of March, in 1435, to support the crown's power-broker in the area, William Douglas, earl of Angus (died 1437), and acquire thereby the lands of Lintlaws, Cruiksfield, and Preston for life; and his piety found expression locally in his transformation of the chapel of St Mary of Dunglass into a collegiate church, a process completed by 1450. 
In the major struggle between James II and the Black Douglases (1451-5), Sir Alexander Hume was in a difficult position, for though he had received grants from William, eighth earl of Douglas (died 1452) -- parts of the lordship of Stewarton in Ayrshire -- he had also enjoyed continuing patronage from the king. Initially Hume hedged his bets, being named on the safe-conduct to go to Rome with the earl of Douglas for the papal jubilee in 1450; and he may have collected his bull of foundation for Dunglass collegiate church in person from Pope Nicholas V ('r'. 1447-55). However, 1451 found both Douglas and James II bidding for Hume support; wisely Sir Alexander opted for the royal side, and by 1453 he was in receipt of royal funds for the defence of Hume Castle. No king's friend -- he is never to be found as a royal charter witness -- Hume was nevertheless a loyal border magnate, and a natural choice to be a Scottish commissioner at the 1458 border talks at Reddenburn, which produced a truce with England and sought to close the door firmly on the forfeited Douglases. When Sir Alexander died, shortly after 3 February 1461, he left a sizeable family (five sons and two daughters) and a secure inheritance. 
Sir Alexander was succeeded by his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 13633


Alexander Hume, first Lord Hume (d. c.1491), who consolidated the family gains made by his father. Loyalty to James II during the Douglas crisis of the 1450s brought extensive rewards -- royal charters of the lands of Dunglass, Hume, Sisterpath, and Kello in 1450, all united into the free barony of Hume at the end of 1451. To these lands were added Chirnside -- granted on 4 February 1452, less than three weeks before James II killed the eighth earl of Douglas at Stirling -- and Birgham, with a confirmation of the Hume barony in February 1453. In the next reign, Sir Alexander was confirmed in the bailiary of Coldingham, which was made a hereditary office, by the adult James III in November 1472; and Hume's second son, John, was assiduously seeking royal recognition as prior of Coldingham with his father's strong support. A regular attender at parliament since James III's assumption of personal power in 1469, Sir Alexander was created a lord of parliament, as Lord Hume, on 2 August 1473. 
However, this elevation may have been little more than an attempt by the king to avoid antagonizing the Humes over a royal plan, first evolved in April 1472, to suppress the priory of Coldingham, a daughter house of Durham (in Berwickshire, where its position had become increasingly uncertain since the beginning of the Anglo-Scottish wars), and reallocate its revenues to the Chapel Royal of St Mary of the Rock, St Andrews. A revised version of this plan in 1473, envisaging a collegiate church -- but 'not' retaining the priory -- at Coldingham, may have been intended as a further royal olive branch. However, any scheme which rejected John Hume's claim to be prior of Coldingham was doomed from the start, for the first lord, bailie of Coldingham for more than a generation, lord of parliament, and (from 1476) a march warden, found royal interference in the growing Hume empire in the south-east unwelcome, and resisted it strenuously with the committed support of his sons. The political struggle over the future of Coldingham was conducted by these younger men. Alexander Hume, the first lord, cannot be shown to have taken an active part in politics after 1479, though he lived long enough to see Dunglass erected into a burgh of barony in June 1489, a year after James IV's accession. 
Hume was the father of seven sons from two marriages. With his first wife, Mariota, heir of Landells in Berwickshire, he had four sons: Alexander, who died before his father, but already married and with two sons, Alexander (second Lord Hume) and John; John, prior of Coldingham; George of Aytoun; and Patrick of Fastcastle. The second marriage, to Margaret, daughter of Alexander, master of Montgomery in Ayrshire, produced three sons, Thomas of Langshaw, Nicholas, and David. 
It fell to 


@@@@@


doc= 13634


Alexander Hume, second Lord Hume (d. 1506), grandson of the first lord, to steer the family safely through the turbulent 1480s to the calmer political waters of the reign of James IV. Before he succeeded to the lordship in 1492, Alexander and his kin had successfully resisted and seen off one Stewart king and received extensive rewards from his successor. 
In the early 1480s the Humes were faced with a stark choice of loyalties: on the one hand James III, who had not abandoned his Coldingham plans, on the other the king's brother Alexander Stewart, duke of Albany (died 1485), in 1482 claiming King James's throne or, at the least, control of royal government. Albany's initial successes in the 1482 crisis -- entering Scotland accompanied by a huge English army -- meant that he was a man who could not be ignored by border magnates such as the Humes. However, Albany was also earl of March, and as such his success would represent a threat to the Humes, who had initially come to prominence following the forfeiture of March in 1435. In the event, Alexander Hume performed a dramatic political volte-face at the end of January 1483, first joining Albany and his supporters at Dunbar Castle to plot the seizure or overthrow of James III, then moving swiftly to Edinburgh to reveal the conspiracy to the king. Hume had chosen the right side; by April 1483 Albany was a fugitive, by July he was a forfeited exile, and in a series of grants of territory within the earldom of March to Alexander and his Hume kinsmen, King James expressed his gratitude for recent Hume support. By January 1484, indeed, Alexander Hume was being described as a royal familiar. 
However, the Coldingham dispute had not been resolved. It acquired a new and dangerous lease of life in 1484-5, when Alexander's uncle John Hume misused royal letters to obtain a new set of bulls from the pope, confirming his status as prior of Coldingham. In October 1487 James III effectively declared war, not only on the Humes, but on any magnates who were prepared to join them in resisting royal plans for Coldingham. Thus the king himself precipitated the revolt of 1488 which cost him his life at Sauchieburn (11 June). Throughout this crisis the Humes remained rebel hard-liners -- given James III's attitude, they had no other choice -- and, together with their allies and kinsmen, the Hepburns, they were the major beneficiaries of the uprising and the advent of a new king, the fifteen-year-old James IV. Thus in the parliament of October 1488 Alexander Hume was confirmed as chamberlain for life; over the next two years, he acquired the wardenship of the east march and the custody of Stirling Castle and of James IV's brother, John, earl of Mar; and the Coldingham dispute was at last resolved in favour of John Hume as prior. 
A spate of royal grants and confirmations to Alexander Hume between 1488 and 1491 -- the bailiary of Ettrick Forest, the keepership of Newark, the stewardship of Dunbar, an Edinburgh town house, lands in Ayrshire, Stirlingshire, Fife, and the Merse -- further increased Hume strength. When Alexander was finally served heir to his grandfather, as second Lord Hume, in 1492, he responded to royal rewards with a career of unswerving loyalty to James IV -- in the front line during the Anglo-Scottish wars of 1496-7, taking a leading part in the Scottish naval expedition to Denmark in the summer of 1502, and serving as a commissioner to exchange the ratifications of the 'treaty of perpetual peace', in December of the same year. Alexander, second Lord Hume, died on 9 September 1506. He was twice married: first to Isobel Douglas, a marriage soon dissolved (May 1476) owing to its illegality in canon law; and second to Nichola Ker, daughter and heir of George Ker of Samuelston, with whom the second lord had seven sons -- Alexander, who succeeded him as third Lord Hume, George Hume (the future fourth lord), John, Patrick, William, Andrew, and David -- and three daughters, Elizabeth, Mariota, and Nichola. 



@@@@@


doc= 13635


Alexander Hume, third Lord Hume (d. 1516), rapidly succeeded to his father's extensive lands and to the office of chamberlain. The third lord anticipated James IV's invasion of Northumberland in August-September 1513 by taking a large force of borderers into England on a plunder raid early in August; but while withdrawing on 13 August, he was ambushed at Milfield near Wooler by Sir Henry Bulmer, and suffered heavy losses in what came to be known as the 'ill raid'. A month later Hume fought alongside James IV at Flodden, and together with his ally Alexander Gordon, earl of Huntly (died 1524), was one of the few Scottish magnates of note to survive the battle. Later -- and extremely dubious -- tales suggested that James IV had also survived, and that he had been murdered by the Humes. More believable is Pitscottie's story that Huntly and Hume, having fought and won in their own sector of the battlefield, refused to lend any further assistance to the Scottish army and withdrew from the field. The third lord had, after all, been in the field for a month longer than anyone else, and suffered heavily on the 'ill raid'. 
In the tortuous political power struggle which followed Flodden, with the queen mother and her new husband, Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus (died 1557), opposing the return from France of John Stewart, duke of Albany (died 1536), as governor for the infant James V, Alexander, third Lord Hume, at first sided with Albany, but then (possibly because Albany was restored to his father's earldom of March and thereby became a potential local menace to Hume dominance) changed sides, and plotted with others to obtain possession of the king. Failing in this, and once pardoned, he again took to arms, but, along with his brother William, was tried and convicted for treason, forfeited, and beheaded in Edinburgh on 8 October 1516. He was married, between September 1513 and February 1514, to Agnes Stewart, widow of Adam Hepburn, second earl of Bothwell; they had one daughter, Janet. 
Overall, Hume dominance in the south-east of Scotland, and influence in royal politics in general, had been gained -- with the notable exception of the Coldingham episode -- through service to the crown. Two successive dukes of Albany, acting as earls of March, presented a local threat and proved fatal to one Hume lord in 1516; but the title and many of the estates were restored to Alexander's brother George, who succeeded as fourth Lord Hume in August 1522. 


@@@@@


doc= 13636


Home, Alexander, fifth Lord Home (c.1525-1575), nobleman, was the eldest son of George Hume or Home, fourth Lord Hume (d. 1549), and his wife, Dame Mariota Haliburton. He was probably sixteen when his curators were chosen, about 1541. He had acquired his father's titles and estates by March 1550, though these were not ratified by retour until 16 April 1551. There was a rumour that he would be offered the earldom of March in June 1565, but this never materialized. About 1558 he married Margaret Ker of Cessford, who died on 24 June 1565, leaving a daughter Margaret who married George Keith, fifth Earl Marischal, about 1581. Home's second wife, whom he married in October 1565, was Agnes Gray (died 1583x6), daughter of Patrick, Lord Gray, and widow of Robert Logan of Restalrig. They had one son, Alexander Home, sixth Lord Home and later first earl of Home, and two daughters including Isobel, who later married Sir James Home of Eccles. Agnes later married Sir Thomas Lyon of Baldukie, after Lord Home's death. Home also had a bastard son, John, provost of Dunglass, who was legitimized by the privy council in 1565. 
Alexander Home is first noticed as the fourth lord's son and heir in a land grant of June 1535. Eager to placate James V at the time of the latter's general revocation of all land grants in 1538, his father granted Alexander's marriage agreement to the king. Alexander was to 'contract marriage with ane dochtir naturale of his hienes' and could not marry elsewhere without the king's consent (Hannay, 468-9). The king had in mind a daughter of his liaison with Elizabeth Beaton, but this wedding never happened. The rights to Alexander's marriage were then passed successively to James Douglas, third earl of Morton, in October 1541, and to Margaret Stewart, sister of the earl of Lennox, in 1542. There were rumours that he would marry a daughter of George, Lord Seton, in 1543, as Seton had acquired the rights from Margaret Stewart. It was not until 1550 that Alexander had his choice of bride given to him by Mary of Guise in return for good service on the borders. He thereafter chose to marry the daughter of a border laird instead of a fellow nobleman's daughter. 
In the 1540s, as master of Home, Alexander served bravely alongside his father in the wars against England. The English falsely claimed that 'Master Howme' had assured to their allegiance in October 1543. Lord Home and his son would never betray the Scots throughout the troubled 1540s, though a few of their kinsmen did capitulate. Henry VIII demanded Alexander as a hostage in July 1544 to stop Scottish retribution for the earl of Hertford's raid on Scotland that May. Home defied him by evading capture on several occasions, and he and his kin signed an assurance to defend the Merse and Teviotdale from English attack at the parliament of October 1545. Alexander's luck had run out by May 1546, however, when he was listed as an English prisoner, though there was some discussion of exchanging him for the earl of Cumberland's brother, Thomas Clifford. The master was probably released later in 1546, as he attended parliament that year with his father, but he was recaptured after the Scottish defeat at the battle of Pinkie on 10 September 1547. By November 1547 Lady Home was begging Protector Somerset (formerly Hertford) to let her son come home while she was secretly negotiating the surrender of Hume Castle. The master of Home and his mother were now seen to be important in their own right as the fourth Lord Home had been badly injured at Pinkie. After a licensed return to Scotland on 6 December 1548 Alexander probably assisted with the recapture of Hume Castle from the English on 16 December. He went on to help recapture the occupied town of Kelso as well. By July 1549 he and his father were receiving pensions for themselves and regular salaries for the Hume garrison. By October 1559 these salaries amounted to $75 Scots per month. 
Alexander Home was acting as his father's executor by March 1550, and it was as Lord Home that he accompanied Mary of Guise on her voyage to France in the summer of 1550. Once in France he was amply rewarded for his family's service to both Scotland and France during the 1540s. His French pensions were paid regularly throughout the 1550s, but dried up after Mary's death in 1560. After he returned from France, Home took a leading role in the administration of the Anglo-Scottish borders throughout the 1550s and 1560s. He was warden and justiciar of the Scottish east march during 1550-58 and 1559-70 and was temporarily joint warden of the east and middle marches in 1557-8. He was additionally a border commissioner in 1550 and 1559 and a guardian of Liddesdale in 1562. During 1554, when he was 'trublit with infirmitie', he asked his brother Andrew, commendator of Jedburgh, to deputize ('Reg. PCS', 'addenda', 122). Home also held local offices as bailie and chamberlain of the crown lands in the Merse, steward and receiver of the earldom of March, bailie of Coldingham, Eccles, and Dryburgh, heritable bailie of Coldstream Priory (from 1566), and sheriff of Berwickshire and bailie of Lauderdale after the downfall of the fourth earl of Bothwell in 1567. The latter appointment gave Home particular pleasure as he had viewed Bothwell as a territorial rival, even though the Home kindred was firmly entrenched in Berwickshire by the mid-sixteenth century. 
At a national level Home attended parliaments in 1546, 1558, 1560, 1561, 1567, when he was elected one of the lords of the articles, and 1568. He was also a privy councillor from 1561 until 1570. His political role at the centre of Scottish government took off after he attended the Reformation Parliament of 1560. Home had previously been in the pro-French faction in Scotland, and he entertained Mary of Guise at Hume Castle in 1557. He was never destined to become a committed supporter of the protestant cause, yet like many of the Scottish elite he dallied with Reformation politics during the late 1550s and 1560s. He sometimes appeared to play each side against the other in 'politique' fashion. After the return of Mary, queen of Scots, in 1561, he continued to keep Hume Castle garrisoned for her, yet appeared to lean towards the pro-English protestant lords. And despite entertaining the queen at Hume in 1567 he became one of the rival 'king's men' that year, supporting the faction surrounding the fledgeling James VI. During 1567 he besieged the queen, tried to arrest her husband Bothwell, and joined forces against her at the defeat of Carberry. He signed the order to imprison Mary in Lochleven Castle, witnessed her abdication, and assisted at the subsequent coronation of James VI. Home subsequently fought with Regent Moray's forces against those of the queen until she went into exile after the battle of Langside on 13 May 1568, when he apparently fought on foot and sustained many injuries. Home undoubtedly achieved greater power and influence as a result of this politicking, but he was privately unhappy about the turn of events. 
In 1569 Home dramatically changed sides again to assist the supporters of the now exiled Queen Mary. Why he did this is unclear, but he must have felt remorse about his earlier opposition to the queen. Perhaps he had fallen out with the politically ascendant earl of Morton, whom he had stood beside at Carberry? He may also have reclaimed his Roman Catholicism, and with it an image of Mary as the victim of oppression and the rightful claimant to both the Scottish and the English thrones. The clearest manifestation of this change of heart came when Home gave shelter at Hume Castle to fugitives from the doomed English northern rising of 1569, including the countess of Northumberland, whom he treated 'honourablie' (T. Thomson, 154). There was a heavy price to pay for this hospitality as Queen Elizabeth then ordered the earl of Sussex to attack Hume Castle with all possible force. Home could do little to stop the English, either from taking the castle and ransacking it, or from garrisoning Hume for the next three years, gathering Lord Home's crops for their own profit without any local opposition. 
Home had made a major political blunder, for most of his kinsmen in the Merse had remained in the king's party. The politically ambitious Homes of Manderston and Cowdenknowes, in particular, were now openly hostile, and competed with the fifth lord for power in the locality. Other lairds, more subdued in their opposition, simply refused to join him. An erroneous English report of 1570 stated that 'my lord Hume and almost all the gentlemen in Tevydale Marsh and Lowdyan were knitt together in such frendship' (Clifford, 2.114). In truth Home had very few friends at this time, especially among his own kinsmen. Unable to return to the Merse, he became increasingly embroiled in the affairs of the Marians during the confused years of 1570-73. The centre of Scottish politics was split between king's men and Marians, with rival parliaments meeting and political leaders forfeiting each other. Home was taken prisoner in 1571 and warded in Tantallon Castle, only to be released in an exchange a few weeks later. During 1572 he demanded the return of the Hume and Fastcastle properties but without success, and in disillusion he then joined William Kirkcaldy of Grange, William Maitland of Lethington, and their supporters, in Edinburgh Castle. Home prepared himself for a lengthy siege as he took a large entourage with him, including his wife, his sister-in-law, his servitor Mr John Home, a dozen hagbutters (gunners), 'Marten the cooke' and his two boys, a tailor, a brewer, a shoemaker, and 'Esabell the wessher' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/25, fols. 68-9). The Edinburgh Castle Marians were then besieged for eleven days in May 1573 by Regent Morton's forces backed up by English reinforcements, until they reluctantly surrendered. 
Home was taken prisoner and transferred to Holyrood. Morton lost no time in executing the rebels, but now the Homes of Manderston and Cowdenknowes changed their tactics, and along with Home of North Berwick successfully pleaded with Morton for Lord Home's life. Home then had to find $10,000 Scots security to secure this clemency, together with a pardon for his children. As his finances were precarious, his kinsmen -- the lairds of Polwarth, North Berwick, Huttonhall, and Manderston -- obliged him as sureties when he borrowed the money from Andrew Ker of Faldonside. Home was nevertheless forfeited of his lands and titles and imprisoned back in Edinburgh Castle for the next two years. He became so ill that in June 1575 Morton released him from the castle to his lodging in Friar Wynd. Too weak to walk, Home was 'cariit thairto in ane bed' (T. Thomson, 348). He died there on 11 August 1575, probably having discovered the treachery of Manderston and Cowdenknowes. In his will he asked the lairds of Wedderburn, Ayton, and Polwarth to protect his widow, son, and daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 13637


Home, Alexander, first earl of Home (c.1566-1619), nobleman, was the eldest son of Alexander Home, fifth Lord Home (c.1525-1575), and his second wife, Lady Agnes Gray (died 1583x6), daughter of Patrick, fourth Lord Gray, and widow of Robert Logan of Restalrig and Fastcastle, who later married Sir Thomas Lyon of Baldukie. Because of his involvement in rebel action on behalf of the exiled Mary, queen of Scots, the fifth Lord Home and Alexander, as master of Home, took the unusual step of choosing curators for their estates on 16 February 1571, but to no avail as the lands and title were forfeited in October 1573. The younger Alexander Home was at St Leonard's College, St Andrews, in 1578-9, but did not take a degree. He was restored to his father's estates and title, as sixth Lord Home, by parliament on 25 July 1578 and was retoured heir to these lands on 18 August 1579. Probably as part of the restitution deal his ward and marriage had been granted on 6 August 1578 to William, Lord Ruthven, who acted with Home's tutor Andrew Home as curator for his estates until he was twenty-one. Andrew Ker of Faldonside had held the lease of most of the Home estates during the forfeiture and had resisted the temptation to asset-strip the properties because of his friendship with Home's father. Others who benefited from the fifth lord's downfall, including kinsmen and even the new sixth Lord Home's stepfather, were, however, less willing to return his property. Home took back the semi-ruinous Hume Castle by force and used the privy council to evict the others. 
In 1581, although only fifteen, Home attended his first of many sittings of parliament and assumed his father's roles as warden of the Scottish east march, sheriff of Berwickshire, and bailiff of Lauderdale. In the following year the privy council ordered him to hold his first judiciary court. Home had shown early responsibility by arbitrating a feud between some of the Homes and the Niddries of Wauchope in 1580, yet he became embroiled in the infamous 1582-3 Ruthven raid that kidnapped the young King James VI from the earl of Lennox's faction, probably owing to his being a ward of Lord Ruthven, now earl of Gowrie. Gowrie imposed his feudal rights to arrange the marriage of his ward. On 31 May 1582 Gowrie proffered either Lilias or Dorothy, his daughters. Home's aunt Mary Gray had refused Gowrie's hand in the 1560s and Home now rejected his daughters. On 9 January 1586 he married Christian (died 1604), daughter of William Douglas of Lochleven (earl of Morton from 1588) and widow of Lawrence, master of Oliphant. Her tocher (dowry) was a mere thirty chalders of victual from the Oliphant estates and though Christian had children by her first marriage, she had none during her second union. This may have been linked to irreconcilable social and religious differences as Home would have children from his second marriage. According to court gossip in October 1595 there was 'appearance of a seperacon between my Lord Home and my Lady who hathe taken the platte and beste stuffe at Dunglass and caryed with her to fife to her lyving there' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/57/37). 
In 1584 Home was warded in Tantallon Castle by order of the earl of Arran, chancellor of Scotland, for his part in various property disputes and feuds. Resentment at this led to Home's involvement with the return of the banished protestant lords in 1585, who subsequently toppled Arran's regime. By 1587 Home was in trouble again as he challenged to combat Lord Fleming, brother-in-law of Home's territorial rival Maitland of Thirlestane. However, the most damaging alliance for Home was his turbulent on-off friendship with the maverick earl of Bothwell. From 1583 to 1593 both their petty feuding and Home's reconciliations with the eventually outlawed earl alarmed the government. Home was warded several times and even ordered to remain within his Scottish east march during 1589-90, when the king sailed to Denmark to collect his bride, Princess Anne. He foolishly joined Bothwell's rebel band in 1591, yet by July the lure of Bothwell's escheat and the advice of kinsmen made it politically expedient for Home to make his peace with the king. James also insisted that he sign a bond of friendship with Maitland to prevent further trouble in the borders. The Homes of Huttonhall, Broxmouth, North Berwick, and Wedderburn did not want Home to suffer the same fate as his father and probably instigated Home's self-imposed exile during 1591-2 which kept him far from Bothwell's influence and Maitland's meddling. James welcomed Home upon his return and bestowed lands and honours on him for forsaking Bothwell's allegiance. These included the lands of Coldingham Priory and the offices of privy councillor, grand master stabler, gentleman of the bedchamber, and captain of the king's guard. He was, in addition, a lord of the articles at the parliaments of 1593, 1594, and 1612. Home signed James VI's declaration against Bothwell in 1593 and was a commissioner to hound Bothwell out of his bounds in 1594. He had an inconclusive sortie with the disgraced earl near Edinburgh in April 1594, but 1595 saw both Bothwell's departure into exile and the death of Maitland of Thirlestane. These events gave Home great power in the borders and at court, but his triumphs would be marred by his adherence to Roman Catholicism. 
Until 1588 Home's religious affiliation had not given cause for concern. Church authorities were beginning to suspect Home, though, for not repairing churches and for keeping well-known Jesuit sympathizers such as Andrew Clark and Thomas Tyrie in his household, and tried to have him cast out of royal circles. James VI, however, refused to be dictated to by the kirk and Home avoided the wrath of the presbytery of Dunbar by going abroad during 1591-2. The presbytery of Edinburgh ordered him to appear before them in January 1593 when he 'professed himself a Catholik Roman, but desired conference' (Calderwood, 5.221). That October he was provocatively excommunicated by the synod of Fife against the express wishes of the king. He appeared before the general assembly on 17 May 1594 and absolved himself from excommunication by promising to adhere to protestantism. When the riding of parliament took place that month it was very obvious to the crowd that the king had placed Home at his left hand, a position of great honour. Evidence of royal favour was apparent at the baptismal celebrations for Prince Henry in August 1594, when Home carried a diamond crown in the procession and sat near Queen Anne at the banquet, and where his Turkish-attired team won the tournament. 
Even so, the sceptical presbytery of Edinburgh alerted the presbytery of Duns to watch Home. They cited his shortcomings and excommunicated him in 1598 for killing William Lauder, who had murdered an ally of Home's in front of his stepsister, Lady Marischal. James VI could not persuade the kirk to change its mind so Home left the country for another year-long exile, taking both his protestant kinsman Alexander Home of Huttonhall and Thomas Tyrie with him. Lady Home stayed at home and there is no indication that she was ever Catholic. Home was never far from church scrutiny as he modified payments to the church from the third of benefices of Coldingham Priory and Jedburgh Abbey, of which he had become commendator in 1597. In 1602 the general assembly deliberately planted a minister in his household, but this was to no avail for Tyrie was still in his household in 1604. In 1606 the kirk ordered Home to remain in Edinburgh as 'a suspected Papist' (Calderwood, 6.248, 608). He continued to provoke the authority of the kirk by non-payment of taxes in 1607, though he shrewdly took the 1608 oath of allegiance to keep all his offices. 
Home's lifelong service to the crown proved to be his ultimate defence against the kirk. He was James VI's ambassador to Henri IV of France between April 1599 and May 1600, and for three months in the autumn of 1602. He had been to France on four occasions between 1591 and 1602, which prompted the derogatory comment that he was 'sore grieved with the French pokis and being every year occasioned to go beyond sea for his health' ('CSP Scot.', '1597-1603', p. 1017). He was praised for his diplomatic skills by Henri IV and received an audience with Queen Elizabeth I while travelling back to Scotland in 1602. She thanked him for his excellent border service as an exemplary warden of the generally peaceful Scottish east march who never failed to give good justice to his opposite English wardens. Home had salvaged Anglo-Scottish friendship after a disastrous day of truce in 1597 when, during a fracas, he gathered his kinsmen around the English commissioners to protect them, escorted them into Scotland for hospitality, and persuaded the worst Scottish middle march recalcitrants to hand themselves over to the English commissioners after this event. 
After the union of the crowns Home was a natural candidate to be lieutenant and justiciar over all three Scottish marches. He was appointed on 7 July 1603 and set about his wide-ranging commission from August 1603, after he returned from accompanying James VI and I to London. He had no qualms about torturing and executing persistent thieves, which made him few friends outside his east march domain. The Maxwells and Armstrongs, for instance, attacked some of Home's property and tenants in retribution for his actions. Although his Catholicism lost him this office in 1607 he returned in 1618 to lead the Scottish commissioners in a new commission for the pacification of the so-called middle shires and remained active in border affairs until his death. Much of the credit for the eventual pacification of the marches belongs to Home and his deputies. 
In 1603 James VI and I spent the first night of his journey to England at Home's house of Dunglass. Home was rewarded in 1605 with the new British title of earl of Home -- for reasons unknown he had turned down the Scottish earldom of March in 1600. As a mark of favour his ecclesiastical properties at Jedburgh and Canonbie were amalgamated into a temporal lordship in 1606, with Coldingham and various kirklands being officially added to the lordship in 1610. He was possibly made an English privy councillor at Theobalds in May 1603. Home remained an active member of the Scottish privy council, yet his overall political powers were in slow decline after 1603. He acknowledged that he had become a client of his kinsman the supremely ascendant earl of Dunbar and after Dunbar's death in 1611 sought the patronage of the earl of Salisbury. Salisbury's death in 1612 left him further removed from British court politics since he had no particular ties to the king's subsequent favourites, Somerset and Buckingham. The king still honoured Home during his return visit to Scotland in 1617 by spending his first night in Scotland at Dunglass, where Home's kinsman poet Alexander Home of Logie delivered an impressive welcome speech in Latin, after which Home lavishly entertained the king and his company. 
As Home had no heirs at his first wife's death in 1604, he provided a tailzie of his titles to his closest kin, the Homes of Cowdenknowes. However, on 11 July 1605 he married Mary Sutton (1586-1645), daughter of the ninth Lord Dudley. They had a happy marriage that produced two sons and two daughters. Home died in London on 5 April 1619, where he had gone to accompany his wife at the forthcoming funeral of Queen Anne. His body was brought back to Scotland and was buried in May at his family chapel in Dunglass collegiate church. He was succeeded by his eldest son, James, seventh Lord Home and second earl of Home. His widow remained in Edinburgh, building a magnificent house in the Canongate now known as Moray House. 


@@@@@


doc= 13638


Home, Daniel Dunglas (1833-1886), medium, was born at Currie, near Edinburgh, on 20 March 1833, the third son of William Home ('c'.1810-1882), a labourer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' McNeil ('c'.1810-1850), and was raised as a Presbyterian. He seems to have added his middle name later because of his belief that his father was the illegitimate son of the tenth earl of Home. Hostile biographers have alleged that he invented this story; but there is documentary evidence that the earl paid for William Home's apprenticeship and upkeep. Daniel Home was adopted in infancy by his mother's sister, Mrs Mary Cook, and with this lady and her husband emigrated about 1842 to the United States, settling in Greeneville, now part of Norwich, Connecticut. Here he attended school, receiving a sound basic education. His own family shortly settled in nearby Waterford, Connecticut. 
Home was a studious, dreamy, and sensitive boy, often ill. A vision in 1850 of the unexpected death of his mother awoke in him religious interests that led to friction with his aunt. That lady, a strict Presbyterian, was further shocked early the following year when poltergeist phenomena, in the form of inexplicable raps and object movements, broke out around him. This was the period of the Fox sisters and the rapid spread of 'spirit-rapping' in the eastern United States. Daniel's rappings soon began to take the form of ostensible communications from the dead, and the terrified Mrs Cook threw out her nephew, still not quite eighteen, to fend for himself. The strange phenomena went with him. 
In this way Home was precipitated into a mode of life that he pursued for many years. He did not become a professional medium, but almost a professional guest, moving from one hospitable family to another, mostly of spiritualists. At first they were solid middle-class folk, but after his return to Europe he moved increasingly among the cosmopolitan upper classes. Usually there was a tacit understanding that he would, if 'in power', hold seances for his hosts and their friends. He would never sit for money, though he did receive indirect benefits over and above hospitality -- for instance travelling expenses and gifts, especially of jewellery (which he retained rather than sold). 
During Home's residence in the United States most of his characteristic phenomena were already in evidence. The company generally sat with their hands on a table, often a large and heavy one. Raps would come from it, spelling out messages from the 'spirits', who sometimes produced information which the medium could hardly have known. Commonly the table would move about, rock, and rise clear of the floor, sometimes to a considerable height. Or it might tilt steeply while objects on it remained as if glued in position. Surrounding items of furniture might be moved, or small objects carried through the air. These phenomena would often occur in good light, and sitters were at liberty to search beneath levitated tables. Dimmer, though usually passable, light was required for the playing of musical instruments by unseen hands, and for the visible or tangible manifestation of the hands themselves. Near, though not total, darkness was needed for the relatively frequent phenomenon of 'spirit lights' and the much rarer one of levitation of the medium's body. Later developments included the unscathed handling of red-hot coals, the supposed elongation of his body, once by as much as 11 inches, and the materialization of dim or misty phantom figures. During all these happenings (which were by no means confined to seance situations) Home might be awake, or sleepy, or ostensibly in a trance state. When in trance he might clairvoyantly 'see' spirits and deliver messages from them (some of which profoundly impressed the recipients) or be 'taken over' and speak as if controlled by them. 
Meanwhile friends at Newburgh, New York, had been urging him to resume his education. Early in 1853 he went as a boarder to the Newburgh Theological Institute, and began the private study of French and German. That autumn he commenced medical studies in New York, but after a few months his health broke down. A second attempt the following autumn had the same result. In January 1855 pulmonary consumption was diagnosed and a voyage to Europe recommended. On 31 March he sailed for England, probably subsidized and furnished with introductions by prosperous American spiritualists. 
In the spring and summer Home stayed for extended periods with two spiritualist sympathizers, Mr William Cox of Cox's Hotel, Jermyn Street, London, and Mr J. S. Rymer, a solicitor of Ealing. Invitations to his sittings were eagerly sought. Among notables who attended and were impressed were Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, Robert Owen, Lord Brougham, Sir David Brewster (who later denied that he had seen anything remarkable), J. J. Garth Wilkinson (a well-known Swedenborgian), T. Adolphus Trollope and his mother, and Elizabeth Barrett Browning. However Elizabeth's husband, Robert, conceived a violent loathing of Home and later lampooned him viciously in 'Mr Sludge the Medium' (1864). 
In autumn 1855 Home travelled to Florence at the invitation of the Trollopes. There 'the manifestations were very strong', and hostesses were eager to secure him. But he became the subject of obscurely unfavourable gossip, and on 10 February 1856 the spirits informed him that his power would depart for a year. Shortly afterwards he visited Naples and Rome with friends, and while at Rome was received into the Catholic church. In June 1856 he went to Paris and remained there through the winter, despite serious lung ailments. On 10 February 1857 his powers duly returned. The emperor, Louis Napoleon, immediately summoned him, and for much of the next year he was frequently at court, where his virtuoso displays caused amazement and his supposed influence over the emperor and empress dark rumours. Towards the end of March he returned briefly to America to fetch his sister, Christine, whose education the empress had offered to arrange; in August and September he visited Baden Baden, and there gave three sittings to Friedrich Wilhelm, the crown prince of Prussia (later emperor of Germany). In February 1858 he was taken to Holland for sittings with a rationalist group, De Dageraad, and also gave sittings to the queen of Holland. On his return to Paris he received medical advice to seek a warmer climate, and in March went to Rome. There he met, and after a swift courtship became engaged to, Alexandrina (Sacha) de Kroll, a diminutive, vivacious, and charming Russian girl of seventeen, the daughter of Count de Kroll, and a goddaughter of the tsar. They were married at St Petersburg on 1 August 1858. 
For almost a year they remained in Russia, where Home gave sittings to many in high society, including the tsar. On 8 May 1859 the Homes had a son, Gregoire (Gricha). In the autumn they made their way to England, staying there for the best part of the next two years. Home was now famous, and much in demand by fashionable hostesses. Persons of greater intellectual consequence also showed some interest, especially following publication of Robert Bell's article 'Stranger than fiction' in the 'Cornhill Magazine' for August 1860. Sacha Home, by now a total convert to spiritualism, frequently attended her husband's sittings, but she was consumptive, and her health was failing. Visits to health resorts in England and abroad did not halt the disease, and she died in France on 3 July 1862. 
On returning to London, Home found himself in financial difficulties. Sacha's modest estate had been seized by relatives. To raise funds he produced, with the help of two recent converts, W. M. Wilkinson, a solicitor, and Robert Chambers, his autobiographical 'Incidents in my Life' (1863). He also embarked on a disastrous attempt to train as a sculptor in Rome. He arrived there in November 1863, but early in January was summarily expelled as a practitioner of the black arts. In England again, he decided to earn his living by giving public readings, and in the summer of 1864 successfully toured America. On his return in May 1865 he set out for Russia, where his phenomena were very powerful and he became the guest of the tsar and of Count Aleksey Tolstoy. Back in England later in the year his health deteriorated, and he spent several periods at the Malvern hydropathic establishment of another convert, Dr James Manby Gully. In the summer of 1866 Gully joined Mr and Mrs S. C. Hall and other well-wishers in establishing a spiritualist centre, the Spiritual Athenaeum, at 22 Sloane Street, London, of which Home became resident secretary without any obligation to hold sittings. 
This comfortable arrangement was upset after a few months by the intrusion into Home's life of a dominating and emotionally disturbed elderly widow, Mrs Jane Lyon, who pressed upon him $60,000 by deeds of gift on condition that he added her surname to his own. Home foolishly agreed. In the summer of 1867 Mrs Lyon changed her mind, accused Home of swindling her, and instituted a chancery suit. At the hearing in April 1868 she was detected in numerous lies and contradictions, but the vice-chancellor, although refusing to award her costs, found against Home on the curious but legally correct grounds that the onus was on the defendant to prove that he had not exercised undue influence. 
Home was befriended during this difficult period by Lord Adare (later fourth earl of Dunraven) and the master of Lindsay. He spent much time in the company of Adare, whose accounts (and his father's) of seventy-eight sittings from November 1867 to July 1869 ('Experiences in Spiritualism with D. D. Home') constitute the most extensive, and the most controversial, record of the phenomena Home produced both within and between seances. 
The Lyon lawsuit left Home heavily in debt, and in 1869 and 1870 he toured England and Scotland giving highly successful public readings. On the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War in July 1870 he travelled to France as war correspondent for the 'San Francisco Chronicle'. In February 1871 he accepted an invitation to recuperate in Russia. There he was investigated by a number of savants, including A. Butlerov, professor of chemistry at St Petersburg. He also met Butlerov's sister-in-law, Miss Julie De Gloumeline, a keen spiritualist, and almost immediately became engaged to her. 
Before the marriage, however, Home returned to England to fulfil a promise to William Crookes, the eminent chemist. Between April and July 1871 Crookes conducted the only attempts ever made to record Home's phenomena on self-registering instruments. In the most remarkable of these experiments Home, watched and held in sufficient light, was several times able to depress, without contact, a pivoted board and a parchment drum. 
Home (now received into the Greek Orthodox church) and Miss De Gloumeline were married in Paris on 16 October 1871. She was a person of considerable worldly competence and took total charge of their affairs. She came from a well-to-do and well-connected family, and Home had by this time obtained the residuum of his first wife's estate. They travelled a good deal around Europe, visiting friends and health resorts. Their only child, a daughter Marie, born in April 1872, died a few months later. Though Home's health problems, pulmonary and arthritic, grew steadily worse, he still gave occasional sittings. He kept up a large correspondence, and published two more books, a second series of 'Incidents in my Life' (1872) and 'Lights and Shadows of Spiritualism' (1877), which shocked spiritualists by its attacks on mediumistic fraud. He died at Auteuil in France on 21 June 1886, survived by his second wife, and was buried at St Germain-en-Laye. 
Home was about 5 feet 10 inches in height, slim, blue-eyed and red-haired, often tired or ill, but always fastidious in dress. There are many photographs of him. He had no immediately obvious faults of character, unless one counts a somewhat marked vanity, an occasional prickliness, a delight in wearing jewellery, and a willingness to be cossetted by the ladies; he was often accused of effeminacy. He was a pleasant guest, musically talented, a fair linguist, kind, humorous, sociable, and happy to participate in parlour games and amateur dramatics. Scandalous rumours about him sometimes circulated, but are difficult to trace to any satisfactory source. 
Of the strange happenings that surrounded Home many contemporary reports remain which, though varying in value, raise considerable problems. If the phenomena were as described, the framework of conventional science cannot accommodate them. But explaining them away presents its own difficulties. That (as sometimes suggested) Home hypnotized his sitters could be maintained only by someone who knew nothing of hypnosis. That he was a clever conjuror there is little evidence. The few allegations that he was detected in fraud were second- or third-hand, or were related long after the event, or both, and are of unclear significance. The conjuring hypothesis is almost pure speculation and generally involves passing over many of Home's performances, and supposing that others were radically different from the reports of them. He remains a puzzle. 


@@@@@


doc= 13639


Home, Sir Everard, first baronet (1756-1832), surgeon, was born at Hull, Yorkshire, on 6 May 1756, the son of Robert Home (1713-1786), a former army surgeon, of Greenlaw Castle, Berwickshire, and his wife, Mary (died 1795), daughter of Colonel Alexander Hutchinson. Robert Home, the painter, was his brother. Educated at Westminster School where he was a king's scholar, Home gained a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1773, but chose instead to become a surgical pupil of his brother-in-law John Hunter (1728-1793), surgeon at St George's Hospital, London. Hunter had married Home's sister Anne ['see 'Hunter, Anne] in 1771 after a seven-year courtship during which Home had come to know him well. Home qualified through the Company of Surgeons in 1778 and was appointed assistant surgeon in the new naval hospital at Plymouth. In 1779 he went to Jamaica as staff surgeon with the army, but on returning to England on half pay in 1784 he rejoined Hunter at St George's as assistant in teaching, research, and clinical practice, living in Hunter's house in Green Street, Leicester Square. He was elected FRS on 15 February 1787 and in the same year he became assistant surgeon at St George's Hospital. For his first published medical work, 'A Dissertation on the Properties of Pus' (1788), he received the gold medal of the Lyceum Medicum Londinensis, a medical society founded by Hunter and George Fordyce. In 1790-91 Home read lectures for Hunter and in the following year he succeeded Hunter as lecturer in anatomy. Also in 1792 he married Jane Thompson, daughter of the Revd Dr Tunstall, and widow of Stephen Thompson. They lived in Leicester Square near Hunter's house and there were two sons and four daughters. 
Home joined the army in Flanders in the spring of 1793, but returned just before Hunter's sudden death on 16 October 1793. He then became surgeon at St George's Hospital and was also joint executor of Hunter's will with Matthew Baillie, Hunter's nephew. In 1793-4 they saw Hunter's important work, 'On the Blood, Inflammation and Gun-Shot Wounds', through the press and in 1794 Home approached Pitt's government to secure the purchase for the nation of Hunter's large collection of anatomical and pathological specimens. After protracted negotiations the collection was purchased for $15,000 in 1799 and presented to the College of Surgeons. In 1806 the collection was moved from Hunter's gallery in Castle Street to form the Hunterian Museum at the new site of the college in Lincoln's Inn Fields. Home was chief curator and William Clift, who had worked with Hunter since 1792, was retained as resident conservator. Clift also had charge of Hunter's numerous folios, drawings, and accounts of anatomical and pathological investigations, which were essential for a clear understanding of the collection. 
In the years following Hunter's death Home built up a large surgical practice and published more than one hundred papers of varying quality, some very good, mainly in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society'. The society awarded him its Copley medal in 1807. He gave the Croonian lectures fifteen times between 1794 and 1826. As Hunter's brother-in-law and executor he had great influence at the Royal College of Surgeons where he was elected to the court of assistants in 1801, an examiner in 1809, master in 1813 and 1821, and its first president in 1822. Having, with Matthew Baillie, endowed the Hunterian oration, he was the first Hunterian orator on 14 February 1814 and again in 1822. He became keeper and a trustee of the Hunterian Museum in 1817 and was professor of anatomy and surgery at the college from 1804 to 1813 and again in 1821. His 'Lectures on Comparative Anatomy' were published in 1814 with a volume of plates from drawings by Clift. A further volume of lectures followed in 1823 accompanied by microscopical and anatomical drawings by Bauer and Clift. Two more volumes appeared in 1828. This work, although lacking in structure, is an important record of Hunter's investigations, especially the last two volumes. 
Home drew heavily on Hunter's work in the papers and books which he published after Hunter's death. Before the collection was presented to the Company of Surgeons in 1799 Home arranged for Clift to convey to his own house Hunter's folio volumes and fasciculi of manuscripts containing descriptions of the preparations and investigations connected with them. He promised to catalogue the collection, refusing help, but, despite repeated requests, only a synopsis appeared in 1818. B. C. Brodie says that Home was busily using Hunter's papers in preparing his own contributions for the Royal Society. Home himself later stated that he had published all of value in Hunter's papers and that his one hundred articles in 'Philosophical Transactions' formed a 'catalogue raisonee' of the Hunterian Museum. Home destroyed most of Hunter's papers in 1823. 
A select committee was set up by parliament after Home's death to enquire into the details of this act of vandalism. Clift told this committee in 1834 that Home had used Hunter's papers extensively and had claimed that Hunter, when he was dying, had ordered him to destroy his papers. Yet Home, who was not present at Hunter's death, had kept the papers for thirty years. Clift also declared that he had often transcribed parts of Hunter's original work and drawings into papers which appeared under Home's name. Home produced a few of Hunter's papers which he had not destroyed and Clift had copied about half of the descriptions of preparations in the collection, consequently enough of Hunter's work survives to suggest that Home had often published Hunter's observations as his own. Although the full extent of Home's plagiarism cannot be determined, there is little doubt that it was considerable and this seriously damaged his reputation. 
Home's friend Astley Cooper said that he had a good deal of genius and great mental quickness. He was a competent surgeon; his examinations at the college were good and he was an excellent teacher, but his destruction of Hunter's papers was unwise as it led to the unfounded belief that he did nothing himself. Home's best work is in his surgical books, especially his 'Practical Observations on the Treatment of Ulcers on the Legs' (1797), based on his military experience. In character he was vain, overbearing, and violent in language. He wanted to be recognized as the equal of Hunter and tried without success to fill his place. Yet, although disappointed, he received many honours never accorded to Hunter. In 1808 Home was appointed sergeant-surgeon to George III. He also established a personal friendship with the prince regent who on 2 January 1813 created him baronet. In 1821 Home became surgeon to the Royal Chelsea Hospital and in 1827 he resigned the surgeoncy at St George's Hospital, becoming consulting surgeon. He died in his apartments at Chelsea Hospital on 31 August 1832 and was buried in the hospital burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 13640


Home, Francis (1719-1813), physician, was born in Edinburgh on 9 November 1719, the second son of James Home, an advocate of Eccles, Berwickshire, and Jean Kinloch. Home's early schooling was in Duns with the respected classical scholar and teacher Mr Cruickshanks, who instilled in his pupil the love of classical literature and skill in Latin that remained with him throughout his life. After this early schooling he was apprenticed to Mr Rattray, an eminent Edinburgh surgeon. Next came studies at the new medical faculty of the University of Edinburgh, where he was an early member of the influential Royal Medical Society. However, before graduating he became a surgeon with the 6th Inniskilling regiment of dragoons and served with them in Flanders during the War of the Austrian Succession. During the campaign Home drew up regimental orders for the prevention of fevers, which stated that the soldiers should not drink water unless it had been boiled. He used the winter campaign breaks to attend Leiden medical school (popular with Scots wishing to study medicine) and still flourishing in this period twelve years after Herman Boerhaave's death. 
After the war Home settled in Edinburgh, where he finally graduated MD from the university in 1750. He put his army experience to good use by incorporating medical data on the remittent fevers (malaria) collected while tending troops at Worms into his inaugural dissertation, 'De febre remittente'. The next twenty years were very productive and Home's interests ranged widely. In 1751 he published an essay on the chemical properties of 'Dunse Spa' (Duns), proposing that the waters had an anthelminthic effect. The year 1751 also saw Home becoming a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh and starting to build up his medical practice. In 1758 an Edinburgh measles epidemic prompted him to experiment with the use of a measles vaccine. In 'Medical Facts and Experiments' (1759) he stated 'I should do no small service to mankind if I could render this disease more mild and safe in the same way as the Turks have taught us to mitigate the small-pox'. Home took blood from the cutaneous veins found among the measle spots of his most feverish patients and tried it out on both children with measles and those without. He concluded that the inoculated patients had milder cases of measles. He also published important observations on diphtheria in the first clinical description of croup, 'An Inquiry into the Nature, Cause and Cure of the Croup' (1765). This publication detailed the development of laryngeal and tracheal involvement in the disease. Home described the 'white, soft, thick prenatural coat or membrane' lining the upper respiratory tract and vividly observed that it lay loose, resembling the 'blankets of a bed that has been lain in' (pp. 16-19). He suggested that tracheotomy should be used in desperate cases. 
In 1756 Home turned his attention to chemistry and in 'Experiments on Bleaching' recommended that bleachers should use dilute sulphuric acid instead of sour milk. This publication greatly increased the profitability of bleaching and the Honourable Board of Trustees for the Improvement of Manufactures in North Britain paid him $100 and presented him with a gold medal. In 1757 it was agriculture that benefited from his research. In his book 'The Principles of Agriculture and Vegetation' he applied chemistry to farming, describing the growth of plants potted in soils treated with compounds like magnesium sulphate and potassium nitrate. He also showed that plants gain nutrition from air. 
Home was not neglecting medicine and in 1758 he published the first edition of his scientific history of disease, 'Principia medicinae', which included a description of his discovery that yeast ferments diabetic urine. 'Principia medicinae' increased his reputation -- especially in Europe and America, where the publication was widely used as a textbook. It went through several editions and was still consulted well into the nineteenth century. In 1768 Home obtained the first professorship of materia medica in the University of Edinburgh. The subject had previously been studied as a subset of botany. To meet the student need for a syllabus of drugs Home published in 1770 'Methodus materia medicae' based on his lecture notes. During this period Edinburgh University had an official relationship with the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh (established in 1756) and Home was one of the professors responsible for patient care and bedside teaching in its teaching ward. Clinical observation was always one of his interests and he promoted the methodology for history taking and physical examination formulated by the medical faculty. He stated that 'many symptoms cannot be described by the patient himself, these we must discover by our senses' ('Clinical lectures', 8). The publication of a course of clinical lectures in 1780, 'Clinical Experiments Histories and Dissections', rounded off his publishing career. 
Home was one of his majesty's physicians in Scotland and he followed William Cullen as president of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh from 1775 to 1777. During his presidency he oversaw the problematic construction of the college's George Street Hall, designed by James Craig. In 1798 James Home succeeded his father, becoming the second professor of materia medica. Francis himself lived for another fourteen years. Contemporary statements and the evidence of his manuscript cashbook suggest that he was mentally active until within a short period of his death on 15 February 1813 in his ninety-fourth year. He was buried at Earlston, Berwickshire. 
Francis Home was in many ways the quintessential establishment Scottish Enlightenment physician, whose long life spanned the period when Edinburgh medicine was at its most influential. 


@@@@@


doc= 13641


Hume, George, fourth Lord Hume (d. 1549), nobleman, was the brother of Alexander Hume, third Lord Hume (d. 1516), and son of Alexander Hume, second Lord Hume (d. 1506) ['see under 'Hume family], and his second wife, Nichola Ker of Samuelston. George was restored to his family titles and estates in August 1522, which was not ratified by parliament until 1526. About 1518 he married Mariota Haliburton of Dirleton, coheir of Patrick Haliburton, Lord Haliburton, which brought a third of the lucrative Dirleton estates in Haddingtonshire into Hume ownership. They had three sons: Alexander Home, fifth Lord Home, Andrew, commendator of Jedburgh Abbey, and Matthew Hume of Cloichtow. Their daughter Margaret married Alexander Erskine of Gogar and was mother of Thomas Erskine, first earl of Kellie. Hume also had an illegitimate son, George. 
The power vacuum left by the downfall of the third Lord Hume, executed for treason in 1516, caused unrest in the Scottish east march. Anthoine de Labastie, acting warden of the march, was murdered by the Humes in 1517. An accomplice to this deadly act (Labastie had been exulting in the third lord's downfall), George was denounced a traitor, yet after being offered amnesty in March 1518 he surrendered himself in order to save his life and protect his wife's heritage. He had no other lands at this time, as his brother's forfeiture was still in force. Hume Castle in Berwickshire, for example, was in the custody of Sir James Hamilton of Finnart. He did not regain his family's estates at Hume and Dunglass, Haddingtonshire, until 1522 and had to claim back other lands at Greenlaw, Leitholm, and Birgham in 1524. 
In July 1520 Hume came to Edinburgh with others in order to reclaim the honour of his family. One account states that they proceeded to the Tolbooth and removed the heads of the third lord and his brother William. Later they held a proper funeral for them at the Blackfriars with 'greit offeringis and banquets', before returning home (Lesley, 115-16). Another account states that it was the eighteenth earl of Angus who ordered the heads to be removed and delivered to George. Either way this action symbolized the Humes' recovery, underlined when on 12 August 1522 George Hume was restored to his brother's peerage title. During that summer he was praised by Henry VIII for opposing the regent, the fourth duke of Albany, in the name of the young James V. When Albany left Scotland in 1524 the Humes soon fell out with Angus, who succeeded him, resenting the new regent's predominance in the borders. In May 1526 Hume's failure to support Angus led to his being charged with treason, and though a temporary reconciliation followed, with Hume signing a bond of manrent with Angus on 20 June, he later backed the king against the regent. This brought instability to the borders, but strengthened Hume's position during the period 1526-8. He was thanked for preserving the king from Scott of Buccleuch's kidnap attempt in 1526, during which Andrew Ker of Cessford was slain, and he gained from the downfall of Angus in 1528, replacing the earl as warden of the east march. 
Hume held that office during the periods 1528-32, 1535-8, 1542-3, and 1546-7, and his deputies were normally his kinsmen. He was displaced only when a higher ranking lieutenant or warden-general was appointed by the crown -- magnates such as the earls of Angus, Lennox, or Moray. In 1529, moreover, he was appointed royal lieutenant within the bounds of the Merse, Lauderdale, Teviotdale, Haddingtonshire, and Lammermuir to preserve peace and resist rebels. He was occasionally called to the court to account for border affairs and like other wardens he was warded by the king in 1530 as part of James's programme of strengthening his own authority on the marches. None the less, he was later said to have done good service during the brief Anglo-Scottish war of 1532-3. 
The strategic position of Hume Castle in the east marches made it an obvious target for invading English armies. The Scots army lay at Hume Castle, with all the gentlemen of the Merse, just before the battle of Solway Moss in 1542. The following year Hume was described by Sir William Parr as 'a man of a precise, obstinate and froward nature... very unmeet for his office [wardenship]' ('LP Henry VIII', 18/1, no. 592), a hostile view reflecting the fact that he was now a supporter of the pro-French party in Scotland, led by Cardinal Beaton. This guaranteed him French money to defend Hume Castle, but it also led to the deliberate targeting of his property by English raiders. Hume retaliated by attacking settlements in the English east march. However, in May 1544 he could not stop the retreating English army, led by the earl of Hertford, from passing through the strategic pass of Pease near Dunglass. 
The Humes were staunch supporters of the Franco-Scottish alliance throughout the 1540s, fighting against the English at Ancrum Moor in 1545, but they paid a heavy price for their loyalty as Lord Hume had 'no goods left undestroyed' by the end of 1545 ('LP Henry VIII', 20/2, no. 1009). The compensation that he received from both the Scottish privy council and France could never equal all that he and his kinsmen lost at this time. His family's situation appeared gravest by the autumn of 1547, when French help was expected but did not come. Hume broke his collar bone during a skirmish at Fawside, two days before the battle of Pinkie. The subsequent defeat of the Scots, on 10 September 1547, and the capture of the master of Hume probably led to Lady Hume giving some assurance to Protector Somerset (formerly Hertford) without her husband's knowledge. In a letter to Somerset she wrote with appropriate discretion: 'I dare not let my lord my husband see your last writing about the rendering of Home and the pledges' ('CSP Scot.', '1547-63', 36). This may be why Hume Castle capitulated with suspicious ease in 1547, even though Hume had been promised $1845 to pay for horsemen, gunners, and victuals there. When French forces finally arrived in 1548 they reconquered southern Scotland, including Hume Castle. When Lord Home died in 1549 he had the satisfaction of knowing that Hume was safe and that his son and heir was back in Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 13642


Home, George, earl of Dunbar (d. 1611), courtier and administrator, was the fourth son of Alexander Home of Manderston (died 1593) and Janet Home (died 1593), daughter of George Home of Spott. The date of his birth is uncertain. There were many divisions among the Homes as a family, including religious divisions. The Manderston sept was firmly protestant. The head of the family, Alexander, sixth Lord Home, was a Catholic, and in 1590 George Home married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of the Catholic Sir George Gordon of Gicht. His ties to both religious parties stood Home in good stead in the occasionally overheated religious atmosphere of Jacobean Scotland. 
At some point in the early 1580s Home made his way to court. In March 1585 he was cleared of a charge, brought by a kinsman, of being in touch with the Ruthven raiders, a group of nobles and lairds who had seized the young James VI and taken control of government in 1582-3; shortly thereafter he became a gentleman of the bedchamber. In 1589 Home accompanied King James on his voyage to Denmark to claim his bride. While there Home engineered his first major promotion, to the office of master of the wardrobe. James was annoyed at the incumbent, Sir William Keith, because, James said, Keith dressed better than he did. More importantly, the king was annoyed at the head of the family, George Keith, fourth Earl Marischal, his ambassador to the Danish court, who resented having to yield precedence there to the lord chancellor, John Maitland of Thirlestane, whom Marischal regarded as an upstart. In making his profit from circumstances for which he was not responsible, Home showed a sure touch and an ability to read the king's moods which he never lost. He became a favourite with James, but not of the usual kind. He was not a pretty young man. He did not share the king's passion for hunting. But he was good company, discreet, cautious, and, above all, loyal. As George Nicolson, the English agent in Edinburgh, who knew him well, put it in January 1603, Home acted 'by the King's good direction, without which he is noted to deal in nothing' ('CSP Scot.', '1597-1603', 1055-6). 
In the faction-ridden Scottish court of the 1590s Home became the quintessential courtier. As early as August 1590 Chancellor Maitland thought it worth while to have Home's support for requests he made of the king. On 4 November 1590 Home was knighted; he and Alexander Lindsay, who became Lord Spynie in that same month, were described as James's 'special favourites', who received 'a promise of a great part' of the annual pension James received from England 'before it be arrived' ('CSP Scot.', '1589-93', 419, 473). Spynie was a rival. Both became privy councillors in June 1592, but by August they had quarrelled, and Spynie found himself accused of being friendly with Francis Stewart, first earl of Bothwell, the king's cousin but now the object of James's hatred and fear. Home was Bothwell's enemy, and had been ever since 1584, when Bothwell 'hewed Davy Hume [George's brother] all to pieces' ('CSP Scot.', '1584-5', 330), because Bothwell claimed the priory of Coldingham, currently in the possession of George's eldest brother, Alexander. Home solidified his position as the king's confidant. James frequently used him to carry messages to the English agents at court, one of whom described him in December 1591 as 'very wise and very honest' ('CSP Scot.', '1589-93', 595). Those in James's bad books, such as Bothwell's associate John Colville, found that the surest way to regain the king's goodwill was to enlist Home's support. In June 1594 Home in his capacity as master of the wardrobe received $4000 Scots to buy cloth, chairs, and stools, and repair tapestries, in anticipation of the baptism of James's son and heir, which took place in August. A month later an English agent reported that Bothwell, who in 1592 had publicly urged that Home be killed, planned to seize the king and hang Home, in imitation of the aristocracy's treatment of James III's alleged favourite, Thomas Cochrane, in 1482. Within six months Bothwell had left Scotland forever. During these years Home managed to avoid denunciation by the kirk on account of his friendship with the Catholic earl of Huntly -- he was alleged to have obtained the notorious blank commission for Huntly before the latter's murder of the earl of Moray in 1592 -- and indeed Home helped to persuade his kinsman Lord Home to submit to the kirk and follow the king's wishes. 
The appointment of the Octavians in 1596 to bring order out of the chaos of James's finances threatened not only the incomes of those like Home whom the contemporary historian David Calderwood described as 'cubicular courtiers' (Calderwood, 5.510), but also Home's ambition, which had surfaced as early as 1592, to become lord treasurer himself. It is possible, as Calderwood alleges, that Home had a hand in prodding some clergymen to take action against the Octavians, many of whom were regarded, accurately, as Catholics. The resulting anti-Catholic riot in December 1596 served Home well. James now viewed the Octavians, efficient though they were, as a political liability. Successive lords treasurer who replaced them were incompetent; so James finally turned to Home, whom Nicolson described in October 1600 as 'the only greatest courtier' ('CSP Scot.', '1597-1603', 720). On 1 October 1601 Home became lord treasurer. He retained the office until his death, although after 1603, when he followed the king to London and remained there, he exercised his authority through deputies. 
During his eighteen months of direct supervision of the treasury Home acted with vigour. The collection of arrears of taxation was speeded up; Home himself received a share of what was collected. He tightened up the administration of acts of caution. In the interest of law and order as well as the treasury he ordered all sheriffs and their subordinates to pursue all those at the horn (outlawed) since 1596 and to seize their moveables until they found caution to appear in court. Paradoxically, his own record as sheriff of Berwick was none too good; the privy council in December 1599 cited him for negligence in pursuit of those charged with crimes, especially if their names happened to be Home. 
These activities, and regular attendance at meetings of the privy council, kept Home busy, but never so busy that he neglected his principal occupation: constant attendance on the king. He had a reputation for ruthlessness in undercutting potential rivals; so much so that when in February 1601 the earl of Mar was preparing to go to London on special embassy, he had his cousin Thomas Erskine, one of the heroes of the Gowrie conspiracy, remain behind to be sure Home attempted nothing prejudicial to Mar's interests while he was gone. Only Home had the courage and tact to discuss with James the rumours of Queen Anne's possible involvement with Gowrie. When the royal couple's baby son died in June 1602 Home brought the body quietly at night to Holyrood Abbey for burial -- neither parent was there -- and then rode off to Dunfermline to comfort the king. He was not one of those officially involved in James's private correspondence with Robert Cecil in the last years of Elizabeth's reign, but he could foresee what would happen, and knew that it would pay him to have a good reputation among English officials. So he cultivated Nicolson, who in 1595 used him to urge James to write to Elizabeth about the situation in Ireland; he was helpful, wrote Nicolson, in keeping aid from going to the Irish rebels. Nicolson regularly praised him as 'a very good instrument for the peace and amity' ('CSP Scot.', '1595-7', 39-40), and as regularly pointed out his closeness to the king: he followed James's wishes absolutely, 'so dutiful and observing of the king is he' ('CSP Scot.', '1597-1603', 924). His power was steadily growing; in July 1602 Nicolson wrote that Home and Comptroller David Murray of Gospertie, his colleague in the financial administration, were the dominant figures in the government. 
When James succeeded to the English throne Home and Murray loaned him large sums to pay the expenses of his journey south. And they accompanied James, along with many others. Most of the officials in James's entourage eventually returned to Scotland; Home did not. His power depended on personal contact with the king, and he was determined not to relinquish it. James wanted him to stay; he appointed Home to the English privy council, made him keeper of the great wardrobe, put him in charge of Norham Castle, raised him to the English peerage as Baron Home of Berwick on 7 July 1604, and in the spring of 1608 made him a knight of the Garter. Home established an excellent working relationship with Sir Robert Cecil, and in effect acted as James's principal gatekeeper: access to the king could be most readily obtained through him. Perhaps in anticipation of the successful conclusion of the union he had so much at heart, James also made Home chancellor of the exchequer, one of two Scots named to an English governmental office. The appointments were widely resented, especially as Scots monopolized those positions, such as bedchamber posts, that involved personal access to the king. In 1606 Home, who on 3 July 1605 became earl of Dunbar in the Scottish peerage, stepped down from his English office. 
Dunbar took no part in the union negotiations of 1604. In the first two years after his removal to London he concentrated on another cause dear to James's heart: improved law and order in Scotland, especially on the borders. James could now afford a police force; Dunbar's ally, Comptroller Murray, was authorized to raise one. A separate border police was established in 1605, as was a joint Anglo-Scottish commission of justiciary. There were complaints on both sides of lack of co-operation; finally, in December 1606, James appointed Dunbar as chief of a revamped border commission with virtually full power to reorganize border administration and crack down on malefactors. Dunbar's crackdown was savage and efficient, so much so that his police chief, Sir William Cranston, was almost lynched in Dumfries. But by August 1609, following a mass hanging at Dumfries -- one of several over which Dunbar had presided in the previous three years -- Lord Chancellor Dunfermline could write to James comparing Dunbar's work to Hercules's cleansing of the Augean stables. His task was facilitated by the existence after 1608 of a refuge in the Ulster plantations for border reivers on the run from Cranston's police. By the time of Dunbar's death in 1611, writes one authority, 'there was no more Borderland in the old, wild, independent sense of the word' (Fraser, 327). 
That Dunbar rather than one of the Edinburgh-based members of the privy council was put in charge of the borders was not surprising. By 1606 he had prevailed over Dunfermline, the head of the administration in Edinburgh, in their rivalry for the position of James's principal agent for Scottish business in the wake of the failed plans for Anglo-Scottish union. Once again Dunbar profited from circumstances not of his own making: Dunfermline's mishandling of an act of defiance by a group of ministers, who insisted on holding an unauthorized general assembly in 1605 in spite of a royal prohibition. James was very angry, and sent Dunbar north to deal with the ringleaders. In January 1606 six of the ministers were tried for treason and convicted by a jury packed with Dunbar's kinsmen which, even so, had to be bullied into its verdict. Dunbar returned to court to report and, if possible, to undermine the king's confidence in Dunfermline. In May 1606 Dunbar returned to Scotland to conduct a hearing that might have led to the chancellor's dismissal. Dunfermline saved himself, but had lost the power struggle. Dunbar's victory was facilitated by the technique he developed for exercising his influence: he travelled. From 1606 on he went back and forth between James's court and Scotland, as often as was necessary. When in Scotland he employed a combination of abruptness, violence, and distribution of favours which stimulated the fear and the greed of the Scottish political class. The method was extremely effective: Dunbar's appearances in Edinburgh had something of the impact of a royal visit. 
Dunbar was first, last, and always the courtier. He had no discernible views on public issues: what James wanted, he wanted. So he concentrated on James's priorities: the union, about which he could do little save to advise the passage of a parliamentary act prohibiting anti-English speeches, plays, and other writings; law and order; and the reimposition of the power of the bishops in the Scottish church. The first step toward the achievement of the last goal was taken in parliament in July 1606, with the repeal of the 1587 act of annexation of the temporalities of benefices to the crown, an action accompanied by lavish rewards to many members of the landed classes, and ratifications of their existing possessions, in order to allay their fears for their own holdings of church property. For the clergy there was the creation of a commission to improve clerical stipends. Dunbar was instrumental in implementing James's decision to exile his principal clerical opponents, including Andrew and James Melville, and the six ministers convicted of treason. 
The next step was to convene a clerical conference in Linlithgow in December 1606, ostensibly to deal with Catholics and increase clerical harmony. Dunbar, amply provided with cash, went north to manage it -- his third trip of the year. He got the gathering to accept the king's proposal that each presbytery should have a permanent moderator appointed by the king. On being assured that this was a temporary measure, the gathering accepted it. When the record of the meeting emerged a few months later, however, it had been altered to declare that the meeting had been a general assembly, and that synods as well as presbyteries were to have constant moderators, namely, the bishops. Under pressure the synods and presbyteries, one by one, accepted this, and so did a properly convened general assembly in July 1608. Dunbar once again managed the meeting. He was accompanied north by his chaplain, George Abbot, and another English cleric 'to persuade the Scots that there was no substantial difference in religion betwixt the two realms' (Calderwood, 6.735). In January 1609 a convention of estates adopted a series of measures against Catholics and authorized the bishops to enforce them; in June parliament restored the bishops' jurisdiction over commissary courts; in February 1610 James created courts of high commission in the two archiepiscopal provinces, in imitation of England. Finally, in June 1610 a general assembly held at Glasgow approved the restoration of episcopal authority, subject only to the power of the assembly to censure or deprive a bishop, with the king's consent -- if the assembly ever met again: there was no guarantee that it would. Dunbar managed all these meetings with his usual combination of intimidation and bribery. When parliament ratified the actions of the Glasgow assembly in 1612, after Dunbar's death, there was no mention of episcopal accountability to the assembly. Thanks to James's determination and Dunbar's tactical skills diocesan episcopacy returned to Scotland after a lapse of fifty years. 
With the question of episcopacy on its way to solution, Dunbar tightened his grip on power by a reorganization of the privy council. In February 1610 it was reduced substantially in size, and Dunbar swept out virtually all the judges of the court of session save those who were also officials: as lawyers they were more apt to be Dunfermline's allies than his. In August 1610 Dunbar took advantage of the death of the comptroller to combine that office with his own, thus monopolizing financial authority. Two months later he and Dunfermline persuaded James to approve a plan to revise customs rates and end free trade with England in order to increase the crown's income. Dunbar's power in Scotland was at its apogee when he suddenly died, at Whitehall, on 20 January 1611. There was evidence that he was beginning to interest himself in English politics, with the decline in the influence of Robert Cecil, now earl of Salisbury, after the failure of the 'great contract' in the previous year. He recommended his former chaplain, Bishop George Abbot of London, for the vacant archbishopric of Canterbury; James made the appointment two months after Dunbar's death. After a funeral service at Westminster in April 1611 Dunbar's body was sent back to Scotland for burial in Dunbar collegiate church, where a splendid monument was raised to his memory. 
There were no more earls of Dunbar. With his wife Elizabeth Gordon, whom he married in 1590, George Home had two daughters. The elder, Anne, married Sir James Home of Whitrig; their son James Home succeeded to the earldom of Home in 1633. The younger daughter, Elizabeth, married Theophilus Howard, the heir of Thomas Howard, first earl of Suffolk, one of Salisbury's political allies. Calderwood, who detested Dunbar for his role in restoring episcopacy, rejoiced that he died before he could occupy his 'sumptuous and glorious palace' in Berwick: 'But the curse was executed upon him that was pronounced upon the builders of Jericho. He... left nothing undone to overthrow the discipline of our church... But none of his posterity enjoyeth a foot broad of land this day of his conqueist in Scotland. (Calderwood, 7.153)' Even Archbishop Spottiswoode was hardly effusive: 'a man of deep wit, few words, and in his majesty's service no less faithful than fortunate. The most difficult affairs he accomplished without any noise, and never returned when he was employed without the work performed that he was sent to do. ('History of the Church', 3.214)' What can be said of Dunbar is that during his years of power Scotland saw greater change than at any other time in James's twenty-two years of absentee rule. There is a splendid portrait, painted in his last years, in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 13643


Home, Henry, Lord Kames (1696-1782), judge and writer, was born at Kames, near Duns, Berwickshire, the first son of George Home of Kames (died 1741) and his wife, Agnes ('b'. 1675), daughter of John Walkinshaw of Barrowfield, near Glasgow. His father was an impecunious border laird, much burdened by debt and a large family (by 1715 he had nine children). Home was educated at home by private tutors, first John Wingate and then a Mr Anderson, who taught him Greek, Latin, mathematics, and natural philosophy. Both tutors were nonjuring clergymen. Aged sixteen Home was apprenticed to John Dickson, a Berwickshire neighbour, who was a writer to the signet in Edinburgh. He also enrolled at the private civil law college of James Craig. Two years of learning law by rote followed, but then came an important switch in direction into advocacy. It was prompted, or so Home said, by a chance visit to the home of Sir Hew Dalrymple, lord president of the court of session, whose affluent lifestyle whetted Home's appetite for a branch of the legal profession in which the returns to the successful were so very much more obvious. He continued to study with Craig for a further year, but having resolved on the change to advocacy, he had to make up the deficiencies in his education, notably in the classics, although he also took up French and Italian. Home was a prodigiously hard worker, a man of energy and drive to complement his native intelligence, and after a public examination on 19 January 1723, he was duly admitted to the Faculty of Advocates three days later. 
Home lacked a powerful patron so the early years of his practice as an advocate proved difficult. At first he seems to have led a carefree existence, but he soon found himself in debt and had to concentrate on establishing a career. He gained little employment, but was able in his free time to continue his education, and he also began to play a role in the Faculty of Advocates. In January 1725 his name appears on the faculty's list of public examinators for the first time. He also began to write on legal topics. His 'Remarkable Decisions of the Court of Session from 1716 to 1728' (1728) was followed by a stream of further writings, which helped both to chart the development of the Scottish legal system in this period and to shape it. He was first taken notice of at the bar in the bankruptcy case of Charles Belches in 1730, owing to the efficient job he made of scheduling the debts on the estate which earned the congratulation of the presiding judge, Sir Gilbert Elliot, second baronet, Lord Minto. No doubt in order to supplement his income, in August 1732 he applied unsuccessfully for the chair in Roman law at the University of Edinburgh, vacant by the death of his old teacher, James Craig. His application was coterminous with the publication of 'Essays upon Several Subjects in Law' (1732), which demonstrated the philosophical cast of his approach to the law. 
By 1736 Home had acquired a reasonable legal practice. In July 1736 he was defence counsel in the high profile trial of Captain John Porteous. Following the lynching of Porteous by the Edinburgh mob, the subsequent inquiry at Westminster sent for Home, who spent April and May 1737 in London although he was not called upon to give evidence. He took the opportunity to call upon Dr Joseph Butler, author of 'Analogy of Religion', for conversation on deism and Christianity. The appointment in 1737 of his friend Charles Erskine as lord advocate led to his own appointment as advocate-depute. He continued to write, and in 1741 published 'Decisions of the court of session, from its first institution to the present time. Abridged and digested under heads in the form of a dictionary', in two volumes. This had originated as an idea of an Edinburgh bookseller, who had approached Home on the recommendation of the Faculty of Advocates when his first author withdrew. The combination of abridgements of reports and accounts of issues of law in one dictionary had proved popular in England, but Home used the dictionary to emphasize his belief that the reasons upon which judges made their decisions must be examined, and that precedent was worthless if the decision was founded upon wrong principles. Two further volumes were published in 1778 and 1797, edited by Alexander Fraser Tytler. 
In April 1741 Home's father died. This was followed by Home's marriage on 24 August 1741, 'at the prudent age of forty-seven' (Chambers, Scots., 275), to Agatha (1711-1795), daughter of James Drummond of Blair Drummond, Perthshire, with a portion of $1000. They had one son, George, born in November 1743, and one daughter, Jean, born in 1744. During the Jacobite rising of 1745 Home stayed at Kames, surely the action of a prudent man, given that he had been accused of Jacobite sympathies in the past. Enforced absence from Edinburgh, where the courts were not sitting, led Home to write another book, published in 1747 as 'Essays upon Several Subjects Concerning British Antiquities', which eventually went through four editions. It contained several pieces critical of Jacobite political thought. In August 1746 he subscribed $300 to the British Linen Company, a key project of Archibald Campbell, third duke of Argyll, and Andrew Fletcher, Lord Milton, important members of the Scottish whig establishment. 
Home was now a candidate for the Scottish bench. Upon the death of James Graham, Lord Easdale, in August 1750, the duke of Argyll recommended Home for the vacant seat on the Scottish bench, but to no avail. The next vacancy occurred in August 1751, but Home's promotion was delayed by a political smear that his father had been a Jacobite -- in fact George Home had been in arms for the Hanoverians in 1715. Although his maternal uncle John Walkinshaw had been an active Jacobite (Clementine Walkinshaw, mistress of Prince Charles Edward Stuart, was Home's first cousin), this smear was easily refuted, and Home was appointed an ordinary lord of session on 6 February 1752, taking the title Lord Kames. In consequence of his appointment, he resigned as a public examinator and as a member of the council of the dean of the Faculty of Advocates. 
Kames's next published work, 'Essays on the Principles of Morality and Natural Religion' (1751), produced a furore among the more high-flying members of the Scottish church, and there were some who wished to see the author excommunicated. Kames's friendship with, and support for, David Hume made him a target, although the 'Essays' were not an uncritical endorsement of Hume's views. Kames's fault was to suggest that man had a 'deceitful... feeling of liberty' (Ross, 103) -- that all was determined, but that this was not evident to men who made choices as if they were free. At the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in May 1755 Kames escaped censure by name as that body contented itself with generalities. However, the controversy did cause Kames to rethink some of his more controversial opinions, which appeared in December 1756 as 'Objections Against the 'Essays on Morality and Religion' Examined'. However, he retained a dislike of the 'popular Scottish clergy' (Ross, 165) and what he perceived as their bigotry and intolerance. 
After Kames's promotion to the bench, other appointments followed: to the commission for forfeited estates (1752), to the board of trustees for fisheries and manufactures (1754), and as a director of the British Linen Company (1754-6). In May 1754 Kames became a founder member of the Select Society and its offshoot, the Edinburgh Society for Encouraging Arts, Sciences, Manufactures, and Agriculture in Scotland, which were part of the flourishing intellectual life of Edinburgh. In 1755 he served as vice-president of the Philosophical Society, having been involved with that body and its forerunners since the 1730s. 
Kames was still ambitious for advancement in the legal profession. In 1759 he was disappointed not to be chosen to succeed Sir James Fergusson, second baronet, Lord Kilkerran, on the justiciary court. This prompted him to return to his literary efforts and in 1760 he published 'Principles of Equity', his principal work in the eyes of Scottish legal historians. It drew on an extensive body of historical and philosophical material, and made comparisons with theory and practice in England: he considered that each legal system could learn with advantage from the other. Although it was a theoretical work, Kames also dealt with practical issues, including the rules relating to bankruptcy. The work was well received, not least by William Murray, Baron Mansfield, lord chief justice of the king's bench in England, who in a letter to Kames in February 1762 regretted the lack of any equivalent English writer: 'I wish we had a pen and genius and diligence like your lordship's to do it' (Ross, 238). A second edition appeared in 1767, and a third in 1778, with a section on workers' combinations, then an issue very much under discussion. 
In 1761 Kames befriended the young James Boswell, then in Edinburgh studying to be an advocate, in what can be seen as the latest of a long line of friendships with able younger men which began in the 1730s and included David Hume, Adam Smith, and the poet William Hamilton as well as foreign dignitaries such as Benjamin Franklin who visited Kames in 1759. It is Boswell who provided much intimate and colourful detail on Kames. He recognized the formidable powers of concentration deployed by the judge to secure his professional advancement: 'women and wine are only your amusements and mislead you no more from your main aims than an evening walk or a game at whist' (Ross, 90). 
In 'Elements of Criticism' (1762) Kames sought to propound the fundamental principles of criticism drawn from human nature. That year saw Kames's involvement in one legal case and the beginning of another with which his name would be associated. In January 1762 Kames found in favour of Peter Williamson, who had been kidnapped as a boy some twenty years earlier by local merchants in Aberdeen and sent to North America. On his return to Scotland, Williamson had told the story of the trade in boys, which brought down on him the wrath of the Aberdeen mercantile community, outraged by the slur on them. Williamson was forced by the magistrates of Aberdeen to disown his account and was temporarily gaoled. However, on being reunited with his relatives he took the magistrates before the court of session and won damages. December 1762 saw the beginning of the 'Douglas cause' before the court of session, between rival claimants to the vast Douglas inheritance. It continued before the court in July 1767 when Kames supported the claim of Archibald Douglas against that of James George Hamilton, seventh duke of Hamilton, before being settled on appeal to the House of Lords in February 1769. 
Kames finally reached the criminal court following his appointment on 15 April 1763 as a commissioner of justiciary, taking his seat on 3 May. This also meant going on circuit. His favourite circuit was the northern, including sittings at Perth, Inverness, and Aberdeen, but he also took his turn on the two other circuits, the western and the southern. Kames had the reputation as a judge keen to secure convictions, with a somewhat cruel wit: according to George Fergusson, later Lord Hermand, defence counsel in the case, in 1780 he greeted a verdict against Matthew Hay, an old chess partner found guilty of murder, with the quip, 'that's checkmate to you, Matthew!' (Ross, 311). 
In 1764 and 1765 Kames was the central figure in the committee of proprietors appointed by the British Linen Company to review its affairs and which produced a report which saved the company from financial disaster. The encouragement of linen was the central element of the government's strategy for the economic development and political passivity of Scotland, particularly the highlands. Kames was to become an expert in the possibilities and problems of this industry, publishing an anonymous pamphlet, 'Progress of Flax-Husbandry in Scotland' (1766). He explained that he regarded linen as Scotland's principal manufacture stimulating the circulation of currency, and providing work for otherwise idle hands. Kames was most involved through his membership of the board of trustees for fisheries, manufactures, and improvements in Scotland, although the commission for forfeited estates also took an interest. He used a network of correspondents to get first-hand expert advice for the board, corresponding with William Cullen about the chemistry of linen bleaching, with William Tod over the quality of Scottish linen on sale at London, and with George Young of Coupar Angus on the role of small merchants and hawkers. Not all of his suggestions and proposals turned out well. The Linen Hall established at Edinburgh in 1766, which was a scheme that Kames persuaded the board of trustees to support with the intention of assisting individual linen dealers against large wholesalers, proved an expensive failure, but it was widely approved by experienced merchants in the trade whom Kames had consulted. 
Kames continued his legal writing during this period. In 1766 he published a further volume of 'Remarkable Decisions of the Court of Session', covering the period 1730 to 1752; his work in collecting decisions of the court was ongoing, and 'Select Decisions of the Court of Session', covering the period from 1752 to 1768, appeared in 1780. After 1768 the court of session appointed a clerk to take over Kames's work. 
In 1766 the death of her brother and his infant son saw Kames's wife inherit Blair Drummond, in Perthshire but near Stirling, an estate worth nearly $2000 per annum. Henceforth his wife was known as Mrs Home Drummond, and the double surname was adopted by their descendants in the male line. This estate was to provide a focus of Kames's quest for agricultural improvement, setting in train a scheme to clear moss land of its unproductive top layers of moss and peat. His enthusiasm for improvement bore fruit with the publication of a 400-page tome, 'The Gentleman Farmer', in 1776. This book offered both an attempt to bring together agricultural change and technique into a coherent theoretical system and some very practical observations based on experience about crops, rotations, buildings, and stock. He observed how much progress there had been, and how very different the condition of agriculture in Scotland was from forty years previously, but called for the creation of a board for improving agriculture: centralized direction had benefited the linen industry, and would, in his view, do the same for agriculture. In 1778 the 'Present State of Husbandry in Scotland' was published. This was the result of an initiative from Kames in the commission for forfeited estates to authorize a series of surveys in the highlands to investigate what agricultural practice was in the north and how it might be improved. Kames wrote the preface in which he welcomed turnpike roads, bridge construction, and canal projects as measures to promote development. In 1777 Kames published his last legal book in what had become a prolific and significant career as a writer on Scots law, 'Elucidations Respecting the Common and Statute Law of Scotland'. This was a detailed and systematic analysis, with a strong autobiographical flavour, of areas which had long exercised his mind such as how to rank creditors on a bankrupt estate. His last major work was 'Loose Hints on Education, Chiefly Concerning the Culture of Children' (1781), which with its emphasis on training to develop sensibility unsurprisingly drew the criticism that it showed a lack of respect to Christianity. 
In October 1782 Kames's son, George, married Janet Jardine at Blair Drummond. By December Kames was visibly ailing. On 21 December Boswell recorded his last appearance in the court of session: 'like a ghost, shaking hands with Lord Kennet in the chair, and lords Alva and Eskgrove patting him kindly on the back as if for the last time' (Ross, 370). Traditionally, Kames's parting from his fellow judges was recorded with his characteristic earthiness as 'fare ye a' weel, ye bitches' (Ross, 370). Kames died on 27 December 1782 at his house in New Street, Canongate, Edinburgh. He was buried at Blair Drummond, probably on 30 December 1782. His wife died on 18 June 1795. 
Kames was succeeded in his estate by his son, George, who had been educated away from his father's eye at St Andrews University, followed by the grand tour and a period in business in London. He had then taken over as laird of Blair Drummond, where he completed the work of his father in draining the moss land by utilizing Meikle's great wheel which he had installed in 1787. Kames's daughter, Jean, married in 1761, and within a month she had embarked on an affair with James Boswell. After that ended, other affairs followed, and in January 1772 her husband obtained a divorce on the grounds of adultery. Kames found the court proceedings wounding with her own servants giving evidence against her, and he could not forgive Jean, whom he sent away to France. Father and daughter were never reconciled, and Jean receives no recognition on the family memorial in the churchyard of Kincardine in Menteith. 
Kames was a striking figure physically -- it was said that he was tall enough to have made a Prussian guard -- and robust featured. He was bitingly sharp tongued and on occasion showed the warmth of temper to which the epitaph raised by his son refers. He could and did blow hot and cold, and could be by turns convivial and studious, sentimental and clear eyed, coarse and refined, vain and quirky. As a writer on Scots law his output of eight books plus essays and collections was prolific and significant, even if his style of writing lacked fluency. In John Ramsay of Ouchertyre's judgement had Kames devoted himself fully to the law, he would have been one of the greatest and most enlightened judges of his time. As it was, he made important contributions to many other areas of Scottish life. 


@@@@@


doc= 13644


Home, James, third earl of Home (1615-1666), politician, was born in the summer of 1615, the eldest son of Sir James Home of Cowdenknowes (died 1618x20) and his wife, Lady Anne (died 1621), eldest daughter and coheir of George Home, earl of Dunbar. With the death on 13 February 1633 of his distant cousin James Home, second earl, he became third earl of Home. During his lifetime the second earl had obtained a decreet in favour of his sisters Lady Doune and Lady Maitland against Sir James Home of Cowdenknowes. This decreet reduced the contract of tailzie made between the second earl's father, Alexander, first earl of Home, and Sir John Home of Cowdenknowes and his son Sir James (the third earl's grandfather and father respectively), dated 18 December 1604, in which Lord Home entailed his estates of Home to himself and his heirs-male, whom failing to Sir John Home and Sir James Home and their heirs-male, whom failing to Lord Home and his heirs-female. James Home of Cowdenknowes was able to secure a reversal of the decreet of reduction, after litigation, in March 1634. However, a new patent was not issued by Charles I until 22 March 1636 (dated at Hampton Court), ratifying to him and his heirs-male of the honours, privileges, and precedencies enjoyed by Alexander and James, earls of Home. On 31 July 1637 he had a charter of the barony of Duns, and on 14 July 1638 he had a charter of the lands and the baronies of Dunglas and others. On 1 July 1641 he was served heir male of Alexander, first earl of Home, of Alexander, fifth Lord Home, and of James, second earl of Home. 
Home signed the petition against the king's and Archbishop Laud's introduction of the new liturgy in Scotland, and was present in Edinburgh on 20 September 1637 when the petition was presented to James Stewart, duke of Lennox, to be sent to Charles I. Together with John Lindsay, Lord Lindsay, he protested openly at the market cross of Edinburgh against the king's proclamation of 19 February 1638, in the name of the nobility, ministry, barons, and burgesses. John Gordon classes him among those of the commissioners in 1638 who were professed covenanters, or who quickly afterwards declared for the covenant. That year Home served as an elder at the Glasgow general assembly, and on 24 September was appointed by the privy council to oversee the subscription of the national covenant in the sheriffdom of Berwick. Sir James Balfour referred to Home as being among 'some of the chieffe covenanters' in March 1639 ('Historical Works of Balfour', 2.321). On 22 March, accompanied by other leading covenanters, Home went at the head of 1000 musketeers to Dalkeith House and forced the lord treasurer, John Stewart, earl of Traquair, to surrender it, when they discovered concealed in it an immense quantity of ammunition and arms, and also the regalia, crown, sceptre, and sword, which they then carried with them to Edinburgh. He was appointed colonel of horse in the covenanting army, and towards the end of the month raised a force of 600 horse. During the second bishops' war (1640-41) he was a colonel of foot. He also attended both the 1639 parliament and the parliamentary sessions of 1640-41. 
By contract dated 13 July 1640 Home married Lady Jane, fourth daughter of William Douglas, earl of Douglas. Meanwhile he had become alienated by the radical leadership of Archibald Campbell, earl of Argyll, and he signed the 1640 Cumbernauld bond, drawn up by the earl of Montrose. On 17 November 1641 he was nominated a member of the privy council, but his name was deleted by parliament on the ground that he was opposed to the covenanters. Home presented the royalist 'cross petition', articulated in 1642 and designed to win over moderate covenanting opinion, to the privy council on 10 January 1643, as part of the ongoing struggle in Scotland over whether or not to support Charles I in his conflict with the English parliamentarians. He became sheriff of Berwickshire and he was also present in the 1643 convention of estates. Similarly, he was present in the 1644 convention of estates on 16 April, when he was appointed to the committee for the south for governing the country. That year he was fined $20,000 Scots for violently dispossessing Sir Patrick Hepburn of Waughton of Fast Castle and the adjacent lands of Wester Lumsden. With five other noblemen he voted against rendering the 'raising of armes' punishable by 'forfaultry', and also against a similar punishment for 'holding houses against the estates of the country' ('Historical Works of Balfour', 3.200). Home sat in the parliamentary sessions of 1644-6, and was a member of the shire committee of war for Berwickshire in 1644, 1647, and 1648. His increasingly royalist stance was reflected in his attendance at the Engagement Parliament on 2 March 1648, his appointment as colonel of the Berwickshire foot on 4 May, and his membership of the committee of estates on 8 June. He was instructed to levy 1200 men and they crossed the border in July 1648. Home's infantry were involved in the military action of the engagement invasion, but the earl escaped to Scotland following the surrender of the infantry at Warrington Bridge. The English captured 277 of his men, including his lieutenant-colonel. 
In 1650, during Home's absence, Home Castle was captured and garrisoned by Cromwellian troops. He repented for his involvement in the engagement, allowing for his political rehabilitation. This was reflected in his appointments to the committee for regulating the affairs of the army on 28 March 1651 and to the committee of estates on 3 June. On 28 March he was also appointed colonel of Berwickshire. On 7 May 1651 he raised a regiment of horse which was part of the 7th cavalry brigade, though it appears that it suffered heavy losses in the Cromwellian victories of that summer. With the Cromwellian conquest of Scotland, Home's estates were forfeited. 
At the Restoration, Home went to London as one of a special deputation to represent to the council and to parliament 'the grievances of this opprest kingdom' (Nicoll, 279). In the autumn and winter of 1660 he attended the meetings of the committee of estates, which acted as a provisional government in Scotland until parliament was convened on 1 January 1661. That year he was reinstated in his estates, and was named a member of the Scottish privy council. He was present in the parliamentary sessions of 1661, 1662, and 1663, and on 8 January 1661 was appointed as a member of the standing committee, the lords of the articles. Parliamentary proceedings of April and May 1661 indicate that he was called as a witness in the trial against Archibald Campbell, marquess of Argyll. In November 1661 and July 1663 Home was a member of privy council committees to consider the prevention of theft and robbery in the borders, while in November 1661 he had been appointed to a privy council committee to consider the activities of the minister Robert Blair. In September 1664 he was ordered by the privy council, along with the earls of Haddington and Roxburghe, to provide twenty-six men for service in the English navy. That year he was appointed a member of the high commission for the execution of the law in church affairs, and in February 1663 and November 1664 he was also involved, in his capacity as sheriff of Berwick, in the apprehension in the borders of two Quakers, Andrew Hague and Andrew Robertson. Home sat in the 1665 convention of estates and on 2 August 1665 he was appointed as a member of the committee for inbringing taxation. Shortly before his death, which occurred in December 1666, he had been instructed by the privy council in November to assist in the government preparations against the expected rebel insurrection which came to be known as the Pentland rising. 
Home was survived by his wife, who was still alive in 1683. They had a daughter and four sons, of whom Alexander (died 1674), James (died 1687), and Charles (died 1706) successively succeeded their father as fourth, fifth, and sixth earls of Home. 


@@@@@


doc= 13645


Home, James (1760-1844), physician, son of Francis Home (1719-1813), studied medicine at Edinburgh University and succeeded his father as professor of materia medica at Edinburgh in 1798. He was so successful that he raised the attendance at his class from 50 to 310 students, even though his lectures were given at 8 a.m. in winter. In 1821, on the death of James Gregory, he obtained the professorship of physic after a severe contest; his tory political views agreed with those of the majority of the town council, who were the patrons. He was, however, more than sixty years old, and failed in his new post from the first. In later years his classroom was a scene of great disorder. Nevertheless, he continued to lecture until his death on 5 December 1844. A good clinical teacher, Home was president of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1787. 


@@@@@


doc= 13646


Home, John (1722-1808), Church of Scotland minister and playwright, was born in Leith on 21 September 1722, the son of Alexander Home, town clerk of Leith, and Christian Hay, daughter of John Hay, writer in Edinburgh. Home was a distant relative of both the earl of Home and David Hume. 
Home was educated at Leith grammar school and Edinburgh University, where he graduated MA on 18 March 1742. He trained for the ministry alongside William Robertson (soon leader of the moderate faction in the Church of Scotland), Hugh Blair, Alexander Carlyle, and Adam Ferguson. Carlyle records that Home was 'a great favourite with his companions', and 'his entry to a company was received like letting in the sun into a darkened room' (Carlyle, 24, 114). Contemporaries testified that he 'was from childhood delighted with the lofty and heroic ideas which embody themselves in the description or narrative of poetry' (Mackenzie, 6). 
On 13 September 1745 Home enlisted in the college company of volunteers to defend Edinburgh against the Jacobite army. With the opening of the city to the rebels, Home and a few companions joined the army of Sir John Cope at Dunbar. As lieutenant in a regiment of volunteers raised by Glasgow, Home joined Hawley's army: he was taken prisoner at Falkirk on 17 January 1746 and held in Doune Castle, from which he led an escape by means of blanket-ropes. 
With the patronage of Sir David Kinloch of Gilmerton, Home was ordained minister of Athelstaneford, in the presbytery of Haddington, on 17 July 1746, succeeding Robert Blair, author of 'The Grave'. He was inducted on 11 February 1747. Kinloch's encouragement of farming on his estate fostered a prosperous and enlightened community. 
Home found in Plutarch inspiration for his first tragedy, 'Agis' (1749), which dealt with the sufferings of the king of Sparta. His addition of a romantic sub-plot 'to suit the prevailing dramatic taste' (Mackenzie, 34) prompted David Hume to allege he 'had corrupted his taste by imitation of Shakespeare, whom he ought only to have admired' ('Letters of David Hume', 1.204). Home took the play to London at the end of 1747. When David Garrick rejected the play as not well adapted to the stage (Mackenzie, 35), the author vented his mortification in 'Verses Written by Mr. Home, with a Pencil, on Shakespeare's Monument in Westminster Abbey'. Returning via Winchester, Home was introduced to William Collins, who inscribed to him his 'Ode on the Popular Superstitions of the Highlands of Scotland', in which he predicts Home's success in tragedy and enjoins him to find subject matter in his native land. 
The ballad 'Gil Morrice' provided the inspiration for Home's most famous tragedy, 'Douglas'. There, according to his biographer Henry Mackenzie, Home found material 'which happily suited the bent of his imagination, that loved to dwell amidst the heroic times of chivalry and romantic valour, particularly amidst those in which the great names of our ancient Scottish Worthies were distinguished' (Mackenzie, 91-2). Heeding criticisms of 'Agis', Home eschewed romantic sub-plot and focused on maternal tenderness and youthful honour in a plot comparable to that of Voltaire's 'Merope' ('c'.1743), but 'as simple and natural as that of the French author is complicated and artificial' (Scott, 346). The project found favour with the literati, eager to validate in terms of tragic drama Scotland's right to cultural partnership with England. Drafts circulated among Blair, Robertson, Carlyle, Lord Elibank, and Sir Gilbert Elliott of Minto, corrections were made, and, later, names were changed (Douglas for Norval, Randolph for Barnet). Hume's endorsement ('Letters of David Hume', 1.215) represented 'only the sentiment of the whole Republic of Belles Lettres' (Carlyle, 152). The view was not shared by Garrick who, in February 1755, rejected the play as totally unfit for the stage (Mackenzie, 37). 
Home's introduction by Lord Milton to Archibald, third duke of Argyll, helped get 'Douglas' staged in Edinburgh at the theatre in the Canongate on 14 December 1756, with Digges as Douglas and Mrs Ward as Lady Randolph. Though then a boy, Mackenzie recalled that 'the applause was enthusiastic; but a better criterion of its merits was the tears of the audience' (Mackenzie, 38). The Edinburgh prologue, appealing for 'no common tear' for a renowned Scottish hero, identifies Caledonia and ancient Athens in terms of topography, learning, and the finer feelings such as pity, so establishing 'Douglas' as a key text in the Scottish literature of sensibility. Here, unlike his classically derived tragedies, Home discovered 'a beautiful talent for painting genuine nature and the manners of his country' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 3.298). The equation of proximity to nature with emotional intensity, combined with the analogies between human and natural experience, anticipates James Macpherson's 'Poems of Ossian'. The sustained evocation of pity for Lady Randolph, locating the play within the tradition of the pathetic tragedy of Thomas Otway and Nicholas Rowe, long proved effective with audiences -- Robert Burns wrote of 'the horrors I felt for Lady Randolph's distresses' ('Letters of Robert Burns', 2.64) -- and the clash between the heroic code and her maternal protectiveness provides dramatic tension. 
From Dublin, Thomas Sheridan sent Home a gold medal, an action which Dr Johnson found incomprehensible (Boswell, 'Life', 2.320, 5.360), and the play inspired Frances Sheridan in writing her 'Memoirs of Miss Sidney Bidulph' (1761). Approving of 'Douglas''s adherence to the unities and seeing it as a standard-bearer for Scottish tragedy, Hume dedicated his 'Four Dissertations' (1757) to its author thus: 'you possess the true theatric genius of Shakespeare and Otway, refined from the unhappy barbarism of the one, and the licentiousness of the other'. Not all agreed: witness 'The Philosopher's Opera' (1757), an anonymous satire, and Oliver Goldsmith's demurring ('Monthly Review', 16, May 1757). Even Hume had misgivings, including questioning why Lady Randolph should break her silence regarding her lost child after eighteen years ('Letters of David Hume', 1.215-16). The language was widely praised (for example, Gray, 2.515; 'Complete Works', 9.94), but, with most of the action taking place either in the past or off-stage, it is a play of words rather than deeds. 
The staging of 'Douglas' sparked a religious controversy. Presbyterian opposition to drama was exacerbated by the circumstances: the dramatist was a clergyman and performances were attended by ministers. Charges were brought against Alexander Carlyle, and Thomas White of Liberton was suspended, though with mitigated sentence on his pleading 'that he attended the representation only once, and endeavoured to conceal himself in a corner to avoid giving offence' (Mackenzie, 44). Between the high-flying and moderate factions a war of pamphlets ensued. Defences came from Adam Ferguson and Carlyle, whose 'An argument to prove, that the tragedy of Douglas ought to be publicly burnt by the hands of the hangman' was an ironical piece in the manner of Swift. Carlyle also circulated 'A Full and True History of the Bloody Tragedy of Douglas', which added two nights to the run. Home pre-empted prosecution by the presbytery of Haddington by resigning as minister of Athelstaneford on 7 June 1757. Soon 'manners overcame the law of the church' (ibid., 49): in 1784 Mrs Siddons played Lady Randolph to the severe detriment of attendances at the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. 
Having moved to London in March 1757, Home lodged in Chapel Court, South Audley Street. Bute installed him as his private secretary and as tutor to the prince of Wales, whose mother awarded him $100 a year. It was said that Home was 'entirely at the command of Lord Bute, whose nod made him break every engagement' (Carlyle, 170). 'Douglas' was staged by John Rich at Covent Garden on 14 March 1757, with Spranger Barry as Douglas and Peg Woffington as Lady Randolph. Its success, and its author's new-found eminence, induced Garrick to stage 'Agis' at Drury Lane (21 February 1758), himself playing Lysander. Attended twice by Bute and the prince of Wales, it ran for nine nights and 'the author made some hundreds by it' (ibid., 182). 'The Siege of Aquileia' followed at Drury Lane on 21 February 1760, with Garrick as Aemilius and Mrs Cibber as Cornelia. Though the events relate to the siege of Berwick by Edward III in 1333, Home, politically alert on this occasion, relocated the action in Roman times. While the play suffers from Home's characteristic weakness -- predominance of declamation over action -- he achieves a measure of psychological realism: the dilemma of Aemilius, who must surrender the city or his two captive sons will die, dramatizes the conflicting demands of public duty and personal loyalty. 
In 1760 Home published 'Douglas', 'Agis', and 'The Siege of Aquileia' in a volume dedicated to the prince of Wales, who, on his succession, bestowed on him an annual pension of $300. Home, it was claimed, 'might have been said to have been the second man in the kingdom while Bute remained in power' (Carlyle, 208). Others have questioned his qualifications for such eminence, alluding to his vanity, inattention to money matters, and lack of reserve (Mackenzie, 52-5), and designating him 'like many other bards, in every respect the reverse of a man of method' (Scott, 317). However, far from abusing his position of power to his own advantage, Home was active in the interest of his friends (Knapp, 246; 'Letters of David Hume', 1.429). So unpopular was the Bute ministry, and such the preponderance of eminent Scots in the capital, that Hume wrote in March 1763 of 'the general rage against the Scots' ('Letters of David Hume', 1.382). When Bute's administration fell in April 1763 Home resigned as his secretary, but they remained close. 
Home was a member of the Poker Club, founded in 1762, so named by Adam Ferguson to stir resentment at the refusal to grant Scotland the right, allowed to England, to raise a militia. In 1763 Home was appointed conservator of Scottish privileges at Campvere, a sinecure worth $300 a year which he held until 1770, entitling him to attend the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. These visits may have prompted his notion of standing for parliament in August 1765 on the death of Sir Harry Erskine, a plan which Hume deemed 'wild and extravagant' ('Letters of David Hume', 1.518) and which came to nothing. In 1767 Home leased land from Kinloch and built a villa at Kilduff. His grateful former parishioners 'insisted on carting the [building] materials free of charge' ('Fasti Scot.', new edn, 1.354). On 15 July 1770 he married Mary (died 1816), daughter of a relation, William Home, minister of Foggo (1758-85); the marriage was childless. Until 1779 they lived at Kilduff, where the young Walter Scott was a frequent guest (Lockhart, 1.153). 
Home had three further plays staged. 'The Fatal Discovery' opened at Drury Lane on 23 February 1769. Originally titled 'Rivine', it was inspired by one of the fragments -- whose authenticity he steadfastly accepted -- translated to Home by Macpherson when they met at Moffat in October 1759. Alert to anti-Scots feeling, Garrick presented an Oxford undergraduate as its author, but so favourable was its reception that Home acknowledged the authorship, terminating its run. 'Alonzo' ran for eleven nights from 27 January 1773, with Mrs Barry as Ormisinda. With slight variations in plot, it transposed the material of 'Douglas' to the Spain of the Moorish invasions. Eliciting pity for maternal tenderness, it proved the most popular of Home's plays after 'Douglas'. Walpole thought otherwise, threatening to send it to a correspondent as a punishment ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 5.445). First staged on 21 January 1778, 'Alfred' was one of Home's least successful, but most ambitious, plays. Its failure may be attributed to what Adam Ferguson termed 'the substitution of a love-interest for an interest of state, which the audience expected from the name of Alfred' (Mackenzie, 117); yet, with language relatively free of bombast and ornament, the play depicts Alfred as human being rather than figure-head. 
At Morpeth in April 1776 Home and Adam Smith met Hume, now ailing and heading south. Home accompanied him to London, Bath, Buxton, and back to Edinburgh. In a letter of 13 May 1776 to Blair, Hume testified to the beneficial effect of Home's company (Mackenzie, 162-3). The codicil to Hume's will makes reference to the two bones of jocular contention between them -- the orthography of the surname, and their respective preferences for claret and port (ibid., 163). 
Home's interest in matters military led in 1778 to his commission in a new regiment of the Midlothian fencibles, with the duke of Buccleuch as colonel. A fall from his horse had the consequence that, even after convalescence, 'his intellectual powers were never restored to their original state' (Mackenzie, 66). In 1779 Home and his wife moved to Edinburgh. 
After the failure of 'Alfred' Home occupied himself with his 'History of the Rebellion, 1745', which he had begun as early as 1746. Finally published in 1802 with a dedication to George III, the history 'breaks off abruptly at the battle of Culloden, without giving us any account of the manner in which that victory was used' (Scott, 352). Mackenzie lists among Home's papers an unfinished tragedy, 'Alina, or, The Maid of Yarrow', and two acts of an unfinished, untitled play based on an East India story; there is also reference in a letter of Macpherson to a comedy, 'The Surprise, or, Who would have thought it?' (Mackenzie, 118-20). Home also wrote occasional verse. 
John Home died at Merchiston, Edinburgh, on 5 September 1808. He was buried in South Leith churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 13647


Home, Robert (1752-1834), portrait painter, was born in Hull on 6 August 1752, and baptized on 15 September that year at Holy Trinity, Kingston upon Hull. The son of Robert Home (1713-1786), former army surgeon, of Greenlaw Castle, Berwickshire, and his wife, Mary (died 1795), daughter of Colonel Alexander Hutchinson, Robert Home was one of eight children, not all of whom survived infancy: his brother was the surgeon Sir Everard Home, first baronet; his sister Anne Home ['see 'Hunter, Anne], poet, married the anatomist John Hunter; and another sister, Maria (died 1797), married the architect and engineer Robert Mylne. 
At the age of twelve or thirteen Home stowed away to Newfoundland in order to avoid parental pressure to enter medicine. Put off the ship eighteen months later, he returned with a badly disabled left arm, which, when treated by John Hunter, was immobilized across his chest and ossified in that position. Reunited with his family, who were by then settled at Pall Mall in London, Home developed an aptitude for anatomical drawing with instruction from John Hunter. He received encouragement from Angelica Kauffmann and entered the Royal Academy Schools on 14 February 1769. He first exhibited there in 1770, contributing twenty-three paintings intermittently until 1813. In 1773 Home departed for Rome, visiting Paris and Florence 'en route', and remained there until August 1777. He met the artists William Miller and Thomas Jones, undertook small commissions, and made studies of antiquities, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum. 
Having tried, unsuccessfully, to establish a practice in London, Home moved, in 1780, to Dublin under the patronage of Lord Lifford the Irish chancellor. There he exhibited twenty-two paintings at the Artists' Exhibition in 1780, and, in 1782, undertook eight portraits, at 35 guineas each, for Trinity College theatre, including copies of portraits of Elizabeth I and Dean Swift, and Henry Grattan from life. Home married Suzanna (died 1790), daughter of the painter Solomon Delane on 8 September 1783. They had one daughter, Anne (died 1829), and between three and five sons. With the arrival of a rival portrait painter, Gilbert Stuart, in Dublin, and Suzanna's failing health, Home returned to London in 1789. 
Suzanna died in London in 1790, and Home left for India, where he had connections. Leaving his children with relatives, he departed without permission from the East India Company, reaching Madras in January 1791. There he met the artists John Smart and William Hickey, and found work painting theatrical scenery. Having sought and secured permission to accompany the grand army to Bangalore during the Third Anglo-Mysore War, Home reached the troops on 5 March. He remained with them until early April 1792, sketching captured forts, officers, and the local countryside (examples are in V&A). He was present at, and later painted, the handing over of the hostage princes to Lord Cornwallis ('Lord Cornwallis Receiving the Sons of Sultan Tipu as Hostages' 1794-5, exh. RA, 1797; NAM). 
Home's contact with the British military proved enduring and lucrative. Within six months of returning to Madras, a subscription was raised and Home was commissioned to paint the death of Colonel Joseph Moorhouse ('The Death of Colonel Moorhouse at the Storming of the Pettah Gate of Bangalore, 7 March 1791', 1793-4, exh. RA, 1797, engraved by E. Stalker, 1811, NAM) and several notable portraits including 'Charles, Second Earl Cornwallis' (1792; Banqueting Hall, Madras). Home's style combined careful drawing with simplicity and dignity, and his intimate knowledge of Indian topography enlivened his large-scale paintings with local detail and colour. After travelling with the artists Thomas and William Daniell he depicted a number of local monuments, including 'Sculptured rocks: penance of Arjuna, Mahabalipuram' and 'Dharmaraja Rath, Mahabalipuram' (both 1793; Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta). Twenty-nine of his earlier sketches were engraved and published, with written descriptions, as 'Selected views of Mysore, the country of Tippoo Sultan' (1794) and 'A Description of Seringapatam' (1796), containing six coloured aquatints. 
Home sailed for Calcutta on 28 May 1795, and arrived on 4 June. On 17 September he married (Anna) Alicia Patterson (died 1817), sister-in-law to his close friend James Colvin, and was later joined by his daughter and sons. In 1797 he was elected a member of the Asiatic Society, and secretary from 6 March 1802 to April 1804. His practice flourished, William Baille writing to Ozias Humphry in 1795 that Home was 'much employed, and has handsome prices' (MS, RA archive, London). Home's accounts ledger, June 1795-August 1814 (NPG archive), lists eight portraits of Richard, first Marquess Wellesley, when governor-general and fourteen of his brother Sir Arthur Wellesley (later first duke of Wellington), begun between September 1804 and August 1806. Examples are at Aspley House, London; Stratfield Saye, Hampshire; the Royal Collection; and the National Portrait Gallery, London. Other significant subjects were 'Lord Lake and his Son on Horseback' (1805; Victoria Memorial, Calcutta), 'Gilbert Elliot, Lord Minto' (1811-12; Rashtrapati Bhavan, New Delhi, and 1812; Victoria Memorial). 
Home's prosperity was due to his willingness to accept commissions large and small. He repaired paintings for Wellesley's rebuilt Government House in 1803, although a group of ceiling paintings was not completed. He also recorded indigenous mammals, birds, and reptiles. Two volumes of watercolours are at Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta, and 'A White Leopard' (1805) is in the Royal Collection. In 1814 Home moved to Lucknow as historical and portrait painter at the court of Oudh, where his son John was equerry and European aide-de-camp, 1820-25. He received 5000 sicca rupees per annum, and was also responsible for designing and superintending the making of carriages and other court attributes. Bishop Heber, visiting Lucknow in 1824, noted that: 'Mr. Home would have been a distinguished painter had he remained in Europe, for he had a great deal of taste and his drawing is very good and rapid; but it has been of course a great disadvantage to him to have only his own work to study, and he probably finds it necessary to paint in glowing colours to satisfy his Royal masters. (Heber, 1.395)' Alicia Patterson died in 1817, and in 1825 Home resigned and moved to Cawnpore with his daughter and granddaughter, Jean. Home died in Cawnpore on 12 September 1834 and was buried there at Cutcherry cemetery. On 5 November 1834, Home's sons presented their father's collection of paintings to the Asiatic Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 13648


Home, Robert (1837-1879), army officer, born in Antigua, West Indies, on 29 December 1837, was eldest son of Major James Home, who served for some years in the 30th regiment, and afterwards settled in Ireland as a land agent. Robert Home was early thrown on his own resources, and when, for a short time during the Crimean War, commissions in the artillery and engineers were opened to public competition without the necessity of passing through the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he obtained one in the Royal Engineers, and was commissioned lieutenant on 7 April 1856. After serving at Chatham and in Nova Scotia, in 1858 he was one of the first to join the new Staff College at Sandhurst. After the course there, he was attached at Aldershot to the other three arms of the service successively, to complete his training for the staff. In 1862 he went to Portland, and was employed in the new defences. He married, in February 1864, Anne Josephine, daughter of J. Hunt, a Dublin barrister, who survived him with four sons and two daughters. 
After his promotion to captain on 9 December 1864 Home was sent to Canada, where he wrote an able report on the defence of the frontier against invasion, which attracted the attention of the authorities at home. The following year he was appointed to the staff at Aldershot as deputy assistant quartermaster-general. The ability he showed led to further special employment. In 1870 he became secretary of the Royal Engineers committee (a standing scientific committee), and in 1871 he was appointed to the topographical and statistical department of the War Office, which in 1873 developed into the intelligence branch. 
In 1873 Home was selected by Garnet Wolseley to be the commanding royal engineer of the Asante expedition, and he became a member of the Wolseley 'ring'. In the Second Anglo-Asante War he proved himself capable in the field, his energy and force of character enabling him to overcome manifold difficulties in preparing the way for the march to Kumasi. He used 6000 local labourers to clear a road through 70 miles of bush, build seven way stations, and construct the forward base at Prasu. He received a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy and a CB. On his return he resumed his duties at the intelligence branch, assisting its head, Major-General Sir Patrick MacDougall (deputy adjutant-general for intelligence). Home was able, energetic, and far-sighted, and the 1875 mobilization plan for the army and the 'regulations for the organisation of the communications of an army in the field' were his work. He also rendered good service as the secretary and moving spirit of several War Office committees. On 1 April 1876 he succeeded Major Charles Wilson as assistant quartermaster-general of the intelligence branch, the post he retained until his death. 
During the Russo-Turkish War, when there was risk of Britain intervening, Home's opinion was frequently sought, and reportedly great weight attached to it in military circles. Towards the end of 1876 he was sent to Turkey to report on the defence of Constantinople. His dispatches gained him a brevet colonelcy, and the knowledge he had acquired of the politico-military situation reportedly made him the trusted adviser of the highest authorities. He was appointed British commissioner for the delimitation of the frontier of the principality of Bulgaria, under article 2 of the treaty of Berlin, on 10 September 1878. He had hardly begun the work when he contracted typhoid and came home. 
Home's real work, according to 'The Times' of 31 January 1879, was known to 'a comparatively limited circle, but that circle comprised most of those to whose hands the destinies of the empire have been entrusted during the last two administrations.... most of the statesmen who have been engaged in the difficult work of the last few years attribute no small importance to the assistance derived from Colonel Home's genius and grasp of facts.' Home published a small anonymous pamphlet on army administration. His principal work, 'A Precis of Modern Tactics' (1873), was when published one of the few English books on the subject, and continued for some years the best, becoming an official textbook. In 1872 he translated Baron Stoffel's 'Military Reports' and a French work on the 'law of recruiting'. He also contributed to the 'Quarterly Review', 'Macmillan's Magazine', and other periodicals. He was a FRGS and an associate of the Society of Telegraph Engineers. Home died of typhoid at his residence, 21 Regent's Park Terrace, London, on 29 January 1879. A stained-glass memorial window was placed in Rochester Cathedral by public subscription. A civil-list pension of $300 a year was conferred on his widow, in recognition of his services. 


@@@@@


doc= 13649


Home, William, eighth earl of Home (d. 1761), army officer, was the second but first surviving son of Alexander seventh earl of Home (died 1720), and his wife, Lady Anne (died 1727), second daughter of William Kerr, second marquess of Lothian. Having succeeded his father in 1720, Home embarked on a military career, obtaining a cornet's commission in the 2nd regiment of dragoon guards on 13 May 1735 and a troop in Churchill's dragoons in May 1740. At the election of 1741 he was chosen a Scottish representative peer, a place which he continued to hold until his death, no doubt because of his support for the Argyll interest, he being described about 1757 as one of the third duke's 'greatest favourites' (Carlyle, 166). He married at Hampstead on 25 December 1742 Elizabeth (1703/1704-1784), daughter and heir of William Gibbons, of Vere, Jamaica, the widow of James Lawes, who was the son of Sir Nicholas Lawes, governor of Jamaica. Although she had a jointure of $7000 p.a. from her first husband, Home apparently deserted her in February 1743. They had no children. 
In July 1743 Home received a captain's commission in the 3rd regiment of dragoon guards, with which he served on the continent. Home was in Scotland when the Jacobite rising of 1745 broke out and volunteered his services to the army under the command of Sir John Cope, distinguishing himself at the battle of Prestonpans on 21 September 1745. He was given command of the Glasgow volunteer regiment of foot which was dispatched to defend Stirling, and he was very active in Scotland while the bulk of the rebel forces were in England. In 1749 Home was promoted major of the 3rd regiment of foot guards; on 11 August 1750 he became colonel of the 48th foot and on 29 April 1752 colonel of the 29th foot. Home's local power base was in Berwickshire where he faced the intense rivalry of the Hume family of Polwarth, earls of Marchmont. Early in April 1757 Argyll procured for Home the lord lieutenancy of the county, and on 16 April he was named governor of Gibraltar. He was made a lieutenant-general in 1759. He died in Gibraltar on 28 April 1761, on the eve of his departure for England, and was succeeded by his brother Alexander. His widow died in London on 15 January 1784 and was buried in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 13650


Arthur Homer (bap. 1758, d. 1806), the fourth son of Henry Sacheverell Homer and his wife, Susannah Pitts, was baptized at Birdingbury, Warwickshire, on 9 August 1758, and educated at Rugby School and at Magdalen College, Oxford. He graduated BA (1778), proceeded MA (1781), BD (1790), and DD (1797); from 1782 to 1802 he was a probationary fellow of Magdalen. In 1802 the college presented him to the rectory of Standlake, Oxfordshire, where he died on 4 June 1806. There is a monument to his memory, with an inscription supposed to have been written by Samuel Parr, on the south wall of the chancel of Standlake church. In 1799 Homer published a proposal and prospectus, 'Bibliotheca Universalis Americana, or, An Universal American Library', a work that was to consist of 'two quarto volumes... and to be dedicated to Gen. Washington' ('GM', 1806, 1208). The proposal was revised twice (in 1800 and 1801) but in 1803 Homer issued a printed letter to his prospective subscribers announcing that he had suspended work on the project indefinitely. His work never did appear in print, though Leman Thomas Rede's 'Bibliotheca Americana' (1789) was later thought to be the first volume of it and misattributed to Homer. 


@@@@@


doc= 13651


Homer, Henry Sacheverell (bap. 1719, d. 1791), writer, son of Edward Homer, of Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire, and godson of Henry Sacheverell, from whom he received his Christian name, was baptized in Sutton Coldfield on 19 November 1719, and educated at Oxford, where he matriculated on 26 June 1736 as a member of University College. He became a demy of Magdalen College in 1737, and graduated BA in 1740, MA in 1743. On 11 February 1751 he married Susannah Pitts (died in or after 1806) at Birdingbury. He was appointed rector of Birdingbury, Warwickshire, and vicar of Willoughby in 1764; and chaplain to Edward, Lord Leigh, high steward of the University of Oxford. From 1774 to 1779 he also held the vicarage of Anstey, Warwickshire. 
While Homer was a clergyman, he was also a Warwickshire commissioner of enclosure. His name 'appears in Acts for at least twenty enclosures in surrounding counties alone' (Beresford, 131) and he dedicated his 'Essay on the nature and method of ascertaining the specific shares of proprietors upon the inclosure of common fields' (1766) to his fellow commissioners. According to J. A. Yelling, Homer's work on enclosure 'gives perhaps the most detailed view of the procedure from the commissioners' point of view' (Yelling, 135). Homer's other major work, 'An Enquiry into the Means of Preserving and Improving the Publick Roads of this Kingdom' (1767), examines the importance of inland navigation to the British economy. Its anonymous reviewer in the 'Monthly Review' called it 'a masterpiece of its kind' (1767, 403). Homer also wrote in 1788 a memoir of the archdeacon of Richmond, Thomas Townson, which later appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1792 (587-8). 
Homer died on 14 July 1791 'suddenly, as he was returning from his hay-field', and was buried in the family tomb 'near the east end of the church at Birdingbury' ('GM', 1791, 685; 1806, 1209). His seventeen children included Arthur ['see below'], Henry Homer, and Philip Bracebridge Homer. 




@@@@@


doc= 13652


Homer, Henry (bap. 1752, d. 1791), classical scholar, was baptized on 27 November 1752 at Birdingbury, Warwickshire, the eldest of the seventeen children of Henry Sacheverell Homer (bap. 1719, d. 1791), rector of Birdingbury, and his wife, Susannah Pitts (died in or after 1806). From 1758 he was educated at Rugby School, where aged fourteen he became head boy. Afterwards he studied for three years at Birmingham. In November 1768 he was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, under Richard Farmer, where he became acquainted with Samuel Parr, who helped to direct his studies. Other intimate college friends included William Bennet, afterwards bishop of Cloyne, and George Dyer, poet and political reformer. He graduated BA (1773), MA (1776), and BD (1783). Homer was elected a fellow of the college in 1778, and returned to the university from Warwickshire, where he had been living for about three years, soon after his election. 
About this time Homer was admitted into deacon's orders. He now resided chiefly at Cambridge, and spent much time in the university library, turning his attention to philological studies. In 1787 he joined with Parr in the republication of Bellenden's 'Tracts', and prepared editions of several classical authors, all remarkable for the accuracy and elegance of the typography. On Parr's suggestion he undertook a variorum edition of Horace, but died before its completion. It was finally published by Charles Combe, and this occasioned an angry literary altercation between Combe and Parr. In consequence of religious scruples Homer declined to take priest's orders in compliance with the college statutes, and his fellowship was therefore declared vacant in June 1788. Among Homer's other publications are editions of works by Livy, Tacitus, Sallust, Cicero, Pliny, Ovid, and Julius Caesar. He died at Birdingbury after a short illness on 4 May 1791, and was buried in the family tomb in the parish churchyard. Those works, including an edition of Quintilian, which he left unfinished were completed by his brothers Arthur Homer ['see under 'Homer, Henry Sacheverell] and Philip Bracebridge Homer. 


@@@@@


doc= 13653


Homer, Philip Bracebridge (1765-1838), schoolmaster and poet, was the tenth son of the Revd Henry Sacheverell Homer (bap. 1719, d. 1791), rector of Birdingbury, Warwickshire, where Philip was born, and Susannah Pitts (died in or after 1806). He went to Rugby School in 1772, and was distinguished for his classical attainments. He matriculated as a member of University College, Oxford, on 31 October 1781, aged fifteen, and was elected a demy of Magdalen College in 1783 (BA 1785, MA 1788, BD 1804). In 1785 he returned to Rugby, where he was an assistant master for thirty-seven years. He was better regarded for his scholarship than for his abilities at maintaining discipline among the boys, who gave him the sobriquet Philly. He entered holy orders and was a probationer fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, from 1802; he gave up his fellowship in 1806, having married in the previous year. His wife, Caroline, died on 21 February 1815. The terms of his will (20 June 1834) indicate that he remarried. In 1825 he was elected a fellow of Rugby School, being the first of the newly created fellows on the foundation. He died at Rugby on 26 April 1838. 
While at Oxford, Homer gained a literary reputation, contributing in 1787 to the miscellany 'Olla Podrida' edited by his Magdalen contemporary Thomas Monro. A collection of poems, 'The Garland', followed in 1788, and his 'Anthologia' (1789), including verse which he had previously published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', gained the high opinion of Thomas Burgess, who was then a fellow of Corpus Christi College. Some light-hearted aspersions by Samuel Parr on the quality of his verse only temporarily interrupted their friendship. With his brother Arthur Homer (d. 1806) ['see under 'Homer, Henry Sacheverell] he completed and prepared for publication the editions of the Latin classics which their brother Henry Homer, had left unfinished. In the 1820s he published two schoolbooks, an edition of the Eton Greek grammar (1825) and a school text on Christian evidences (1827). A manuscript English-Hebrew lexicon which he had compiled was presented by Henry Homer (1819-1911), his son by his second marriage, to the library of Magdalen College, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 13654


Hondius, Abraham Danielszoon (c.1631-1691), painter, was born probably in Rotterdam, the eldest of six children (four boys and two girls) of Daniel Abrahamszoon de Hond (died 1664), master mason, and Crijntgen Alewijnsdochter Pancrasz (died 1673). His brother Isaac de Hond ('c'.1646-1716) also became a painter. Although Hondius was already a skilled master by the age of about twenty -- his earliest known painting, 'Sportsman Outside an Italianate Inn', signed and dated 1651, was described as a work of consummate skill -- nothing is known of his youth or of how or with whom he learned his trade. On 27 April 1653 he married Geertruyd Willemsdochter van den Eijck (died 1681), of Rotterdam. The date of birth of their only child, a daughter named Geertruyd, is not known; a son, Abraham, also a painter, is mentioned in Hondius's will. 
The signed and dated 'oeuvre' of Hondius is large and varied. A break in his work, according to where the paintings were made, is evident: in his Netherlandish work, made before he settled in England, the subject matter is varied and includes hunting scenes with and without figures, domestic scenes, history paintings based on stories from the 'Old' and 'New' Testaments, historical and mythological works. He often painted on panel, and the dimensions of his paintings are on the whole modest. A key work is his monumental altar piece 'Adoration of the Shepherds', signed and dated 1664 (Museum Catharijneconvent, Utrecht). At that time he was living at the Oppert, in Rotterdam; since a clandestine Roman Catholic church was an integral part of the buildings it can be inferred that he himself was a Catholic. 
In Hondius's signed and dated work after 1671-2 the variety of subject matter has disappeared, as has the use of panel as support. He now almost exclusively paints savage hunting scenes without figures on canvas, generally of very large dimensions. A subject unusual for Hondius but very popular in England appears in his 'oeuvre', namely large town views that refer to a specific event; 'The Frozen River' (1677; Museum of London) is a good example of this development. The quality of his canvasses depicting hunting scenes declined at this time. 
These changes in his 'oeuvre' indicate that Hondius left the Netherlands in 1671-2, a time of great economic crisis. In his 'Diary', which covers the period 1672-80, the scientist and architect Robert Hooke mentions that he is involved with Hondius on two projects, for the Guildhall (1674) and for the Royal College of Physicians (1674). Sequences in Hooke's 'Diary' indicate that their partnership fell apart for financial reasons that were mainly due to Hondius's awkward temperament. His biographer Jacob Campo Weyerman (1729-1769), also a painter, who might have known him in London, describes Hondius as 'a great man in his profession but quite unfortunate in his temperament which was not well served by his behaviour' (Weyerman, 3.157-8). Weyerman further notes: 'he left for England with someone else's wife with whom he lived as his genuine spouse. After the death of this lady he married a frump who, with a basket on her head, earned her living in the vegetable market. (ibid.)' Hondius died at the Blackamoor's Head, near Water Lane, Fleet Street, London, in September 1691 and was buried on 17 September. His wife, Sarah, inherited 'two peices of landskipp, halflenghts. And eight of his best small peices with his own picture' (Croft-Murray and Hulton, 370). To his son Abraham he left his prints, books, and drawings 'for his own proper use'; the remaining paintings were intended to be sold to pay for his funeral. Weyerman recorded that he 'painted Portraits, Trojan devastations, candlelight scenes, statuary, deerhunts, hounds -- and bearfights, hawking parties, horses and dogs... an Amsterdam Dog Market by his hand, with more than thirty different types of dogs, [was] beautifully drawn and lovingly painted' (Weyerman, 157-8). 


@@@@@


doc= 13655


Hondius, Jodocus (1563-1612), engraver and cartographer, was born on 12 October 1563 at Wackene, near Ghent, in Flanders, one of several children born to Olivier de Hondt (died 1580), engraver, and his wife, Petronella van Havertuyn. Two years later his parents moved to Ghent, where Hondius was educated. By the age of eight he was able to reproduce his own designs by engraving on ivory and copper, and in due course his father apprenticed him to Hendrick van der Keere, an engraver and typecutter at Ghent. Hondius's formal education ceased with the death of both his father and van der Keere in 1580, but he had shown sufficient proof of his talents to be offered commissions by Alexander Farnese, duke of Parma, commander of the Spanish forces in what was then the Spanish Netherlands. As his family was protestant, Hondius declined this invitation, and another to go to Rome, and applied himself to the study of Greek and Latin and to cosmography. When Parma's troops captured Ghent in 1583 Hondius and the family of van der Keere were among those who fled to London. 
In London, Hondius adopted the Latin form of his name, settled in the parish of St Thomas the Apostle, Southwark, and was soon at work engraving maps and charts bearing the latest information brought back by mariners venturing new routes into distant seas. His work for the map publisher Edward Wright brought him into contact with the great explorers, among them Sir Francis Drake, Sir Walter Ralegh, and Thomas Cavendish. In 1589 he associated with De Bry and Augustin Ryther to engrave maps for the English version of 'The Mariner's Mirror', and he produced a world map in hemispheres measuring some 71/2 by 6 feet. He cut type, illustrated the voyages of Drake and Cavendish, and engraved their portraits and those of Queen Elizabeth, Henry IV, and Gerardus Mercator, signing his prints H. J. A set of five circular thematic maps, probably designed as book illustrations, may date from this period. On 11 April 1587, at the Dutch church in London, Hondius married Colette van der Keere, daughter of his late master. Of their thirteen children, two sons and four daughters survived infancy. 
Celestial globes had long been familiar, and the first terrestrial globes had been produced on the continent about 1500. The depiction of topographic information on globes grew in popularity as voyages of discovery extended to distant regions and high latitudes, for it was difficult to project such large areas realistically on a flat map. William Sanderson (1548?-1638?), a merchant who had funded several of the northern voyages, paid for the manufacture of a pair of large globes (of 62 cm diameter), the terrestrial being the first to be made in England. Emery Molyneux compiled the maps and Hondius engraved the copper plates in the richly embellished style of the Southern Netherlands. They were published in 1592 and the first pair were presented to Queen Elizabeth at Greenwich. A second pair, bearing Sanderson's newly acquired arms, are now in the library of Middle Temple, London. 
In 1593 Hondius left London for Amsterdam, now part of the United Provinces and a prosperous trading city. Hondius was fully employed, obtaining a privilege to publish in 1597 the first pair of his own globes. The celestial globe was the first to show those constellations newly invented by Petrus Plancius, based on a recent survey by Dutch navigators. In the same year Hondius brought out a Dutch translation of Robert Hues's 'Tractatus de globis' (1594), updated and corrected as 'Tractaet Ofte Handelinge van het Genbrijk der Himelscher ende Aertscher Globe', to serve users of his own terrestrial globe. His smaller map of the world of 1596/1597, known as the 'Christian knight' from a prominent figure in the margin, was one of the first produced before 1600 to Gerardus Mercator's projection. It led to trouble with Edward Wright, who complained that Hondius had stolen this projection when he was shown in confidence the manuscript of Wright's 'Certaine errors in navigation' (1599). The argument turned on whether Hondius had used the method of calculation published by Mercator in 1569, or that of Wright. Hondius was, moreover, in competition with other map makers, first with Jacob Floris van Langren and later with the Blaeu family. In 1602 he bought the plates of Mercator's famous 'Atlas', adding fifty more plates in a new edition published in 1606. In his later years Hondius was described as tall and stout, but sober, pious, gentle, and hardworking. He died at Amsterdam on 10 February 1612. The business continued in the hands of his widow and their eldest son, Jodocus de Hondt (1593-1629), later joined by the younger son, Hendrik de Hondt (1597-1651). 


@@@@@


doc= 13656


Horace Hone (1754-1825) and 


@@@@@


doc= 13657


John Camillus Hone (1759-1836), both of whom became highly accomplished miniature painters in their own right. Hone's celebrated painting 'A Piping Boy' (1789; NG Ire.) and 'The Spartan Boy' (1775; priv. coll.) featured his son John Camillus, and 'David the Shepherd Boy' (1771) his son Horace. Horace Hone was born in Frith Street, Soho, London, the second son of Nathaniel Hone and Mary. On 19 October 1770 he entered the Royal Academy Schools when his age was recorded as '17 11th Febry next' (Hutchison, 136), indicating that he was born on 11 February 1754. He exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1772 to 1822 and was elected an associate of the academy in 1779. In 1782 he went to Dublin, where he established a successful practice, living in Dorset Street. He painted in watercolour and enamel as well as producing engravings. In 1795 he became miniature painter to the prince of Wales. After the union of England and Ireland his practice declined, and he returned to London in 1804. His sitters included the actress Mrs Siddons (NG Ire.), Mrs Elizabeth Prentice, wife of Thomas Prentice of Dublin (enamel, priv. coll.), the fourth duke of Rutland, and Lord Edward Fitzgerald. Daphne Foskett noted that 'Hone's style of painting varies a great deal; it is usually elegant and his miniatures of ladies are attractive and well posed' (Foskett, 568). He was a friend of the painter and diarist Joseph Farington, in whose diary he is mentioned. He suffered from mental health problems from about 1807. Hone died at 20 Dover Street, London, on 24 May 1825, leaving both a widow and a daughter, Sophia Matilda. He was buried in the grounds of St George's Chapel, Bayswater Road, London. A self-portrait by Horace Hone is in the National Portrait Gallery, London, and another in the National Gallery of Ireland. Further examples of his work are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 13658


Hone, Nathaniel (1718-1784), painter, was born on 24 April 1718 at Wood Quay in Dublin. He was descended from a family of goldsmiths. His father was Nathaniel Hone, a merchant in Dublin and treasurer of the congregation of Eustace Street Presbyterian Chapel, and his mother, Rebeckah, was the daughter of Samuel Brindley of Staffordshire. Hone, if not self-taught, may have studied with Robert West, who had an art school in St George's Lane. He moved in his youth to England, where he worked as an itinerant portrait painter. In 1742 (February or 9 October) he married Mary (Molly) Earle (died 1791), a woman endowed with a small fortune, in York Minster. His marriage may have obviated his need to travel, as soon afterwards he settled in St James's Place, London. He produced both oil paintings and miniatures and quickly established a sizeable clientele. His works on enamel are of particularly high quality. Contrary to popular accounts, Hone did not travel to Italy. His younger brother Samuel, also an artist, having been elected a member of the Accademia del Disegno in Florence in September 1752, arranged for Nathaniel to be elected 'in absentia' on 14 January 1753. Nathaniel's application was endorsed by Ignazio Hugford, one of two consuls of the academy. 
Hone exhibited a total of twenty-eight paintings at the Society of Artists of Great Britain between 1760 and 1768, was one of the artists who signed a petition for incorporation in 1766, and was among the first directors of the new Society of Incorporated Artists. However, he defected in 1768 to become one of the two Irish foundation members of the Royal Academy ['see 'Founders of the Royal Academy of Arts]. He was a prolific exhibitor at the academy, showing sixty-nine oil paintings and miniatures there between 1769 and 1784, the year of his death. Hone wished to be identified principally as a painter in oils, and gradually relinquished working on miniatures to concentrate on easel painting. He developed a reputation for irreverence, submitting to the Royal Academy in 1770 a picture of Francis Grose and Theodosius Forrest masquerading as Capuchin monks feasting at a table. The treatment of the subject, which featured one character stirring a bowl of punch with a crucifix, was deemed inappropriate for the academy. Hone agreed to amend the painting for exhibition, but engraved it subsequently in its original state. In 1775 he painted 'The Conjuror', a blatant attack on Sir Joshua Reynolds, president of the Royal Academy. It appears that Hone was suspicious of Reynolds's reliance on Italian artistic models for his own work, and also resented his adversary's pre-eminent status among portrait painters. 'The Conjuror''s implicit suggestions of plagiarism, and alleged scurrilous references to an intimate relationship between Reynolds and Angelica Kauffman led to its removal, at Kauffman's behest, from the Royal Academy exhibition. Hone denied all allegations and painted out the figure of Angelica Kauffman, but the painting was not reinstated. Hone duly made it the centrepiece of his one-man show, probably the first of its kind, at 70 St Martin's Lane, London, which featured sixty-five other works. Formally entitled 'The exhibition of pictures by Nathaniel Hone: mostly the works of his leisure, and many of them in his own possession', the exhibition was accompanied by a catalogue, which itself featured a deliberately pedantic introduction by the artist. 
Among Hone's principal sitters were Captain Thomas Baillie; Edmund Burke; John, fourth earl of Bute; Lady Caroline Curzon; Henry, first Earl Digby; Sir John Fielding; Lord Fortescue; Francis Grose; Lord and Lady Middlesex; Frederick, prince of Wales; Horace Walpole; John Wesley; and Signora Zamperini. A large number of his portraits were engraved, often by Hone himself. 
Though best-known as a portrait painter, Hone also produced a number of genre paintings, and pictures with theatrical, mythological, and biblical themes, many of which he exhibited. Among these were 'The Brickdust Man' (exh. Society of Artists of Great Britain, 1760); 'Diogenes Looking for an Honest Man' (exh. Society of Artists of Great Britain, 1768); and 'A Historical Sketch of Nathan in his Reply to David the King' (RA; 1783). Hone also executed a large number of self-portraits during his career, both miniatures and easel paintings, in which he presented himself in a variety of guises, from cavalier to country squire. He referred to his wife in a number of his self-portraits by various means, such as the introduction of a relief, an easel portrait in the background, or a miniature. Hone was a mercurial character, but his portraits of other members of his family demonstrate his affection for them. He painted his sons 
John Camillus Hone was a younger son of Nathaniel Hone and studied under his father. He exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Free Society of Artists from 1775 to 1780, after which date he worked in India for about ten years. He was teaching drawing in Calcutta in 1785. Following his return home about 1790 he settled in Dublin, where he became engraver of dies in the stamp office. In October 1807 he married his cousin Abigail (died 1855), daughter of Joseph Hone of York Street and widow of the Revd John Conolly of York Street. He painted miniatures and oil portraits. John Camillus Hone died at his house in Summerhill, Dublin, on 23 May 1836. 
Nathaniel Hone also painted his daughters Lydia ('bap'. 1756) and Amelia, his granddaughter Eleanor (or Mary) Metcalfe, his brother Samuel, and his mother. He is believed to have had at least seven other children, Samuel Augustus ('bap'. 1748), Herbert, Apelles Earl ('bap'. 1750), Mary, Charles, Sophie, and Floretta Augusta ('bap'. 1751). Hone was also a competent etcher and an enthusiastic art collector, and could count within his collection drawings by and prints after works by such artists as Maratti, Rubens, Rembrandt, Watteau, and Vernet, and a large number after Hogarth. A number of his drawings and prints carry his mark, a human eye. His collection was sold in two auctions in February and March 1785. Hone was also associated, with Captain William Baillie, in the formation of Lord Bute's collection. 
Hone moved to Pall Mall in 1774, and then to north Soho in 1780. He may have maintained contact with his family in Dublin, but remained in London until his death at his home, 44 Rathbone Place, on 14 August 1784. He was buried six days later on 20 August in Hendon churchyard, where five of his children had already been interred. In his will Hone mentions that his 'dear wife Ann Hone's fortune is in her own power' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1121, sig. 509). This suggests that Ann was probably identical with the Mary Earle whom Hone married in 1742. Hone's portraiture was solid, and sometimes exceptional. He was particularly adept at depicting children, and often afforded his sitters a distinctly soft expression. Though he was not universally admired, and his use of colour was often adversely criticized, he commanded an enviable profile among his peers. 


@@@@@


doc= 13659


Hone, William (1780-1842), political writer and publisher, was born on 3 June 1780 at Bath, the first child of William Hone (1755-1831) and his wife, Frances Maria Stawell (died 1833). 
Little is known of Hone's mother. Hone's father was the eldest son of a farmer from Surrey, who, after an apprenticeship with a law stationer and a short-lived ambition to act in the theatre, became a clerk, initially to a solicitor, then to a corn merchant in Bath. Hone was baptized on 26 August in the parish of St James, and in 1783 the family moved to London in order that Hone's father, a devout Calvinist Methodist, could attend the congregation of the well-known preacher William Huntington. They lived first in Grafton Street, Paddington, then briefly in Tottenham Court Road, before settling in Warren Street, while Hone's father resumed his career as a solicitor's clerk. The environment of Hone's early years, spent on the edge of a rapidly expanding London, allowed him to witness the poverty of urban life alongside the rural scenery of nearby dairy farms and Hampstead Heath. His parents taught him to read from the 'Bible' (although Hone claimed his first book was 'Nature'), and before he was six he was sent to a local dame-school, where he showed an aptitude for reading. At seven he was sent to a day school for boys, and shortly afterwards contracted a dangerous smallpox; this, followed by another move -- to Old North Street, Red Lion Square -- led to a cessation of his formal education. At twelve he attended another boys' school for a short period before a bullying incident led his father to remove him permanently. Thereafter the only instruction he received was from his father and his own reading. 
Hone's love of books was evident from an early age. His home held only a few devout volumes, but he garnered reading material from a variety of sources, saving his meagre pocket money in order to buy secondhand copies, borrowing books from friendly booksellers and neighbours, gathering odd sheets from printers, and even collecting old printed papers used for wrapping. In 1792, at the age of twelve, he witnessed the arrest of Thomas Spence for allegedly selling Paine's 'Rights of Man', an event prefiguring his future persecution as a champion of the free press. At this time, however, Hone's incipient politics were conservative, and in 1793, encouraged by his parents, he wrote an anti-Jacobin poem comparing the liberties of England to the tyrannies of revolutionary France, which was privately printed as a single sheet. Its distribution brought small gifts of money from admirers. In the same year Hone began employment as a solicitor's assistant before becoming a clerk in the office which his father supervised, and then, in turn, a clerk to a solicitor named Pelletti. Hone held this position until he was seventeen, when his father arranged for him to take up a similar post in Chatham, probably as a result of his worries about the political and social life which his son was developing: Hone had become infatuated with the theatre, interested in Unitarianism and subsequently intrigued by rationalism, a member of the London Corresponding Society, and a follower of Holcroft and Godwin. His exile was short-lived. He returned to London the next year, took lodgings at Lambeth, and on 19 July 1800 married his landlady's daughter, Sarah Johnson (1781-1864). With the help of Sarah's mother he set up as a bookseller and stationer with a circulating library on Lambeth Walk. 
Hone's life in business was always a struggle, and a large family compounded his difficulties: the first of his thirteen children was born in 1801. Bankrupted twice, and permanently beset by debt, he spent the greater part of the next thirty years engaged in publishing ventures ranging from outright flops to popular successes, but he was never able to convert the latter into significant financial gain. About 1806 he became involved in an elaborate and ambitious scheme known as 'tranquillity', and inaugurated by John Bone, one-time secretary of the London Corresponding Society. This aimed to end the poor law by establishing a fund by subscription to provide for the deserving poor. Bone, together with the radical publisher J. S. Jordan, also set up the Society for the Gradual Abolition of the Poor's Rate, and Hone acted as the secretary. The venture collapsed within a year. In 1808, a year in which a severe bout of rheumatic fever led Hone to learn to write with his left hand, he went into partnership with Bone to take over Jordan's publishing and bookselling business. Until 1810, when the business went bankrupt, they were active in publishing reformist works, and in providing support for the financial backing of the 'Old Price' riots against an increase in theatre admission prices in 1809. These activities drew Hone into the Westminster circle of reformists and radicals, an association which lasted some ten years, and led to his friendship with Francis Place, and his acquaintance with Bentham, Mill, and John Cam Hobhouse, among others. In 1810 Hone was prominent among organizers of the triumphal procession planned to accompany Sir Francis Burdett's release from the Tower of London, following his controversial confinement there by the House of Commons on a breach of privilege charge (Burdett's case had become a focal point for the radical cause, and a large crowd had gathered along the route planned by Hone and his associates, only to be disappointed by Burdett's decision to take a quiet exit route along the Thames). By the end of 1810 Hone's family were living with his wife's mother, while he opened a small bookshop in Bloomsbury. By 1811 Hone was a trade auctioneer in Ludgate Hill, but his continuing impecuniosity forced the whole family to move into the Old Bailey, whence Hone contributed articles to such publications as the 'Critical Review' and the 'British Lady's Magazine' as a means of securing some income. 
Hone's strong public-spirited and reformist tendencies are evident in his campaign of 1814 to improve the condition of lunatic asylums. Together with Edward Wakefield and James Bevans the architect, he formed a self-appointed and voluntary committee to investigate asylums and present a report to parliament. The committee simply visited asylums and compiled an account of what they saw. Their most famous exposure was that of William Norris, confined in Bethlem Hospital for twelve years with an elaborate system of chains and manacles permitting only minimal movement. Wakefield presented the report to a selected group of MPs while Hone extracted the illustration of Norris and published it priced at a shilling. The etching was by George Cruikshank, and it marks the beginning of Hone's fruitful partnership with this famous caricaturist and illustrator. Hone's efforts were undoubtedly influential in the subsequent asylum reforms. Following the case of Norris, he espoused two other famous causes in 1814 and 1815: that of Lord Cochrane, who had been tried and convicted of alleged fraud in 1814 as a result (it was widely believed) of his reformist politics and his anti-Admiralty stance; and that of Elizabeth Fenning, who was convicted and hanged for attempted murder. Hone took a major part in the Cochrane affair, collecting a public subscription to pay his $1000 fine. 
The case of Fenning -- who was convicted on circumstantial evidence -- attracted large public sympathy. Before she was hanged Hone was active in compiling a petition for mercy; after the event, he published accounts of the case and a hurriedly produced but highly successful satirical pamphlet with illustrations by Cruikshank, based on a popular drama showing at the time, entitled 'The Maid and the Magpie'. In 1815 Hone also witnessed the shooting of a corn-law rioter, Edward Vyse. Having become editor of the 'Critical Review' in the previous year, Hone used the journal to publicize this brutality, and made other political critiques. This led to his dismissal in June 1815, and the loss of a salary. Undeterred as ever, Hone went on to lend his support to the lord mayor, Matthew Wood, in his exposure of the spy network and blood money system in London. 
December 1817 marked Hone's moment of eminence, for it was then that he was put on trial for blasphemy, in one of the great case histories of all blasphemy trials. The provocation was three parodies written and published by him in 1817: 'The Late John Wilkes's Catechism of a Ministerial Member', 'The Political Litany Diligently Revised to be Said or Sung until the Appointed Change Come', and 'The Sinecurists' Creed or Belief, as the Same Can or May be Said'. The trials -- a separate trial for each publication -- attracted enormous publicity, and they were clearly a strategic and malicious attempt by the government to make an example of Hone, who, at this time, may have seemed an easy target. Although reasonably well known, he was not regarded as among the most dangerous of radicals. He had placed himself -- with some political acumen -- apart from the ultra-radicals in 1816 when he distributed posters advising against carrying arms at the time of the Spa Fields riots, and he was not, unlike many radicals of his time, a great public speaker. Nevertheless, he had begun publishing the 'Reformists' Register' in February 1817, and he had entered the controversy surrounding the suspension of habeas corpus in 1817, which had been provoked by a stone thrown at the regent's carriage in January. The stone was at first adjudged to be a bullet, and the event, therefore, an assassination attempt, and this in turn had called forth a form of thanksgiving that was published and read in churches. Hone's quick-witted response was another parody of litany entitled 'The Bullet Te Deum', a publication not included in the charges against him, almost certainly because the affair had become so farcical. 
Hone knew he was being watched. He withdrew his parodies, and when seditious materials were planted on his premises, he simply took them up and handed them in at the Treasury. Yet on 3 May 1817 he was arrested on grounds of blasphemy and sedition, and was brought before Lord Ellenborough, the lord chief justice, who demanded that he plea without seeing a copy of the indictment. A punitively high bail was set at $2000, and Hone was sent to await trial in prison. He was released on 2 July after protests against the grounds of his arrest and amid challenges to special juries (generally acknowledged to be packed) by Charles Pearson, a young lawyer acting on his behalf. The campaign against special juries continued in the 'Reformists' Register'. In November 1817 the case against Hone was reinstated, and the first trial was set for 18 December. Hone elected to speak for himself, a decision that brought with it the entitlements to call witnesses, cross-examine, and review the case for the jury. The courtroom was full to the brim with a large crowd outside; 'The Times' gave a figure of 20,000. Most of the special jury did not arrive, and unvetted jurors were therefore conscripted. 
The three trials were -- vindictively -- held on successive days and Hone was acquitted at each one. Justice Abbot presided over the first, and was promptly replaced on the bench by Ellenborough himself for the second and third, a ploy which increased the prosecution's humiliation, as also did the attorney-general's decision to go on to a subsequent trial after each acquittal. Hone's defence in each case was quite simple, although all accounts of the trials testify to his masterly control and strong sense of theatre. Shabbily dressed, and surrounded by literary evidence, he complained purposefully that his trial was unjust because he was not allowed to see the indictment without paying an extortionate fee. He claimed that parodies were of two kinds: those that ridiculed the form imitated, and those that, like his own, used the form as a means of ridiculing another subject. As he had been charged with blasphemy and not sedition, he found himself in the unique position of being able to frame his defence against a vituperative government by claiming that it, and not religion, was the subject of his ridicule. Further, he remarked on the number of parodies of scripture and litany in a vast range of literary and other texts, including those of Canning, the anti-Jacobin poet -- who, ironically, sat in the ministry that endorsed Hone's persecution. Quoting extensively, and rising in confidence though ailing in health as each trial proceeded, Hone won three unmitigated victories and stated that he stood not just for himself but for 'the liberty of the press'. His exoneration was celebrated wildly and vigorously by a London public fired up by the transparency of vituperative government tactics, and delighted by Hone's unlikely virtuoso performance in court. The trials also stood for the restitution of the credibility of the jury system, each concluding with shouts of 'Long live an honest jury! An honest jury for ever!' Hone was therefore acclaimed as champion of the people's rights on a dual account. 
Following the trials came rallies of support for Hone in the form of visits from eminent sympathizers, contributions of money, press coverage, and a proliferation of popular literature about the trials themselves and the discomfited ministers. On 29 December a public meeting for the 'Friends of Liberty of the Press and Trial by Jury' was held at the London tavern, organized by Robert Waithman, who had assisted Hone with the asylum project, and was later to become lord mayor. The meeting set up a subscription list for Hone which excited a national response, and the money he received allowed him to move his household to 45 Ludgate Hill, where he set up in business. Hone was now famous, and the subsequent publishing ventures brought in sales but not financial security. He sought now to set himself up as a publisher of collectable editions as well as popular items. To this end, he proposed to develop his antiquarian interests by investigating the collections in the British Museum, and made an application for access in 1818 that was granted in 1820. The 'Trials' themselves were published early in 1818, and in February 1819 Hone announced his most ambitious project to date: an edition of the 'Trials' that would also serve as a history of parody, providing full versions of all the parodies cited in his defence. An extensive library of materials for this history was collected by Hone, and was auctioned in 1827 when he was imprisoned for debt: the publication was never finished. 'The Political House that Jack Built' (1814), however, was highly successful, with sales in excess of 100,000 copies in fifty-four editions. This satire, a response in part to the atrocities of Peterloo, was a poem by Hone based on the similarly fitted nursery rhyme, accompanied by thirteen woodcuts by Cruikshank. An attack on Liverpool's cabinet (specifically Canning, Castlereagh, and Sidmouth), the regent, and other well-known figures of the day involved in government repression (such as Robert Gifford, the attorney-general from July 1819), the parody extolled the virtues of a free press and reform as guardians of a traditional British liberty. The piece is carefully pitched, like so much of Hone's work. The levity established in the nursery-rhyme structure provided a protection against prosecution, which necessarily would invoke trivia and farce. Simultaneously, the parody is vehemently critical of its targets, of the violent oppression of the people, and uncompromising in its defence of a subversive free press. 
In the same year Hone and Cruikshank collaborated on an imitation of a $1 note, entitled the 'Bank Restriction Note', a copper-plate engraving displaying a line of figures on the gallows. The note was an attack on the legislation which permitted the death penalty for the forging or passing of imitation paper money, a law which was popularly deemed too savage given the temptations involved and the opportunity for the persecution of innocent people, including children. The note attracted much attention, as too did another joint parodic production, 'A Slap at Slop and the Bridge Street Gang' (1820), a burlesque of John Stoddart's newspaper, the 'New Times'. Stoddart had attempted to influence the jury in Hone's trials by circulating false reports that someone had been tried and convicted for publishing Hone's parodies. 'A Slap at Slop' ('Slop' being Hone's nickname for Stoddart) was his revenge, much of the imitation being taken up by mischievous mockery of the newspaper itself, and a good proportion dedicated to a vicious biography of Stoddart. The years from 1819 to 1822 were perhaps Hone's most prolific period as a political satirist, during which he published such popular successes as 'The Queen's Matrimonial Ladder', 'Hone's Political Showman -- at Home!', and 'Buonapartephobia'. 
Hone had always nurtured a scholarly antiquarianism alongside his politics. In 1820 and then again in 1823 he published two books with impacts in both fields, raising questions about biblical canonicity: 'The Apocryphal New Testament' and 'Ancient Mysteries Described'. He wryly claimed that his interest in the medieval mystery plays was stimulated by a comment by Lord Ellenborough about them at his trial. Investigating the manuscripts at the British Museum led to the discovery of the little-known 'New Testament' apocrypha, which he very rapidly published, to the great discomfort of Christian orthodoxy; the book had a stormy reception. 'Ancient Mysteries Described' was less controversial, but by no means innocent: both books constituted a challenge to the limits of knowledge, and in particular scriptural knowledge. Hone was also accused of stepping beyond his class position in his invasion of theology, an exclusive field of scholarship. 
However, these controversial books mark Hone's passage into the more generally acceptable antiquarian publishing activities which led to his fame in the nineteenth century, in the form of the 'Everyday Book' (1825), the 'Table Book' (1827), and the 'Year Book' (1832). Admired by Southey and Dickens among others, these works began as weekly publications before being bound into volumes. Each was a miscellany, including short articles from various contributors including Hone on fairs and customs, folklore, memories, accounts of urban rambles or travels, trade and working practices, natural history, and local life. There were also illustrations from a variety of sources. These publications were at once popular, educational, quaint, and socially pertinent. They constructed an inclusive readership not restricted by class boundaries, and they were affordable. 
As ever, Hone's sensitivity to the public taste was not matched by his financial abilities. In April 1826 he was arrested for debt, evicted from Ludgate Hill, and placed under the rules of the king's bench prison requiring him to live in Southwark, where he remained with his family until declared bankrupt in 1828, when he moved to Newington Green. Friends and benefactors then raised a sum to help the Hone family set up in a coffee house in Gracechurch Street near London Bridge which opened in April 1830, and ran for three years before the inevitable bankruptcy. Thereafter the family went to live in a cottage on Peckham Rye Common before Hone's appointment as a sub-editor of 'The Patriot' required a removal to the paper's office at Bolt Court in 1836. The newspaper was an organ of evangelical nonconformism under the editorship of Josiah Condor, and Hone was well regarded there, although he found the work onerous, not least because of his declining health. In 1832 Hone became a Christian, and soon afterwards, a regular member of the congregation of the Weigh House Chapel, where he became a friend and admirer of the preacher the Revd Thomas Binney. The ecclesiastical historian John Fuller Russell met Hone in 1833, and described him as 'rather corpulent, dressed very plainly, and his lofty forehead, keen eye, grey and scanty locks, and very expressive countenance, commanded respect'; by then he reportedly believed that the 1832 'Reform Act' had gone too far and that the political unions should have been forcibly put down. In June 1840, after a string of convalescent breaks, Hone retired and soon after moved to Tottenham, eventually settling there at 8 Grove Place. In 1841 he published a work of autobiography, 'The Early Life and Conversion of William Hone'. He died at home in Tottenham on 6 November 1842, having been visited on his deathbed by Cruikshank (with whom he had quarrelled some fifteen years before) and Dickens, of whose novels he had grown particularly fond. He was buried in Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington. A collected edition of his output entitled 'Hone's Works' (4 vols., 1882) is not comprehensive: a full bibliography is included in F. W. Hackwood, 'William Hone: his Life and Times' (1912). 
Until recently, Hone's fame rested largely on the achievements of the 'Everyday Book', 'Table Book', and 'Year Book', the antiquarian charm of which appealed to his Victorian readers. Undoubtedly these works were important, and they retain their value as forms of social commentary and records of popular life. In addition, their serialized production and their form -- that of the essay-sketch -- influenced the genres and styles of later writers. Latterly, Hone has been increasingly recognized as a key figure for those historians recovering the radical milieux of early nineteenth-century Britain on account of his strong advocacy of the liberty of the press and the rights of individuals and the persecuted. He dedicated himself to these causes to the detriment of his own self-interest and financial security, and his literary and political influence is still underestimated. 


@@@@@


doc= 13660


Honey, George (1822-1880), actor and singer, was born on 25 May 1822. In 1843 he became a call-boy at the Adelphi in London. He was later given the opportunity to sing some verses of a comic duet as the singing mouse in 'Harlequin Blue Beard', and made his acting debut in London at the Princess's Theatre, in November 1848, as Pan in 'Midas'. In the summer of 1851 he began to appear in comic operas such as 'Good Night' and 'Signor Pantalon' at the Adelphi, and continued at the Lyceum and at Covent Garden with the Pyne and Harrison opera company. In 1860 he played at Her Majesty's in G. A. Macfarren's 'Robin Hood'. Honey then quit the lyric for the dramatic stage. He appeared at the Strand in October 1863 in H. T. Craven's 'Miriam's Crime', in which he played a disreputable lawyer, and gave a good presentation of drunkenness. Thereafter he performed mainly in comedies and extravaganzas, his most notable roles being Turco the Terrible in William Brough's burlesque 'Prince Amabel' (Royalty, 1865), Annibal Locust, a bibulous sergeant, in Watts Phillips's 'The Huguenot Captain' (Princess's, 1866), and Eccles in T. W. Robertson's 'Caste' (Prince of Wales's, 1867). In the opening performance at the Vaudeville, on 16 April 1870, he was Major Buncombe in Andrew Halliday's 'For Love or Money'. He had played Graves in Bulwer-Lytton's 'Money' at the Holborn in 1869 under Barry Sullivan, but attracted more attention in this part when the play was revived at the Prince of Wales's in 1872, and again in 1875. Among his later creations the most successful was Cheviot Hill in W. S. Gilbert's 'Engaged' at the Haymarket, on 3 October 1877. Honey also acted in America. He was a useful singer and a clever comic performer, and was most successful in the presentation of eccentric and dissipated characters. After a paralytic seizure in 1879 his only theatrical appearances were in minor parts for benefits. He died in London of aneurysm of the heart on 28 May 1880, and was buried in Highgate cemetery, where a medallion surmounts his grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 13661


Honey, Laura Martha (1816?-1843), actress, said to have been born on 6 December 1816, was the daughter of Mrs Young, an actress at Sadler's Wells, and as a girl worked in the wardrobe of that house. She first appeared on the stage there, under the name of Laura Bell, in some juvenile parts. In 1826 she was with her mother at the Olympic, and in 1827 played a midshipman in Bayle Bernard's 'Casco Bay'. After a brief engagement at the Surrey, where she took lessons in music, she returned to Sadler's Wells in 1829. At the age of sixteen she married William Honey, a lawyer's clerk, from whom she soon separated; he continued to live on her earnings. He was accidentally drowned in the Thames in 1836. Mrs Honey went in 1832 with Harriet Waylett to the Strand, where she first appeared in Leman Rede's 'The Loves of the Angels'. In 1833 she was at the Queen's (subsequently the Prince of Wales's) Theatre, under Mrs Nisbet. At the Adelphi under F. H. Yates she made a great success as Psyche in a burlesque called 'Cupid' with John Reeve, and as Lurline in the fairy drama of that name. 
After a season at the Haymarket, where she played in J. B. Buckstone's 'Open House', and a tour in the provinces, Laura Honey went to the Olympic under Madame Vestris. She was described as 'the delicious Mrs Honey, beautiful as a houri, with the throat of a nightingale' (Baker, 2.148). In 1837 she undertook the management of the City of London Theatre, where she played Tom Tug in 'The Waterman', Myrtilla in Planche's 'Riquet with the Tuft', and in 'The Spirit of the Rhine' by Morris Barnett, in which she sang with great effect 'My Beautiful Rhine', which long remained popular. In her last season she performed at the Haymarket and in the provinces, and returned to the City of London. She died on 1 April 1843, from 'ulcers in the chest', at her home, 149 Albany Street, Regent's Park, and was buried on the 6th in the churchyard of the Old Church, Hampstead. She bequeathed her property by will to two children aged respectively ten and three. She was a pleasing and graceful actress, particularly in breeches roles, and a delightful ballad singer, but her performances were practically confined to the lightest class of entertainment. 


@@@@@


doc= 13662


Maria Honner (1808-1870), actress, born at Enniskillen, Ireland, on 21 December 1808, was the daughter of Eugene Macarthy, actor-manager, who died in the Dramatic College at Maybury, Surrey, on 14 May 1866, aged seventy-eight. She was educated at Cork and lost her mother at an early age. Being left to her own resources at her father's second marriage, with a younger brother to support, she made her first appearance on the stage at the age of fifteen, at a theatre in the south of Ireland. She afterwards played in Dublin, and as the hero of juvenile tragedy attracted the notice of Charles Kean and W. C. Macready. Her first important character was Rosalie Somers, which she played to Edmund Kean. An engagement in Scotland followed, and she became a popular favourite. In 1831 she was taken on by John Farrell for the Pavilion Theatre, London, where for two seasons she was the leading attraction. In 1833 she transferred her services to the Coburg Theatre, and, on the retirement of Davidge, the lessee, moved to Sadler's Wells, where Honner was the manager. After the termination of two successful seasons she went to the Surrey. In June 1835 she played Julia in Sheridan Knowles's 'The Hunchback' with great success at Drury Lane, for the benefit of 'Jerry-Sneak Russell'. On 21 May 1836 she married Honner. 


@@@@@


doc= 13663


Honner, Robert William (1809-1852), actor and theatre manager, the youngest son of John Honner (died 1817), solicitor, in the partnership of Fletcher and Honner, of the parish of St Anne, Soho, was born at 24 Percy Street, Tottenham Court Road, London, on 18 January 1809. He was educated at a private school at Pentonville, where Joseph Grimaldi the younger and Thomas Hamblin were his schoolfellows. His father gave up his profession to become proprietor of the Heathcock tavern, Heathcock Court, close to the Sans Pareil Theatre (later known as the Adelphi) in the Strand. There Robert Honner found opportunities for indulging his taste for theatricals. His father soon died, leaving his mother unprovided for. 
In 1817 Honner was articled for three years to the ballet master Charles Leclercq, and shortly after appeared for his master's benefit at the Sans Pareil in a ballet called 'The Crown of Roses'. In 1820 he went as a dancer with Kinloch to the Pantheon Theatre, Edinburgh, but the enterprise was a failure, and he was left destitute. He visited south and west England, then joined the corps de ballet at the Coburg Theatre, London, and in 1824 went to the Surrey. In 1825 Honner was again at the Coburg, and soon afterwards joined Andrew Ducrow, with whom he remained a long period, although he still undertook provincial tours, during which he played every character, from leading business to harlequin, clown, and pantaloon. He acted subsequently at Sadler's Wells under Grimaldi (1827), at the Surrey, first with R. W. Elliston and then with Charles Elliston and D. W. Osbaldiston, and at the Old City Theatre in Milton Street under Benjamin Webster (1829). At later dates he returned to the Coburg, was one of G. B. Davidge's company at Liverpool, was stage-manager for George Almar at Sadler's Wells (1833), and from 1835 to 1838 was lessee of Sadler's Wells, as well as acting-manager for Davidge at the Surrey. He also often appeared at the latter house at short notice for John Reeve, T. P. Cooke, and others who happened to be indisposed. 
On 21 May 1836 Honner married the actress Maria Macarthy ['see below'], and they appeared together at the Surrey until 1838. As lessee of Sadler's Wells from 1838 to 1840 Honner tried to establish a taste for the legitimate drama. He managed the Surrey from 1842 to 1846, and after a short lease of the City of London Theatre in Norton Folgate he joined John Douglass as stage-manager of the Standard Theatre, where he remained until his death. 
Honner was a good actor, his chief roles being Richmond, Laertes in 'Hamlet', Fag in Richard Cumberland's 'The Jew', Scrooge the Miser in 'A Christmas Carol', and Jemmy Twitcher in 'The Golden Farmer'. He died at his home, Nichols Square, Hackney Road, London, on 31 December 1852. His death was registered in the name Robert Walter Honner. 
His wife, 
Maria Honner continued acting with her husband at the Surrey until Whitsuntide 1838, when he became lessee of Sadler's Wells; they played together at the latter house for about five years to much acclaim. At the request of Davidge she returned to the Surrey, where she remained until September 1845, and then went to the City of London Theatre. She was a good actress in pathetic roles, and after the retirement of Elizabeth Yates was for a time without a rival. She was excellent in many Shakespearian parts, as well as in the roles of Mary in 'Paul the Pilot', Susan in 'The Kohal Cave', Felix in 'The French Revolution', and Clemency in Dickens's 'The Battle of Life'. She died of paralysis on 4 January 1870, at the residence of her second husband, Frederick Morton, stage-manager of the Charing Cross Theatre. 


@@@@@


doc= 13664


Honorius (d. 653), archbishop of Canterbury, was, according to Bede, one of the 'disciples of St Gregory' sent to England in either 597 or 601 with the missionary groups under Augustine and Mellitus ['see also 'Gregorian mission]. After the death of Archbishop Justus, Honorius was consecrated to the see of Canterbury as the fifth archbishop by Paulinus, bishop of York, at some date between 628 and 631. The ceremony took place in the stone church which the reeve Blaecca had built at Lincoln. In 630 or 631 Honorius sent the exiled Burgundian bishop, Felix, to preach to the East Angles. He also collaborated with Paulinus and with King Eadwine in requesting Pope Honorius I to establish a metropolitan see at York so that when a vacancy occurred at either Canterbury or York the surviving archbishop might ordain to the empty metropolitan see. The pope wrote to him on 11 June 634 acceding to these wishes and sending palls both to him and to Paulinus. The terms of the pope's letter and the equal gifts sent to both are sufficient to discredit the spurious privilege, forged at Canterbury after the Norman conquest and purporting to have been written by Pope Honorius on the same day, which declares the primacy of Canterbury over York. By 634, however, the Roman mission in Northumbria had already been overthrown by the defeat and death of Eadwine in the previous year. Honorius received Paulinus in Kent and with the concurrence of King Eadbald appointed him to the vacant see of Rochester. With the accession of Eorcenberht in Kent in 640 Honorius gained a zealous helper, for the king compelled the destruction of all the idols and the observance of the Lenten fast in his kingdom. Honorius's authority was limited to Kent, where he ordained Ithamar as bishop of Rochester in 644, and to East Anglia, where he ordained (in succession to Felix) Thomas in 647 or 648 and the Kentishman Berhtgils, in 652 or 653. He died on 30 September 653, and was buried in the west porch of St Peter's and St Paul's Monastery at Canterbury (later St Augustine's). The see of Canterbury remained vacant until the consecration of Deusdedit eighteen months later. Neither the brief life by Goscelin (died after 1107) in the form of ten lections, nor the summary late medieval versions in verse or prose add anything to Bede's account. 


@@@@@


doc= 13665


Honyman, Sir George Essex, fourth baronet (1819-1875), judge, was born at Strawberry Hill, Middlesex, on 22 January 1819, the eldest son of Sir Ord Honyman, third baronet (1794-1863), who became lieutenant-colonel commanding the Grenadier Guards in 1850, and his wife, Elizabeth Essex 'nee' Bowen (died 1864) of Coton Hall, Shropshire. 
Honyman joined the firm of Martineau, Malton, and Trollope, solicitors, of Lincoln's Inn in 1838 and in 1840 became a pupil of Sir Fitzroy Kelly. He afterwards read with David Octavius Gibbons, the special pleader. In 1842 he commenced his own practice as a pleader, gaining few clients for seven years, but studying hard to master commercial law. On 8 June 1849 he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple, and practised on the home circuit, where by 1853 he was thought to be the best commercial lawyer of the day. On 26 November 1860 he married Annie Johanna Thirkettle (died 13 Jan 1881). 
Honyman was not considered a great orator, but he had a quick intellect, a tenacious memory, and was industrious and conscientiously thorough. On his father's death he became fourth baronet; and on 23 July 1866 was appointed a queen's counsel. He became a bencher of his inn in November 1866, and a serjeant-at-law on 23 January 1873. On the recommendation of Lord Selborne he became a judge of the court of common pleas on 23 January 1873. He resigned in February 1875, and died at Tunbridge Wells on 16 September 1875. His brother, the Revd Sir William Macdonald Honyman, succeeded as fifth baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 13666


Honywood, Mary (1527-1620), matriarch and sustainer of protestant martyrs, was the daughter and coheir of Robert Waters, esquire, of Lenham, Kent, where she was born. In 1543 Mary married Robert Honywood, esquire, of Charing, Kent. The couple had 16 children and by the time of her death she had 114 grandchildren, 228 great-grandchildren, and 9 great-great-grandchildren. As Fuller remarks, 'thus she had a child for every day in the (though leap) year, and one over' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 2.86). Her many grandchildren included Michael Honywood (1596-1681), the post-Restoration dean of Lincoln, and his brother Sir Thomas Honywood of Marks Hall (1587-1666), a leading parliamentarian in Essex, where his father had acquired property. However, the same writer regarded Mary as 'more memorable on another account, viz., for the patient weathering out the tempest of a troubled conscience' (ibid., 2.85-6). According to Simeon Foxe, the son of the martyrologist, Mrs Honywood languished 'sick of a consumption through melancholy' from the age of forty, and during this time 'consulted with the gravest Divines and the best Physitians' including his own father, John Foxe. Previously she had also sought spiritual solace from the martyr John Bradford and the renowned puritan preacher Edward Dering, both of whom corresponded with her. In 1592 it was reported that she had believed that she was possessed by a devil for some fourteen years and that in 1591 she had endured exorcism at the hands of the religious charlatan William Hacket. Simeon Foxe later recorded a meeting between Mrs Honywood and John Foxe, at which the latter assured her that she would recover and live to a great age. To which she replied 'as well might you have said... that if I should throw this glasse against the wall, I might beleeve it would not break to pieces' and 'threw it forth'. The glass hit a chest before falling to the ground without either breaking or cracking (Foxe, sig. B3'r'- 'v'). 
Other contemporary and later authors, including Fuller, cast this story as a miraculous test by Mrs Honywood of her salvation, for which Foxe gently reproved her. According to Fuller her encounter with Foxe did not cure Mrs Honywood, but some time later she suddenly received comfort 'like lightening into her soul' and spent the rest of her life in 'spiritual gladnesse' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 2.86). Although most authors have concentrated on stories of Mary Honywood's numerous descendants and of her religious despair, she also played an important role as one of the female 'sustainers' of the Marian martyrs. She corresponded with John Bradford, although they had never met, and Fuller records that 'in the days of Queen Mary she used to visit the prisons, and to comfort and relieve the confessors therein' (ibid.). He also states that Mrs Honywood was determined to see the end of John Bradford's sufferings and was present at his burning in 1555, when the press of people was so great that her shoes were trodden off and she was forced to walk barefoot from Smithfield to St Martin's before she could purchase a new pair. 
Mary Honywood died at Marks Hall (bought in 1605 by her son Robert) on 12 May 1620, in her ninety-third year, and was buried at Lenham on the 20th. A portrait of her which descended in the Mildmay family, showing her holding the Venetian glass that failed to break, was reported in the early nineteenth century, but its present whereabouts is unknown. But pictures of her made in 1597 and 1605 survive in the Colchester and Essex Museum and Wren Library respectively. 


@@@@@


doc= 13667


Honywood, Michael (1596-1681), dean of Lincoln, was born on 1 October 1596 in the parish of St Helen in London, the sixth son and ninth child of Robert Honywood (1545-1627), esquire, of Charing, Kent, and later of Marks Hall, Essex, and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1631), daughter of Sir Thomas Browne of Betchworth Castle, Surrey; he was the grandson of Mary Honywood (1527-1620) and younger brother of Sir Thomas Honywood (1587-1666). He was admitted to Christ's College, Cambridge, graduated BA in January 1615 and proceeded MA in 1618. In 1618, through the patronage of Elizabeth, queen of Bohemia, he became fellow of his college. He was ordained deacon in the same year and priest in 1619. He assisted Richard Crakanthorpe with his 'Logicae libri quinque' (1622), help gratefully acknowledged by the author. He served the university offices of taxor in 1623 and of proctor in 1628. Among the fellows of Christ's during his years of residence were Thomas Bainbridge (master of the college), Henry More, Joseph Mede, and Edward King, whose early death was commemorated by the publication of a collection of verses, including two Latin poems by Honywood, and 'Lycidas' by John Milton, a former student of Christ's. Honywood took an active part in the management of the college. He was probably the instigator of the erection of the new fellows' buildings, completed in 1644; he gave money to the project, lent more, and was active in raising funds for it. 
In 1636 Honywood proceeded BD and in 1639 he was appointed to the lucrative college living of Kegworth, Leicestershire, but he was exempted from the requirement to reside by his appointment as president, or deputy master, of the college. In January 1643 he crossed to the Low Countries, and by August he was in Leiden. Although Thomas Bainbridge wrote to him in August of that year urging him to return and expressing the wish that Honywood should succeed him as master of Christ's, Honywood remained abroad. During his exile he lived mainly at Utrecht, enjoying the friendship of William Sancroft and devoting himself to the collection of books. The notebook in which he recorded his purchases reveals the breadth of his interests, including theology, politics, travel, antiquities, linguistics, science, and mathematics. He acted as a lending library to the circle of exiled Anglican clergy in the Netherlands, many of whom were writing books of their own. For some time he was able to retain the rectory of Kegworth, employing a curate to carry out his duties there, but by 1649 the benefice was finally sequestered by the Leicester county committee and a new minister, William Moore, appointed. 
At the Restoration, Honywood returned to England. Some of the fellows of Christ's College vainly petitioned that he might be appointed master, in place of Dr Ralph Cudworth. He was restored to his living of Kegworth, which he held until his death. Although it was necessary for him in 1667 to bring a suit against one Richard Gibson, a Quaker, for non-payment of tithes, the parish was not much frequented by nonconformists and it was reported in 1669 that there was no conventicle there. Honywood gave $20 to the repair of the schoolhouse. On 29 September 1660 the king presented him to the deanery of Lincoln; he was installed in person on 12 October. He proceeded DD in 1661. As dean Honywood set vigorously to work to repair the damage done to the fabric of Lincoln Cathedral and its precincts during the civil war and interregnum, contributing liberally from his own purse. He also acted swiftly to re-establish the long-suspended choral services, and by the end of 1660 vicars and choristers had been appointed. With all English cathedrals in a similar position, skilled musicians were in short supply. In 1663 Honywood brought a Dutch organist, Andreas Hecht, to Lincoln, and in 1666 he was in correspondence with Sancroft, then dean of St Paul's, in search of duly qualified voices for the Lincoln choir at a time when the choir of St Paul's was unemployed as a result of the fire of London. The rebuilding of the ruined houses of the vicars choral and the education of the singing boys also occupied Honywood's attention. He earnestly defended the long-suspended rights of the dean and chapter, resumed the practice of decanal visitations of the prebendal churches and estates, and reasserted the franchises of the close. Honywood's chief work in connection with his cathedral was the erection at his own cost ($780) of the library from the designs of Sir Christopher Wren, on the site of the ruined north walk of the cloister. In this building he placed his extensive collection of books, which he eventually bequeathed to the chapter. The collection contains incunabula, an invaluable series of rare seventeenth-century tracts, and other works on a wide range of subjects and in a great variety of languages. Although the library's collections have continued to grow since his death, Honywood's own books are distinguished by the monogram 'MH'. 
Besides Sancroft, Honywood's friends included Herbert Thorndike and Samuel Pepys. The latter speaks of him as 'a good nature, but a very weak man; yet a Deane and a man in great esteem', and 'a simple priest... though a good well-meaning man' (Pepys, 'Diary', 29 June, 6 Aug 1664). Honywood died unmarried at his deanery on 7 September 1681; he was buried in the cathedral. John Walker describes him as 'a Holy and Humble Man, and a Living Library for Learning' (Walker, 2.269). 


@@@@@


doc= 13668


Honywood, Sir Robert (1601-1686), diplomat and translator, was born on 3 August 1601 at Hollingbourne, Kent, the second of twenty children, and eldest surviving son, of Sir Robert Honywood of Petts Court, Charing, Kent, and Alice Barnham, daughter of Sir Martin Barnham of Hollingbourne. Robert Honywood the elder was knighted by Charles I at Canterbury on 15 June 1625. The younger Honywood received the same honour at Oakfields on 7 July 1627, when he is described as 'servant to the Queen of Bohemia' (Shaw, 192). Elizabeth refers to him as her steward and his duties evidently included staging entertainments for her household -- Elizabeth mentions Honywood's participation in a production of Francis Beaumont's and John Fletcher's 'The Scornful Lady' -- and carrying messages on Elizabeth's behalf to her friends and allies in England, including Charles I and Archbishop Laud. In a letter to Laud, Elizabeth describes Honywood as honest and faithful, and thus suitable to be trusted with confidential information ('Letters', ed. Baker, 78; 'CSP dom.', '1635-6', 338, 402, and 222). The appointment of Sir Charles Cotterell as steward to Elizabeth '[a]bout 1652' ('DNB') may indicate that by this date Honywood had left her service. 
Honywood married Frances Vane (1614-1688), daughter of Sir Henry Vane, on 3 April 1631, at Shipbourne, Kent. The historian Edward Hasted says that they had sixteen children (BL, Add. MS 5480, fol. 69'r'), but only seven are recorded by name, four in Kent parish registers (Robert, Henry, Frances, and Edward). In her will, dated 26 January 1688, Frances Vane mentions three further children, Elizabeth, Ann, and Charles, all deceased. (Frances, her mother's executor, seems to have been the only one of the Honywood children to outlive the parents.) At least one of the children appears to have been born in the Netherlands, where Honywood is said to have owned three houses ('CSP dom.', '1635', 435). 
Honywood's sympathies during the civil war are unclear. Through his father-in-law and brother-in-law, also named Sir Henry Vane, he had close connections with the parliamentary side; and he continued to correspond with the elder Vane even while the latter was serving as a parliamentary commissioner to Scotland in 1645. In a friendly letter to the elder Vane, dated 13 October 1645, Honywood appears to refer to Fairfax's forces as 'our army', and to foreign animadversions against parliament as an 'ill office' ('CSP dom.', '1645-7', 188-90). However, Honywood also maintained his links with Elizabeth of Bohemia, who records his presence, with his son Robert and brother-in-law Walter Vane, at The Hague in August 1655 ('Letters', ed. Baker, 239). In the later 1650s he apparently served as a captain in one of the English cavalry regiments in the army of the states general, for in 1659, while on leave in England, he wrote to De Witt requesting that his company be transferred to his son, then on duty with the Dutch forces at Copenhagen (Rowen, 159). On 19 May 1659 he was appointed a member of the council of state, and in June 1659 Honywood, Algernon Sidney, Edward Montague, and Thomas Boone were chosen as plenipotentiaries to negotiate a peace between the kings of Sweden and Denmark. The English party arrived at Elsinore in July 1659 and remained in Denmark until after the Restoration. With Sidney, Honywood was among the signatories to the peace treaty signed between Sweden and Denmark, dated 27 May 1660. He returned to England in August 1660. 
Honywood's involvement with the council of state evidently caused him some embarrassment with his erstwhile employer, the queen of Bohemia, to whom he wrote, probably in autumn 1660, to say that he had seen King Charles and received assurances 'that he had nothing of objection against my person nor in relation to the employment I had been in, knowing well that I had followed my instructions, and beleeving that having lived so long in yr Mastys service, I could not in any thing be forward to disoblige yr family' (BL, Add. MS 18744). Further distress ensued when his son Robert was attainted for treason in 1667, having refused to answer a proclamation recalling him from service with the Dutch forces against the English in the Second Anglo-Dutch War. 
In 1673 Honywood published 'The history of the affairs of Europe in this present age, but more particularly of the republick of Venice', a translation of the 'Historia della republica Veneta' by the Venetian diplomat Giovanni Battista Nani (first published in 1662). In his dedicatory letter to Walter Vane (identified as 'Colonel of His Majesties Holland-Regiment'), Honywood writes that he had begun this translation 'in the Circumstances of an uncomfortable old Age and ruined Fortune, brought upon me, rather by publick Calamity than private Vice, or domestick Prodigality. And I undertook it to divert the melancholy hours, arising from the consideration of either' (sig. A1'r'). There may have been a domestic political motivation in Honywood's choice of Nani's history of Venice. From the civil war period onwards, the government and institutions of Venice had been of especial interest to Englishmen of parliamentarian and oppositional sympathies, including Honywood's erstwhile colleague Algernon Sidney. Such men admired Venice as a mixed polity, in which the head of state ruled in collaboration with an enlightened aristocracy, and which had, uniquely among Italian states, successfully resisted tyranny. Interest in Venice seems to have been especially intense in the middle and later years of Charles II's reign: Honywood's translation is one of ten books on the government of the Serene Republic to have been published by Englishmen during this period (Fink, 125). Since Nani's history explicitly honours the institutions of Venice and celebrates liberty, it is probable that Honywood's translation would have carried anti-monarchical and possibly republican connotations in the fraught English politics of the 1670s. 
Honywood died on 15 April 1686, and was buried at Charing church. By his will, dated 10 December 1672, he left all his possessions to his wife. She died on 17 February 1688 and was buried with her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 13669


Honywood, Sir Thomas, appointed Lord Honywood under the protectorate (1587-1666), parliamentarian army officer and local politician, was born on 15 January 1587 at Betchworth Castle, Surrey, the second son of Robert Honywood, esquire (1545-1627), and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1631), daughter of Sir Thomas Browne, whose seat Betchworth was. His paternal grandmother was the long-lived and devout Mary Honywood, who died aged ninety-three in 1620. Michael Honywood, royalist and dean of Lincoln, was a younger brother. 
Honywood was possibly a student of the Inner Temple in 1605, when a man of his name is described as of South Mimms, Middlesex, gentleman. He inherited Marks Hall, Essex, in 1631 and was knighted on 22 November 1632. Honywood married Hester (1606/7-1681), widow of John Manning of Hackney and daughter of John Lamotte of London, both merchants, on 10 May 1634. They had seven children of whom only three, Thomas, John, and Elizabeth, survived their father. 
Honywood was not active as magistrate or deputy lieutenant in the 1630s, perhaps out of antipathy to Charles I's political and religious policies. War with the Scots saw him named as an Essex commissioner for the collection of subsidies; fear of Irish insurgents saw him appointed commissioner for the $400,000 tax of 1642. 
Honywood was a committed puritan. He appointed a puritan to Markshall rectory in 1646 and befriended the puritan minister Ralph Josselin of Earls Colne. Driven by his religious proclivities he became a stalwart supporter of the parliamentarian cause. Named on every major ordinance relating to taxation, sequestration, and the militia he was a committed county committee man and a key divisional commissioner around Colchester. He was appointed a member of the Essex committee for scandalous ministers in both 1644 and 1654 and was nominated as an elder on the stillborn presbyterian classis of 1645-8. In 1650 he was appointed commissioner for the Commonwealth church survey. He upheld the authority of parliament and its successor regimes as magistrate at quarter sessions, 'c'.1645-59 and was 'custos rotulorum' between 1656 and 1659. He was keen to see local fortifications maintained. 
Yet while acknowledging local concerns and expressing concerns to parliament about excessive demands (in 1643 describing his local administrative division as being 'infinitely oppressed'), Honywood saw beyond any narrow county provincialism (BL, Egerton MS 2647, fol. 199). In June 1643 he backed the attempt by the earl of Essex at a levee 'en masse' 'for the defence of Religion and libertie' (BL, Stowe MS 189, fol. 10). He saw 'forwardness' in Essex as potentially inspirational to the well affected in other counties (BL, Egerton MS 2647, fol. 146). In spring 1643, as colonel of a regiment of foot, he took Essex trained bands to Reading and in July 1644 took them out again to the siege of Greenland House. The committee of both kingdoms consequently acknowledged his 'very good service to the public' in preventing the enemy from entering the very 'bowels of the Association' ('CSP dom.', '1644', 346). Significantly he had been one of the Essex signatories at the inception of the eastern association in February 1643 and was active in supporting both it and the subsequent New Model Army. 
Honywood was decisive in undermining local support for the royalists during the second civil war in 1648 through his rapid deployment of the trained bands. He preserved the magazine at Coggeshall. He joined Thomas, Lord Fairfax, on 11 June and subsequently formed part of the forces besieging Colchester. He appears to have headed the signatories to the articles of surrender at the end of August. Honywood's hostility towards the defeated was implacable; he opposed indemnity and demanded that enemy estates should be sequestrated and the money arising used to secure Essex from 'like imbroilments' ('Portland MSS', 1.480, 473-4). He insisted on the right of the Essex county committee and not Goldsmith's Hall to compound with them so that those suffering losses at Colchester could be compensated. Honywood was appointed to the high court of justice for trying Charles I in 1649, but did not attend. 
Trouble flared again in Colchester and neighbouring counties at the end of 1650. Since Honywood had disobeyed orders by not dismantling the fortifications at Colchester the council of state was obliged to appoint him governor of its garrison with the power to raise militia forces and disarm suspects. In 1651 Honywood again came to the defence of the Commonwealth when Charles II threatened at Worcester. At the battle Honywood was in charge of a regiment of foot from Essex; his forces allowed Lieutenant-General Fleetwood 'to advance close up' ('Mercurius Politicus', 28 Aug-4 Sept 1651, 1042). For this he was created a doctor of civil law by Oxford University. Locally, during 1655, Honywood, appointed a militia commissioner, zealously supported Cromwell's major-general, Hezekiah Heynes, by finding malignants; he and his fellow commissioners used godly rhetoric to request tough action against rebels and was 'most forward' in his support of the decimation tax (Thurloe, 4.320). That year Honywood stayed in Colchester to influence the elections there to ensure 'a good magistracy' (ibid., 320). 
Honywood was elected MP for Essex in 1654 and 1656. He was appointed to several committees, from the committee for printing to a committee which considered abuses in alehouses; occasionally he acted as a teller. In December 1657 Honywood was made a peer and appointed to the upper house. 
At the Restoration political settlement was all, and although excluded from the earl of Oxford's commission for deputy lieutenants for Essex and from the county bench Honywood received his pardon and paid his 'free and voluntary present' in 1661, while drifting into a healthy political obscurity. He died aged seventy-nine at Cotton House in Westminster, the house of his son-in-law, on 26 May 1666 'taken with a vomiting &c' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. Essex 23, fol. 300). He was interred on 1 June in the chancel of Markshall church by Ralph Josselin. 


@@@@@


doc= 13670


Hood, Alexander (1758-1798), naval officer, was born on 23 April 1758 at Netherbury, Dorset, the second son of Samuel Hood ('fl'. 1720-1780) of Kingsland, Dorset, and Anne (died 1775), daughter of James Bere of Westbury, Wiltshire. His father was a purser in the navy and first cousin of Samuel Hood, Viscount Hood, and of Alexander Hood, Viscount Bridport. His elder brother, Arthur, also served in the navy, and was lost in the sloop 'Pomona' in August 1776. His younger brother was Sir Samuel Hood, baronet, naval officer. Alexander's entry into the navy is a matter of uncertainty, as an Alexander Hood appears on the books of two ships simultaneously, namely the 'Romney', carrying his cousin Samuel's broad pendant on the North American station, between 15 April 1767 and 9 November 1770, and the yacht 'Katharine', commanded by his father, from 4 July 1768 to 4 March 1772. Although the 'Dictionary of National Biography' places him in the 'Romney', it is not known by what authority, as his passing certificate for lieutenant mentions only the yacht, from which he was discharged into the 'Resolution' (Captain James Cook) for the latter's second voyage of exploration. 
In 1776 Hood went to North America under the patronage of Lord Howe, by whom he was promoted lieutenant in the 'Raisonable' on 18 July 1777. In March 1780 he was appointed to command the cutter 'Ranger', which in the early part of 1781 was sent to the West Indies, where Sir George Rodney gave him the rank of commander on 17 May 1781. On 27 July he was appointed to the 'Barfleur' as flag-captain to his cousin Sir Samuel Hood, then in temporary command of the station. As captain of the 'Barfleur' he took part in the action off Cape Henry on 5 September 1781, and again in that at St Kitts on 25-6 January 1782. A few days later he was appointed to the frigate 'Champion', one of the repeating ships in the actions off Dominica on 9 and 12 April, specially attached to the Red squadron under Sir Samuel Hood, with whom she was afterwards sent to the Mona passage; there she had the fortune to capture the corvette 'Ceres', with whose captain, the baron de Parois, a nephew of the comte de Vaudreuil, Alexander Hood became very friendly. On the arrival of the squadron at Port Royal he was moved into the 'Aimable', another of the prizes, which he took to England in the summer of 1783. He then visited France at the invitation of the comte de Vaudreuil. In 1790-92 and again in 1793 he commanded the frigate 'Hebe' in the channel, and in the following year he was appointed to the 'Audacious', but was compelled by ill health to leave her. He was unable to resume active service until February 1797, when he was appointed to the 'Mars' (74 guns), attached to the Channel Fleet, then commanded by Lord Bridport. He experienced the mutinies at Spithead and St Helens, and was one of the captains sent on shore by the mutineers on 11 May. In the following spring the 'Mars' was with the fleet off Brest, and late on the morning of 21 April 1798, in company with the other ships of the inshore squadron, the 'Ramillies' and the 'Jason', discovered a French ship, the 'Hercule' (74 guns), making for the harbour. About 9 p.m. the 'Mars', by herself, found the 'Hercule' at anchor off the Pointe du Raz, waiting for the tide to turn. The darkness and the strength of the current prevented any attempt at manoeuvring. After an interchange of broadsides the 'Mars' fell alongside the 'Hercule' with the effect that the anchors at the bows became hooked together with the two ships touching, and the guns, which could not be run out, were fired in many cases from inboard. Such conditions led to the 'Hercule''s losing 315 men killed or wounded and with her guns dismounted she struck her colours. Casualties on the 'Mars', a similarly sized but older ship, totalled no more than ninety. Early in the action Hood had been shot in the thigh by a musket-bullet which cut the femoral artery. He was carried below, and expired just as the sword of the French captain, who also died later, was placed in his hand. Hood's body was taken to England, and buried in the churchyard of Butleigh, Somerset, beneath a monument erected by his widow, Elizabeth, daughter of John Periam of Butleigh. Although Hood undoubtedly benefited by his family connections, and he also showed some signs of being excessively strict, which resulted in his being put ashore in 1797, examples of his consideration also exist, and he was clearly an officer of ability and good powers of leadership. 
His will, leaving all to his wife, was made after he received his fatal wound, and gives no indication of his financial position. He was survived by their two children, of whom Alexander (died 1851) succeeded to the baronetcy conferred on his uncle Sir Samuel Hood; his children in turn included Sir Arthur William Acland Hood, naval officer. 


@@@@@


doc= 13671


Hood, Alexander, Viscount Bridport (1726-1814), naval officer and politician, was born on 2 December 1726, second son of Samuel Hood (died 1777), vicar of Butleigh, Somerset, and Mary, daughter of Richard Hoskins of Beaminster, Dorset. He was the younger brother of Samuel Hood (later Viscount Hood), who also entered the Royal Navy, Alexander preceding him by a few months, the protege of Captain Thomas Smith. 
Hood was entered on 19 January 1741 as captain's servant to Smith in the 'Romney', in which he remained with Captain Thomas Grenville until 22 April 1743, when he transferred to the 'Princess Mary', again with Smith, who rated him midshipman. He followed Smith to the 'Royal Sovereign' (December 1744), the 'Exeter' (March 1745), and the 'Hawk' (May 1746); from her he was promoted lieutenant on 2 December to the 'Bridgewater' in which he remained until she was paid off in October 1748. 
Hood remained on half pay until January 1755 when he was appointed lieutenant in the 'Prince' (Captain Charles Saunders); he was then (23 March 1756) appointed to the command of the sloop 'Merlin', fitting in the River Thames, and subsequently (10 June) was made post captain in the 'Prince George', in which Saunders, now a rear-admiral, hoisted his flag and proceeded to the Mediterranean station as second-in-command. Hood remained Saunders's flag captain for the next two years, following him successively to the 'Prince', the 'Culloden', and the 'St George'. Following his return to England, on 5 January 1759 Hood was appointed to the frigate 'Minerva', attached to the fleet off Brest under Sir Edward Hawke, whence she was placed in October and November in a small squadron commanded by Captain Robert Duff cruising on the Morbihan coast of Brittany. In the latter month the squadron was chased by the French fleet, which was then itself pursued by Hawke and defeated on 20 November 1759 in Quiberon Bay where Hood was present. He remained with the Channel Fleet for two more years, distinguishing himself on 23 January 1761 in the Bay of Biscay when the 'Minerva' fell in with the 'Warwick', a British 60-gun ship captured by the French in 1756 and now used as a transport. Although reduced in her armament, the 'Warwick's' size and scantling posed a challenge to the 32-gun frigate, and indeed the contest proved roughly equal. In an engagement lasting six hours, each ship lost two of three masts, and each had about forty-six dead and wounded. But, to Hood's credit, the 'Warwick' was captured. 
In summer 1761 Hood married Mary, known as Molly ('c'.1706-1786), daughter of Richard West, prebendary of Winchester; her mother was Maria, daughter of Sir Richard Temple, connected to the Lyttelton and Grenville families. Lord Lyttelton gave away the bride. Mary was twenty years older than Hood, but the match proved a happy one and his genuine tenderness to this 'glorious girl' was touching (Wyndham, 2.278). That August, Lord Anson, first lord of the Admiralty, honoured Hood by taking the 'Minerva' with him in a small squadron that escorted Princess Charlotte, the future queen, on her sea crossing from Mecklenburg to Harwich. In September 1761 Hood transferred to the 'Africa' (64 guns), launched the previous month, in which he served in the Mediterranean until the peace in 1763. In December 1763 he was appointed to the royal yacht 'Katherine', a command he retained until December 1777. His income was supplemented from 23 September 1766 when he succeeded Sir Charles Saunders as treasurer of Greenwich Hospital. The fortune of his wife, which Hood insisted she retain, and his several incomes permitted the couple to maintain a country house, Cricket Lodge at Cricket St Thomas, near Chard, Somerset, and a house in Harley Street, London. 
In December 1777 Hood was appointed to the 'Robust' (74 guns). On 27 July of the following year she formed one of Vice-Admiral Sir Hugh Palliser's rear division of the fleet under Admiral Augustus Keppel which indecisively engaged the French off Ushant. The ensuing controversy, involving courts martial of both Keppel and Palliser, almost ruined Hood's career, for at Keppel's trial he was forced to admit that he had directed the log book of the 'Robust' to be altered, by the insertion of signal, after the court martial was ordered. Hood made the perfectly reasonable assertion that the book had been written up carelessly and that his additions, which were not suspicious, merely improved and corrected the master's rough draft. Other log books had also been amended and the court did not condemn the insertion. George III was also inclined to put a favourable interpretation on the alteration: he recalled Hood had hitherto 'always borne the character of a man of strict honour. I therefore trust the affair will be explained and that his conduct will rather be proved to have been actuated by over-niceness than any inclination to alter the complexion of a document. (Hood, 47-8)' But the public noise in favour of Keppel was vociferous; Hood was hissed in court and the word 'hooded' for a short while meant being subject to false evidence. 
To restore his reputation after the court martial Hood appealed in February 1779 either for promotion or for a colonelcy of marines, his wife and brother adding their weight to his request. The 'most friendly act' Lord Sandwich, first lord of the Admiralty, felt he could do was to order the 'Robust' to the North American station. But, determined to face hostile opinion at home, Hood resigned his command of the 'Robust', and was re-appointed to the royal yacht 'Katherine'. He was promoted rear-admiral on 26 September 1780 but it was another two years before he was appointed to a real command, following the death of Rear-Admiral Richard Kempenfelt, in the Channel Fleet under Lord Howe. He hoisted his flag on the 'Queen' (90 guns) and took part in the final relief of Gibraltar and the subsequent skirmish with the Franco-Spanish fleet off Cape Spartel, on 19 October 1782. 
At the general election in 1784, under the patronage of the fourth Earl Poulett, Hood was elected member for Bridgwater. He spoke in parliament for the first time on 23 June 1784, and thereafter on three or four other occasions, all on naval matters. He voted with the government on the regency question, but abandoned his seat in 1790 on failing to agree terms with his patron. He was nevertheless re-elected for Buckingham in December 1790, and represented that constituency until 1796, though virtually without utterance, by the influence of the marquess of Buckingham, to whom he was related through his first wife, Mary. She had died in 1786 and on 4 May 1788 he married Maria Sophia ('c'.1746-1831), daughter of Thomas Bray of Edmonton. He had been promoted vice-admiral on 24 September 1787, and three days after his second marriage he was nominated a knight of the Bath. 
During the Spanish armament of 1790 Hood hoisted his flag for a short while on the 'London' at Spithead. However, significant further service only recommenced in February 1793 when he was appointed third in command of the Channel Fleet under Lord Howe and hoisted his flag on the 'Royal George'. He was promoted admiral on 24 April 1794; and for his part in the battle of 1 June 1794 he was created Baron Bridport in the Irish peerage (two years later he was created Baron Bridport of Cricket St Thomas in the peerage of Great Britain). Following the battle Bridport became second in command of the Channel Fleet; and from mid-1795, when Howe's weakening health obliged the Admiralty to permit him to command from on shore, Bridport took the fleet to sea in the invidious position of responsibility without power. On 12 June he sailed in escort of the British expedition to support a royalist rising in Brittany, parting company from the troop convoy and escort under Sir John Borlase Warren close to Belle Ile. The French fleet was reported to have left Brest, and it was sighted by Warren off Belle Ile; taking evasive action, Warren immediately sent word to Bridport who sighted the French fleet on 22 June. Villaret-Joyeuse, the French admiral, had only twelve of the line; Bridport, with Warren's ships of the line, a potential seventeen. Bridport gave chase, and on 23 June, Isle de Groix east 6 or 7 miles, captured three French battleships before Villaret-Joyeuse took refuge in Lorient. 
Since Howe had been forced ashore to recuperate from the battle of 1 June, Bridport had revealed jealousy of the favourable treatment of his commander-in-chief who was only a year older than himself and with whom he did not enjoy a close relationship. Bridport too had health problems, complaining in 1794 of gout. To retain Howe as nominal commander-in-chief, yet to reward and encourage Bridport for remaining at sea, in July 1795 Earl Spencer, first lord of the Admiralty, proposed the latter be appointed commander-in-chief of a squadron to be employed on a particular service, which carried higher emoluments. Bridport reported honestly that the new commission, which he thought overdue, failed to arouse in him either a sense of honour or feeling of gratitude, and that he still expected some further mark of royal approbation for his services. Irritating to Spencer, the reply prompted George III to observe that his remarks revealed Bridport's true priorities; 'in his family self value is so predominant that all other objects are not sufficiently attended to' (to Spencer, 16 Aug 1795, 'Later Correspondence of George III', 2.380). Yet the arrangement proved unsatisfactory. Remaining overall commander-in-chief, Howe still shared in prize money even though he served on shore, while Bridport, probably deliberately, failed to keep him informed of his proceedings. The new commission was suspended in October and Bridport retired on shore on half pay. 
Bridport did not again volunteer his services until October 1796, when Spencer was ready to employ him. Under the necessity to defend the Quiberon expedition from interference, the close blockade of Brest and Lorient had begun in June 1795. Since then detachments of the British fleet had relieved one another on station off Brest and this arrangement remained adequate throughout autumn 1796, though enhanced activity in the port steadily raised the demand for larger scale deterrence. In a move that coincided with the reinforcement of the Brest fleet from Rochefort, Bridport rehoisted his flag on 18 December 1796, though still nominally under the shore command of Howe. The French expedition to Ireland had sailed two days earlier; on 20 December the Admiralty dispatched orders to Bridport to put to sea from Spithead; an easterly wind and adverse tide contributed to collisions involving five ships on 25 December and eventually he sailed on 3 January 1797. However, though he remained at sea for a month, Bridport contributed little directly to the failure of the French expedition which returned into port on 13 January, having lost a quarter of its force through foundering, grounding, or capture by frigates. 
Following a brief cruise in March 1797 Bridport was at Spithead on 15 April when, on account of discontent in Ireland and intelligence of preparations in Brest, the fleet was ordered to make ready for sea and the seamen of the fleet, led by those in the 'Queen Charlotte', refused to unmoor. The Spithead mutiny took Bridport by surprise. In March the seamen had sent petitions to Howe who had referred them to Lord Hugh Seymour in the fleet; he had assured Howe that there was no general sign of discontent and sent the petitions to the Board of Admiralty where they had been ignored. Rather the board simply hoped that officers of the fleet would take steps to nip the mutiny in the bud. This placed the responsibility on Bridport, for Howe had finally resigned as commander-in-chief of the Channel Fleet on 8 April. Bridport was angry that measures had not been taken earlier to pacify the men; he also realized the scale of the mutiny and the impossibility of forcing the seamen to sail against their will. He accordingly ignored directions to proceed to sea and committed the Admiralty to answer the petitions. That answer was noncommittal, and as further petitions reached him, he placed responsibility squarely with the board to state to the seamen precisely how their grievances were being answered. 
In the ensuing negotiations Bridport consistently took the part of the mutineers. After the board migrated to Portsmouth to settle matters on the spot and seamen's delegates met on Bridport's flagship, the 'Royal George', on 21 April he was obliged to strike his flag. But on 23 April he was able to report to the mutineers that their demands had been conceded and he was permitted that day to rehoist his flag. At this time six ships became operational and dropped down to St Helens, the outer anchorage. However, further demands promptly emerged from them; before sailing the seamen also wished to secure the concessions they had won. Following Bridport's example, Spencer was willing to keep the seamen informed of the progress made in meeting their requirements. By 6 May order seemed to have been re-established. Yet again discontent revived, the St Helens ships refusing to sail without confirmation of the funds granted by the House of Commons towards their increased pay and provisions. Evidence of this was sent down from London. Bridport ensured its acceptability by insisting that the date the increases would take effect should be not the date set in London by order in council, but that which he had used in negotiating with the seamen. He also insisted that officers opposed by the men be replaced by others and that authority in ships be restored before he took the fleet to sea. He graciously accepted the diplomatic mediating mission of Howe, through whose reassurances the mutiny was finally settled by 15 May. The delegates expressed to Bridport their gratitude for his 'open and generous manner' and for the 'humanity' with which he employed his authority. Their letters of thanks were retained in his personal papers. 
Bridport did not arouse similar feelings either at the Admiralty or with some of his officers. Since mid-March 1797 Spencer had maintained the need to keep a more strict and systematic watch on the port of Brest. To more closely co-ordinate Falmouth-based frigate squadrons (hitherto reporting directly to the Admiralty) with the battle fleet operating from Spithead, in May 1797 the frigate squadron commanders, Sir John Borlase Warren and Sir Edward Pellew, were placed directly under Bridport's command. Both resented their loss of independence and found relations with Bridport difficult. At the same time, despite having the command of more frigates, Bridport denied being able to keep Brest under close watch, especially in easterly winds which drove blockading ships off shore while permitting the French to pass through the narrow neck of Brest harbour. He also wished to grant favoured captains cruising voyages within the limits of his command as a reward for past services while the Admiralty, short of ships and having to ration both frigates and ships of the line within every command, wished to understand and specify precisely the stations ships would fill, and have their captains keep those stations with absolute regularity. On other matters, such as officer appointments, the Board of Admiralty did what it could to satisfy him. But Bridport's dissatisfaction was by now accepted as characteristic: hence the secretary of the Admiralty observed in September 1797 he 'ought to be pleased, though he is never likely to be so' (Sir Evan Nepean to Spencer, 11 Sept 1797, BL, Althorp papers). 
Bridport became more reconciled to more strict Admiralty control after March 1798 when discontent in Ireland and mass manning of ships in Brest appeared extremely threatening. Nevertheless he did not refrain from complaint at losses of ships to other stations or deficiencies of flag officers. While short of ships, he denied an ability to defend convoys passing through the mouth of the channel while also blockading Brest. Undoubtedly after May 1798 he felt the strain of having to maintain station off Ushant. His correspondence with the Admiralty became acrimonious; he had a reputation at the Admiralty for putting 'a stronger and unfavourable construction on some things than they were meant to convey' (Bridport to unknown Admiralty commissioner, 2 July 1798, BL, Add. MS 35199). In the event, the blockade failed to prevent French ships sailing for Ireland from Rochefort in August and from Brest in September. Moreover, though seven of the nine vessels that escaped from Brest were captured, the credit did not fall to Bridport, most being taken by ships under the commander-in-chief on the Irish coast. A third expedition sailed from Rochefort in October but, on learning the fate of its predecessors, it returned safely into Rochefort. 
Through winter 1798-9 the blockade was reduced to squadrons, occasionally even fewer ships, and Bridport remained on shore. He returned to sail from Spithead on 13 April 1799 and was off Ushant when, under the cover of fog, Vice-Admiral Eustache Bruix with eighteen ships of the line slipped out of Brest, was reinforced from Lorient, and sailed for the Mediterranean. The threat of the loose fleet was momentarily exacerbated by an obvious 'ruse de guerre' contained in messages captured on 27 April on the French lugger 'Black Joke'. By now elaborate instructions were in place for the defence of Ireland, while reinforcements were sent to the Mediterranean. Yet it was not until 10 May that the Admiralty knew for certain that Bruix had gone south. He did little harm in the Mediterranean, but was able to unite with his fleet Spanish squadrons from both Cartagena and Cadiz which in July returned north. After leave on shore Bridport took station off Brest but could not prevent the re-entry of an enemy fleet of forty ships of the line. 
During autumn 1799 Bridport presided over thirty-two ships of the line off Brest; in March 1800 he was directed to keep twenty-eight always with him. Inshore the blockade by frigates focused as much on preventing the entry of stores as on the departure of warships. With the necessity to maintain the largest possible Channel Fleet at sea, the emphasis in maintenance and victualling had shifted from Portsmouth to Plymouth. Special efforts were made to improve victualling arrangements, especially to the fleet anchorage in Torbay. These included the provision of fresh vegetables and lemon juice, issued since 1796, to deter scurvy. The disease was not entirely beaten. Because lemon juice was still issued only as a cure, scurvy continued to break out, as much a psychological worry for fleet commanders as a physical problem. 
In April 1800 severe weather drove Bridport into Torbay and he took the opportunity to strike his flag for the final time. He was by then seventy-three and had for some time been feeling frail. He nevertheless lived until 2 May 1814. He was still not favoured by George III, but in justice was honoured by his advancement in 1800 to the dignity of viscount in the peerage of Great Britain. His titles in the peerage of Great Britain became extinct at his death, but his Irish barony descended to his great-nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 13672


Hood, Charles (1826-1883), army officer, was educated at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He obtained an ensigncy by purchase in the 3rd Buffs on 26 June 1844. In 1846 he was secretary to the mission sent to settle the dispute between Great Britain and France and General Rosa, governor of Buenos Aires. He became lieutenant in the Buffs on 20 November 1846, and captain on 7 November 1851. 
Hood arrived in the Crimea in May 1855. He was senior officer of his regiment in the trenches before Sevastopol, and led the ladder party in the attack on the Redan on 8 October 1855, and was wounded. He commanded the regiment from 13 September to 27 December 1855, and was at its head when it marched with colours flying into the Korabelnaya suburb after the fall of Sevastopol. He was rewarded with promotion to brevet major (8 January 1856) and with the Mejidiye (fifth class). 
After serving as major of the depot battalion at Templemore, Hood became lieutenant-colonel 58th (Rutlandshire) foot on 23 November 1860, and from 1864 to 1874 commanded the regiment in Bengal. He became a major-general on 25 July 1870. On 23 May 1874 he retired on half pay. He was promoted lieutenant-general (retired list) on 1 July 1881. He died at his home, 29 Belsize Road, Hampstead, London, on 8 February 1883. 


