@@@@@


doc= 13673


Hood, Edwin Paxton (1820-1885), Congregational minister and writer, son of Thomas Hood, an able seaman who had served under Nelson on the 'Temeraire', and a maidservant to Bishop Beilby Porteous's brother, was born in the latter's home, Half Moon Street, Piccadilly, on 24 October 1820. The child was fostered by Mr Simpson, a heraldic painter, and his wife, of Deptford, members of Greenwich Road Tabernacle. Edwin attended Union Chapel, Lewisham, and then Midway Place Chapel, Deptford. He also sat at the feet of Thomas Binney at the King's Weigh House Chapel: here he imbibed the romantic, liberalized theology later conspicuous in his own preaching. He began to lead worship and to lecture on temperance and peace, and in 1840 became a full-time temperance worker. In York in 1847 he met and married Jane Wagstaff ('b'. 1824/5), who died in childbirth the following year. He was a delegate to the Paris peace conference in 1848. From 1852 to 1857 he was Congregational minister at North Nibley, Gloucestershire: he described this appointment as his 'college training'. In 1853 he married Elizabeth Atkin Barnly ('b'. 1824/5) of Hull, but she died of consumption two years later. At Nibley he began to write hymns for Sunday school anniversaries, and these rank among his best compositions. 
From 1857 to 1862 Hood served at Offord Road Church, Islington, a new cause which he built up as a thriving middle-class congregation with a strong working-class fringe. In 1857 he married his third wife, Lavinia, daughter of the Revd S. Oughton of Kingston, Jamaica -- she outlived him. Offord Road was troubled by a serious burden of debt, and in 1862 he moved to Queen Street, Brighton, where the church had to be enlarged to house his growing congregation. Surprisingly he returned to Offord Road in 1873, even though the surrounding area was deteriorating and the debt problem remained. In 1877 he was called to the prestigious pulpit of Cavendish Street, Manchester. He began badly by fiercely attacking Disraeli's foreign policy from the pulpit. This so divided his flock that his health became impaired and he resigned in 1880, preaching to his supporters for a short time in Hulme town hall. He visited the USA and then for four years pastored the historic Falcon Square Chapel, London, where he seems to have found a peace which had long eluded him. 
Hood, a restless, quixotic and inspirational activist, wrote many books, popular biographies, temperance and peace literature, textbooks for young people, and appreciations of his own age. Two of these last are particularly notable: 'The Age and its Architects' (1852), in which he famously defines and explores his own times as 'an age of experiment' with an absence of 'all present faith and belief', and 'The Throne of Eloquence' (1885), a keenly observed introduction to earlier, but especially Victorian, preachers and preaching. He was for eight years editor of the 'Eclectic Review' and for two years edited the 'Preachers' Lantern'. He played some part in putting the poetry of Robert Browning on the literary map. The British Library catalogue lists more than sixty of his publications. He was a great friend of, and fund-raiser for, the Hospital for Incurables, but after his death was best known as a hymn writer, particularly for children. He edited 'Our Hymn Book' (1862) and 'The Children's Choir' (1870). Though a later age found many of his hymns too cloying, some, especially 'I love to think though I am young' and 'God who hath made the daisies', were still being anthologized in the mid-twentieth century. 
He took his last services at Falcon Square Chapel on 7 June 1885 and then departed on a tour of Italy; he had reached only Paris when he died on 12 June 1885. He was buried in Abney Park cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 13674


Hood, Francis Grosvenor (1809-1854), army officer, born on 4 March 1809, was the second son of Lieutenant-Colonel Francis Wheler Hood (1781-1814), son of Henry, second Viscount Hood. His mother was Caroline (died 11 March 1858), only daughter of Sir Andrew Snape Hamond. His father was killed in action in his thirty-third year, on the heights of Aire in France, on 2 March 1814, and was, in the words of Wellington, 'an officer of great promise and merit' ('Despatches', ed. J. Gurwood, 7, 1837, 346; 'GM', 1st ser., 84/1, 1814, 413, 492). Francis joined the Grenadier Guards in 1827, was promoted to his lieutenancy and captaincy in 1830, became captain and lieutenant-colonel on 31 December 1841, and on 27 June 1854 was gazetted major of the 3rd battalion. He married on 8 September 1842 his first cousin, Elizabeth Jane (died 15 Jan 1910), second daughter of Sir Graham Eden Hamond; they had no children. 
Hood went with the 3rd battalion to the Crimea, and led it at the battle of the Alma on 20 September 1854, when his bravery and judgement contributed to the defeat of the Russian counter-attack, and he received the special thanks of Lord Raglan. On 18 October 1854 he was in command of the covering party guarding the trenches and guns before Sevastopol, and was killed by a Russian roundshot. Lord Raglan, in his dispatch of 23 October, described Hood as an excellent officer, and wrote that he was 'deeply lamented'. 


@@@@@


doc= 13675


Hood, John (c.1721-1784), land surveyor, was born at Moyle, co. Donegal. He was the first known in a family of land surveyors active in the north-west of Ireland in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. In 1772 he published in Dublin his 'Table of Difference of Latitude and Departure for Navigators, Land Surveyors, &c.', which he had 'compiled at the insistence of the Dublin Society' (title-page). In it he also gives an account of the diurnal variation of the compass needle and its correction following the work of a 'Mr Anderson' and a description of his new combined theodolite and compass, known as Hood's compass theodolite, which was sold by Edward Spicer and James Lynch, both instrument makers of Dublin. This is the earliest known description of such an instrument. Hood is also said to have anticipated the invention of Hadley's quadrant, but he took out no patents. In the 'Proceedings of the Dublin Society' (1777) he advocated the use of a chain of 1/100th of an Irish mile. He died in 1784. 
John Hood had at least one son, 




@@@@@


doc= 13676


Hood, Robin (supp. fl. late 12th-13th cent.), legendary outlaw hero, is wellnigh impossible to identify, first because of the sparsity and peculiar nature of the evidence, and second because Robin quickly became a composite figure of an archetypal criminal, and then an outlaw hero. 
Only three early writers attempted to place Robin in a historical context. Andrew Wyntoun, who by 1420 had completed a rhyming chronicle of Scotland up to 1408, referred to Robin Hood and Little John under the years 1283-5. In the 1440s Walter Bower inserted a notice of Robin Hood and Little John into his continuation of Fordun's 'Scotichronicon' under the year 1266. Then in 1521, in his 'Historia majoris Britanniae', John Mair assigned Robin and Little John to the years of Richard I's captivity in Germany, 1193-4. All three writers were Scots. On this matter they are independent of one another. Their sources for these statements are unknown. They were not copied by English historians, and no medieval English historian made any such attempt to identify Robin Hood. Of the three, John Mair's date is the best. This is because Robin Hood, in all probability, was already a legendary criminal by 1261-2. 
The earliest indication of the legend is to be found in the surname Robinhood and its variants (Rabunhod, Robehod, and so on), which first appear in the late thirteenth century. Some eight examples, widely scattered, have so far been discovered. Such a name formation is rare, and the most likely explanation of it is that one so called, or those who gave him the name, knew something of the legend of Robin Hood. The earliest example, coming from Berkshire in 1261-2, is crucial. It begins with an entry on the king's remembrancer's memoranda roll of Easter 1262 which notes a pardon of a penalty imposed on the prior of Sandleford for seizing without warrant the chattels of William Robehod, fugitive. The same case occurs on the roll of the justices on eyre in Berkshire in 1261, which records the indictment and outlawry of a criminal gang suspected of robberies and the harbouring of robbers. The gang included one William, son of Robert le Fevre (Smith), whose chattels had been seized by the prior of Sandleford. Without any doubt William Robehod of the memoranda roll and William, son of Robert le Fevre, of the plea roll were one and the same person. Someone along the administrative channel from the justices on eyre to the king's remembrancer changed the name. He probably did so because William, son of Robert, had Robert in his name and was a member of an outlaw gang. So he became William Robehod. It follows that whoever changed the name knew of Robin as an exemplary outlaw. 
The discovery of this evidence by Dr David Crook in 1984 was decisive. The original Robin Hood, if such there was, must have lived before 1261 and probably some considerable time before, sufficient at any rate to generate this kind of fame. This gives some credence to John Mair's date. It is further supported by the appearance of a Robert Hod, fugitive, who failed to appear before the justices at the York assizes in 1225 and whose chattels, worth 32's'. 6died, were accordingly forfeit at the account of the exchequer in Michaelmas 1226. Finally, and much later, Thomas Gale, dean of York (1697-1702), left among his papers a note of an epitaph which recorded that Robin died on 24 Kalends December 1247. This is late evidence, and there is no such date in the Roman calendar; yet the interval between 1225 and 1247 exactly matches the final twenty-two years of his life which, in legend, Robin spent in the greenwood. So, in a somewhat tendentious reconstruction, a shadowy biography emerges: Robin was an active outlaw in 1193-4, outlawed again in 1225, dead in 1247, and already a legendary figure by 1261-2. In that outline the dates 1225 and 1261-2 are firm; and this Robert Hod is the only possible original who is known to have been an outlaw. There is even a hint that he became legendary: when the account for his chattels was repeated in 1227 he was recorded as 'Hobbehod'. The only other morsel of information is that the account was due from the liberty of St Peter's; Robert Hod must accordingly have been a tenant of the archbishopric of York. 
However, what the evidence of 1261-2 gives with one hand it takes away with the other. Certainly it provides a 'terminus ante quem' for a prototype Robin Hood. Yet it also demonstrates how Robin Hoods were made. If William, son of Robert le Fevre, could become a Robin Hood, so could others. In the case of Robert Hod of 1226-7 the real name and nickname coincided; it is the only case where this is certainly so, and he could well have started the legend. But in many other cases criminals could have used or attracted the nickname without its leaving any trace of itself in the record of their crimes. It is only through luck that the flash of illumination from the case of William, son of Robert le Fevre exists. So it could well be, and almost certainly was, that the legend as it is now originated in multiple Robin Hoods, a composite person embodying real people and real incidents all brought together under the umbrella of a single persona. There were other outlaws with other names -- some real, some legendary. This one snowballed, absorbing other legends and continuing to gather new material down to the present day. 
In this context the evidence from 1261-2 ceases to be a touchstone. Instead scholars have attempted to match real incidents and real people with the legend of Robin Hood as it first appeared in written form in the fifteenth century. The first tales to survive in manuscript come from about 1450. 'Robin Hood and the Monk', found in a manuscript collection that includes a prayer against thieves and robbers, is a thriller, a story of treachery and revenge. Robin is betrayed to the sheriff by a knavish monk while at worship in the church of St Mary, Nottingham. He is then rescued from Nottingham Castle by Little John and the rest of the gang. 'Robin Hood and the Potter', part of a manuscript collection of romances and moralistic pieces probably written shortly after 1503, is by contrast a burlesque. Robin, after challenging and fighting a travelling potter, takes the potter's dress and wares in order to inveigle his way into Nottingham Castle and lure the sheriff to the outlaw lair in Sherwood. The 'Gest of Robyn Hode', assembled in the fifteenth century, most probably after 1450, is a collection of tales then current, which it presents as an integrated 'geste' in a roughly constructed chronological sequence. It attracted the attention of the early printers, in no fewer than five editions produced between the last years of the fifteenth century and the middle of the sixteenth century. It is in effect a minstrel's serial, designed to be recited at intervals. It includes what is perhaps the earliest story of all, the tale of the impoverished knight. In this story, Robin assists a knight who has mortgaged his lands to the abbot of St Mary's, York, by robbing the monks themselves to repay the loan. The knight later becomes Sir Richard of the Lee who fortifies his castle to protect Robin and his men from the vengeful sheriff. The 'Gest' includes much else, including two archery contests held in Nottingham, also an encounter between the king and Robin in Sherwood, and a summary tale of Robin's death at Kirklees Priory in the West Riding of Yorkshire, which was later amplified in a seventeenth-century version. The main setting of the 'Gest' is Wentbridge and Barnsdale (West Riding), but it is partly obscured by the intrusion of a tale of Little John and the sheriff of Nottingham, and by the setting of the meeting of Robin and the king in Sherwood. The canon is completed by a separate tale, 'Robin Hood and Guy of Gisborne', which is the story of a medieval bounty hunter whom Robin defeats and kills. This also is set in Barnsdale. Its early date is confirmed by a dramatic fragment of 'c'.1475 which covers much the same ground. 
Together these tales make up the authentic medieval legend. The 'Gest' is much the largest and most important item, a long poem of 456 four-line stanzas. The thematic material of the 'Gest' is generally accepted as coming earlier rather than later in the development of the legend. Partly because of this, it is primarily in the 'Gest' that scholars have sought to find the traces of real people. However, 200 years, and more, separated the composition of the 'Gest' from the William Robehod of 1261-2, and very little is known of the development of the legend in that interval. The only landmark is William Langland who, in 1377, had Sloth declare that he could recite rhymes of Robin Hood and Ranulf, earl of Chester. That remains the earliest literary reference. So the search for real individuals is made more difficult by the total ignorance of when and how the surviving tales were generated. There is only one point of certainty. In the 'Gest' the king has no other name but Edward. In 1852 Joseph Hunter established that the circuit of 'Edward our comely king' through the royal forests of Yorkshire and Lancashire and thence to Nottingham, as described in the 'Gest', fitted only one royal progress, namely that of Edward II between April and November 1323. Nothing that has been discovered since has disturbed Hunter's conclusion. This part of the 'Gest' is based on Edward II's journey and must have been composed after 1323. It may, nevertheless, be intrusive. 
It is within these limits that the search for real people has been carried out. It has yielded some real probabilities, some possible candidates, one disappointing rejection in which for a time great confidence was placed, and a rag-bag of assertive speculations which do not merit serious consideration. The first concerns Eustace of Lowdham, who acted as sheriff or deputy in Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire at various times between 1217 and 1233. He combined in these offices the two geographic locations of the Robin tales. In this respect he fits the bill of the legendary sheriff; he is one of the few sheriffs to do so. In 1225, as sheriff of Yorkshire, he was instructed to seek, take, and behead one Robert of Wetherby as an outlaw and evil-doer. Robert was quickly caught and his body suspended in chains, an outlaw at the right time, in the right place, and with the right forename, but by Robin Hood's standards a failure. Yet incidents lying behind these bare records may have contributed to the legend, especially perhaps to the violent tale of Guy of Gisborne. Another possible contributor was Roger Godberd, who led an outlaw gang which terrorized Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Leicestershire in the years after the Montfortian rebellion of 1265. He was pursued by various posses and, after evading capture for many years, ended his days in Newgate Prison in 1276. The final charges against him were that he and other malefactors had robbed an abbey, taking money, stock, and horses, and slain one of the monks (though of Stanley, Wiltshire, not St Mary's, York). Roger gained some protection from a local knight of some prominence named Richard Foliot, who in 1272 was accused of harbouring Godberd and had to surrender his castle of Fenwick and find sureties of good behaviour. Like Sir Richard of the Lee he was a knightly patron of outlaws, and his land lay in the right place: Fenwick is 6 miles or so from Barnsdale, and Foliot also held estates on the eastern bounds of Sherwood. So he too fits the bill. He surrendered his castle; Sir Richard of the Lee fortified and defended his; otherwise their roles are identical, and the coincidence of outlaw and knightly patron is remarkable. A third set of possible originals has been advanced from a later period: Thomas Moulton, abbot of St Mary's, York, 1332-59, as the abbot of the 'Gest'; Geoffrey Scrope, chief justice of the king's bench, 1324-38, as the corrupt justice; and John Oxenford, sheriff of Nottingham for most of the years 1334-9, as the vicious sheriff. These are less acceptable. Such strength as the case has depends on the coincidence of the three, and the context does not include an outlaw leader as a possible contributor to Robin. 
These suggestions have all arisen since 1955, some since 1980. None of them has gained anything like the acceptance of the hypothesis put forward by Joseph Hunter in 1852. He identified Robin Hood with a Robert Hood of Wakefield, who is well recorded in the rolls of the manor court up to 1317. The crux of his argument was that Robert Hood vanished from the Wakefield records by 1323 (there being no surviving rolls for 1317-23), while a Robyn Hod appeared as one of the porters of the king's chamber in 1324. This seemed to occur at just the right place and moment -- at Nottingham, at the end of Edward II's northern progress which matches so exactly the king's journey in the 'Gest', after which Robin made his peace with the king and entered the royal service as a yeoman. This concordance seemed utterly convincing, and it has been much embroidered, partly by Hunter who advanced the guess that Robert Hood had been outlawed as a supporter of Thomas, earl of Lancaster, who had been defeated at the battle of Boroughbridge in 1322, but mainly by later antiquaries who have compounded their enthusiasm with bad judgement, worse understanding of record, and, on occasion, rank mistranslation of Latin. But it scarcely matters, for Hunter missed crucial evidence which put beyond doubt that Robyn Hode, porter of the chamber, was already in the royal service six months before Edward came to Nottingham. That is sufficient to bring the whole edifice tumbling down. The last heard of the porter is that he retired through incapacity (either of age or health) with a grant of 5's'. in November 1324. There were two men, then, not one: Robert Hood of Wakefield and Robyn Hode, porter of the chamber; and there is no evidence that either of them contributed to the legendary Robin. 
The legend had a life of its own. New personae were constantly absorbed. The early tales contain no Friar Tuck and no Maid Marion. The friar is of special interest because he demonstrates once again how the doings of real people were pressed into service for the story. The original was Robert Stafford, parson of Lindfield, Sussex, who gathered around him a band of evil-doers who committed murders and robberies and threatened the peace of Surrey and Sussex between 1417 and 1429. He assumed the name of Friar Tuck, and puzzled royal officials recorded that he was 'newly so called in common parlance'. By 1475 the friar figured in the first surviving fragment of a Robin Hood play. Maid Marion in contrast was a literary and dramatic figment. She originated in a French pastoral play, 'Robin et Marion', composed 'c'.1283 by Adam de la Halle; she was then taken over in Gower's 'Mirour de l'omme' of 1376-9 where she participates in rustic festivals; and by 1500 or shortly afterwards Robin Hood and Marion had come to figure as king and queen of May in the May games. But Marion was by no means the first literary component. Once the story had become an entertainment in the hands of minstrels it was contaminated by other tales. The earliest written versions share analogues and topoi with romances of other outlaw heroes -- Hereward the Wake, Eustace the Monk, Fulk Fitzwarine (died 1256). These all belong to the thirteenth century. All Robin's literary links are with adventures of this kind, all concerned with real men. The argument that he was some kind of woodland sprite, linked with Robin Goodfellow or the Green Man, which originated with Thomas Wright (1846) and culminated in Margaret Murray's 'God of the Witches' (1931), is no longer seriously entertained. 
One other element is also missing from the earliest versions. All the early notices of Robin treat him as a criminal. In 1433, for the first time, he is described as 'Goodman'. The early written tales contain little if anything of what has become Robin's best-known characteristic, that he robbed the rich to give to the poor. This was foisted on the legend in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and was further developed by the radical antiquary Joseph Ritson in his edition of the tales of 1795. The notion probably originated in the Robin Hood plays. These are first recorded in Exeter in 1425. By the beginning of the sixteenth century they were widespread in southern England as a feature of the spring festival. They were licensed by ecclesiastical authority, and in some centres Robin and his players conducted charitable collections, sometimes far from gently. The churchwardens met the expenses for dress and entertainment and received an account of the collection. In effect, and under licence, Robin was taking from the rich and giving to the poor. 
The claim that Robin Hood was of noble birth is derived from Leland, later much expanded in Anthony Munday's 'Downfall of Robert Earl of Huntington' (1598). It has no further warrant. In the medieval legend he is a yeoman, nothing else. His association with Saxon resistance to the Normans stems from Sir Walter Scott's 'Ivanhoe' (1819) and is equally fictitious. Scott's depiction of Robin of Locksley in this, his most popular novel, ensured Robin's prominence in the age of mass culture. Many plays and popular stories about him appeared in the nineteenth century (though Tennyson's verse play, 'The Foresters', failed disastrously in 1892). The legend lent itself easily to film and television, with 'The Adventures of Robin Hood' (1938), starring Errol Flynn, the best of a long series. 
Robin Hood was supposedly buried at Kirklees. Nathaniel Johnston in 1665 sketched a grave slab which is now much damaged. As with Little John's supposed grave at Hathersage, no body lies underneath. At Castle Hill near Wentbridge, the most exact of all the locations in the 'Gest', Johnston also sketched a plan of what he took to be a small motte and bailey castle. This has not been excavated. 


@@@@@


doc= 13677


Hood, Sir Samuel, first baronet (1762-1814), naval officer, third son of Samuel Hood of Kingsland, Dorset, and Anne (died 1775), daughter of James Bere of Westbury, Wiltshire, was born on 27 November 1762. Captain Alexander Hood (1758-1798) was his brother. He entered the navy in 1776 on the 'Courageux' with his cousin Samuel (afterwards Lord) Hood. In 1778 he was moved to the 'Robust' with Alexander Hood, the future Lord Bridport, and was present at the action off Ushant on 27 July. In 1779-80 he served in the sloop 'Lively' in the channel. When Sir Samuel Hood was appointed second in command in the West Indies he took Samuel into his flagship, the 'Barfleur', on which he was promoted lieutenant on 11 October 1780. He was present in the several actions with De Grasse -- off Martinique on 29 April 1781; at the Chesapeake on 5 September 1781; and at St Kitts on 25-6 January 1782. 
On 31 January 1782 Hood was promoted by his cousin to the nominal command of the sloop 'Renard', then a hospital ship at Antigua. Hood remained in the 'Barfleur' as a volunteer until the end of the war, and was thus at the actions off Dominica on 9 April, at the battle of the Saintes on 12 April, and in the Mona passage on 19 April 1782. He brought the 'Renard' back to England at the end of the war. He lived two years in France, acquiring an intimate knowledge of the language. In 1785 he was appointed to the sloop 'Weasel' on the Halifax station, where he surveyed the coasts and harbours, and on 24 May 1788 he was posted to the command of the frigate 'Thisbe', which he brought home and paid off in the autumn of 1789. In May 1790 he commissioned the frigate 'Juno' (32 guns) in which he went out to Jamaica. On 3 February 1791, while lying in St Anne's harbour, he rescued three men from a wreck during a violent storm. With his bargemen reluctant to man his captain's barge, Hood himself jumped in, saying, 'I never gave an order to a sailor in my life that I was not ready to undertake and execute myself', and shoved off. For this the house of assembly of Jamaica voted 100 guineas for a sword to be presented to him. 
The 'Juno' returned to England in the summer of 1791, and through the autumn and the following year was stationed at Weymouth, in attendance on the king. Early in 1793 she went out to the Mediterranean with the fleet under Lord Hood, and was with it at the occupation of Toulon. However, the 'Juno' was absent at Malta when Toulon fell, and Hood, unaware of developments, brought her back to the inner harbour on the dark and drizzling night of 9 January 1794; but then he made a dashing escape, under fire. 
Soon after this Hood was engaged in the operations on the coast of Corsica, and after the capture of S. Fiorenzo Lord Hood transferred him to the fine frigate 'L'Aigle' (36 guns), and sent him in 1795 in command of a small squadron into the archipelago to protect the trade and watch some French frigates which had taken refuge in Smyrna. In April 1796 Hood was moved into the 'Zealous' (74 guns), one of the fleet with Sir John Jervis (afterwards the earl of St Vincent) off Toulon, and in 1797 off Cadiz. He won the confidence of his new commander (who had little love for Hood's cousins) by establishing discipline in a previously disorderly ship. He missed the battle of Cape St Vincent because the 'Zealous' was refitting at Lisbon; but in July she was one of the squadron with Nelson in his disastrous attack on Santa Cruz. With the assault force almost out of ammunition and surrounded in a square, Hood was employed by Troubridge to conduct the extraordinary negotiations which extricated the survivors. Hood demanded of the Spanish governor that they be provided with boats to return to their squadron within ten minutes or they would burn the town; he stood with watch in hand until the Spaniard backed down. 
In early 1798 the 'Zealous' was in the Bay of Biscay and off Rochefort; but having again joined the fleet before Cadiz, she was one of the ships sent in May to reinforce Nelson in the Mediterranean ['see 'Nelson's band of brothers]. In the battle of Abu Qir Bay the 'Zealous''s role was particularly brilliant: closely following the 'Goliath', Hood let go his anchor on the bow of the 'Guerrier', the leading French ship; he than heartened the oncoming British line by dismasting her within twelve minutes. After a three-hour pounding 'Guerrier' surrendered, completely shattered, and Hood passed on to engage other ships. When Nelson quitted the coast of Egypt, Hood was senior officer commanding the squadron which continued to blockade the French army, and captured or destroyed some thirty of their transports. In February 1799 he rejoined Nelson at Palermo, and was employed during the spring in the defence of Salerno, and afterwards as governor of Castel Nuovo at Naples. The king of the Two Sicilies awarded him the order of St Ferdinand and of Merit. 
In May 1800 the 'Zealous' was paid off, and Hood was appointed to the 'Courageux', in the squadron under Sir John Borlase Warren off Ferrol. In January 1801 he was moved into the 'Venerable', which after a few months in the channel joined Sir James Saumarez (afterwards Lord de Saumarez) in time to take prominent parts in the unfortunate action at Algeciras on 6 July, and in the brilliant victory in the straits on 12 July. When leading the pursuit next day, the 'Venerable' had all her masts shot away; she went ashore, and was later refloated with difficulty. The 'Venerable' was paid off at the peace, and in October 1802 Hood was sent out as joint-commissioner for the government of Trinidad. By the death of Rear-Admiral Totty he became commander-in-chief of the Leeward Islands station, hoisting a broad pennant on board the 'Centaur'; and on the renewal of the war he captured, together with the land forces, the islands of St Lucia and Tobago in June 1803, and, on the mainland, Demerara, Essequibo, and Berbice (September), and Surinam (May 1804). Under his command also a large number of the enemy's privateers and warships were captured or destroyed, to the great advantage of the English trade; and in January 1804 the Diamond Rock at the entrance to Fort Royal harbour, Martinique, was occupied, armed, and commissioned as 'a sloop of war'. Hood's services were acknowledged by complimentary addresses from the legislative assemblies of the islands, and the present of plate of the value of 300 guineas; he was also nominated a KB (26 September 1804). On 6 November he married the Hon. Mary Elizabeth Frederica Mackenzie (1783-1862), eldest daughter of Lord Seaforth, governor of Barbados; they had no children. 
Early in 1805 Hood returned to England, where he was further rewarded with a colonelcy of the marines; continuing in the 'Centaur' he was sent off Rochefort in command of a squadron of six battleships. On 25 September he fell in with a French squadron of five large frigates and two brigs bound for the West Indies with troops, but while his ships were capturing the four largest of these Hood's right elbow was smashed by a musket ball, entailing the amputation of the arm; for this he was awarded a pension of $500 per annum. In the 1806 election the government nominated him a 'naval hero' candidate for the Westminster seat once held by Lord Hood, and he topped the poll. His lust for active service afloat led him to decline a proffered seat on the Admiralty board. At the May 1807 election his friend Sir Evan Nepean provided him with a seat, Bridport, which he was to hold until 1812. Hood returned to sea in the 'Centaur' in 1807, and was in Lord Gambier's fleet at Copenhagen. On 2 October Hood was promoted rear-admiral of the blue, and later, with his flag in the 'Centaur', he had naval command of the force which captured Madeira on 26 December 1807. In the following year he advanced to rear-admiral of the white and was second in command of the fleet in the Baltic, under Sir James Saumarez. On 26 August the 'Centaur' was with the 'Implacable' (Captain Thomas Byam Martin), pursuing far ahead of the Swedish fleet to which they were attached; Hood cut off the 'Sevolod' (80 guns) from the Russian line, and captured her after a stubborn defence in which the two ships, locked together, ran aground. The 'Sevolod' had to be burnt, but the 'Centaur' was saved from the Russian fleet by Byam Martin's intervention. The king of Sweden awarded him the grand cross of the order of the Sword. 
In January 1809 Hood was second in command at Corunna during the re-embarkation of the army, for which he received the tumultuous thanks of the House of Commons in his seat as member for Bridport. He was created a baronet on 13 April 1809, and for the next two years he commanded a division in the Mediterranean. On 31 July 1810 he became rear-admiral of the red. On 1 August 1811 he was advanced to vice-admiral of the blue, and towards the end of the year was appointed commander-in-chief in the East Indies, where he arrived in the early summer of 1812. His command was uneventful, the war having been brought to an end with the capture of Java and Mauritius; and the time was mainly occupied in regulating and reforming points of organization or discipline and the methods of victualling, in which his reforms reportedly effected a saving to the government of something like 30 per cent. On 4 January 1814 he was appointed vice-admiral of the white. He died at Madras on 24 December 1814, of malaria, after three days' illness. 
A life which, with few and short intermissions, was spent in active service left Hood short of social polish. Even service friends thought him 'reserved to a distressing degree' ('Letters and Papers of... Thos. Byam Martin', 1.154) and 'awkward and ungraceful' (Hotham, 1.270). The latter thought him the only man he ever knew 'who appeared to like a sea life 'par excellence', and who was never happy out of it' (ibid., 1.269). In his own element he was a thorough professional and a popular commander with all ranks. The 'occasional streak of obstinacy about him if what he heard did not coincide with his opinion or suit his wishes' (ibid., 1.269), also made him an unrelenting opponent in combat, the archetypal fighting captain that commanders wanted when action loomed. Because Hood died without children, the baronetcy, by a special clause in the patent, passed to the son of his brother Alexander. 


@@@@@


doc= 13678


Hood, Samuel, first Viscount Hood (1724-1816), naval officer, born on 12 December 1724 in Butleigh, Somerset, was the eldest son of Samuel Hood (died 1777), vicar of Butleigh and prebendary of Wells, and Mary Hoskins. Both parents came from Dorset, the father being a younger son of Alexander Hood, squire of Mosterton, and the mother a daughter of Richard Hoskins of Beaminster. The sea was nowhere in Hood's background. Samuel and his younger brother Alexander Hood may well have been charmed by Captain Thomas Smith's tales of navy life when he stayed overnight at Butleigh in 1740. Smith is known to have occasionally visited Butleigh Court, the country house of his cousin James Grenville. Alexander went aboard Smith's 'Romney' (50 guns) a few months before Samuel, who was entered for pay on 6 May 1741 but must have joined the ship in March before she sailed for Newfoundland. At sixteen he was somewhat older than most boys who aspired to be naval officers and thus had time to become more broadly educated. 
Smith was arguably the best guardian and mentor that a youngster entering the navy could have. Thomas Grenville succeeded Smith as the 'Romney''s captain in 1742 in the Mediterranean, and Hood followed Grenville to the 'Guarland' in April 1743. In November Hood was rated a midshipman in the 'Sheerness', under Captain George Bridges Rodney. He moved with Rodney to the 'Ludlow Castle', leaving her on 23 January 1746 for service under Smith who had just been given command of a squadron patrolling the coast of Scotland in consequence of the Jacobite rising of 1745. As commodore, Smith was able to appoint Hood acting lieutenant of the 'Winchelsea' (20 guns) on 17 May; the promotion, seconded by her captain, Henry Dyve, was confirmed by the Admiralty a month later. 
The ship was ordered from the North Sea to the channel where, during a fierce and ultimately successful action near the Isles of Scilly with the 'Subtile' (26 guns), Hood was wounded in the hand. In March 1748 he went on the 'Greenwich' (50 guns) under Captain John Montagu, but Smith was quickly able to persuade Rear-Admiral Charles Watson to take Hood as third lieutenant of his flagship, the 'Lyon' (60 guns), on a voyage to North America. On her return in November, the 'Lyon' was paid off. 
While on half pay at Portsmouth Hood married, on 25 August 1749, Susannah Linzee (1726-1806), daughter of Edward Linzee, a prominent surgeon and apothecary who was active in borough politics and frequently held the office of mayor. She was twenty-three and within a year a son was born, named Samuel. Hood plunged into Portsmouth politics with gusto. In October 1750 the infant was elected a junior burgess of the corporation but he died six months later. Hood remained in close touch with Admiral Smith and in January 1753 he was appointed a lieutenant of the guardship 'Invincible', from which he transferred in May to the 'Terrible', also a guardship at Portsmouth. A squadron preparing for the East Indies offered hopes of promotion and Hood was eager to go if he could be placed favourably for filling a vacancy, but a better option arose in early 1754 when his father-in-law got word that the captain of the sloop 'Jamaica', stationed at South Carolina, was 'as far gone as a man can be and alive'. There may have been help from Sir Richard Lyttelton, but it seems clear that Edward Linzee, who went up to London to solicit Lord Anson personally, was the main cause of Hood's gaining the rank of master and commander. Towards the end of June he took passage to Charles Town. Although career advantage may have been in his mind when he married Susannah Linzee, he found, as he confided to Smith, the parting 'very severe. I did not think it would have affected me so much, but I find I love my sweet wench better than I thought for' (Wyndham, 2.102). 
Hood arrived in America on 8 August 1754. He had anticipated that South Carolina's warm climate would soothe his intestinal disorders and found that he liked 'the face of the country' and was 'treated with... civility and respect by all the best of the people'; they were 'all prodigiously kind'. Only one thing was missing, he told Smith: 'if Susan should come to me (which I have earnestly desired if no war) I shall then be happy indeed!' (Wyndham, 2.106). He wrote this from Hampton Roads in early May 1755 in company with Commodore Augustus Keppel who had been assisting General Braddock, so he well knew that war with the French was possible; yet his extravagant optimism regarding the upcoming British and colonial operations in North America allowed him to hope that the French might give up. Susan stayed in Portsmouth, and the sloop 'Jamaica' was placed under Commodore Charles Holmes. After Hood distinguished himself in an action with a French squadron off Louisbourg on 27 July 1756, Holmes posted him as captain of his flagship 'Grafton' (70 guns), not knowing that the Admiralty had already posted Hood for the 'Lively' (20 guns). 
The 'Grafton' came home in late 1756. At thirty-two Hood was not a young captain, yet not too old for good career prospects. Highly regarded by first-rate professional mentors (Smith, Watson, Holmes), he could also look to his father-in-law's influence and his connection through Smith and James Grenville to the 'cousinhood' -- Lytteltons, Grenvilles, and Pitts -- who had just moved into high offices of state. Lord Temple (Richard Grenville) was now first lord, and Hood -- 'no ways inclined to be idle ashore' -- wrote that he would be happy to take over temporarily for any captain required ashore for the court martial of Admiral Byng. Consequently in spring 1757 he commanded three ships in rapid succession: the 'Torbay' (70 guns), the 'Tartar' (35 guns), and the 'Antelope' (50 guns). In the last he found an opportunity to prove himself in command when, on 14 May 1757, he espied three sail off Brittany. Pursuing the largest, the 'Aquilon' (50 guns), he chased, engaged, and drove her on the rocks in Audierne Bay, where she became a total wreck. A week later he captured a 'small snow' bound from Bordeaux to Canada, and on 25 May a 16-gun privateer. The Admiralty rewarded him on 14 July with permanent command of the 'Bideford' (20 guns), attached to Sir Edward Hawke's squadron cruising in the Bay of Biscay. 
On 7 February 1758 Hood was given command of the 'Vestal' (32 guns); he took part in Hawke's second foray into Basque Roads and the destruction of the fortifications on the Isle of Aix, but during most of the year he cruised the channel approaches between Ushant and Ireland. Early in 1759, on the way out to North America with Commodore Holmes's squadron, Hood encountered off Cape Finisterre (21 February) the French frigate 'Bellona', also carrying 32 guns. He chased and engaged; in a running battle of more than three hours the 'Bellona' was devastated and she struck. The 'Vestal', heavily damaged, returned to Portsmouth with her prize; her victorious captain was presented to the king by Lord Anson. After refitting, the 'Vestal' patrolled off Le Havre, where an invasion flotilla of flat-bottomed boats had been collected. She formed part of a bombardment squadron that succeeded in destroying them (4 to 6 July 1759). Rodney, who supervised from on board the 'Vestal', gave all credit for positioning the bomb vessels in darkness to Hood and two other officers, the assigned pilots proving useless. By spring 1760 the war in the Atlantic was winding down, and on 30 April Hood asked to be sent to the Mediterranean, mainly, it appears, for genuine reasons of health. 'For ten years past,' he explained, 'I have been afflicted more or less with a bilious disorder, which has been very severe within these nine months as to confine me to my cabin for many days together' ('DNB'). Again he looked for a warmer climate. The 'Vestal' carried out Sir Charles Saunders's orders to scour the Spanish coast and then headed for the Levant. Hood was occupied mainly in Mediterranean convoy service until the war ended. 
On his return home in 1763 Hood found that his most important naval patrons had died, yet his service reputation was well established and he was soon employed in the privileged position of captain of the guardship 'Thunderer' at Portsmouth. In February 1764 he requested leave to take the waters at Bath, and again in September when he asked for two months 'to fortify my stomach against the winter', something to which he felt entitled because he had 'served the whole of the last war, without asking a single day's' absence from duty (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/1898, 13 February and 2 Sept 1764). In summer 1765 the ship carried a regiment of foot from Ireland to Halifax. Edward Linzee became mayor of Portsmouth for a fifth time in 1766 and Sir Edward Hawke, the first lord, was one of the borough's MPs; it was not surprising that Hood should be favoured by appointment to the North American station in April 1767 as commander-in-chief. 
Hood's base was Halifax and except for the cold climate the assignment promised to be pleasant, quiet, and advantageous (Robert and John Linzee were with him and he secured promotions for both), but it came to be dominated by the storm of protest aroused in Boston by the 'Townshend duties'. Hood sent the 'Romney' there in May 1768 but did not go himself until November. He planned to stay only through that winter but remained in Boston until late July 1769. To provide him with enough warships for moving troops, since transports for the purpose could not be hired locally, his authority was extended to encompass the entire Atlantic coast. Initially Hood favoured strict enforcement of the revenue laws, but by February 1769 he had observed the spread of opposition throughout the colonies and was 'apprehensive it will be a task no ways easy to bring America to acknowledge (I mean the assemblies) the Power of Great Britain's Parliament to tax it'. He therefore became 'very circumspect... not to widen, but rather to heal, the unhappy breach' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/483, 27 February and 26 March 1769). Thereafter his dispatches aimed at dissuading the home government from acting provocatively; he did not believe there would be armed rebellion. Later in 1769 Hood was at Halifax supervising improvements to the yard facilities, and he did not return to Boston until ordered there in September 1770; his successor arrived on 10 October. 
Hood commanded the guardship 'Royal William' at Portsmouth from January 1771 to November 1773. During this time he settled into a country house at Catherington, near Horndean, and rode 10 miles to work. Spending very little time on half pay, he was next appointed to the guardship 'Marlborough'. As she was clearing for the dock on 5 July 1776 she suffered a powder explosion that killed almost twenty people (men, women, and children) and wounded fifty. Turned over with officers and crew into the 'Courageux' (74 guns), Hood spent most of 1777 at sea, first in raising men, then in cruising to protect trade from Cape Finisterre to the channel. Hood was happy to find that despite her size she chased extremely well and could frighten off American privateers, though he made no captures. Upon returning to port in early February 1778 he accepted a civil appointment as resident commissioner of the navy and governor of the Royal Naval Academy at Portsmouth. He was now fifty-three and thinking about his health, but he accepted the position on condition that it would not preclude an eventual return to active service as a flag officer. Also, by soliciting and obtaining command of the 'Courageux' for his unemployed brother, Alexander, he was able to give some continuity to the careers of his followers, one of whom was the earl of Chatham's third son, whom Lady Chatham had entrusted to his care (James, who died of disease in the West Indies in 1781). 
Spring 1778 was a time of feverish mobilization for impending war with France. George III journeyed to Portsmouth in May to witness the preparations and took the occasion to discuss with Hood the entry into the navy of his third son, Prince William. He took notice of Hood's energy in forwarding 'the business of the Dockyard' ('Extracts', ed. Laughton, 1.225) and forthwith created Hood a baronet. As Sir Samuel, an officer very favourably noticed by the king, he could not help looking at his career from a new perspective. Upon declaration of war with France he wrote to Lord North reminding him that he was still available for sea service, further remarking that he had not politically identified himself with the Pitts and Grenvilles but had instead both publicly and privately supported the government. For whatever reason, he was kept on as commissioner. Two years later, as promotions to rear-admiral were speeding up, he wrote to Lord Sandwich, the first lord, expressing his 'very great desire of hoisting [his] flag and serving in the military line' ('Private Papers of... Sandwich', 3.161) and claiming that he had accepted the commissionership not out of inclination but to accommodate the government. After some very impatient waiting Hood's plea finally got results. In mid-September 1780 a letter from the Admiralty arrived asking him whether, if there was a promotion of admirals, he would accept his flag and go to the West Indies. Lord Sandwich needed someone to serve as second-in-command to the demanding, irascible Rodney after Hyde Parker, unable to stand him any more, resigned. Faced with a defection of opposition whig officers and the reluctance of others to serve under Rodney, the first lord remembered Hood, who had twice served under Rodney without serious friction. 
Amazingly Hood turned the offer down; he cited 'bodily infirmities' so long continued that he was without 'spirits' and would 'only be the shadow of a flag officer'. Two days later, however, he wrote again, rather urgently, saying that he would like to accept; he added: 'a warm climate will tend more towards removing my complaints than any assistance I can get at home' ('Private Papers of... Sandwich', 3.228-9). Reconsideration of his health prospects may have been linked to news that Edward Linzee was sure to be elected mayor again, making Hood's presence less critical, yet this flag promotion and assignment was the chance of a lifetime, so a third explanation seems more compelling. For more than a year, in the wake of the notorious Keppel-Palliser court martial, Sir Samuel had been striving to rescue the career of his younger brother, who had corrected his ship's log, perhaps legitimately, but in a way that favoured Palliser's accusations. Alexander was castigated for this by the officer corps and the public, and Lord Sandwich found it prudent to turn his back on him. In refusing the offer Hood had asked Sandwich to protect and favour Alexander. No record of a promise from the first lord regarding Alexander survives, but in the extensive promotion of 26 September the brothers were elevated to rear-admiral simultaneously. 
As rear-admiral of the blue Hood hoisted his flag in the 'Barfleur' (98 guns) and departed with eight of the line and the trade on 19 November to join Rodney in the West Indies. After leading an advanced division in the expedition against St Eustatius in January 1781 he took station to windward of Martinique with eighteen of the line in imminent expectation of an arriving French squadron and convoy. Because Rodney remained at St Eustatius looking after the booty Hood held independent command. Hood was not free to decide where to position his force, however; he chose the windward station, but after five weeks of futile cruising (the French force was much delayed) Rodney ordered him to leeward. Hood repeatedly wrote to try to reverse his chief's decision, knowing that from leeward he would have little chance of preventing the enemy from gaining shelter under Martinique's guns should the escort commander choose to avoid battle. But Rodney held him to leeward. Hood believed that Rodney's main motive was to ensure that the six warships already at Martinique were blockaded, to prevent them from attacking the loot to be transported from St Eustatius. 
On the morning of 29 April the French squadron, twenty of the line, came round the southern end of the island, the storeships hugging the shore. Although Hood had got word of their arrival from one of his frigates during the night, his attempt to close was frustrated by the adverse current and very light, sometimes non-existent breezes. Four of the line from Fort Royal joined Admiral de Grasse's already strong squadron. Outnumbered and with crews weakened by lack of refreshment, Hood had to be wary. De Grasse chose not to press an attack, but during a long-range skirmish six of Hood's ships were damaged and he had to retire to Antigua for repairs. 
Everyone knew that the battle fleets would go to North America for the hurricane season, but no one on the British side anticipated that de Grasse, co-operating with the American army in a secret plan that required assured naval superiority, would take his entire fleet. Before sailing for home Rodney gave Hood most of the available ships, fourteen of the line. With these Hood left Antigua on 10 August and reached the American coast before de Grasse. Not finding him in the Chesapeake or Delaware bays he went to New York to join the ships of Rear-Admiral Thomas Graves. Clearly, the best course was to attack de Grasse's squadron before seven French warships at Rhode Island could join it; only after vehement remonstrations could Hood persuade Graves of the urgency. Graves, slightly senior to Hood, was in command when the British fleet, numbering nineteen of the line, arrived off the entrance to the Chesapeake on the morning of 5 September 1781. As soon as the tide permitted (around noon), de Grasse began to work his twenty-four of the line out of the bay. 
Afterwards Hood claimed that the obvious move would have been for Graves to fall upon the French van speedily, concentrating the entire British line upon it as soon as it came out. This would undoubtedly have been a wise proceeding since the remaining French ships were only slowly getting clear of Cape Henry. But Graves tried to execute an orthodox form of battle and spent hours in manoeuvring to achieve the parallel extended line that he wanted. All the while the French were assembling their superior force, and not until 4.15 p.m. did firing begin. The vans clashed, but most of Graves's line, approaching on an angle, was beyond range. He realized that he must try to bring his whole force into action, but the manoeuvring example set by his flagship in the centre was inadequate (it turned parallel and began firing at too great a distance), and his signals, based on complex and unfamiliar fighting instructions inherited from his predecessor, sowed confusion. Time ran out as sunset ended the battle. 
Hood commanded the rear division. His decision to remain in line ahead until the battle was almost over kept the rear entirely out of action and does not cast him in a good light. Granted, he felt constrained by Graves's line ahead signal which, until it was hauled down at 5.30 p.m., seemed to negate (remembering Graves's many signals for dressing the line) the simultaneous signal to engage. The next day Graves issued a clarifying instruction which amounted to admission of a problem. Both admirals knew that when sea battles went awry the burden of censure almost always fell upon an officer who failed to adhere to the discipline of the line. Yet posterity must find it difficult to forgive a man of Hood's temper and energy for allowing tactical confusion to trump a signal for close action, even though little could have been done to hurt a retiring enemy so late in the day. By the end of September it was realized that Lord Cornwallis's situation was desperate and the navy could do nothing to help him. 
Hood's record as an admiral had thus far not shown anything commendable. His overblown claim that he was 'conscious of no one omission' in managing his ships prior to or during the action off Martinique ('Private Papers of... Sandwich', 4.155-9) suggests the opposite. With regard to the battle of the Chesapeake it cannot be assumed that if the chief responsibility had been his, he would have had the quick perception and resolve to attack the French van with an improvised line. (Neither he nor Graves was aware on 5 September of Cornwallis's dire predicament.) When he returned to the Caribbean as a commander-in-chief, however, his actions began to disclose the qualities of leadership for which he is remembered. Even before leaving New York he began to reveal some of them: he persuaded Graves's successor, Rear-Admiral Robert Digby, to release four battleships for Caribbean operations until spring, making the bargain attractive by a generous offer to share all prize money until the ships were returned. In consequence Hood commanded a substantial squadron, and he raised it to a high level of fighting efficiency by exercises on voyage. Although still outnumbered, he was nevertheless confident. 'I will seek and give battle to the Count De Grasse,' he wrote to the Admiralty, 'be his numbers as they may' ('Letters', ed. Hannay, 62). 
This he did. When the French attacked St Kitt's, Hood proceeded with his twenty-two of the line against de Grasse's twenty-nine. His plan, carefully confided to the whole squadron in advance, was to attack the three rear ships of the French line at the Basseterre anchorage in succession. It was frustrated by a collision between his lead battleship and a frigate, enabling de Grasse to stand out to sea, and next morning, 25 January 1782, Hood decided that the best chance to save the island was to seize the anchorage. He made a feint towards the French fleet, drawing it seaward, and then raced towards the anchorage. Belatedly de Grasse sought to thwart him, but Hood sent a frigate ahead to give his van precise instructions for entering and anchoring in succession. The plan provided mutual cover for his divisions and resulted in a tight line sealing Frigate Bay. Thus Hood had interposed his ships between the French fleet and their army ashore. With springs to their cables they could direct their broadsides and de Grasse's attacks were driven off. The British land force, however, even using Hood's marines, was insufficient, and when the Brimstone Hill garrison capitulated Hood knew that the French would bring shore batteries against his squadron, trapping it between them and the French fleet, which now numbered thirty-two. After re-embarking his marines, Hood on 14 February summoned flag officers followed by lieutenants from the whole squadron to his cabin and required them to synchronize their watches by his chronometer. At 11 o'clock that night every ship cut its cable without signal and departed, the enemy remaining unaware until near dawn that the anchorage was empty. This campaign though futile was the making of Hood's reputation, and its daring and superb execution were noted by the French as well. Mahan has described the three-week operation at St Kitt's as 'the most brilliant military effort of the whole war' (Mahan, 470). 
Rodney arrived at Barbados with twelve of the line to resume command on 19 February and Hood joined him. Both admirals were aware that de Grasse at Martinique was awaiting a convoy of troops and stores necessary for offensive operations. On 22 March the British squadron numbered thirty-six of the line, and because the French convoy escort was unlikely to number more than fourteen Hood was gratified when Rodney initially placed the fleet (to windward) athwart both the northern and southern approaches. But Rodney changed his mind and ordered a southern concentration. The French convoy, escorted by only three of the line, reached Fort Royal safely by the unguarded northern route. Hood was livid; only a 'madman' in command of the French squadron would have come 'in sight of St Lucia, knowing, as he must, the force of the British fleet, which would naturally be on the lookout' ('Letters', ed. Hannay, 97). 
When de Grasse left Fort Royal for St Domingue with thirty-six of the line escorting a vast convoy of troops and trade, Rodney pursued. Hood's division was in the van, which became isolated on 9 April when the rest of the squadron lay becalmed in the lee of Dominica; the 'Barfleur' received fire from five French ships for over an hour before support could come up. De Grasse, retreating towards Guadeloupe while shepherding battle-damaged ships, was brought to engagement near the Saints on 12 April with his fleet reduced to thirty against the British thirty-six. Hood's division, now placed in the rear because of the damage it had suffered, was in a position to emulate Rodney in breaking through the French line. But this left him becalmed in the lee of Dominica and only in late afternoon could he rejoin the action. By this time de Grasse in the shattered 'Ville de Paris' (110 guns) was looking for a flag officer to whom to surrender with honour. Hood obliged, and after a brief but bloody ten minutes of fire from the 'Barfleur' de Grasse struck. Five French ships were taken and the rest fled. Knowing the French were in disarray, Hood pleaded with Rodney to let him chase, but permission was not given until 17 April, upon which Hood hurried to the Mona Passage with ten of the line. It took only two days, but the French had got through one day before; still, he captured two of the line that came from Guadeloupe plus a frigate and a sloop. Yet all he could think about was the opportunity that had been lost -- 'a great fleet... so 'completely beaten' and 'routed' and 'not pursued''. He vented his feelings in letters bemoaning the capriciousness of Rodney and the irresolution of Rodney's captain of the fleet, who was 'no more fit for the station he fills than I am to be an archbishop' ('Letters', ed. Hannay, 136-7; 'Letters and Papers of... Barham', 1.163). He was advised to tone his letters down, but declared he could not. 
In June Hood supervised fleet repairs at Jamaica. In July Rodney was superseded by Admiral Hugh Pigot, inexperienced and sluggish but agreeable; Hood deluged him with advice, but they got along rather well. The hurricane season of 1782 was spent at New York. Hood, whose marriage was a happy one, wrote to Susannah that he would 'not let slip any opportunity' to return to her (Hood, 'Admirals Hood', 81) and drafted a letter of resignation, but, finding that the king had sent out Prince William to serve under his care, knew he must stay on and threw 'the letter into the fire' ('Letters and Papers of... Barham', 1.249). When Hood left New York on 22 November the 'Albemarle', commanded by young Captain Horatio Nelson, went with him, Nelson having asked Pigot to let him serve under Hood in the West Indies. Nelson was soon elated: 'He treats me as if I was his son' ('Dispatches and Letters', 1.72). Hood held semi-independent command off Jamaica (Pigot was at the Leeward Islands) and spent the rest of the war trying to intercept and bring to battle French and Spanish squadrons that had no wish to meet him. 
Hood returned to England in late June 1783. The warm relationship with Captain Nelson continued; after having him to dinner at his London house, 12 Wimpole Street, Hood declared that it was always open to him, and the oftener Nelson came the happier it would make him. In 1784 Hood helped Nelson obtain command of the 'Boreas', assigned to the West Indies. That same year, as a popular admiral (the City of London had presented him with its freedom in a gold box), he was nominated for Westminster, and though he had considered himself lucky to escape from an earlier attempt to nominate him, this time he could not refuse because Pitt the younger (and the king) truly needed him to oppose Charles James Fox. The election in May 1784 was notoriously marked by violence and fraudulent voting. Hood later described it as 'the most arduous and unpleasant business I ever took in hand' ('Rutland MSS', 3.134). He topped the poll but was not comfortable in parliament, and the expense of being in London exhausted his finances, for he had never set his sights on making a fortune in prize money. He requested a sinecure, which was denied, but was appointed commander-in-chief at Portsmouth during 1786-8 and again in 1791-3. 
In September 1782 Hood had been given an Irish peerage as Baron Hood of Catherington. Certainly he deserved royal favour, not least because responsibility for Prince William was a difficult assignment. The father himself cautioned that 'it would not be proper he should be left to the sole guidance of his volatile imagination' ('Extracts', ed. Laughton, 1.228). When the time came for William to be captain of a ship Hood saw that Lieutenant Isaac Schomberg was placed on board as a 'minder'. At Antigua in 1787 a dispute erupted between the captain and his lieutenant over a petty matter and Schomberg demanded a court martial, which Nelson, then the commodore on station, unwisely granted. Thereafter Hood was unable to do anything for Nelson for five years, but he took the risk of offending Prince William by appointing Schomberg, 'a deserving officer with no prospect of promotion but by him', first lieutenant of his flagship. The prince was deeply wounded by this and wrote angry, censorious letters. Hood composed beautifully tactful replies, making clear, nevertheless, that he was unrepentant and judged Schomberg to be 'a very excellent officer, and a sensible well-behaved man' (Ranft, 4.290-3). This mark of determination to support professional merit even under the most trying circumstances was noticed in the service. 
Hood was not averse to the idea of going to sea again. He had been offered the East Indies command in 1784, but refused it. As he confided to Prince William, 'I should run a great risque of losing that character, which has cost me forty years labour to obtain, and besides, had I lived, I must have returned poorer than I went out, unless I did one of two things, either connive at trade in the Kings ships, or plunder government by contracts, neither of which I could bring myself to do. (NMM, HOO/2, 2 Aug 1784)' Yet he strongly defended Warren Hastings in a parliamentary speech that stressed how dangerous a restraint would be placed upon persons in 'stations abroad of high difficulty' if fear of impeachment hung over them (Brooke, 2.637). Too many of his speeches, however, were thought indiscreet, a factor that evidently prevented his being appointed first lord upon the retirement of Lord Howe. Instead Pitt asked him to take a seat on the board so that Lord Chatham 'should have the best Professional assistance' (NMM, HOO/2, 21 June 1788). Thus, from 1788 to 1795, he served on the Admiralty board; nevertheless, when war came in February 1793 he was appointed commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean. He left Portsmouth on 22 May in the 'Victory' with a talented group of proteges, among whom was Horatio Nelson. 
The Mediterranean command had always required strategic and diplomatic wisdom. Supremacy was to be exerted over a broad expanse while simultaneously keeping the French fleet at Toulon in check. At this time the only British base was Gibraltar, so the navy's operational viability greatly depended upon diplomacy. Hood was soon complaining that he was almost blind from writing to so many ministers and other correspondents. 
Quickly, however, the situation became highly unusual. Hood had scarcely arrived off Toulon when he was approached by envoys from Marseilles and the naval base at Toulon, fearfully seeking his protection from the ruthless Jacobin army sent south from Paris. Their rather amazing offer was to place the Toulon forts and fleet in British hands in trust, to be restored after the war. Hood accepted on condition that the French declare for constitutional monarchy as the price of his assistance, a stance not formally adopted by the British government. Yet Hood had had to act quickly, and as Nelson commented, he had secured a strongly fortified port and twenty-two sail of the line without firing a shot. Pitt publicly hailed the event, but the opportunity had come too early, before British troops could be made available. Having only 1500 to land, Hood had to scrape together what foreign troops he could and hope to hang on until help arrived. Sir Gilbert Elliot came out to assist him politically and administratively; assistance that was welcome, the variety of tasks being well beyond the powers of one man. Yet Hood, though almost seventy, displayed vigour and alertness; Nelson commented that 'he possesses the mind of forty years of age' ('Dispatches and Letters', 1.378). 
However, Hood proved too vigorous, devoting much of his naval force to carrying out manifold tasks all over the Mediterranean according to his original orders. The unfortunate consequence was that when the French launched a major attack on Toulon in December he had only a third of his fleet present to resist it and to remove the French warships and refugee royalists when resistance crumbled. Moreover his excessive optimism led to hanging on too long in hopes of military relief. He ignored the urgings of both his own and the Spanish government to begin preparations for taking the French warships out of harbour. In consequence the final evacuation on 17 December was hastily improvised: only three French battleships were removed, and attempts to burn the rest were botched, with only nine of the line, three frigates, and two sloops being destroyed. 
None the less, it was a prodigious naval victory. The French lost a total of thirteen of the line and the Toulon arsenal was ravaged. Hood refused to be discouraged. After carrying the refugees to Italian ports he mounted an expedition to occupy Corsica as a base. Frustrated by the caution of the generals, he intervened in their business. On this occasion Hood's positive thinking yielded success. Assaults from the sea mounted by his marines (they were actually soldiers assigned to the fleet as marines), assisted by a blockade and Pasquale Paoli's independence movement, helped the army complete the conquest, which was sealed by the French garrison's surrender (4500 men) on 22 May 1794. But the army commanders, two of whom resigned in protest, did not hide their resentment of his imperious direction and sometimes ill-informed criticism. 
Hood went home in early November 1794, intending to return the next spring. In recognition of his services he was made an elder brother of Trinity House, his wife was given a British peerage as Baroness Hood of Catherington, and on 4 April 1795 he was promoted admiral of the blue. He did not return to the Mediterranean because when he insisted, going over the first lord's head, that the number of ships assigned to him by the Admiralty was seriously inadequate, Earl Spencer, seeing a threat to naval discipline, got him dismissed from the command. This ended Hood's naval career. In 1796 he was appointed governor of Greenwich Hospital, and, on vacating his Westminster seat at the general election, he was elevated to Viscount Hood of Whitley in the British peerage. 
Deeply regretting the loss of Hood to the service in 1795, Horatio Nelson remarked that he was 'the best Officer, take him altogether, that England has to boast of,... equally great in all situations which an Admiral can be placed in' ('Dispatches and Letters', 2.146). Few naval officers at that moment in time would have disagreed with this assessment. Although before 1781 Hood had had no experience of fleet command, he rapidly identified the countless things conducive to success, things that required professional knowledge and imagination, clarity of communication (Hood could write as well as speak clearly), forethought, attention to detail, and vigilant monitoring. Some men's minds, he wrote in 1782, 'are full of anxiety, impatience, and apprehension, while others, under similar circumstances, are perfectly cool, tranquil, and indifferent. Mine is of the former cast' ('Letters', ed. Hannay, 145). Naturally he set a high standard for himself and despised indolence or negligence in others whether superiors or subordinates. One is not surprised to hear that he inspired awe. As his former secretary wrote in 1799, he displayed 'the sternness of the old school..., but then, the whole is tempered by a tenderness and urbanity, that prevents its ever being oppressive, or tyrannical' ('Naval Chronicle', 2.45). 
Hood's leadership of a fleet in battle was never fully tested, either because he was second in command or, later, because opposing squadrons were intent on keeping their distance. Instead, he should be remembered as a consummate naval strategist. Gathering information was a fundamental duty; a commander who did not take steps to discover what he needed to know could 'do nothing but from the chapter of accidents' ('Letters and Papers of... Barham', 1.205). Hood's active mind weighed intelligence reports, worried through the possibilities, and produced reasoned appreciations. He was uncannily accurate in forecasting French moves in the Caribbean in 1781-3, often to an unreceptive superior. Working through his anxieties and apprehensions to a reasoned plan, he was then strongly disposed to act, and one may easily detect in him a perpetual offensive spirit, one of his most striking attributes. It was also, however, principled: as he commented to Digby after asking for the four battleships, he wished to be on the offensive; on the defensive he could not 'prevent mischief' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/313, 2 Nov 1781). This offensive spirit he carried to excess during the Toulon occupation, but Hood's inability to exercise it as second in command in 1781-2 was unfortunate. 
Some historians have been disgusted by the relentless stream of advice and criticism appearing in Hood's letters. Although most of the advice was issued beforehand and most of the criticism was provoked by advice not taken, it still seems, at least to the modern eye, excessive and insubordinate. At one point he admitted that he had 'probably gone too far in hints... thrown out' to Admiral Pigot ('Letters', ed. Hannay, 140). At times he certainly went too far when his criticisms touched elements of personal character, as they frequently did in the case of Rodney. Some of this amounted to backbiting but most of it was in the open and may be characterized as effrontery (when asked to tone down his letters he remarked that it would be pointless because his views were known throughout the fleet). He was so often guilty of the crime of being right that the king's personal regard may have played a role in saving him from the usual hierarchical consequences. 
On the other hand, there is no evidence that 'the fleet' disagreed with his criticisms or thought that he should have suppressed them, and it should be recalled that Hood's relations with his chiefs were not, except in the case of Graves, disruptive. Rodney exhausted the patience of many who had to work with him and his temperament was as unlike Hood's as can be imagined, but Hood recognized Rodney's merit as a combat leader. He remarked to Sir Charles Middleton that if Rodney had been in command at the Chesapeake 'the 5th of September would I think have been a most glorious day for Great Britain' ('Letters and Papers of... Barham', 1.125). At the time he wrote this he had recently experienced four months of Sir George in other respects, at his worst. But there was never a breach; in fact there was co-operation, and considering their differences of temperament this was a commendable achievement for both admirals, less common in that century than is sometimes supposed. Hood also worked well with Pigot and Digby. But he did not mend relations with Graves, and Rodney kept them apart. In the end, one should remember that the ablest of Hood's naval contemporaries judged him by his actions. 
They also admired his deep respect for the profession. Fellow officers realized that he was not pure. He helped his relatives to promotions -- they all did -- and accepted the role of patronage. On the other hand, he was confident that performance would always earn approbation and respect, 'for no commanding officer, however overbearing he may be, dare take any liberty with an inferior who does his duty like an officer and a gentleman' (Hotham, 1.32). As for politics, Hood was not really averse, despite his discomfort with the hurly-burly of electioneering at Westminster. He proclaimed that he was not 'a 'party man''; if so perceived, he said, 'I must... expect to lose every consideration in the line of my profession' ('Letters', ed. Hannay, 155-6). His loyalty to the regime during the American war and thereafter to the younger Pitt manifested a strong disposition to support the government in power and avoid partisanship. This disposition seems to have enabled Keppel, when first lord in 1782, to re-establish good relations with the Hood brothers. Finally, there was the matter of prize money, to which Samuel Hood was relatively indifferent. He did not become rich in the service -- unusual for an admiral active in wartime. He therefore felt that he needed (and deserved) a public pension to enable him to support his peerage, because, as he informed Pitt in 1798, 'the greatest part of my income arises from the governorship I hold; and when I drop, Lady Hood, possessing every shilling I am worth, will not have more than $800 a year to maintain her' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/146, fols. 27-8). The pension was awarded in 1800. 
Throughout retirement Hood's mind remained active; he seldom gave way to bitterness, though a great blow fell when Susannah died on 25 May 1806, in the apartments at Greenwich. Hood wrote: 'A better woman, a better mother, or better wife never existed' (GEC, 'Peerage', 6.569). His health problems, so much heard about earlier, were remarkably minor; at eighty-five he still rode every day and had 'no complaint but deafness' ('Diaries of Sylvester Douglas', 2.34). He died at 5 Queen's Square, Bath, on 27 January 1816 after suffering a fall. Upon feeling weak and retiring to lie down, he made a last accurate forecast: the accident, he remarked, would be the 'finishing blow'. 
The viscountcy passed to his third and only surviving son, Henry (1753-1836), whose marriage to Jane Wheler of Whitley Abbey had brought Warwickshire lands to the family. Hood was buried next to his wife at Greenwich Hospital. Among distinguished admirals of the eighteenth century he is almost unique in that no monument has been erected to his memory, but there can hardly be a more impressive one than beautiful Mount Hood in Oregon, sighted and named in October 1792 by a lieutenant with George Vancouver's expedition. Worldwide Hood is remembered for the majestic battle cruiser that carried his name; inadequately armoured and penetrated by a German salvo, she blew up and sank in May 1941. 


@@@@@


doc= 13679


Samuel Hood (c.1800-1875), legal writer, the son of Matthew Hood and Margery Risk, was born in Moyle, co. Donegal, about 1800, emigrated to the USA in 1826, and was called to the bar in Philadelphia. He published a treatise, 'On the Law of Decedents' (1847), and wrote, among other works, 'A Brief Account of the Society of the Friendly Son of St Patrick' (1844) for the Hibernian Society of Philadelphia. He died at Philadelphia in 1875, survived by three sons and his wife, Ellen Gowen. 


@@@@@


doc= 13680


Hood, Thomas (bap. 1556, d. 1620), mathematician and physician, was baptized at St Leonard Eastcheap on 23 June 1556, the son of Thomas Hood, a Merchant Taylor. He entered the Merchant Taylors' School on 7 November 1567 and matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in November 1573. Having gained his BA in 1577-8 he was elected fellow of the college and completed his MA in 1581. Four years later the university granted him a licence to practise medicine. 
In the aftermath of the Spanish armada of 1588, concern for a greater knowledge of the mathematical sciences among military officers and naval commanders was voiced by members of the privy council. In consequence, Sir Thomas Smith and Lord Lumley instituted a mathematical lectureship in London, and Hood was invited to become 'Mathematical Lecturer to the City of London'. He gave his first lecture on 4 November 1588 in Smith's House, Gracechurch Street. This lecture was published within the next few months: it listed the reasons for establishing the lectureship and spoke of the importance of the mathematical sciences to people in all walks of life. It included a brief history of mathematics from Adam to contemporary scholars. Hood was particularly anxious to stress the centrality of mathematical principles to all parts of creation. Later lectures took place in the Staplers' Chapel in Leadenhall Street, where copies of Hood's textbooks were made available to students. Judging from the title-pages, his lectures ceased at some point in 1592. 
At this time Hood was living in Abchurch Lane, but he later moved to a house in the Minories. He continued to teach privately, but turned his attention increasingly to navigational problems and to designing new instruments as aids for navigators and surveyors. He applied for a licence to practise medicine in London from the Royal College of Physicians, but this was denied him owing to his having an insufficient knowledge of Galen. The college finally granted him a conditional licence on 5 August 1597. At some time after this Hood moved to Worcester and established a medical practice. He also had a residence at the nearby village of Shrawley. Hood was married; his wife's name was Frances. He died at Worcester in March or April 1620. 
Hood's works demonstrate both his wide range of interests and his skill as a teacher. He wrote two texts concerning globes, which were just beginning to become widely available: 'The Use of the Celestial Globe in Plano, Set Foorth in Two Hemispheres' (1590) was largely intended to help the student astronomer to recognize the stars and their constellations; 'The Use of Both the Globes Celestiall and Terrestriall' (1592) supplied definitions and applications for both astronomy and geography. Parts of his writing on the myths associated with the constellations were published more than sixty years later as 'Ancient poeticall stories of the starres' in Joseph Moxon's 'Tutor to Astronomie' (1659). 
There were also two books on the use of instruments which he had designed, 'The Use of the Jacobs Staffe' (1590, republished in 1596 as 'Two Mathematicall Instruments, the Crosse-Staffe and the Jacobs Staffe') and 'The Making and Use of the Geometricall Instrument called a Sector' (1598). The latter marked the appearance in England of this type of instrument, which was to be popularized by Edmund Gunter twenty years later. 
Most of Hood's original writing was set in the form of a dialogue between master and scholar. He showed himself able to bring a clarity of expression to complicated topics and the diagrams in his final book, 'The Making and Use of the... Sector', allowed a straightforward presentation of an instrument whose uses cannot easily be explained by the written word. He also did much work as an editor. He produced 'Elements of Geometry' (1590), a translation of the work by Peter Ramus, and the 'Arithmetic' (1596) of an obscure Swiss mathematician, Urstisius. His interest in navigation led him to prepare a new version of William Bourne's 'A Regiment for the Sea' (1592), subsequently reissued twice. 


@@@@@


doc= 13681


Hood, Thomas (1799-1845), poet and humorist, was born on 23 May 1799 at 31 Poultry, London. His father, also Thomas Hood (1759-1811), bookseller and publisher, was a Scot from Tayside. His mother, Elizabeth Sands (died 1821), came from a well-known London family of engravers. Hood was the third of six children, the second of two sons. The family moved to Islington, then pleasantly rural. Hood attended a dame-school in Tokenhouse Yard and, later, Dr Wanostracht's Alfred House Academy in Camberwell. When Hood was twelve both his father and brother died and he moved to a modest day school run by an elderly Scot, afterwards gratefully remembered. By fourteen he was working in a City office but became ill and, possibly apprenticed to his uncle Robert Sands, or Le Keux, began to learn engraving. When his health deteriorated in 1815 he was sent north to relatives in Dundee, where he stayed for about two years. He was already writing prose and verse and contributing anonymously to local papers. 
Hood returned to London in the autumn of 1817, much improved in health. He was busy engraving, working from home, and he joined a literary society. In one of his entertaining letters he wrote in 1821: 'Truly I am T. Hood Scripsit et sculpsit -- I am engraving and writing prose and Poetry by turns' (Hood, 27). 1821 was a year of mixed fortune. His mother died. That summer, however, Taylor and Hessey (Keats's publishers) took over the 'London Magazine' after the death of its editor in a duel. John Taylor had worked for Hood's father and invited the young Thomas to become sub-editor. Hood was in his element: 'I dreamt articles, thought articles, wrote articles... The more irksome parts of authorship, such as the correction of the press, were to me labours of love' (Jerrold, 99). His career as a literary journalist had begun. 
Apart from a novel, 'Tylney Hall' (1834), some unremarkable prose, and minor writing for the stage, nearly all Hood's work, verse and prose, first appeared in magazines and annuals catering for the growing middle-class market. From 1821 to 1845 Hood was closely involved, as contributor or editor, with many of them, particularly the 'London Magazine', 'The Athenaeum', 'The Gem', the 'New Monthly Magazine', and 'Punch'. He wrote -- and illustrated, inventing visual puns -- a series of 'Comic Annuals' (1830-9), collected his magazine contributions into 'Whims and Oddities' (1826 and 1827) and 'Whimsicalities' (1844), and also published 'Hood's Magazine' (1844-5). Hood wrote for a living, and was keenly alive to contemporary life and popular taste. His work provides insight into domestic reading and the development of periodical publishing in the first half of the nineteenth century. 
As a young man at the 'London Magazine', Hood found himself 'in rare company': among the contributors were Charles Lamb, William Hazlitt, Thomas De Quincey, and his own contemporary, Keats's friend John Hamilton Reynolds. His 'Literary reminiscences' in 'Hood's Own' (1839) contain lively descriptions of the principal figures of the Romantic movement. Lamb became his mentor. In 1825 he collaborated with Reynolds in a successful volume of light satirical verse, 'Odes and Addresses to Great People', and published what Lamb termed his Hogarthian etching, 'The Progress of Cant'. On 5 May 1825 he married Reynolds's sister Jane (1791-1846). 
Hood's appearance accords oddly with his destined role of literary buffoon and laughter-maker: slight, unassuming, dressed in black, with what he himself on several occasions called 'a Methodist face' (Hood, 348). The Hoods settled at 2 Robert Street, Adelphi, London. Lamb's poem 'On an Infant Dying as Soon as Born' mourned their first child, but a daughter, Frances (1830-1878) ['see 'Broderip, Frances Freeling], was born soon after they moved to Winchmore Hill; and, after they moved in 1832 to Lake House, Wanstead, a son, Tom Hood (1835-1874), was born; he was to follow his father's profession. Although constantly worried about money and health, the Hoods were a devoted, affectionate family as 'Memorials of Thomas Hood' (1860), based on his letters and compiled by his children, testifies. 
In the year Tom was born the Hoods faced financial ruin. Hood, happy in family and friends, inept or unfortunate in business dealings, invested in a publishing venture that failed. To economize and pay his debts the family moved to Koblenz in 1835; they remained in Europe for five years, the last three in Ostend. Hood worked on courageously although chronically ill. His rheumatic heart condition became much worse and he returned to London in 1840 to the care of his own doctor. The family lived first in various lodgings, finally settling at Devonshire Lodge, New Finchley Road, St John's Wood. Briefly, when he was editor of the 'New Monthly Magazine' (1841-3), Hood's financial position improved, but became precarious again when he initiated a lawsuit over copyright (settled favourably after his death). One of Thackeray's 'Roundabout Papers' gives a touching recollection of this 'true genius and poet' at this time. In 1844 several of his fellow writers, distressed by his financial hardship and rapidly deteriorating physical condition, petitioned Peel to grant him a civil-list pension; it was settled on his wife. Hood died at his London home, Devonshire Lodge, on 3 May 1845, his wife on 4 December 1846. He was buried on 10 May. In 1854 a memorial, paid for by public subscription, was erected over their grave in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Hood had endeared himself to the reading public. Although his early Keatsian collection of serious verse, 'The Plea of the Midsummer Fairies' (1827), was not well received, much in the volume was distinctive: some of the shorter poems, 'I remember, I remember', 'Silence', and 'Ruth', for example, have a haunting quality that places them in many anthologies. The light-hearted banter and agile puns of 'Odes and Addresses', however, sold well. Hood, as he frequently said, became 'a lively Hood for a livelihood'. Years of inventive comic verse followed, its boisterous fun and terse puns uncongenial to later tastes. It does, however, exhibit Hood's extraordinary technical virtuosity in handling form, metre, and language. Here Hood is wholly individual, 'major' not 'minor', as W. H. Auden judged: 'like nobody but himself and serious in the true sense of the word' (Auden, 17). 
Hood was never wholly clown. Light and dark coexist in his world, and often a crude reality punctures the hilarious. He wrote sombre ballads such as 'The Dream of Eugene Aram' (1829), and tender lyrics such as 'The Death Bed'. 'The Haunted House' and 'The Elm Tree' share contemporary taste for the macabre. Hood preferred laughter to preaching as a vehicle for social criticism: before Dickens or Thackeray the serialized, manic history of 'Miss Kilmansegg and her Precious Leg' (1840-41) attacked with comic vigour society's vulgar display of wealth. His 'Ode to Rae Wilson' (1837) reacted sharply to attacks on his levity, revealing the generous humanitarian impulses behind his writing: love of his fellow men, compassion, a tolerant non-sectarian Christianity, and a strong preference for a cheerful philosophy of life. Hood spoke out early against slavery, campaigned for a copyright law, and drew attention to the poor, the rejected, the oppressed, those exploited, and those harshly judged in the midst of Victorian prosperity. 
Near his death Hood engaged the hearts and consciences of his readers directly in a number of poems prompted by real incidents: 'The Song of the Shirt' ('Punch', Christmas 1843) highlighted the plight of the underpaid seamstresses of the day; in 1844 'The Workhouse Clock' addressed the hardship of the poor laws; 'The Lay of the Labourer', the suffering of the agricultural poor. 'The Bridge of Sighs', the purest poem of these public verses, sprang from a newspaper report of a suicide. 
In his short life Hood saw 'Romantic' change into 'Victorian': he took tea with Wordsworth, dined with Dickens. Hood's work mirrors this change. Much of his writing has intrinsic merit; some is memorable, its range impressive, its style often forward-looking, and all is valuable to anyone concerned with the transitional period, literary and social, which it reflects. 


@@@@@


doc= 13682


Hood, Thomas (1835-1874), humorist and journal editor, was born on 19 January 1835 at Lake House, Wanstead, Essex, the son of the poet and humorist Thomas Hood (1799-1845) and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Reynolds (1791-1846). After the death of his parents, Hood was supported by a civil-list pension. He attended the University College School in London, then Louth grammar school, and finally Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1853. He passed his examinations, but ran up huge debts, and never received his degree. 
Living in Cornwall from 1856 to 1859, Hood wrote for and then edited the 'Liskeard Gazette'. A collection of humorous writing, 'Pen and Pencil Pictures', appeared in 1857. Three years later he and his sister Frances Broderip (1830-1878) published their father's 'Memorials' (1860). After friends found Hood a position in the War Office, he became a London literary jack of all trades, publishing 'Quips and Cranks' (1861), a poetry collection entitled 'The Daughters of King Daher' (1861), illustrations for children's books written by his sister, a reissue of his father's 1839 collection 'Hood's Own' (1861), and contributions to such periodicals as 'Cornhill Magazine', the 'Comic News', and 'Temple Bar'. 
Hood was best known as a writer, an illustrator, and ultimately the editor for the weekly penny comic paper 'Fun'. A contributor almost from its inception in September 1861, he replaced H. J. Byron as editor in May 1865. Hood's staff included Ambrose Bierce, E. L. Blanchard, Matt Morgan, George Rose ('Arthur Sketchley'), the dramatist T. W. Robertson, and W. S. Gilbert, whose 'Bab Ballads' first appeared in 'Fun'. Hood edited 'Fun' until he died, making it 'Punch's' foremost competitor. 
Hood issued various collections of his father's works, and wrote fiction, including the sensation novels 'A Disputed Inheritance' (1863), 'Vere Vereker's Vengeance' (1865), 'Captain Masters's Children' (1865), 'A Golden Heart' (1867), 'The Lost Link' (1868), and 'Love and Valour' (1871), the last containing Oxford scenes which may be partly autobiographical. 'Tom Hood's Comic Annual' began appearing in 1867, and he edited collections of anecdotes, comic readings, stories, and puzzles for children. 'The Rules of Rhyme' (1869) was frequently reprinted. 
As a writer and illustrator, Hood was prolific but seldom more than competent. He was more impressive as an editor and champion of his father's reputation. Hood was tall, handsome, and famously convivial. Literary friends recalled fondly his Friday suppers in his lodgings in Brompton during the 1860s. Other contemporaries saw Hood as proof that literary greatness cannot be inherited, and attributed his early death to dissipation. 
Hood's first wife, Susan, often called 'Mrs Tom', died in 1873, aged thirty-seven. He married his second wife, Justine Rudolphine Charotton ('b'. 1844/5) on 15 August 1874, only a few months before his death at his home, Gloucester Cottage, Peckham Rye, on 20 November 1874, from a liver ailment. He was buried in Nunhead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 13683


Hook, James (1746-1827), organist and composer, was born in 1746, probably on 3 June, in the parish of St John, Maddermarket, Norwich, the son of a cutler. He was taught by Thomas Garland, organist of Norwich Cathedral, and possibly also by Charles Burney when Burney was resident at King's Lynn. He began playing in public concerts while still a boy -- he was performing concertos at the age of six -- and later taught music at a local boarding-school. About 1763 he moved to London and became organist at White Conduit House, a tea house in Clerkenwell, where he played daily. He soon established himself as a composer too, and won a Catch Club medal in 1765. On 29 May 1766 at St Pancras, Middlesex, he married Elizabeth Jane Madden (died 1795), a miniature painter, and five months later they visited Norwich, where Hook played in a benefit concert for his widowed mother. Hook and his wife had two sons: James Hook (1772?-1828), later dean of Worcester and father of the clergyman Walter Farquhar Hook, and Theodore Edward Hook (1788-1841), a writer. In 1769 Hook became organist and composer at Marylebone Gardens and about this time also he was appointed organist at St John's, Horsleydown, Bermondsey. Five years later he moved to the more prestigious Vauxhall Gardens, where he became well known particularly for his keyboard concerto performances given each evening during the summer season. 
Hook's output was extensive. Of about thirty stage works, written for the main London theatres as well as for the gardens, the operas 'Il dilettante' (Marylebone, 1772), 'The Lady of the Manor' (Covent Garden, 1778), and 'The Double Disguise' (Drury Lane, 1784, to a libretto by his wife) are among the better examples, but Hook's dramatic sense was not well developed. His music for Vauxhall also included keyboard concertos, cantatas, and more than 2000 songs, some of them written in the fashionable Scottish folk style. His popularity there -- he stayed for almost half a century -- was dependent not least on his ability to turn out musical ephemera in the simple, light, easy-going idiom that suited the relatively unsophisticated tastes of the clientele. He kept abreast of continental compositional trends, from the new orchestral techniques of the Mannheim composers in the 1760s to the symphonic writing of Haydn thirty years later, and was quick to incorporate them in his own music, to the extent that he was considered by some to be little more than an expert plagiarist. Yet he was among the more accomplished English practitioners of the 'galant' style, which, with its lucid phraseology and uncomplicated harmonic gestures, appealed to Vauxhall audiences, and, significantly, he was one of the first English composers of the period for whom the music of Handel ceased to be the main stylistic impetus. In 1768, at a concert in Hickford's room in Brewer Street, he performed a concerto on the newfangled pianoforte, perhaps the first person to do so in public in England, and some of his later keyboard works show a development towards a specifically pianistic technique. Hook was a prosperous teacher, and his 'Guida di musica' instruction manuals, as well as the large amount of chamber and keyboard music he published, must have had a considerable impact on domestic music-making in late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century Britain. 
With Vauxhall Gardens falling out of fashion, Hook left suddenly in 1820, and he died in Boulogne in 1827. His second wife, Harriet, whose surname may have been Horncastle (died 1873), outlived him by many years, and they may have had a son. The oboist William Parke recalled Hook in his 'Memoirs': a good-humoured character, he walked with a limp, having been born club-footed, and was 'a very agreeable companion', an inveterate leg-puller who had 'a happy knack of punning' (Parke, 2.255). 


@@@@@


doc= 13684


Hook, James (1772?-1828), dean of Worcester, was the son of James Hook (1746-1827), organist, and his first wife, Elizabeth Jane Madden (died 1795); he was brother of Theodore Edward Hook. He was born in London, probably in 1772 (his son's biographer says June 1771, but as he is recorded to have entered Westminster School in 1788 at the age of fifteen, and to have died in February 1828, aged fifty-five, this cannot be the case). While at Westminster he edited the school magazine, 'The Trifler', and by an unlucky attempt to satirize Eton provoked a blistering response from George Canning on the 'heavy fellows' of Westminster in 'The Microcosm', the Etonian magazine. He inherited his father's skill in music and his mother's skill in painting: as a young man he wrote the librettos of two of his father's musical entertainments, 'Jack of Newbury' and 'Diamond Cut Diamond', which were performed, but never printed; his juvenile sketches, which included a set of caricatures of leading public men, induced Sir Joshua Reynolds to recommend that he should be educated as an artist. In 1792 he was a candidate for election from Westminster School to Christ Church, Oxford, but was excluded for 'acts of insubordination', to which he had also invited others. He proceeded to Oxford nevertheless, and graduated from St Mary Hall in 1796. In the same year, yielding to the strong wish of his mother, he took holy orders, and in the following year contracted an advantageous marriage with Anne (died 1844), daughter of Sir Walter Farquhar, bt, physician and confidential friend of the prince of Wales, whose private chaplain he became. 
Hook's rise in the church was consequently very rapid. After having held livings in Gloucestershire, Leicestershire, Lincolnshire, and Hertfordshire he became in 1814 archdeacon of Huntingdon, in 1817 rector of Whippingham in the Isle of Wight, and in 1825 dean of Worcester, an appointment bringing with it two valuable livings. He did not enjoy it long, dying at the deanery, Worcester, on 5 February 1828. He was buried in the south aisle of the cathedral, and his epitaph was written by the bishop (Folliott H. W. Cornewall). Notwithstanding his accumulated preferment, he left his family in straitened circumstances. Walter Farquhar Hook was his son. 
Hook published 'Anguis in herba' (1802), a defence of the clergy against certain imputations and an attack on Methodism and Jacobinism; he also published sermons and charges. The review of Thomas Moore's 'Loves of the Angels', published among his brother's works, is probably from his pen. He was also author of a pamphlet against Thomas Paine and other revolutionary writers, signed Publicola; of 'Al Kalomeric: an Arabian Tale' (1814), satirizing Napoleon; and of 'The Good Old Times, or, The Poor Man's History of England' (1817). His anonymous novels, 'Pen Owen' (1822) and 'Percy Mallory' (1824), are similar in style to his brother's. The former, which is considerably the better, has a lively portrait of R. B. Sheridan as Tom Sparkle, and a spirited description of the Cato Street conspiracy. 


@@@@@


doc= 13685


John Hooke (bap. 1634, d. 1710), Independent minister, second son of William, was baptized at Axmouth, Devon, on 9 February 1634 and grew up in New England. He left Harvard without taking a degree, matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1652, and graduated BA in 1654. He was rector of Kingsworthy, Hampshire, from 3 November 1658 until some time before 29 January 1661, when his successor was instituted. Thereafter, he never took a parish living, although he conformed; he subscribed on 21 August 1662 as of the Savoy Chapel, London (surprisingly, but no doubt because of his father's connections). He was admitted as a chaplain there on 30 July 1663, and held office until 1702 when the Savoy Hospital foundation was dissolved. He had lived for a time in Berkshire, but after 1702 lived in Basingstoke, Hampshire, preaching 'to a separate congregation from the Church' ('Calamy rev.'). He died in 1710 and was buried there on 26 April. He was survived by his wife, Elianor (died 1714), and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 13686


Hook, Theodore Edward (1788-1841), writer and hoaxer, was born on 22 September 1788 at 3 Charlotte Street, Bedford Square, London, the son of James Hook (1746-1827), composer, and his wife, Elizabeth Jane Madden (died 1795). Theodore Hook was educated at private schools, and subsequently for a short time at Harrow School. He was, according to his own account, principally distinguished at school for mischief, deceitfulness, and a lack of serious application. Such a natural talent for raillery was fostered by an early introduction to the theatrical world as author of the words for the songs of his father's comic operas, a predilection he shared with his mother and elder brother James Hook (1772?-1828). Theodore Hook's libretto for the 'Soldier's Return, or, What Can Beauty Do?' (1805), a comic opera in two acts, earned him $50 when he was only sixteen. Sometimes in conjunction with his father, sometimes independently, he produced during the next five or six years a number of farces and melodramas. One of the latter, 'Teleki', in which the hero is hidden in a barrel on the stage, was ridiculed by Byron in 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers' but proved a popular success. Hook's achievements as a writer, however, were at least matched by his penchant for clever practical jokes and, in particular, by his skill in perpetrating hoaxes. 
The most celebrated of Hook's hoaxes was the Berners Street hoax of 1809. This hoax, aimed at a Mrs Tottenham, against whom Hook had grievances, was undertaken with two accomplices and was six weeks in preparation. Having falsely ordered a range of goods and sent out bogus invitations to dignitaries and notables, Hook and his accomplices watched from a room opposite as wagonloads of coal from the Paddington wharves, upholsterers' goods in cartloads, organs, pianofortes, linen, jewellery, and all types of furniture arrived in unison at the woman's Berners Street door. The lord mayor of London, governor of the Bank of England, chairman of the East India Company, and the duke of Gloucester were equally tricked into making an appearance. An amused crowd blocked the street for the entire day; yet, although he was suspected, Hook escaped without his involvement being proved. 
Hook next took up residence at St Mary Hall, Oxford University, but left after two terms to resume his high-spirited life. He became acquainted with the Revd E. Cannon and other favourites of the prince of Wales and it was probably through their influence and that of his brother that, at twenty-four and utterly unacquainted with business, he obtained the post of accountant-general and treasurer at Mauritius, where he arrived in October 1813. This apparently miraculous piece of good fortune proved his ruin. An examination into the state of the treasury in 1817 revealed a shortfall of $62,000, for which Hook could offer no explanation. His property was confiscated and he was sent home. On his return to England the case was investigated by the Treasury who, though discovering no grounds for criminal proceedings, seized his remaining property. He was imprisoned from 1823 to 1825. Despite for many years receiving an ample income from his writing, he never attempted to discharge any portion of his admitted liability. 
Long before his release from gaol Hook began making his living with his pen. In 1811 the two farces 'Trial by Jury' and 'Darkness Visible' were staged, and in 1819 and 1820 appeared the clever farce 'Exchange No Robbery', brought out under the pseudonym Richard Jones, along with 'The Arcadian', a short-lived magazine, and 'Tentamen, or, An Essay towards the History of Whittington, Sometime Lord Mayor of London', a satire on Queen Caroline and Alderman Wood. The latter achieved great success and, combined with the general recommendation of Sir Walter Scott, saw Hook appointed as the editor of the 'John Bull', established in late 1820 to counteract the popular enthusiasm for Queen Caroline. Hook's penchant for comedy and faculty for improvisation were never displayed to so much advantage as in this scurrilous, but irresistibly facetious, journal. He was the prince of lampooners, exuberant, polished, and energetic and 'John Bull', along with 'The Craftsman' and the 'North Briton', can be counted as one of the most influential English publications of its time. 'It is impossible to deny', said the 'Quarterly Review', 'that ''Bull'' frightened the Whig aristocracy from countenancing the Court of Brandenburg House. The national movement was arrested and George IV had mainly ''John Bull'' to thank for that result' ('QR', 77). It also produced another, far less satisfactory result: when Hook's long concealed identity leaked out it became impossible for the Treasury to ignore his previous financial mismanagement. 
In the meantime Hook was dissipating his energies in a number of abortive literary projects, rather than concentrating them in the journal, so much so that, despite some years of unparalleled success, it eventually ceased to be financially viable. Between 1826 and 1829 he did, however, produce nine novellas under the collective title of 'Sayings and Doings', for which he received almost $3000. The best known are 'Martha the Gypsy', in which a respectable Londoner is cursed by a Gypsy for refusing to give alms, 'Passion and Principle', 'Cousin William', a story about dark passion, and 'Gervase Skinner', about a miser who loses his money. Hook well understood his method of framing story in humorous incident and social observation. 'Give me', he said, 'a story to tell, and I can tell it, but I cannot create' (Barham, 169). The hero of 'Maxwell' (1830), his next and most carefully constructed novel, is a close portrait of his friend Cannon, while his later works 'Gilbert Gurney' and 'Gurney Married' (1836 and 1838) are thinly disguised portraits and a string of anecdotes from real life. They appeared in the 'New Monthly Magazine', of which he became editor, in 1836. In the interval he had written 'The Parson's Daughter' (1833) and 'Love and Pride' (1833); 'Jack Brag', published in 1836, is a satire on freeloading. Turning to biography, he published in 1832 a life of Sir David Baird, rewrote reminiscences of Michael Kelly, and began a life of Charles Mathews, which was discontinued following differences with his family. Hook's last novel of importance was 'Births, Marriages and Deaths' (1839), a novel about jealousy. His health failing, works after this are believed to be only partially from his own hand. 
Hook died at his house, Egmont villa, in Fulham on 24 August 1841, 'done up', as he said, 'in purse, in mind and in body' ('QR', 100). His effects were seized by the crown as preferential creditor, but his family were provided for by subscription (although he never married, he and Mary Anne Doughty, with whom he lived, had six children). Tellingly, except for support from the king of Hanover, this subscription did not include support from his aristocratic patrons. He was, wrote John Gibson Lockhart, editor of the 'Quarterly Review', 'human, charitable, generous.... and there was that about him which made it hard to be often in his society without regarding him with as much of fondness as of admiration' (ibid., 104). He appears in Disraeli's 'Coningsby' as Lucian Gay and in Thackeray's 'Vanity Fair' as Lord Steyne's toady Mr Wagg. Coleridge, a contemporary, described him as being 'as true a genius as Dante' (ibid., 66). Hook's genius lay in his extremely sharp wit and his clever improvisations. His hoaxes are as indicative of this as his prose. 


@@@@@


doc= 13687


Hook, Walter Farquhar (1798-1875), dean of Chichester, was born on 13 March 1798 in Conduit Street, London, the eldest child of the Revd James Hook (1772?-1828) and his wife, Anne Farquhar. His early childhood was spent at his father's rectory of Hertingfordbury. 
At the age of nine Hook was sent with his only brother, Robert, to Dr Michael Henry Thornhill Luscombe's school at Hertford, and two years later to Tiverton School, where the discipline was severe but the teaching indifferent. In 1812 he was entered as a commoner at Winchester College, where he formed his lifelong friendship with William Page Wood. Although weak at both formal scholarship and games, he acquired at Winchester a deep love for the works of Shakespeare and Milton, and his physical strength ensured that he was never bullied. Indeed, he retained his substantial and robust physique for the rest of his life. By working diligently he passed the examination to enter the sixth form, and twice won the silver medal for speech-day recitations. 
In 1817 Hook's grandfather, Sir Walter Farquhar (1738-1819), obtained a nomination for him from the prince regent to a studentship at Christ Church, Oxford. Here he had an undistinguished career, leading a rather isolated and reclusive life, with little interest in the formal course of studies; he became a keen reader of the works of Sir Walter Scott, and made his first, rather tentative, contacts with some of the future leaders of the Oxford Movement, such as E. B. Pusey and J. H. Newman. His failure in 1821 to win the Newdigate prize for an English poem, the only university honour which he tried to obtain, was a great disappointment to him, and he was glad to leave Oxford after graduating BA in 1821. He subsequently obtained his MA in 1824, and his BD and DD in 1837. 
This life of comparative indolence changed completely after Hook's ordination as deacon on 30 September 1821. He now acquired a sense of purpose and direction that had previously been absent, and his time as his father's curate from 1821 to 1825 at Whippingham in the Isle of Wight was spent in an intensive programme of study. He built a small hut for himself where he spent up to ten hours a day working through a detailed reading plan of church history and theology, which confirmed his high-church interpretation of Anglicanism. His ideas were clearly outlined in his first published sermon in 1822, and at Christmas that year he was ordained priest. At the same time he discovered a talent for pastoral work. In the village of East Cowes, some 2 miles from the rectory and with no church of its own, Hook improvised Sunday evening services in a sail-loft, and for the first time in his life came into intimate contact with working people. 
This growing self-confidence was demonstrated in 1825 when Hook's former schoolmaster, Dr Luscombe, pointed to the absence of episcopal supervision for the scattered Anglican congregations on the continent. After the initial proposal of a suffragan to the bishop of London was rejected for constitutional reasons, it was Hook who pointed to the precedent of the Scottish Episcopal church consecrating the first bishop for the American republic in 1785. His idea was adopted, and on 20 March 1825 Dr Luscombe was himself consecrated at Stirling, Hook preaching the sermon. This was subsequently published as 'An attempt to demonstrate the Catholicism of the Church of England and other branches of the episcopal church', in form and content marking an advance in his thinking over the sermon of 1822. In May 1826 Hook defended the consecration of Luscombe in an article in the 'Christian Remembrancer', which further demonstrated his recently acquired command of church history. 
With the departure of his father to the deanery of Worcester in 1825 Hook left Whippingham and was appointed perpetual curate of Moseley, near Birmingham. Here he established a village school and experienced the first opposition to his work from local evangelicals. His appointment to a lectureship at St Philip's, Birmingham, in 1827 enabled him to appoint a curate at Moseley, while he established a penitentiary in Birmingham. 
In 1828 Hook became vicar of Holy Trinity, Coventry, and it was here that he had his first contact with a large urban parish, an experience that was to prepare him for his later work in Leeds. He arrived at Coventry in a period of great economic distress among the textile workers of the town, with much consequent poverty, and from this point onwards Hook's ministry always combined spiritual revival with a strong social concern. By 1830 he had begun evening services, and in 1831 a course of lectures. When he arrived in Coventry there were only 120 children in the Sunday schools; by the time he left in 1837 there were 1200. He increased the frequency of holy communion, and founded a savings bank and the Religious and Useful Knowledge Society. In all this work he was now supported by his wife, Anna Delicia (died 1871), eldest daughter of Dr John Johnstone, whom he married on 4 June 1829. They had several children, the eldest son dying in 1836. 
It was while Hook was at Coventry that the Oxford Movement gained momentum with the first of the 'Tracts for the Times' appearing in September 1833. His relationship to the Tractarians was often misunderstood at the time, and has sometimes been misinterpreted subsequently. Hook's theological position had been clearly formed in the years before the movement began, and, while he showed much sympathy with its earlier manifestations, distributing the tracts among his flock in Coventry, he also had some clear areas of disagreement with the movement's leaders, valuing the church establishment and its sixteenth-century Reformers more highly than many of them did. Over the years his reservations matured into distrust, especially with what he saw as the increasingly Roman tendencies of the more extreme members of the movement. Hook always remained a traditional high-churchman, and, unlike some of that persuasion such as Henry Newland, he never departed from his original views. 
In 1837 Hook became vicar of Leeds: it was his work there over the following twenty-two years as a pioneer in restoring the position of the Church of England in the new industrial towns that marked it as one of the most important parochial ministries of the nineteenth century. However, even before his formal election by the trustees, Hook encountered opposition in the form of a petition against his appointment signed by 400 of his future parishioners, and he was attacked in the local press as a Tractarian. At that time Leeds was a town of very decided protestant sympathies; as Hook himself wrote to Samuel Wilberforce in 1837: 'the 'de facto' established religion is Methodism'. Between 1770 and 1840 some twenty-two Wesleyan Methodist chapels had been founded in the outer townships of Leeds alone. In contrast in 1825 the Church of England had its parish church, thirteen chapels of ease, and only eighteen clergy, many of whom were non-resident, for a parish of 125,000 souls. It was a system which had proved unworkable in the eighteenth century, and was now totally inadequate for an industrial town of the nineteenth. In the years immediately before Hook's arrival in Leeds, Anglicans had lost control of the improvement commission in 1829 and of the town council following the 'Municipal Corporations Act' of 1835. In 1827 the nonconformist majority in the vestry had voted against any further payments towards the building of new Anglican churches, and by 1833 the majority of the churchwardens were nonconformists; not surprisingly the sums raised by the church rate fell from $2611 in 1818, to $614 in 1833, and from that latter year no further rate was raised. 
Hook's achievements in Leeds fall into three broad areas. First of all, he largely overcame the suspicion and opposition which he faced in 1837; secondly, he reconstructed the material resources of the Church of England; and thirdly, he developed a new concept of pastoral mission for an urban community. Upon his arrival the ratepayers deliberately elected seven churchwardens hostile to him who refused to pay to replace the tattered surplices and service books. However, Hook's first success came as early as 19 August 1837, at a meeting in the Old Cloth Hall called to fix a church rate. He effectively found himself faced by a hostile mob of 3000 persons, but with shrewdness, good humour, wit, and tolerance brought the meeting to an end with a vote of thanks to himself carried by acclamation. During the following years Hook encountered opposition on many occasions, notably in March 1841, when it became known that he had defended Newman's publication of 'Tract 90' in letters to Newman and others, and again faced a hostile audience at a meeting of the Pastoral Aid Society in Leeds. But gradually the opposition subsided in the face of his tireless work in Leeds, and his departure in 1859 was marked by a testimonial collection of 2000 guineas. 
Hook knew that the material resources at his disposal when he first arrived in Leeds were totally inadequate to the demands made of them. Nevertheless, one of his first decisions was to build a new parish church, which was completed in 1841 at a cost of $28,000, and which had a capacity of nearly 4000 persons, many of them in free seating. He also embarked on a parallel programme of church building throughout the town, and by the time he left Leeds he had doubled the number of Anglican churches to thirty-six. In addition, he increased the number of parsonages from six to twenty-nine, and the number of church schools from three to thirty. In all of this work he found a ready ally in Charles Thomas Longley, the first bishop of the newly reconstructed diocese of Ripon in 1836; the Diocesan Church Building Society gave grants of up to 30 per cent of the cost for building many of the new churches in Leeds. In many ways the centrepiece of this aspect of Hook's work was the 'Leeds Vicarage Act' of 1844, by which the chapels of ease were reconstituted as parishes in their own right, the former vicar sacrificing not only control but also about one-third of his income. 
The liturgical and pastoral life of the town's Anglican churches also underwent a transformation, with Hook increasing the frequency and dignity of the services. His new parish church was specifically designed for a surpliced choir and sacramental worship. When he arrived in Leeds the parish church could barely muster fifty communicants; within four years he had raised that to nearly 500, and could count former Methodist ministers among their number. However, as well as gaining friends by his work Hook could also on occasion arouse equal measures of hostility. His open support for the Ten Hours Movement for factory reform as demonstrated in his speech to a public meeting in Leeds in 1844, when he defended the proposed bill then before parliament on medical, moral, and educational grounds, caused a temporary rift with some of his supporters among the Leeds merchants and manufacturers. In 1846 he published a pamphlet, in the form of a letter to the bishop of St David's, outlining his views on education: he argued that only the state had the capacity to educate all the nation's children, but as there was no longer a common religion in England, secular and religious education should be separated and no one denomination favoured over another. Such ideas led to criticism of him by other high-churchmen, the National Society, and some nonconformists. On the other hand, his frequent lectures at mechanics' institutes and his friendly relations with his churchwardens who were Chartists made him popular with the working population of Leeds. In his early life Hook had been a natural tory, but by the early 1850s he had become sceptical of all organized political parties; the one politician with whom he retained friendly relations throughout his career was William Gladstone, who shared his educational views. 
Hook's relationship with his fellow Tractarians also underwent change in the 1850s. His one major disappointment at Leeds was the building of St Saviour's church by E. B. Pusey as a Tractarian centre in the town. His initial support for this was shaken in 1847 when the first clergy from this church converted to Roman Catholicism, followed by further waves of converts into the early 1850s. Indeed, this whole episode was crucial in confirming his own growing disillusionment with the Oxford Movement. By 1859 Hook's energies were clearly waning, and in that year he accepted the offer of the deanery of Chichester, where he could retire to compose his most significant work of scholarship, the 'Lives of the Archbishops of Canterbury', of which ten volumes were completed before his death. This, his 'Church Dictionary', and 'A Dictionary of Ecclesiastical Biography' (8 vols., 1845-52) were his major academic works. Although well regarded in their time, they were soon overtaken by more advanced historical scholarship. Many of his sermons were collected into two volumes entitled 'The Church and her Ordinances' (1876). On 5 May 1871 his wife died, and he followed her on 20 October 1875, dying at the deanery in Chichester and being buried next to her at Mid Lavant, Sussex, on 27 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 13688


Hooke, William (1600/01-1678), Independent minister, was the second son of William Hooke of Hook, Hampshire. He matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, on 19 May 1620, aged nineteen, graduated BA that year, and proceeded MA in 1623. He became rector of Upper Clatford, Hampshire, on 4 May 1627. In May 1630 he married Jane ('fl'. 1622-1681), daughter of Richard Whalley of Kirketon and Screveton, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Frances Cromwell. She was sister to Edward Whalley the future regicide, niece to Joan, Lady Barrington, and cousin of Oliver Cromwell; the Barrington family papers include letters from William and Jane Hooke. In 1631 they moved to Axmouth, Devon, where Hooke became vicar on 26 July 1632. He took his family to New England some time after October 1637. 
Hooke settled at Taunton (Cohannet), Massachusetts, within the Plymouth patent. He gathered a church and, according to Thomas Lechford, was reordained by a schoolmaster and a husbandman. On 23 July 1640 he preached on the first official fast day for England observed in New England. The sermon was printed as 'New Englands Tears for Old Englands Feares' (1641), one of the first tracts to reach the London press from the puritan colonies. Its publication was part of a strategy to reassure the godly in England that colonists, though absent, had not deserted their homeland. Hooke's sequel, 'New Englands Sence of Old-England and Irelands Sorrows', appeared in 1645. 
In 1644 Hooke moved to be teacher to the New Haven church, alongside its pastor, John Davenport. By 1653 New Haven faced threats from the Dutch and from Indians, and was in serious economic difficulties. Hooke wrote to Oliver Cromwell about the colony's straits, and its consequent loss of settlers: many, he reported, liked Cromwell's plans to move colonists to Ireland; others were 'more willing... once more (if God will) to salute their native soyle' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 1.564-5). Hooke's son John Hooke ['see below'] had already left, and Hooke and Davenport were on the brink of returning to England. In July 1654 Davenport wrote that Hooke would stay another year until new ministers could be found, 'though he thinkes to send his family before, for the good of his posterity, whereunto he hath strong encouragements' ('Letters of John Davenport', 93). Davenport in the end remained in New England. Jane Hooke returned to England in 1654 with her remaining children: William, Walter, Caleb, Eliazar, Ebenezer, Jane, Elizabeth, and Mary. Her husband followed in October 1656. 
On 13 April 1657 Hooke wrote to John Winthrop the younger 'I am not, as yet, settled, the protector having engaged me to Him, not long after my landing.' He told of Cromwell's 'desire... that a church may be gathered in his family', but predicted difficulties ('Massachusetts Historical Society Collections', 3rd ser., 1, 1846, 182). He acted as one of Cromwell's chaplains. On 24 October 1657 he was appointed an assistant to the Middlesex commission. Early in 1658 he became master of the Savoy, London, which Cromwell was using to accommodate members of his court. Later that year representatives from congregationalist churches met there, for the Savoy conference. In 1659 Hooke printed the catechism he and Davenport had used in New Haven. 
Following the Restoration, the 'Act for Confirmation of Leases' of 18 December 1660 prevented Hooke from continuing as master of the Savoy. He remained in London and in 1661 published with Joseph Caryl Davenport's 'The Saints Anchor-Hold'. He and Jane Hooke maintained contact with New England by letter, and probably influenced Edward Whalley's decision to emigrate there with William Goffe. Hooke went into hiding in March 1663 when a letter to Davenport, reporting English news, was intercepted: John Winthrop the younger, visiting London to resolve a dispute between New Haven and Connecticut, met the parties at Hooke's secret lodgings. Jane Hooke collected money and clothing for colonists. On 20 April 1672 Hooke was licensed as a congregationalist minister at Richard Loton's house, Spital Yard, Bishopsgate. The following year he published 'The Priviledge of the Saints on Earth', a discourse on 'Hezekiah' and the building of the new Jerusalem on earth. He died on 21 March 1678 and was buried at Bunhill Fields. His final work, 'A Discourse Concerning the Witnesses', appeared in 1681. 




@@@@@


doc= 13689


Hooke, John (1655-1712), judge, was born in Drogheda, Ireland, the eldest son of John Hooke, a merchant, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Christopher Hooke of Alway, Gloucestershire. The Jacobite politician Nathaniel Hooke (1664-1738) was his brother. John was educated at Kilkenny School and on 28 June 1672 entered as a pensioner at Trinity College, Dublin, under the tuition of Richard Acton of Drogheda. He was admitted to Gray's Inn on 3 February 1675 and was called to the bar on 8 February 1681. His wife, Elizabeth (died 1736), was the daughter of Major-General John Lambert. Their son, Nathaniel Hooke (d. 1763), wrote a history of Rome. 
Following the revolution of 1688 Hooke achieved office on 15 August 1689 as second justice of Anglesey, Caernarfon, and Merioneth, rising to chief justice there on 2 May 1695. Also in 1695 he became deputy to Sir J. Coombes as chief justice of Chester. On 8 March 1699 a meeting was held at Hooke's house in Lincoln's Inn which resulted in the foundation of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK). Hooke was the organization's first treasurer, and it continued to meet in his residence for the next three years. In November 1700 he was made a serjeant-at-law, his patrons being Lord Guilford (another founder member of the society) and Sir Nathan Wright (the new lord keeper). However, Hooke was not reappointed a Welsh judge on the accession of Queen Anne. 
Hooke returned to office as chief justice of Anglesey in May 1706, although he was still practising as a barrister in Chester in August of that year. In 1707 he was accused by Lord Bulkeley of demanding presents, which was examined by a committee of the House of Commons. Hooke's explanation that it was merely a customary present from the town of Beaumaris was not sufficient to sway the committee which found him guilty, but when the matter was reported to the house he was exonerated by a vote of 178 to 130. Hooke's politics are difficult to determine, and he himself rejected a party label, informing Robert Harley, the new chief minister, that 'I cannot list myself under either of the two common denominations, Whig or Tory'. Further he did not support 'an absolute unlimited Toleration', but opposed 'persecuting good loyal Protestants who agreed with the Church in fundamentals' (Rose, 173, 188). Hooke was removed from office in 1711 and died in 1712, affirming in his will of February 1711 (proved in May 1712) his 'zeal for true and pure Christianity and moderation' (Woolrych, 2. 467). 


@@@@@


doc= 13690


Hooke, Luke Joseph (1714-1796), Roman Catholic theologian, was born in Dublin, one of three children of Nathaniel Hooke (d. 1763), historian of Rome, and his wife, Mary Gore, an English protestant. He was brought to Paris in the 1720s probably by his father, who acted as secretary to his uncle, Nathaniel Hooke (1664-1738), Jacobite and French diplomatic agent. When his father quit Paris for England, his son remained with his grand-uncle and his wife, Lady Eleanor McCarthy Reagh (1683-1731), in the rue St Jacques du Haut-Pas. 
Hooke took the degree of master in arts in 1734, and it is likely that he got to know Denis Diderot at this time. The following year he entered the Seminary of St Nicolas du Chardonnet, as a student for the Dublin archdiocese. A bachelor of theology of Paris University in 1737, he succeeded as prior of St Germain-des-Vaux in 1738. In 1739 his thesis for the licence in theology, which defended the ecumenicity of the Council of Florence, was referred to the 'parlement' of Paris. He received his licence in 1740 and was appointed professor of theology in 1742 to succeed his countryman James Wogan (died 1742). He supported the Jacobite rising of 1745. Building up a reputation as a modernizing theologian and keeping abreast of intellectual developments in England, he prepared his lecture notes for publication in 1751. However, before the text appeared Hooke agreed to preside over the examination of the thesis of Jean Martin De Prades, a priest of Montauban diocese and contributor to the second volume of the 'Encyclopedie'. Although the faculty awarded the grade, De Prades was subsequently charged with deism. Hooke was implicated and, a victim of faculty politics, lost his chair. Despite this set-back he published two volumes of his 'Religionis naturalis et revelatae principia' in 1752, a third appearing two years later with a 'Monitum lectori'. 
The 'Principia', often mistaken for mere apology, actually sought to build bridges between traditional theology and the new science. It abandoned the scholastic system of presentation and attempted to integrate the work of Isaac Newton into its theological system. It included a remarkably positive assessment of human desire. There were Venetian (1763) and German (1783) editions. Reprinted in Jacques Paul Minge's 'Theologiae cursus completus' (1860) it influenced generations of Catholic theological textbooks. In 1762 Hooke was appointed chairman of a faculty of theology committee set up to examine J. J. Rousseau's 'Emile'. Buoyed up by the successful conclusion of this charge, he put his name forward for election to a vacant theology chair. Nevertheless, his election was contested by the archbishop of Paris, who later ordered a boycott of his lectures. In the ensuing legal wrangle Hooke published his 'Lettre de M. l'Abbe Hooke a Mgr l'archeveque de Paris' (1763). He was forced to resign his chair in 1766; however, he retained the support of many of his colleagues, and in 1767 was appointed professor of Hebrew and Chaldean. 
Hooke developed strong links with the English Benedictines resident in Paris. Among these was Dom John Bede Brewer, who in 1774 undertook to republish and expand the 'Principia'. Hooke translated into French some of his father's writings on Roman history under the title 'Discours et reflexions critiques sur l'histoire et le gouvernement de l'ancienne Rome' (1770-84). He participated in public debates concerning Roman history. In 1775 he welcomed Samuel Johnson to Paris. 'We walked round the palace and had some talk', wrote Johnson, and the next day Hooke returned his call at Johnson's inn (Boswell, 'Life', 2.397). Hooke edited 'Les memoires du marechal de Berwick' in 1778. In the same year he was appointed chief librarian at the Mazarine Library, and under his enlightened rule the collection grew considerably. In 1791 he refused to take the oath to the civil constitution of the clergy. This exposed him to a plot mounted by his assistant, Le Blond, to remove him from the library. He fought back through a series of published letters and petitions to the king, the national assembly, and, later, the provisional executive of the French Republic. In 1791 he published 'Principes sur l'origine, la nature, la souverainete, l'etendue et l'alliance des deux puissances', an important pamphlet on the relations between ecclesiastical and civil powers. It contains a strong argument for an independent state church. Deprived of his position at the Mazarine he retired to St Cloud where he died, in poverty, on 12 April 1796. 


@@@@@


doc= 13691


Hooke, Nathaniel, Jacobite first Baron Hooke (1664-1738), Jacobite politician, was born at Corballis, co. Meath, the third son of John Hooke, a merchant of Drogheda, and his wife, Margaret, the daughter of Christopher Hooke of Alway, Gloucestershire. His grandfather Thomas Hooke was a merchant and alderman of Dublin. John Hooke, serjeant-at-law, was his eldest brother. In 1679 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, but he left almost immediately, possibly on account of his religious opinions, which were puritan. He went to Glasgow University in 1680, but soon moved to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he was admitted a sizar on 6 July 1681, leaving Cambridge as he had left Glasgow, without taking a degree. He then went abroad, joining the earl of Argyll in the Netherlands. In 1685 he landed with the duke of Monmouth at Lyme Regis, acting as the duke's private independent chaplain. When Monmouth passed into Somerset at the beginning of July, Hooke was sent secretly to London with Henry Danvers to raise an insurrection in the city. He was exempted from the general pardon issued on 10 March 1686, but in 1688 he gave himself up and was pardoned after what later enemies would claim were 'some services' involving 'a good deal of treachery' ('Stuart Papers', 6.548). 
Hooke then became a loyal servant of James II and converted to Roman Catholicism, though it was said that his conversion did not occur until the court went into exile at St Germain-en-Laye (ibid.). After James's abdication Hooke joined Viscount Dundee in Scotland, but in May 1689 was captured at Chester and committed to the Tower of London. He was released on 12 February 1690 and travelled to Ireland, where he served in the Jacobite army at the battle of the Boyne, and then entered the French service in the Irish regiment of Galmoy. He was examined regarding Jacobite plots in March 1696. Hooke was in attendance upon King James in 1701, but received a discharge from his service in that year so that he could take service 'under other princes' (ibid., 4.3). In 1702 Hooke entered into communication with the duke of Marlborough; the next year he held a command in the regiment of Sparre, and served with the French army in Flanders and on the Moselle. In 1704 he married Eleanor Susan, sometime maid of honour to the exiled queen-dowager. She was the daughter of Donogh, or Denis, MacCarthy and Catherine Douvns. They had one son, James Nathaniel Hooke (1705-1744), and a daughter, Louise Sophia Francoise ('bap'. 1710), sometime governess of the royal children of France. In August 1705 Hooke went on a mission to the Scottish Jacobites in company with his brother John, and in 1706 he obtained letters of naturalization in France and took part in the battle of Ramillies. In April 1707 he again went to Scotland, with Lieutenant-Colonel John Murray, to confer with the Jacobites. The next year he became a brigadier in the French army (3 March 1708), was created Baron Hooke of Hooke Castle, co. Waterford (in the Jacobite peerage), and was present at the Dunkirk expedition of that year, and at Malplaquet in the next. 
Hooke had now wearied of negotiating schemes for rebellion with the Jacobites in Scotland, and refused in 1709 to go again as an emissary. He is probably the Mr Hooke who appears as a correspondent of the duke of Marlborough in 1710, and in 1711 he went to Dresden on a diplomatic mission from Louis XIV to Frederick Augustus, king of Poland and elector of Saxony, but this negotiation was superseded by the general arrangements for peace at Utrecht. Hooke took no active part in the Jacobite rising of 1715. He communicated in that year with John Dalrymple, second earl of Stair, British ambassador in Paris, but there is nothing to prove that he turned traitor to the Jacobite cause; it is more probable that in his relations with Stair he was acting as a spy in the Jacobite interest. Plans were, however, afoot in 1716 to appoint him Jacobite ambassador to the Holy Roman emperor. On 18 March 1718 he became a 'marechal de camp' in the French army, though he was at this time heavily afflicted with rheumatism. Despite his protestations he was accused of being, and, on account of his support for Marischal, probably was, the active leader of the court opposition against Mar, Kellie, and Middleton, who in 1718 described him as 'no good man' ('Stuart Papers', 6.548). He was still in favour with James III (James Francis Edward Stuart), who appointed him envoy to Prussia on 12 May 1718, perhaps because he was still active in organizing his relations in London to cause trouble for the Hanoverian regime. On 1 January 1720 his letters of French naturalization were confirmed and registered, and on 27 February 1721 he became a knight commander of the order of St Louis. Hooke married his second wife, Helen de St Jean, widow respectively of the Sieur O'Brien and the Sieur MacCarthy, shortly before his death in France on 25 October 1738. 
Lord Hooke's correspondence from 1703 to 1707, partly transcribed by his nephew, Nathaniel Hooke (died 1763), the historian of Rome, is now in the Bodleian Library in Oxford. This was edited, with a memoir by W. D. Macray, for the Roxburgh Club in 1870-71. Portions of Hooke's correspondence had previously appeared in 'Revolutions d'Ecosse et d'Irelande en 1707, 1708, et 1709', published at The Hague in 1758, and in James Macpherson's 'Original Papers' (1775). 


@@@@@


doc= 13692


Hooke, Nathaniel (d. 1763), writer, was the eldest son of John Hooke (1655-1712), serjeant-at-law, and Elizabeth, 'nee' Lambert (died 1736). He was the nephew of Nathaniel Hooke. The younger Nathaniel is thought by the antiquary John Kirk to have studied with Alexander Pope at Twyford School, near Winchester, and formed a lifelong friendship with the poet. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 6 February 1702. Writing to the earl of Oxford on 17 October 1722, Hooke spoke of how 'the late epidemical distemper' (that is, interest in the stocks of the South Sea Company) had 'seized him', and that 'he was in some measure happy to find himself at that instant just worth nothing'. In the letter Hooke sought employment and also permission to dedicate to Oxford his 'Life of Fenelon' (1723), a translation from the French of the work by Andrew Michael Ramsay. The permission was granted, and from 1723 until his death Hooke enjoyed the confidence and patronage of many distinguished men, including Oxford, the earl of Marchmont, Arthur Onslow, speaker in the House of Commons, Pope, the physician George Cheyne, and Dr King, principal of St Mary Hall, Oxford. In 1741 Hooke was recommended by Lord Chesterfield to Sarah, dowager duchess of Marlborough, as someone able to assist her in the publication of her memoirs. The elderly duchess recounted a narrative of her time at court which Hooke wrote up and published in book form in 1742. During the book's compilation Hooke lived with the duchess and the two developed a friendship. As Pope told Lady Marlborough, Hooke's respect for his employer was of 'such a degree that I doubt whether he can be Impartial enough to be your Historian' (Harris, 332). For his work on her memoirs Hooke received $5000 from the duchess. During Hooke's residence with her Lady Marlborough commissioned him to negotiate with Pope for the suppression, in consideration of the payment of $3000, of the character of 'Atossa' in his 'Epistles'. Hooke's Catholicism created tension in his relationship with the resolutely agnostic duchess. Finally, in 1743, Hooke's religious convictions became too irksome and the duchess ended their friendship. Hooke also brought a Roman Catholic ecclesiastic to take Pope's confession on his deathbed, angering Lord Bolingbroke who flew into a great passion on learning what had happened. 
Bishop Warburton described Hooke as 'a mystic and quietist, and a warm disciple of Fenelon', Samuel Johnson observed that he 'was a virtuous man, as his history shows', and Pope suggested that Hooke and Conyers Middleton were the only two contemporary prose writers whose works were worth consulting by an English lexicographer. Other works by Hooke include 'The Roman History, from the Building of Rome to the Ruin of the Commonwealth' (4 vols., 1738-71), a highly regarded study, reprinted in 1830; 'Travels of Cyrus, with a Discourse on Mythology' (1739), translated by Hooke in twenty days while at Bath; 'Observations' (1758), dedicated to Speaker Onslow, and 'Six Letters to a Lady of Quality', first published in 'The contrast, or, An antidote against the pernicious principles disseminated in the letters of the late earl of Chesterfield' (1791). With his wife, Mary, 'nee' Gore, Hook had three children. At his death at Cookham, Berkshire, on 19 July 1763 he was survived by two sons, Thomas, a Church of England clergyman, and Luke Joseph Hooke. His daughter, Jane Mary, died in April 1793 and was buried at Hedsor churchyard in Buckinghamshire where her father had also been buried thirty years earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 13693


Hooke, Robert (1635-1703), natural philosopher, was born on 18 July 1635 in the village of Freshwater on the Isle of Wight, the son of the Revd John Hooke (died 1648), minister of the parish, and his wife, Cecily Gyles (died 1665). According to some autobiographical notes reported by Richard Waller in 'The Posthumous Works of Robert Hooke' (1705), young Robert's constitution was so weak and sickly that his parents feared for his life for at least his first seven years. He was nursed at home, in contrast to his brother and sisters who were nursed abroad. Hooke reports himself to have been sprightly and active in running and leaping, though incapable of more robust exercise. His quick capacity to learn initially led his father to instruct him towards the ministry, but young Hooke's severe headaches interfered with his studies and this plan was abandoned. Left to his own interests, he constructed mechanical toys and devices, including a wooden clock 'that would go' and a ship model about a yard long complete with rigging and some small guns that could fire as it sailed. He also exhibited talent in drawing. 
Robert Hooke's father died in October 1648. John Aubrey reports in his 'Brief Lives' that the thirteen-year-old Robert received an inheritance of $100, but according to the actual will Robert's inheritance amounted to $50 (including $10 from Robert's grandmother on his mother's side) and all his father's books (Nakajima). Hooke was sent to London to study with the painter Sir Peter Lely, his inheritance used to secure his apprenticeship. Waller reports that the smell of the oil paints increased Hooke's headaches, curtailing this activity, while Aubrey ascribes the brevity of this association to young Hooke's conclusion that he could teach himself this art and save the apprentice fee. Aubrey adds that Hooke also received instruction in drawing from Samuel Cowper. Hooke subsequently went to live in the house of Richard Busby, master of Westminster School. Though he attended school infrequently, he actively pursued his education, learning Latin and Greek and gaining an acquaintance with Hebrew and with oriental languages. By Aubrey's account, Hooke mastered the first six books of Euclid in a week and 'learned to play twenty lessons on the organ', which presumably means that he learned to play the organ in twenty lessons. 
In 1653 or 1654 Hooke went to Christ Church, Oxford, where his musical training was sufficient to secure the post of chorister. He served as assistant to the chemist Thomas Willis and subsequently to Robert Boyle. Working for Boyle, Hooke was exposed to active scientific research: he was responsible for Boyle's first workable pneumatic engine (vacuum pump) and assisted Boyle in his experiments on the spring and weight of the air. At Oxford, Hooke was brought into contact with many other of the finest natural philosophers of the day, including John Wilkins, Seth Ward, William Petty, John Wallis, and Christopher Wren. Among his scientific endeavours there were the pursuit of astronomy and, instigated by Ward, the development of clockwork for recording observations. Hooke later ascribed his invention of a spring-regulated watch to this time. He did not receive a bachelor's degree, but was granted his MA degree in 1663. 
In November 1662 Hooke was formally proposed as curator of experiments for the newly formed Royal Society of London, his task being to provide three or four experiments at each meeting ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. This post was to be without recompense until the society could afford to provide a salary. Hooke lost no time in fulfilling his responsibilities, producing his first set of experiments before the society on 18 November. While not always providing the full complement of three or four experiments at every meeting, he almost invariably presented some demonstration or commentary. The value of this activity was soon recognized by the council of the Royal Society, which included Hooke on its list of 20 May 1663 of persons to be admitted as fellows. 
The range of Hooke's demonstrations and commentaries in this early period was remarkable. Indeed, virtually all his later publications had their roots in work performed at this time, in enquiries which Hooke would address and then put aside, sometimes repeatedly over the years. These various endeavours were recorded week by week in the journal books of the Royal Society and eventually printed in Thomas Birch's 'History of the Royal Society of London' (1757). In these volumes, as well as in the many brief references in Hooke's diaries (in the London Guildhall Library), Hooke addresses very different areas of science from week to week, day to day, and even within a single day. While his published accounts in the 'Micrographia', in his Cutler lectures, and in various articles, appear successively over many years, his actual practice involved a more complicated diversity of simultaneous endeavours. This diversity is even more remarkable given his responsibilities in the years following the great fire of London of 1666 as one of the official surveyors for the rebuilding. 
Hooke's employment with the Royal Society gained him respect in the scientific community but his post continued to be without remuneration. An opportunity for a salaried position presented itself in 1664 with the resignation of Isaac Barrow as professor of geometry of Gresham College. On 20 May the committee for the college met to decide on Barrow's replacement, selecting Arthur Dacres over Hooke. A month later, a delegation from the Royal Society was ordered to speak to Sir John Cutler about his promise to pay $50 a year for life to Mr Hooke to lecture at Gresham College on the histories of trades. A formal statement of Hooke's appointment to the Cutler lectureship was made before the Royal Society on 9 November. The next week Hooke was proposed as 'curator by office' to the society, a salaried position corresponding to the volunteer post he had been holding. Although the council had decided some months previously on a yearly salary of $80 for the curator, this now became $30 in view of the $50 per year to be supplied by Cutler. This appointment in effect makes Hooke the first professional research scientist, employed specifically to enquire into the phenomena and principles of nature. On the other hand, as a salaried employee, distinct from the many volunteer curators for specific experiments drawn from the other fellows of the society, Hooke's social position was in principle one of servant. Thus he was frequently 'ordered' to try an experiment or to bring in an account, whereas other members of the society were 'desired' to carry out corresponding tasks. Hooke was, however, so successful in his experimental pursuits that within a couple of years he had made himself indispensable, and for the most part was allowed to determine his own experimental programme. 
Hooke moved into Gresham College in September or October 1664 to lecture on the history of nature and art under the endowment provided by Cutler. Francis Bacon had insisted throughout his works that a history of nature was a necessary prerequisite to the formulation of a new natural philosophy. In his 'New Atlantis' (1627) Bacon imagined an organization, 'Salomon's House', that would carry out this programme. To many of its early members the Royal Society was a realization of Salomon's House, and Hooke's promotion of a new natural history through his lectures was therefore an appropriate activity. Some of his ideas for this new natural philosophy are found in a series of manuscripts which are probably the texts of these early lectures (London, Guildhall Library, MS 1757/11; RS, classified papers 20.50a, 50b). 
For Hooke as for Bacon the improvement of natural philosophy must rest on a suitably collected and arranged body of knowledge which Hooke calls the 'Philosophical history'. He divides the subjects of this history into art or trades versus natural phenomena, with the latter further divided and subdivided. Each investigation into a specific phenomenon is to be guided by an extended series of queries, the order of which serves to organize the observations being recorded. Should observations be found to favour contrary hypotheses, further queries are required to reach an 'experimentum crucis' sufficient to decide between the alternatives. Both here, and when he uses this term in the 'Micrographia', Hooke attributes this phrase to Francis Bacon. While Bacon presents in his 'Novum organum' the idea of observations intended to distinguish between different supposed causes, he refers to these as 'instantias crucis'. The specific phrase 'experimentum crucis', best known for its use by Isaac Newton in his 1672 letter a 'New theory about light and colours', appears to have originated with Hooke. 
Hooke elaborates upon Bacon's views on spreading among many investigators the work of compiling the history of nature and art. His list of qualifications for the 'Philosophical historian' provides insight into the body of learning he presumably hoped to attain. The historian must have a knowledge of mechanics and other mathematical learning and must have experience in experimental procedures and in the techniques of various trades. Since these last would be difficult for any one person to gain first hand, Hooke proposes that detailed accounts of specific trades be collected, an effort to which he himself made several contributions over the ensuing years. He suggests that the techniques of the tradesmen themselves could benefit from the careful scrutiny of capable men not already set in the established procedures of that trade. He expects his historian to be familiar with the full range of current explanatory hypotheses and theories, but free from dogmatic adherence to any of them. The historian ought to repeat all experiments and observations at least two or three times, describing his instruments and manner of experimenting as well as recording the observations themselves. 
The ideas presented in these lectures are restated in more polished form in Hooke's posthumously published essay 'A general scheme, or idea of the present state of natural philosophy, and how its defects may be remedied by a methodical proceeding in the making experiments and collecting observations, whereby to compile a natural history, as the solid basis for the superstructure of true philosophy' (Hooke, 1-70). This essay stands as the most compelling rendition of Baconian principles into a solid programme of scientific investigation. 
Shortly after arriving at Gresham College, Hooke learned of an irregularity in the election which he had lost the year before. According to John Ward's manuscript 'Memoires relating to Gresham College', Hooke petitioned the college committee about this on 20 March 1665. The committee found that of the ten men present at the election the previous May, five had voted for Hooke and five for Dacres. Among this second group was the lord mayor, who then used his tie-breaking vote to declare the election in Dacres's favour. Since, however, the lord mayor was not actually a member of the committee and should not have voted unless there was a tie, Hooke had actually won the election by five votes to four, as was now recognized; he duly ascended to the geometry lectureship of Gresham College in June. 
In both his lecture series of 1665 and his 'General scheme' of 1668, Hooke promises to provide a 'Philosophical algebra' or method for raising general principles of nature from the philosophical history. While he does not deliver on this promise, leaving the 'General scheme' unfinished, he does, however, provide hints about the nature of this method, claiming that it would bring to the study of nature the benefits which mathematical algebra brings to geometry. These last benefits are treated in detail by Hooke in a series of Latin manuscripts in the London Guildhall Library and in the English translation of one of these at the Royal Society (London, Guildhall Library, MS 1757/12; RS, classified papers 20.39). The Royal Society manuscript is dated June 1665, and the lectures show a smooth transition from his previous lectures on the philosophical history to a more mathematical topic fitting his new position. 
In these lectures Hooke represents geometry and arithmetic as the studies of continuous and discontinuous quantities, respectively. Algebra is introduced, not as a third field of mathematics, but as an ancillary means of solving problems in geometry and arithmetic. For Hooke the power of algebra is that it facilitates the procedures of 'comparing, compounding and separating' elements of a problem leading towards the discovery of a solution. Algebra achieves this by: 'comprising in a small space a whole series of ratiocination so, as to a small cast of an eye as it were, and in an instant almost, one is enabled to examine and compare and change and transpose and order any part of it, as he pleases, with very little trouble and the greatest certainty. (RS, classified papers 20.39, fol. 65'v')' Hooke suggests that problems in the understanding of nature could likewise be solved if these same advantages were available to natural philosophy. 
Near the end of the 'General scheme', after advocating the use of simple language in registering natural histories, Hooke suggests recording philosophical histories in a shorthand or abbreviated form. As in mathematical algebra, the use of 'obvious and plain symbols' is to help the mind to reach new insights in natural philosophy. Hooke's ideas in this area reflect the influence of Ward and Wilkins, his acquaintance with whom had carried on from Oxford to the Royal Society. These two scholars advocated the formulation of a universal character as part of a universal language, intended to replace Latin as the language of international communication. Ward and Wilkins, however, felt that this language should have a logical structure such that the words or symbols for objects and relations would reflect the essence of the things being represented. Hooke was much in contact with Wilkins during the years when the latter was composing 'An Essay towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language' (1668). Samuel Pepys mentions in his diary entry for 4 June 1666 that Hooke accompanied him home from Gresham College and borrowed some tables of nautical terms for Wilkins's book. Hooke praises Wilkins's invented language at the end of his Cutler lecture on helioscopes (1676) and prints a description of the principle of his spring-regulated watch in Wilkins's 'Real Character'. Some years later Leibniz and Hooke engaged in a correspondence in which the former expresses views remarkably similar to Hooke's about the inventive power of a well-conceived set of symbols for representing objects and relations in nature. Hooke's statements within that correspondence exactly parallel his earlier claims for the philosophical algebra: 'My aims have always been much higher, viz. to make it not only useful for expressing and remembering of things and notions but to direct, regulate, assist and even necessitate and compel the mind to find out and comprehend whatsoever is knowable. (RS, early letters, H.3.64)' 

Hooke's ideas about the collecting of observations of nature and art and the philosophical understanding to be adduced from them are exemplified in his most famous work, 'Micrographia, or, Some physiological descriptions of minute bodies made by magnifying glasses, with observations and inquiries thereupon' (1665). This book initiated the field of microscopy. Just as Galileo, on turning his telescope to the heavens, had made one remarkable observation after another, so Hooke, applying his microscope to inanimate and animate objects, revealed equally remarkable features about their structure. His talent for drawing and attention to detail is evident in the many plates that adorn the volume, especially those of the fly, gnat, and flea. His text provides clear and precise descriptions of observations, but also provides explanations of the things observed. A description 'Of the colours observable in muscovy glass [mica], and other thin bodies' serves as an introduction to a lengthy discussion of his two-colour (blue and red) theory of light. According to this theory, light is a motion transmitted through a medium, the source of which is the rapid vibration of the minute parts of the shining body. This vibration produces pulses in the surrounding medium which, according to Hooke, may be oblique to the line of propagation. If this obliqueness results in the weaker side or edge of the pulse arriving before the stronger, then the light registers on the eye as blue; if the stronger side precedes the weaker, then the light appears red. While Hooke's theory contains many ambiguous features, it does allow him to explain how white light can become coloured through refraction in prisms and through refraction and reflection in thin plates. 
Hooke's observations of kidney stones and of crystals found in flint lead to a discussion of the regular form of crystals and the way these can arise from arrangements of tightly packed spherical particles. In his observations of petrified wood, Hooke notes the presence of small regular compartments which he terms cells, thereby introducing that term into the biological sciences. In his observations of cork he elaborates on his description of cells, ascribing to them a diameter of less than a thousandth of an inch. In treating fossils he proposes a process by which once living substances fossilize, thereby setting the stage for his later geological speculations in which fossils serve as a record of past life. 
Observations of charcoal lead to a general discussion of combustion. Hooke contends that there is no element of fire present in combustible objects, but rather that combustion is a process in which a substance mixed in the air combines with some part of the combustible material. While Hooke does not discuss respiration in the 'Micrographia', his later treatments of this subject refer to the same substance in the air as being required for respiration. His experiments in this area came to include attempts to keep a vivisected dog alive by blowing air into its lungs with a bellows. In 1668 he showed that a bird remained healthy in a container of compressed air longer than in the same volume of common air, as does a burning lamp. Hooke later engaged in some experiments involving a large chamber in which he placed himself. He reports that the evacuation of a quarter of the air in the chamber caused him to experience pain in his ears and to become temporarily deaf, but that he suffered no other ill effects. 
Hooke describes the glass drops (formed by dropping molten glass into cold water) which shatter entirely when their stems are broken. This leads him to a general discussion of heat, which he regards as arising from the agitation of the parts of a body. Greater agitation results in expansion or, as in the case of water heated in a sealed container, in a tendency to expand which can cause the container to burst. Hooke describes his work with sealed thermometers and his introduction of a scale with zero corresponding to the freezing point of distilled water. 
Hooke includes in the 'Micrographia' descriptions of a variety of instruments that he has recently invented. He describes the wheel barometer and a device based on the beard of a wild oat attached to a dial to register humidity in the air. He describes a device for measuring the refraction of light passing through a transparent liquid, which instrument he reports having used to verify the law of refraction that had been published by Descartes. He also proposes a design, making clear that he has not yet built it, for a device for grinding lenses of large diameter and long focal length. Large lenses of long focal length are ideal for astronomical telescopes, though the suspension of long telescopes presents considerable difficulties. Hooke does not address this last problem in the 'Micrographia', but he subsequently devises a system of braces for suspending long telescopes, and has one of 40 foot length constructed in the Gresham College quadrangle. In the late 1670s Hooke describes an aerial telescope in which object lens and eyepiece are aligned by a rope and pulley, without the need for a massive tube and support. The final sections of the 'Micrographia' deal with astronomical observations of stars and of the surface of the moon; over the course of his career he also made observations of the large spot on Jupiter, of the rotation of Mars, of double stars, and other astronomical phenomena reported in his Cutler lectures and in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society'. 
In the 'Micrographia' Hooke provides a calculation of the height of the atmosphere based on the inverse relation between pressure and volume of gases, a relation now known as Boyle's law. Hooke had been Boyle's assistant at the time Boyle published this relation in 'A Defence of the Doctrine Touching the Spring and Weight of the Air' (1662). Boyle acknowledges that Richard Towneley had originally suggested this relation, but his account suggests that Towneley had not produced an experimental verification of the relation. Boyle supplies this demonstration with two experiments involving the compression and rarefaction of a sample of air by a column of mercury. A question exists of the degree to which Hooke deserves credit for the design and execution of these experiments. In the 'Micrographia' he uses the first person in describing the same experiments. He credits Towneley with having originally suggested the hypothesis, but refers to 'the most illustrious and incomparable Mr. Boyle' only in connection with the value for the density of the air near the earth's surface. Hooke would hardly have failed to give more credit to Boyle for the demonstration of this hypothesis if he had felt that Boyle, or other members of the Royal Society, would find fault with the present version, and in fact was not criticized at the meetings following publication of the 'Micrographia'. Years later Newton, who was always reticent about crediting Hooke, ascribes to Hooke the demonstration of this relation (Cohen, 'Newton, Hooke and 'Boyle's law'', 620). 
Hooke's financial situation improved considerably as a result of the fire of London in 1666. Less than a week after it had ceased he produced before the Royal Society a model for the rebuilding of the destroyed portion of the city. While his grid-work plan was not adopted, Hooke was made one of three official surveyors for the rebuilding, which lasted decades. Recent studies of his detailed activity in this capacity reveal no evidence that Hooke was anything but perfectly scrupulous and responsible in all of his duties (Cooper). His contributions to the rebuilding included acting as architect on a number of projects, some of which have traditionally been associated with Christopher Wren. The most notable of these (and the only one still standing) was the monument to the great fire, a particular feature of which is the open interior column which Hooke hoped to use for a variety of experimental researches. Some of these experiments were carried out, but vibrations from nearby traffic precluded many others. Another such building was the Royal College of Physicians on Warwick Lane which survived well into the nineteenth century. Hooke was also responsible for Bethlem Hospital in Moorfields, a building that was much admired until it was pulled down in 1814. Hooke's involvement with a variety of other well-known building is more ambiguous, largely because it is difficult to separate out his involvement as surveyor. 
A decade after the publication of the 'Micrographia' Hooke began publishing a series of tracts based on lectures delivered at Gresham College before the Royal Society under Cutler's endowment. In 'An Attempt to Prove the Motion of the Earth by Observation' (1674) he describes the fixed zenith telescope he had mounted in his lodgings at Gresham College, with which he had attempted to measure a shift in position of the brightest star of the constellation Draco over the course of the year as a demonstration of the earth's motion round the sun. While his measurements were later called into question, his method was universally praised and served as both instigation and model for the later measurements of Samuel Molyneux and James Bradley. Hooke ends this lecture with a promise to publish an account of the system of the world based upon three suppositions of celestial mechanics: first, that all celestial bodies have a gravitating power towards their centre whereby they attract not only parts of their own bodies, but also all other celestial bodies 'within the sphere of their activity'; second, that all moving bodies travel in straight lines unless their path is deflected into a circle, ellipse, or other curve; third, that the attractive power diminishes with distance from a body's centre. 
In 'Animadversions on the... Machina Coelestis of... Johannes Hevelius' (1674), Hooke argues for the advantages of telescopic sights over plain sights for making astronomical measurements. He was not the first inventor of the micrometer for telescopic use, nor ever claimed to be, but he did invent a form of this device that received particular praise from the Royal Society. He describes in detail a split-image mural quadrant in which a pair of telescopes with sites mounted to a frame may be used to measure angles between astronomical objects. This quadrant features a spirit level so that altitudes may be measured accurately from the horizontal. Hooke describes this level in detail, apparently unaware that Thevenot had anticipated him in its invention. Hooke describes an alternative level, explicitly crediting Wren as its inventor. He devises what may have been the first dividing engine for graduating the limb of his quadrant by a screw. He also describes an equatorial mount driven by clockwork and regulated by a conical pendulum. While this is probably the earliest description of a clockwork-driven telescope, there is no evidence that it was ever constructed. Hooke also describes a quadrant mounted on a platform to which rotary motion is transmitted by another of Hooke's inventions, the universal joint. 
In 'A Description of Helioscopes and some other Instruments' (1676) Hooke describes a series of telescopes in which the path of light is folded within the telescope tube by means of one or more flat mirrors. He discusses the common flaws of mirrors for astronomical purposes and his experiments to improve them. Though the universal joint had figured in his previous lecture, he now elaborates on its various applications, and in a postscript promises to publish a theory of elasticity or springiness, presenting its key principle in the form of an anagram: 'ceiiinosssttuu'. The promised tract is his 'Lectures de potentia restitutiva, or of spring' (1678), where he reveals the meaning of this anagram to be 'Ut tensio sic vis'. This principle, that a spring's extension or displacement from its neutral position is directly proportional to the force applied, has come to be known as Hooke's law. Hooke establishes this principle experimentally for a variety of configurations of springs and springy bodies. A corresponding anagram is revealed as 'Ut pondus sic tensio': the weight is proportional to the extension. This is the principal of another Hooke invention which he called the 'philosophical scale' -- today's spring balance. 
A major premise of the mechanistic philosophers of the seventeenth century was that natural phenomena are to be explained in terms of matter and motion, and that so-called occult qualities such as nature's abhorrence of a vacuum are to be dismissed. Hooke had assisted Boyle in experiments that had gone far towards banishing from the science of pneumatics such occult principles. For Hooke the key motion to the understanding of a wide range of natural phenomena is that of vibration. In 'Lectures de potentia restitutiva' he suggests that the vibrations of the smallest parts of matter account for the overall volume of objects. He is not specific about the details, but the different rates at which the parts of different substances vibrate give rise to a greater or lesser tendency of these parts to pack together, a phenomenon he referred to as the congruity and incongruity of different kinds of matter. Although not mentioned in this lecture, he believed that gravity might be caused by vibrations of a surrounding ether impelling one gross body towards another. He demonstrated using water in vessels and powder on plates how imparted vibrations can cause bodies to be attracted towards the source of the vibration. In the course of these and related experiments Hooke anticipated Chialdni's experiments in the visualization of vibrating modes of vessels and plates. In other experiments involving vibration and sound he anticipated Savart in the production of tones by the rotation of a toothed wheel. 
Among Hooke's most notable inventions was the idea of using a balance wheel vibrating by the action of a spring to regulate portable timekeepers. Like a swinging pendulum, a vibrating spring has the feature that the period of oscillation is the same over a wide range of sizes of oscillation. In his lecture 'Of Spring' he presents a theoretical analysis of the motion of a released spring intended to show that it had this property; but the analysis is flawed. While Hooke never published a corrected version, he did compose one which is preserved in manuscript in the library of Trinity College, Cambridge (MS 0.11 a.1/16). 
In the same postscript to 'Helioscopes' in which he published his anagram on springs Hooke presented his case for having invented the spring-regulated watch: 'About 'seventeen years since' [that is, about 1659], being very inquisitive about the 'regulating the measure of Time', in order to 'find the Longitude', I did from an Art of Invention, or mechanical 'Algebra' (which I was then Master of) find out and perfect this contrivance, both as to the Theory and Experimental verification thereof, of which I then discoursed to 'divers of my Friends', but concealed the 'modus'. (Gunther, 'Cutler Lectures', 146)' There was apparently no working model. Waller confirms having seen a draft of an agreement with Lord Brouncker, Robert Boyle, and Sir Robert Moray guaranteeing Hooke an income in return for revealing his invention. According to Hooke's account, negotiations broke down over a clause that would have denied to him any benefit of his invention should anyone else improve the device. He was aware that there were a large variety of ways that springs could be applied to regulate timekeepers, and that any of these could be regarded as improvements for specific applications, and therefore withheld details of his invention. In January 1675 Christiaan Huygens invented the spiral balance and in February he obtained a French patent. Huygens then offered the rights of any English patent to the society but this offer was not mentioned when Oldenburg read Huygens's letter at the society meeting of 18 February 1675. Hooke protested his priority and, when he heard of the patent offer, accused Oldenburg of treachery. Thereafter the matter degenerated into a personal battle between Oldenburg and Lord Brouncker on one side and Hooke on the other, both sides seeking to obtain a patent. As part of his unsuccessful attempt Hooke had Tompion construct a presentation watch for Charles II with the engraved legend, 'Robert Hook inven. 1658. T. Tompion fecit 1675'. 
Following Oldenburg's death in 1677, Hooke was elected as one of two secretaries to the Royal Society. In this capacity he initiated correspondence with a number of members who had not been heard from in recent years, among them Isaac Newton. In 1672, when Newton had submitted his 'New theory about light and colours' to the Royal Society, it had sparked heated debate and exchanges of letters. Hooke had been particularly critical of Newton's underlying view that light consisted of a stream of particles, though Newton had insisted that his conclusions did not depend upon that hypothesis. In spite of that earlier dispute the exchange of letters in 1677, which also dealt with the refraction of light, was thoroughly cordial. 
In November 1679 Hooke again entreated Newton to communicate his thoughts on philosophical matters, inviting him to comment on Hooke's work: 'And particularly if you will let me know your thoughts of that of compounding the celestiall motions of the planets of a direct motion by the tangent & an attractive motion towards the centrall body, Or what objections you have against my hypothesis of the lawes or causes of Springinesse. ('Correspondence of Isaac Newton', 2.297)' Newton replied that he had not heard of these hypotheses. He proposed an experiment to detect the effects of the earth's rotation on a falling body, including a diagram in which the path of fall is extended within the body of the earth. Hooke corrected Newton's diagram only to be corrected in turn by Newton with a new diagram based on the assumption of a constant force towards the centre of the earth. Hooke replied that his own supposition was that gravitational attraction acted 'in a duplicate proportion to the Distance from the Center Reciprocall' (ibid., 2.309), that is, as the inverse square of distance. Given this correspondence it is not surprising that Hooke felt that Newton had learned the inverse square law of gravity from him. He could not know that over a decade earlier Newton had not only supposed this relation, but had tested it by calculation two different ways. Hooke's insistence that he deserved some credit from Newton for this proposition, and Newton's refusal to acknowledge any debt to Hooke whatsoever, led to mutual resentment that never abated. While Newton had good reason not to acknowledge a debt to Hooke for the inverse square relation, recent scholarship credits Hooke with introducing Newton to the idea of analysing orbital motion as the sum of a tangential velocity and a deflection towards a centre (Westfall; Cohen, 'Newton's discovery'). This became a key feature of Newton's subsequent analysis of orbital motion in the tract 'De Motu' and in the 'Principia' (1687), while it had not figured in his earlier demonstrations on the inverse square law. 
In 1663 Hooke laid before the Royal Society a detailed proposal for making a history of the weather, a version of which was printed in Sprat's 'History of the Royal Society' (1667). He invented or improved several of the instruments commonly associated with meteorology. Best known of these is the wheel barometer, for which he had at least three slightly different designs. He also developed multi-liquid barometers for increased precision, credit for which must be shared with Huygens. Hooke's so-called marine barometer (actually a manometer) was intended to serve on board a moving ship, where the mercury barometer was impractical. Other instruments devised by him include rain gauges, hygroscopes for determining the humidity of the air, and a wind speed instrument. He was also involved in the development of a weather-clock which would automatically record a number of different instrument readings. While the general Baconian goal of collecting data and raising theories from revealed correspondences did not lead to advances in weather prediction either for Hooke or for his successors in the centuries to follow, he was among the first to recognize the barometer's ability to predict storms. 
Hooke's analysis of the height of the atmosphere distinguishes clearly between the two factors of height and density that contribute to the pressure of a surrounding medium. He demonstrated these two effects by immersing a mercury barometer to various depths in vessels of salt and fresh water. In an effort to focus on this second factor as it applies to the atmosphere, he produced an air poise or aerostatic balance, a device previously described by Robert Boyle and Otto Von Guericke. Hooke used the idea of variable atmospheric density, again illustrated by using fresh and salt water, to explain the floating of clouds. Among the experiments carried out by him at the Monument was a series of measurements of air pressure at various altitudes intended as a check on his analysis of the height of the atmosphere. 
Following the society's declared interest in the depth and salinity of the seas and oceans, Hooke developed instruments for sounding the depths and for bringing up water from the bottom. His geological ideas are summarized in a series of tracts collected by Waller in Hooke's 'Posthumous Works'. In 1668 he declared his conviction that fossil shells derive from once-living bodies, by no means a universal view at the time. The presence of these aquatic forms in regions now remote from the sea is explained at some length as being due to the rising from and settling into the sea of bodies of land through the action of earthquakes and, to a lesser extent, erosion by the sea and by weather. In a series of lectures delivered early in 1687, Hooke explains the major upheavals suffered by the earth in terms of the dynamics of a rotating body. Supposing the earth to have consisted originally of concentric layers of earth and water, the uneven stresses caused by its daily rotation would cause fissures as matter is forced away from the axis, most strongly near the equator, least strongly near the poles. Shifts in the axis of rotation, which Hooke believes to have taken place even in historical times, would introduce changes in the portion of the globe subject to the greatest forces. Thus, mountains may form where there had previously been seas, explaining the presence of fossil shells in mountainous regions. 
As curator of experiments for the Royal Society, Hooke's contribution in establishing a strong role for empirical approaches to the understanding of nature was considerable. He also served the society as secretary and publisher of the 'Philosophical Collections', the short-lived successor to the 'Philosophical Transactions', in the late 1670s and early 1680s. He remained as lecturer in geometry at Gresham College until his death, residing in his rooms at the college and carrying out all duties responsibly, including during periods when other professors were failing to deliver lectures and were even renting out their rooms. The only major exception to this was between July 1665 and March 1666 when the plague was most severe in London; during this period Hooke and some others attended Wilkins in Surrey, carrying out philosophical investigations that were later reported to the Royal Society. Hooke's reputation as a natural philosopher and experimenter was widespread. In 1691 he received from the bishop of Lambeth a licence to practise medicine, in recognition of his medical enquiries into relieving his own long-term ill health, and for his earlier anatomical, physiological, and microscopic researches. Thomas Shadwell created the character of Sir Nicholas Gimcrack in his play 'The Virtuoso' as a parody of scientific practitioners of the day, and of Hooke in particular. After attending a performance on 2 June 1676, Hooke recorded in his diary, 'Damned Dogs. 'Vindica me Deus'. People almost pointed' (Robinson and Adams, 235). While Hooke was not pleased at being the object of parody, the incident shows that he was so well known that Shadwell's audience recognized him as the model. 
Three charges against Hooke's character arise in accounts of his life and work. The first is that he was a 'universal claimant', whose response to being told of some invention or discovery was to claim to have accomplished the same work himself years before. The second is that he was miserly. The third is that he was cantankerous and had an ill-natured disposition. The first of these has some justice as there are a large number of minor cases recorded in the minutes of Royal Society meetings of exactly this taking place. There are also a small number of celebrated cases of extended disputes over priority: most notably with Huygens over the invention of the spring-regulated watch and some other devices and with Newton over the discovery of the principles of gravity and orbital motion. When the disputes are individually examined, Hooke's claims are never without foundation, though he does not always appreciate the extent to which others had progressed his ideas, or rendered them practical. Moreover, there are also cases where Hooke makes no claims even when he deserves more credit than he received. Hooke's regard for Robert Boyle, in part a measure of their great disparity in rank but probably also due to his loyalty and gratitude towards one who was so important in launching his career, precludes any hints that Boyle owed him credit for the work they had accomplished together. Halley, a junior friend of social position comparable to Hooke, is never challenged over his paper on the upward extension of the atmosphere in spite of Hooke's earlier, seminal work on this topic. 
Hooke's reputation for being miserly has little foundation. After his death a chest that had been unopened for thirty years, containing several thousand pounds, was found in his rooms. Hooke presumably regarded this money, earned during the most lucrative period of his activities as surveyor, as his savings account, and lived day to day on his income. He was frugal, but no more so than one would have expected of a self-made man in a profession that was not well established. He was involved in a major law suit over money, that against the estate of John Cutler for unpaid salary under the Cutler endowment. This was but the culmination of years of difficulty in obtaining his promised salary. Hooke's initial failure to obtain the position of professor of geometry at Gresham College, in spite of having properly won the election, presumably served as an early reminder that he would obtain what was due to him only by pursuing his claims. 
While Hooke's acrimonious disputes with Newton and Oldenburg have occasionally been ascribed to a cantankerous nature, he is far from alone in being on ill terms with these particular individuals. His disputes with Huygens over matters of priority become acrimonious only with respect to Hooke's belief that Oldenburg was revealing features of Hooke's work that were learned in confidence. His dispute with Hevelius is a technical one over the accuracy of plain versus telescopic sights, in the midst of which Hooke remains free in his praise of Hevelius's accomplishments. Hooke's diaries and correspondence make it clear that he had a goodly number of friends and acquaintances who were pleased to share his company at coffee houses and in his rooms. On the other hand, Hooke did suffer from a range of digestive and other maladies which placed considerable strains upon his disposition. There is no indication of the effect upon him of the death by suicide of his brother John, but Waller reports that after the death of his niece Grace (1660-1687), John's daughter, he became melancholy and cynical, and remained so until his own death (Hooke, xxiv). Grace had lived in Hooke's care at least since she was eleven, and had eventually become his mistress. (An earlier liaison with a married woman, Nell, 'nee' Young, a maid and seamstress, had ended in September 1673.) 
No portrait of Hooke remains, though one is reported to have existed. Waller describes him as crooked and low of stature, though: 'by his Limbs he shou'd have been moderately tall. He was always very pale and lean, and laterly nothing but Skin and Bone, with a meagre Aspect, his Eyes grey and full, with a sharp ingenious Look whilst younger; his Nose but thin, of a moderate height and length; his Mouth meanly wide, and upper Lip thin; his Chin sharp, and Forehead large; his head of middle size. He wore his own Hair of a dark brown colour, very long and hanging neglected over his Face uncut and lank, which about three Year before his Death he cut off, and wore a Periwig. (Hooke, xxvii)' Following his death on 3 March 1703 those members of the Royal Society then in London attended his burial at St Helen, Bishopsgate. His grave is not marked. 


@@@@@


doc= 13694


Hoker, John (fl. 1525-1543), author, was a member of the Hoker family from the region of Maidstone, Kent. Hoker became a demy of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1525. He graduated as BA in 1527, and proceeded to MA in 1535 and bachelor of theology in 1540. Hoker was praised by John Leland, in his 'Cygnea cantio' (1545), where he includes a line of praise for 'Hocherus nitor artium bonarum' (sig. E1'v'). He lectured at his college in many subjects, including natural philosophy, moral philosophy, and, between 1541 and 1543, theology. Several literary works are attributed to Hoker, although many have not survived. These include 'Piscator' (or 'The Fisher Caught'), which Thomas Warton believed to have been a comedy acted by the students of Magdalen College, as well as an introduction to rhetoric and various poems and epigrams. 
A letter from Hoker, apparently to Bullinger and dating from approximately 1538, was published along with an edition of 'S. Clementis epistolae duae ad Corinthios' (1687), and printed in an English translation by Gorham. In this letter Hoker describes the recent exposure and destruction of a 'wooden god' in Kent, a mechanical idol apparently able to 'nod with his head, to scowl with his eyes, to wag his beard, to curve his body, to reject and receive the prayers of pilgrims'. Hoker writes that the idol was taken from its place in a Kentish church by the brother of a certain Nicholas Partridge, who opened it up in front of the local parishioners to show its internal mechanical workings; from there it was taken to London, denounced, and thrown to an indignant audience who smashed it into pieces. The 'Life of Sir Peter Carew' occasionally attributed to Hoker was in fact written by his namesake, John Hooker, alias Vowell, of Exeter. 


@@@@@


doc= 13695


Hooker, John (c.1527-1601), antiquary and civic administrator, was born at Bourbridge Hall, Exeter, the second son of Robert Vowell or Hooker of Exeter ('b'. in or before 1466, died 1537) and his third wife, Agnes Doble (1502?-1537) of Woodbridge, Suffolk. The Vowell family had originated in Pembrokeshire, acquiring the name Hooker through marriage to a Hampshire heiress in the fifteenth century; however, John's forebears usually styled themselves Vowell, and John himself was known by that name for much of his life. By the early sixteenth century the family had been prominent in Exeter for several generations. 
John Hooker's parents both died in summer 1537. The education of their son, who was aged about ten, was then entrusted to Dr John Moreman, vicar of Menheniot, Cornwall, of whom Hooker retained affectionate memories -- 'of a verye honest and good nature, lovinge to all men and hurtefull to none' (BL, Harley MS 5827, fols. 45'v'-46'r'). Hooker is also the principal source for the rest of his own education. He proceeded to Oxford to read civil law, most likely at Corpus Christi College, but left without taking a degree and went abroad, studying law at Cologne and afterwards theology at Strasbourg, where he stayed with Pietro Martire Vermigli (known as Peter Martyr). After a brief visit to England he crossed to France, but the outbreak of war, presumably that of 1544, dashed his hopes of further travel and he returned home, where he was 'dryven to take a wyffe' (ibid., fol. 51'r'- 'v'). She was Martha ('b'. 'c'.1500?), daughter of Robert Toker or Tucker of Exeter; they had three sons and two daughters. 
His staying with Vermigli and many passages in his own writings make it clear that John Hooker was evangelical in religion. He was in Exeter when the city was besieged for several weeks during the western rebellion of 1549, and left a vivid account of events -- 'where at I the writer was present and testis oculatus [eyewitness] of the things ther donne' (Hooker, 'Description', 1.55). The moving force behind the rising was religion in the form of traditional Catholicism, which had its adherents within the city as well as among the rebels. Hooker denounces those who chose 'to supporte the authoritie of the Idoll of Rome whome they never sawe in contempte of their trewe & lawfull kinge, whom they knewe and oughte to obeye' even though he admits that they were in a majority in Exeter, and makes it clear that his own place was in that minority which 'wholye replyed them selffes to the reformed religion: and to the kinges proceadings' (ibid., 67, 71). But his religious partisanship cannot conceal his pride in the valour of the westerners in their resistance to the king's army, and he reflects sadly on the fate of Robert Welsh, the vicar of St Thomas, who had saved the city from burning but was nevertheless hanged in his vestments from his own church tower: 'he was a companyon in anye exercises of activitie & of a courtuose and gentle behavior... he had benne a good member in his commonwelthe had not the weedes overgrowne the good corne' (ibid., 91-4). 
In 1551 Hooker was in the employment of Miles Coverdale, newly appointed bishop of Exeter, on whose behalf he went to Oxford and there obtained for the bishop the services of Robert Weston as his vicar-general. But following Mary's accession Coverdale went abroad, and in 1555 Hooker found secular employment, as the first chamberlain of Exeter. His important office was central to the civic finances -- the chamberlain was responsible for the administration of the city's properties, for example -- and Hooker can hardly have exaggerated when he wrote that it required a man 'wyse and lerned and of great modestie and sobrietie' (Hooker, 'Description', 1.814). In 1559 he gave legal advice to the city's merchant adventurers in a dispute with the craft guilds over the former's new charter of incorporation, and two years later oversaw the rebuilding of Exeter's high school. He applied himself to beautifying Exeter by planting trees, and above all he collected and arranged the city's records, producing what he described as: 'An Abstracte of all the Orders & ordynances extent made, enacted & ordayned by the Maiors & Common Councell of the Citie of Excester for the tyme beinge for the good goverment of the sayde Citie & Commonwelth of the same. (ibid., 863)' The labour was a considerable one, involving documents from the reign of Henry III onwards. 
Given his efforts on Exeter's behalf, Hooker regarded himself as underpaid, and also as underappreciated in some quarters -- there were men 'who most unkyndly and agaynst all humanitie have traduced and most bitterly Chardged me with and false reports' (Hooker, 'Description', 1.5). This may help explain why in 1568 he went to Ireland in the service of Sir Peter Carew, who after an adventurous career in England and on the continent had decided to rebuild his fortunes by establishing himself on lands held by his ancestors across the Irish Sea. Carew had a substantial body of written evidence, but was unable to read it, and therefore turned to Hooker as a man who was 'greatly given to seek and search old records and antient writings, and was very skilful in reading of them' (Hooker, 'Carew', 71). Hooker put the Carew papers in order and drew up a pedigree for Sir Peter, who was so pleased that he persuaded Hooker to go to Ireland with him as his legal adviser. In Dublin Hooker also found relevant documents in Dublin Castle, and committed himself so wholeheartedly to Carew's cause -- principally directed towards securing the barony of Idrone, co. Carlow -- that in 1569 he was returned to the Irish parliament as member for Athenry, and made a speech in defence of an impost on wine that led to his being threatened with violence. 
The principal source for Hooker's activities in Ireland is his own life of Carew, a remarkable exercise in biography and also a highly original one, in recounting the story of a man whose status was only that of a gentleman. That originality extends to Hooker's treatment of his subject, for Sir Peter is presented as combining the stereotypical virtues of the English landowner with new elements of Renaissance culture; thus he is not only a bold and straightforward man of action, but also a jouster, courtier, and traveller who makes his way (always at his ease, whatever the risk) across Europe as far as Constantinople. In his eagerness to present Sir Peter as a man of honour (and perhaps also because he was heavily dependent on the latter for evidence), Hooker almost certainly underplays the violence and chicanery behind Carew's Irish venture, which had a seriously unsettling effect upon Munster, in particular, and thus also understates his own supporting role. He probably helped provoke a quarrel with the Butlers, who held the western part of Idrone, and, though he sometimes returned to Exeter, he nevertheless acted variously as Carew's rent collector, representative, and trustee. In 1574 he found houses for his employer in Cork and Kinsale. 
Carew died on 27 November 1575, and Hooker, who had attended Sir Peter's exequies, returned to England for good. His parliamentary experience was not confined to Ireland, for in 1571 he had been returned to the English parliament as one of the burgesses for Exeter. He kept a journal of proceedings (which only lasted a few weeks), the first of its kind. It accurately relates the business of the session, shedding valuable light on such aspects of parliamentary procedure as the role of the judges during deliberations. His experiences in the Irish and English parliaments led to his writing a treatise on parliamentary practice, 'The Order and Usage how to Keepe a Parlement in England', which was published in two different editions in 1572. One, with a preface addressed to Sir William Fitzwilliam, who was then governor of Ireland, was overtly intended to bring order to the Irish assembly, and seems to have had that effect, becoming the principal authority for proceedings at Dublin for decades afterwards. The other, addressed to the Exeter city authorities, was presumably for the benefit of Hooker's successors as parliamentary burgesses, at a time when the rules and procedures of the House of Commons were 'to most men hidden and unknowen' (Snow, 125). The treatise is historiographically important for printing the early fourteenth-century treatise 'Modus tenendi parliamentum'; the fact that Hooker misdates it to the reign of Edward the Confessor is a reflection of his high view of the status of parliament, and of the House of Commons within it. The monarch was the moving force in parliament, which Hooker saw as above all a court, but under her the Commons constituted the essential element -- he argued that if necessary queen and Commons could disregard the Lords to enact legislation. 
Hooker represented Exeter in parliament again in 1586. By this time he was engaged in another historiographical enterprise, the second edition of Raphael Holinshed's 'Chronicles', which appeared in 1587. Hooker was at one time considered to have been the principal editor; that position is now more often ascribed to Abraham Fleming, but Hooker's contribution was certainly a major one. Not only was his 'Order and Usage' incorporated in the English section, but he also provided an updated history of Ireland, which included both a translation of the late twelfth-century 'Expugnatio Hibernica' of Gerald of Wales and a condensed version of Hooker's own life of Sir Peter Carew. His Irish section sheds revealing light on Hooker's political and religious views. In his dedicatory epistle he makes a direct link between loyalty to the established order and God's blessing, as he compares the desolate condition of the native Irish with the prosperity of the English pale: 'Two notable examples (I saie) and worthie to be throughlie observed; the one of Gods just judgment against the rebels and traitors, and the other of mercie and love towards the obedient and dutifull subject'. And in accordance with this viewpoint he repeatedly denounces the Catholicism of the Irish, which he sees as the prime cause of their persistent rebelliousness, with a virulence unmatched anywhere else in his writings. Rome is 'the pestilent hydra', the pope 'the sonne of sathan, and the manne of sinne, and the enimie unto the crosse of Christ, whose bloodthirstiness will never be quenched' (Holinshed, 2.168, 182). 
In his other writings Hooker shows himself a loyal protestant, but in writing about the Catholic past, as opposed to present-day adherents of Rome, he adopted a less extreme position. In his later years he continued to serve his native city, becoming coroner there in 1583 and recorder in 1590, and he was also appointed steward of Bradninch by Sir Walter Ralegh in 1587. But his energies seem to have been increasingly devoted to historical research and writing. He became a member of the Society of Antiquaries, and a friend of Richard Carew, who in his 'Survey of Cornwall' refers to 'the commendable painful antiquary, and my kind friend Master Hooker' (Snow, 24). Of his writings, his 'Description of the Citie of Excester' was published in 1919-47, but others remain wholly or partly unprinted, including his 'Catalogue of the bishops of Excester' (partly printed, like a number of his writings, in Holinshed) and a 'Synopsis chorographicall of Devonshire' (several manuscripts, including BL, Harley MS 5827). The latter was never finished, but was nevertheless highly influential for later Devon historians. Its structure is indebted to William Harrison, whose 'Description of England', a pioneering work of social and economic analysis, supplied the preface to Holinshed. Hooker was no mere plagiarist, however, but a diligent and affectionate observer of his native city and county. Like other chorographers he devoted much space to the history and heraldry of gentry families, but he also noted the wealth of particular places, for instance by giving the subsidy assessments for the county's boroughs, and did not miss the importance of fishing in the local economy, especially that of pilchards during the summer months. 
Interested in sources of wealth, Hooker also observed the uses to which it was put, for instance praising the third earl of Bath for his lavish spending at Tawstock, where he 'dothe contynewally keepe in most bountefull order to his greate honor & to the great good of the countri and to the releafe of the poor' (BL, Harley MS 5827, fol. 126'v'), while at Plymouth he noted the immense labour involved in Sir Francis Drake's project to give the town its first supply of fresh water. In his comments on the bishops of Exeter, too, he especially praises those who were builders, while denouncing John Veysey for giving away so much of the endowment of his see. Hooker is fair-minded in his accounts of the pre-Reformation bishops; Edmund Lacy, for instance, is allowed to have been 'a good a modest & a discrete man... He was very devoute in the religion in those dayes' (ibid., fol. 70'r'). But his warmest praise is reserved for the protestant prelates of his own time, notably William Alley, where his character sketch has something of the same vividness as his life of Carew: 'He seemed at the first appeerance to be a rough and an austere man, but in verie truth, a verie courteous, gentle, and an affable man... All his exercises, which for the most part was at bowles, verie merrie and pleasant, void of all sadnesse... he was somewhat credulous, of a hastie beleefe, and light of credit, which he did oftentimes mislike & blame in himselfe. (Holinshed, 3.1309)' The same warmth informs almost everything Hooker writes about Exeter, which is repeatedly praised for the beauty of its position and buildings, led by the cathedral -- 'a verie fayre and a sumptuose buyldinge' (Hooker, 'Description', 2.35). Unsurprisingly, he was responsible for the first map of the city, a splendid one engraved by Remigius Hogenberg at Hooker's expense in 1587. By this time his wife, Martha, had died, and Hooker had married Anastryce ('c'.1540?-1599), daughter of Edward Bridgeman of Exeter. They had seven sons and five daughters. One of his daughters, Alice, married the godly clergyman John Travers. Hooker's health began to fail, and he wrote to the corporation of Exeter describing himself as 'Drawen in to yeres and bearinge the borden of sondry infirmities... for my sight waxeth Dymme my hyringe [hearing] very thycke my speache imperfecte and my memory very feeble' (ibid., 2.4). He died in Exeter in 1601, some time between 26 January and 15 September, and was probably buried in the cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 13696


Hooker, Richard (1554-1600), theologian and philosopher, was born in or near Exeter in early April 1554. The original name of the family was Vowell, but in the fifteenth century its members began calling themselves Vowell, alias Hooker or Hoker, and in the sixteenth century the original name was generally dropped. Hooker's great-grandfather, John Hooker (died 1493), and his grandfather, Robert Hooker (died 1537), were mayors of Exeter, the former in 1490 and the latter in 1529. But his father Roger Vowell, alias Hooker, was relatively poor. 
Richard was educated at Exeter grammar school, where according to Izaak Walton he was 'an early questionist, quietly inquisitive' (Walton, 7). His progress was rapid, and at the schoolmaster's commendation his uncle John Hooker, alias Vowell, resolved to provide him with means for a university education. The uncle, 'Exeter's resident humanist for half a century' (Hill, xiii), was intimate with Bishop John Jewel of Salisbury, and urged his friend to look favourably on his poor nephew. Jewel summoned the lad and his teacher to Salisbury, was impressed by Richard's promise, and obtained a place for him at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he matriculated in late 1569. 
The president of the college, William Cole, took an interest in Hooker, who sometimes journeyed on foot from Oxford to Exeter, on the way visiting Jewel, whom he later extolled as 'the worthiest Divine that Christendome hath bred for the space of some hundreds of yeres' (Hooker, 'Laws', 2.6.4). Jewel died in September 1571, and his place as Hooker's patron was taken by Edwin Sandys, then bishop of London, who sent his son Edwin to be Hooker's pupil at Oxford. Sandys and another Oxford pupil, George Cranmer, great-nephew of the archbishop, became two of Hooker's closest friends. In 1573, when he was nearly twenty years old, Hooker was elected a disciple of his college. The statutable limit of age for this was nineteen, but it was permissible according to the founder's statutes to make an exception for a candidate of unusual attainments. Corpus was a Renaissance foundation, with a humanistic curriculum combining classical with Christian wisdom (including that of the Greek fathers). Hooker's education there was accordingly very wide. Theology was his chief study, but he was well acquainted with music (he had been a chorister) and poetry, 'all which he had digested and made useful' (Walton, 19). His friends at university included Henry Savile and his tutor, John Rainolds, a moderate and immensely learned puritan, to whom Hooker submitted some of his later anti-puritan writings for criticism. 
While Hooker was at Oxford, his father, then in Sir Peter Carew's service in Ireland, was captured by rebels. He had died by 1582, when his son was granted a pension of $4 by the corporation of Exeter. By then Richard had graduated in January 1574 and proceeded MA on 29 March 1577. He became a scholar (probationary fellow) of Corpus on 16 September 1577 and a full fellow in 1579. In July 1579, on the recommendation of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, Hooker was appointed deputy professor of Hebrew. On 14 August of the same year he was ordained deacon by John Aylmer, bishop of London. 
In October 1580 Hooker, with Rainolds and three other fellows, was briefly expelled from the college for opposing a manoeuvre to replace Cole as president with John Barfoot, the vice-president, a rigorous enforcer of conformity to the 'Book of Common Prayer'. On 15 January 1583 the chapter of Canterbury Cathedral, persuaded by letters from Leicester and another staunch defender of the protestant cause, Sir Francis Walsingham, granted Hooker an annual bursary of $5 6's.' 8'd.' Two sermons on the epistle of 'Jude' survive from Hooker's Oxford years, and a Latin letter to Rainolds may also come from this period. All three compositions express anguish and trepidation at Roman Catholic attacks on the English church, especially those made by Englishmen themselves. In October 1584 Hooker was presented to the living of Drayton Beauchamp in Buckinghamshire, but there is no evidence of his presence in this parish. Walton's tale of his friends Sandys and Cranmer finding him there tending sheep while reading Ovid and then rocking the cradle under orders from a shrewish wife is certainly false, since Hooker was not yet married. He resigned this living in October 1585. 
The few known remarks made by contemporaries on Hooker's personal characteristics and the many offered in Walton's 'Life' (first published in 1665), must be assessed in the light of his writings and the course of his life. Allowances must also be made for bias in Walton's sources -- family connections no doubt resented a suit brought against Sandys for Hooker's daughters, and hence entertained a low opinion of his wife and in-laws -- and for Walton's readiness to model Hooker as the proleptic defender of an English church very different from the one to which he was actually devoted. When these filters are applied, parts of Walton's account must be rejected outright, such as Mrs John Churchman's entrapment of a naive and rain-soaked Hooker as a husband for her ill-favoured daughter Joan, and the visit of Cranmer and Sandys to a henpecked Hooker at Drayton Beauchamp. Other features in Walton's portrait must be redrawn. The meekness attributed to Hooker by his first editor, John Spenser, and amplified by Walton into being his dominant trait cannot, on the evidence of his writings, have been docile submission to authority as such. If, however, meekness is construed as a notable lack of arrogance or personal animus, the attributions are evidence that Hooker's usual fraternal stance towards his puritan antagonists in his defence (or reconstruction) of the Elizabethan religious and political establishment was an expression of his character, not merely a rhetorical device. As Walton reports it, Hooker meditated on his deathbed, with his friend Adrian Saravia in attendance, on the obedience of the angels and wished it were so on earth. Hooker may have thought of the angels at his end, but their perfect obedience was not as central in his vision of them as it may have been for Walton or for the absolutist Saravia. Angelic delight in beholding God would also have been before his mind (Hooker, 'Laws', 1.4.1). 
It is also possible that some features of the image of Hooker presented by Walton deserve more prominence than the latter actually gave them. Walton has Hooker jesting memorably with young people while beating the parish bounds at Bishopsbourne, a pleasant complement to C. S. Lewis's discovery of 'plenty of humour, almost a mischievous humour' in his writing (Lewis, 462). There is reason to believe that Hooker attended a performance of Shakespeare's 'Julius Caesar', a sign that the taste for poetry Walton ascribes to him at Oxford was not purely classical and bookish. Walton's report that Hooker died of a cold caught on a trip from London is one of the few indications in the 'Life' of the cosmopolitanism that is perhaps C. J. Sisson's most important single addition to the received image of the man. What, then, of Hooker's marriage? He valued silence in women, counting their propensity to gossip (as well as their relatively weak understanding) a factor in the spread of puritanism and going out of his way in a funeral sermon to commend the reticence of the deceased for emulation by others of her sex ('Works of Hooker', ed. Hill, 5.373). Signs of dissatisfaction with Joan? Yet he made 'my wel beloved wife' sole executor of his will ('Works of Hooker', ed. Keble, Church, and Paget, 1.89n.). She is known to have had six children with him (the four daughters who survived him and two boys who died as infants), and it may be supposed that personal experience lay behind his remark that 'that kind of love which is the perfectest ground of wedlock is seldome able to yeeld anie reason of it selfe' (Hooker, 'Laws', 5.73.2). Although an image of Hooker that is both rounded and reliable is not to be had, there are grounds for believing that he was a livelier and more interesting man than the early testimonials may suggest. 
Hooker's preaching style was evidently not entertaining. In Fuller's account of Hooker's preaching in the 1580s: 'his voice was low, stature little, gesture none at all, standing stone-still in the Pulpit, as if the posture of his body were the emblem of his minde, unmoveable in his opinions. Where his eye was left fixed at the beginning, it was found fixed at the end of his Sermon: In a word, the doctrine he delivered, had nothing but it self to garnish it. (Fuller, 'Church-history', bk 9, 216)' The style thus reported was emblematic not only of Hooker's mind but of the attitude towards preaching he expressed in a discussion of sermons some years later. Arguing first for public reading of scripture as the primary form of Christian preaching, he went on to contend that in sermons themselves the essential elements were 'substance of matter, evidence of thinges, strength and validitie of argumentes and proofes', attributes, he pointed out, perfectly retained in reading them. Hence, he contended, it would follow from the puritan denial that bare reading of scripture, homilies, or sermons can save souls, that 'the vigor and vitall efficacie of sermons doth grow from certaine accidentes which are not in them but in theire maker; his virtue, his gesture, his countenance, his zeale, the motion of his bodie, and the inflection of his voice who first uttereth them as his own, is that which giveth them the forme, the nature, the verie essence of instrumentes availeable to eternall life. (Hooker, 'Laws', 5.22.19)' Hooker's ironic downgrading of pulpit oratory does not mean that he considered sermons unimportant. He left money in his will for a new pulpit in his last parish. Nor would it be correct to say that he eschewed the use of rhetorical devices in his own preaching. The point is that rhetoric was to serve the purpose of instruction rather than emotional arousal. Thus reorientated, rhetoric contributed much to Hooker's discourse. If his doctrine had nothing but itself to garnish it, there was considerable art in the internal garnishing. As Fuller also attests, those 'who would patiently attend... had their expectations 'over-paid' at the close' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 264). 
Attentive readers of Hooker's prose have ranked it among the best in the English language. There are more citations of Hooker in the first volume of Samuel Johnson's 'Dictionary' than of any other author save Locke, and Swift found that he wrote so naturally that his English had survived all changes of fashion. More recently, his style in the 'Laws' has been praised as apt rather than natural, as: 'for its purpose, perhaps the most perfect in English... The beauty of Hooker's prose is functional... His characteristic unit is the long, syntactically latinized, sentence, unobtrusively garnished with metaphor, anaphora, and chiasmus. The Latin syntax is there for use, not ornament; it enables him, as English syntax would not, to keep many ideas, as it were, in the air, limiting, enriching, and guiding one another, but not fully affirmed or denied until at last, with the weight of all that thought behind him, he slowly descends to the matured conclusion. (Lewis, 462)' 

Hooker's public career began with the preaching of a sermon at Paul's Cross, London, probably in autumn 1584. On the recommendation of Bishop Aylmer and the elder Edwin Sandys, now archbishop of York, he was appointed master of the Temple in early 1585, receiving letters patent from the crown on 17 March. According to Fuller, Hooker's sermons 'followed the inclination of his studies, and were for the most part on controversies, and deep points of School Divinity' (Fuller, 'Church-history', 216). This is not the impression given by the sermons that survive. These show Hooker as primarily concerned to address the pastoral needs of his congregation. In 'A Learned and Comfortable Sermon of the Certaintie and Perpetuitie of Faith in the Elect' he seeks to show that faith may endure even in those who are not aware of having it, to reassure his auditors that the experience of uncertainty in faith (as compared, say, with the certainty that accompanies the testimony of our senses) is not conclusive evidence that one in fact lacks the enduring faith granted the elect in Reformed theology. There is no exploration of deep theological points here but rather a picture of God as so merciful to human weakness and wavering that even anxiety about not having faith can be taken as a sign of having it. 
In the sermons from this period comprised in the posthumously published 'A Learned Discourse of Justification, Workes, and how the Foundation of Faith is Overthrowne' Hooker's pastoral care was directed to a different sort of anxiety, one that might have been felt by anyone looking back over the previous millennium of Christian history. After laying out the differences between the doctrines of justification taught by the churches of England and Rome, Hooker ventured to suggest that 'God was mercifull to save thousandes of our fathers living in popishe superstitions, in as muche as they synned ignorantlie' ('Works of Hooker', ed. Hill, 5.165). Here he touched on some deep theological points, but his aim was to diminish the salvific importance of such points, to show that even if an individual holds beliefs logically incompatible with faith in Christ, this does not demonstrate lack of such faith. Although the 'popish' doctrine that good works are necessary to salvation is logically incompatible with the 'foundation' of faith in Christ, Hooker the logician does not demand perfect logic from his fellow Christians. Rather, he is concerned 'leste if we make too many waies of denying christe we scarse leave any waie for our selves truly and soundly to confesse him' (ibid., 5.149). Hooker never adopts a relaxed attitude towards Christian believing, but for him that believing was emphatically not a matter of giving impeccable answers to theological inquisitors, even Reformed ones. 
For his apparent leniency towards both weak believing and false beliefs, Hooker came into conflict in his first year at the Temple with his kinsman by marriage Walter Travers, the Temple lecturer. Without personal animosity, Travers, who later declared that Hooker was 'a holy man' (Fuller, 'Church-history', 218), attacked Hooker's views relentlessly in his afternoon lectures for several months, until in March 1586 Archbishop John Whitgift forbade him to continue preaching. Fuller's characterization of the dispute as one in which 'the Pulpit spake pure Canterbury in the Morning, and Geneva in the Afternoon' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 264) can mislead. There is no reason to suppose that Whitgift was closer to Hooker than to Travers on the nature of faith or the possibility of salvation in the Roman church -- the issues disputed between them. But Fuller saw the exchanges as a combat between the 'champions' of the 'Prelaticall Party' and the 'Presbyterian power' (Fuller, 'Church-history', 213-14), and it was indeed Travers's suspected role as an advocate of presbyterianism that sealed the archbishop's judgement against him. Travers appealed against his suspension to the privy council, but, although 'The Councell table was much divided about Travers his petition' (ibid., 218), Whitgift prevailed. 
Hooker held his post at the Temple for five more years. Throughout this period he seems to have lived in the house of John Churchman, a then prosperous London merchant whose daughter Joan he married on 13 February 1588. It is most likely that it was in these years that an attack on his character was made. Fuller touches on it cryptically: 'Spotless was his conversation, and though some dirt was cast, none could stick on his reputation' (Fuller, 'Church-history', 214). Henry King, bishop of Chichester, relates in a letter to Izaak Walton that he had heard from his father, John King, bishop of London from 1611, 'all the circumstances of the plot to defame him [Hooker]; and how Sir Edwin Sandys outwitted his accusers, and gained their confession' (Walton, 82-3, 102-3). Gauden devotes more than a page to the story, as he had it from 'some well advised men of former years'. A prostitute and her accomplice arranged to accost Hooker on a walk in the fields near London and blackmailed him, until Sir Edwin Sandys, whose father had been similarly ensnared, came to know of it, had Hooker's tormentors imprisoned, and secured a confession. Gauden, like Bishop King, suggests that it was 'a 'plot' and 'practice' laid by some of Mr. 'Hookers'... more cowardly 'Enemies'' ('Works of Hooker', ed. Gauden, 32). 
On the ground that Travers had caused or allowed his petition to the privy council to be made public and that his own silence might be taken 'as an argument that I lake what to speake trewlie, and justlie, in myne owne defence' ('Works of Hooker', ed. Hill, 5.227), Hooker addressed to Whitgift in March or April of 1586 an 'Answer' to Travers's supplication which itself became public, gaining respect for him in some quarters but by no means mollifying Travers's supporters -- according to Walton these caused Hooker 'extreme grief' with their opposition after their champion's departure (Walton, 66). His response was to begin what came to be published as 'Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity: Eight Books', the first major work in the fields of theology, philosophy, and political thought to be written in English. In its professed aim of resolving the consciences or enlisting the affections of those who could or would not accept the religious settlement of 1559, the 'Laws' can be read as a continuation of Hooker's earlier pastoral efforts. It can also be read as an attempt to resolve his own conscience against the charge that 'if we maintain things that are established... we serve the time, and speak in favour of the present state, because thereby we either hold or seek preferment' ('Laws', 1.1.1). 
Given the scale on which Hooker conceived the work, it required more time and peace than his position at the Temple afforded. On 21 June 1591 he became subdean of Salisbury and prebendary of Netheravon, livings joined to that of Boscombe, Wiltshire, where he was instituted as rector by Whitgift on 17 July. His appointment at the Temple ended on 10 November. In the next few years he was occasionally active at Salisbury and perhaps at Boscombe. The first drafting of some or all of the 'Laws' was done, however, at his father-in-law's houses in Watling Street in London and at Enfield, Middlesex. Hooker worked in close consultation with his former pupils Cranmer and Sandys, and publication of the preface and first four books early in 1593 was subsidized by Sandys, who signed a contract with Hooker's cousin John Windet for the printing of the work on 26 January. Hooker sent a copy to Lord Burghley on 13 March, in time to be used in support of legislation in that year's parliament that was for the first time directed against protestant separatists as well as Catholic recusants. 
The timing was not accidental. Chapter 8 of the preface, singularly harsh and directly apposite to the measures under consideration, seems to have been a late addition written at the urging of George Cranmer. It was later testified that the printing had been 'hastened by such eminente persons whome the cause did moste speciallie concerne' (Sisson, 145). These must surely have included Whitgift, who had apparently placed his library at Lambeth at Hooker's disposal, would naturally have been kept informed from the beginning, at least in general terms, of what he was writing, and had personally licensed the work's publication; and very likely Richard Bancroft, who was at the time particularly active in pursuing nonconformists and separatists. Burghley, by contrast, had for years opposed Whitgift's repression of nonconformists. The dispatch of Hooker's work to him was thus presumably meant to steel him for action contrary to his personal sympathies. How far Hooker moved him is unknown, but in the event Burghley was the government's chief spokesman in the Lords for the bill that retrospectively legitimated the execution of the separatists Henry Barrow and John Greenwood on 6 April 1593. 
Whatever forces were active at its first publication, the germ of the 'Laws' can be detected in 'A Learned Sermon of the Nature of Pride' preached at the Temple, probably after the controversy with Travers. In it Hooker urges that the divine origin of a law does not entail its immutability. The point is expanded in book 3 of the 'Laws' to refute the necessity of a particular form of church government even if it was the polity of the primitive church. Hooker goes further than this, however. In the course of its eight books, the 'Laws' deals with issues between conformists and nonconformists, episcopalians and presbyterians, and Rome and the Church of England in greater depth than any previous treatment. 
That depth came primarily from Hooker's allocation of the first four books to 'generall meditations' or first principles, before he came directly to grips in the last four with the particular issues concerning worship and governance that so agitated the church when he wrote. Lest this plan call for more patience than those interested in the disputed issues could muster, Hooker prefaced his work with an address 'To them that seeke (as they tearme it) the reformation of Lawes, and orders Ecclesiasticall, in the Church of England' in which he dealt obliquely and historically with the reformist movement, while promising to provide later a direct theological treatment of its particular demands. This preface presents Calvin's establishment of a clerical-lay consistory at Geneva as an astute response to chance circumstances, not the fulfilment of a divine imperative, and attributes enthusiasm for the Genevan model in England to factors other than biblical inspiration or rational persuasion. Early critics noted indignantly the irony in some of his references to Calvin. For example: 'Divine knowledge he gathered, not by hearing or reading so much, as by teaching others' (Hooker, 'Laws', preface, 2.1). 
The ruling idea in Hooker's 'generall meditations' is law. The laws with which he was most crucially concerned are indicated early in book 1. On one hand there are 'the lawes whereby we live', that is, 'the rites, customes, and orders of Ecclesiasticall governement' currently in force in the English church. On the other hand, there is divine law, presented by advocates of Genevan presbyterianism as a radically incompatible alternative. 'We are accused as men that will not have Christ Jesus to rule over them, but have wilfully cast his statutes behinde their backs, hating to be reformed, and made subject unto the scepter of his discipline' ('Laws', 1.1.3). Hooker's strategy for defusing the potentially explosive clash between these alternatives was to enrich the very idea of law to include 'any kind of rule or canon, whereby actions are framed'. More precisely, since 'all things that are' have some characteristic operation or work aiming at an end, which cannot be achieved 'unlesse the worke be also fit to obteine it by', a law is that which specifies how a thing must operate in order to achieve its end: 'That which doth assigne unto each thing the kinde, that which doth moderate the force and power, that which doth appoint the forme and measure of working, the same we tearme a 'Lawe'' (ibid., 1.2.1). In the sixteen chapters of book 1 Hooker does in fact apply this conception of law to 'all things that are': God, the angels, natural (non-voluntary) agents, and human beings; and human beings are considered both as individuals and in societies and as guided by the law of reason, by the supernaturally revealed law of salvation found in scripture, and by laws of their own making. 
In setting forth this legal cosmology Hooker's own aim was to show how much more complex were the issues involved in regulating church life than the proponents of the presbyterian discipline believed. He concludes by showing how each sort of law discussed has a bearing on issues in the life of the church. In this demonstration and in appeals to the whole range of normative considerations in the course of his work, Hooker substitutes devotion to the ideal of law as intelligible direction towards an understood end for devotion to what he regards as a narrow and ill-founded conception of Christ's statutes. Exaltation of 'the scepter of Christ's discipline' is echoed by Hooker in an encomium of law itself, of which, he says: 'there can be no lesse acknowledged, then that her seate is the bosome of God, her voyce the harmony of the world, all thinges in heaven and earth doe her homage, the very least as feeling her care, and the greatest as not exempted from her power, but Angels and men and creatures of what condition so ever, though ech in different sort and maner, yet all with uniforme consent, admiring her as the mother of their peace and joy. ('Laws', 1.16.8)' Hooker's conception of a diversity of laws allows him to mount in book 2 a powerful response to the contention 'That scripture is the onely rule of all things which in this life may be done by men' ('Laws', bk 2, title). Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation, it is perfect in relation to the actions it directs towards the end for which God provided it, but in directing to salvation it presupposes and acknowledges the validity of natural human reason. The same division of directive labour refutes the thesis 'that in scripture there must be of necessitie contained a forme of Church-politie the lawes whereof may in no wise be altered' (ibid., bk 3, title), the subject of book 3. For first, scripture's specific aim of showing the way to salvation through faith in Christ does not require for its fulfilment the laying down of a form of church polity, and further, if a particular polity should be found in scripture, even with divine inspiration or endorsement, that would not by itself show that the designated form was binding on the church in perpetuity. It is not the maker of a law but its nature that determines whether it is immutably binding. The nature of church polity, as Hooker saw it, is not such as to require that it always take a single form. In book 4 Hooker responds to the charge 'that our forme of church-politie is corrupted with popish orders rites and ceremonies banished out of certaine reformed Churches whose example therein we ought to have followed' (ibid., bk 4, title). He argues that conformity with Roman Catholic ceremonial usage is no reason for the Church of England to abandon otherwise effective devotional forms. To make distance from Rome the criterion for adopting a ceremony is to make an incidental feature essential and thus to distort the purpose of ceremonies. 'The end which is aimed at in setting downe the outward forme of all religious actions is the edification of the Church' (ibid., 4.1.3). In Hooker's view, for a church to define itself by difference from other churches does not build it up: 'Where Rome keepeth that which is ancienter and better; others whome we much more affect leavinge it for newer, and changinge it for worse, we had rather followe the perfections of them whome we like not, then in defectes resemble them whome we love. (ibid., 5.28.1)' 

There is reason to believe that Hooker had drafted all eight books of the 'Laws' by 1593, when the first four were published. At the end of this first publication, however, he announced that 'for some causes' he had thought it fit to 'let goe these first foure bookes by themselves, then to stay both them and the rest, till the whole might together be published'. In line with his earlier description of the design of the work, he suggested that the 'generalities of the cause' handled in books 1-4 might well be considered apart, 'as by way of introduction unto the bookes that are to followe concerning particulars'. By the time book 5 was published, about December 1597, Hooker's base of operations had shifted. On 7 January 1595 he was presented by the queen to the living of Bishopsbourne, Kent. 
Book 5 of the 'Laws' is a detailed exposition of the worship and ministry prescribed in the 'Book of Common Prayer'. It is longer than the preface and first four books combined. There is evidence, however, of a shorter earlier form of the book, one less exhaustive in replying to reformist objections. Even in its full form book 5 is as much constructive as defensive. In controversy with Thomas Cartwright in the 1570s Whitgift had collected ancient precedents for the disputed usages, but his decisive argument was that these were 'things indifferent' ('adiaphora') and hence fell under the authority of the Christian magistrate. In effect, when Hooker wrote, the church's ceremonies were seen as 'there because they were there' (Lake, 'Anglicans and Puritans?', 164). Hooker made explicit the many ways in which the prescribed devotional forms could serve the important aim of building up the church. 
This construction project had two dimensions, one broadly social, the other transcendently spiritual. Book 5 begins with a chapter on 'True Religion' as 'the roote of all true virtues and the stay of all well ordered common-wealthes'. The second main section of the book begins with the contention that 'happines not eternall only but also temporall' depends upon a proper Christian ministry (Hooker, 'Laws', 5.76). Godliness, Hooker maintains, is the 'cheifest top' and the 'welspringe' of all true virtues (ibid., 5.1.2). In spelling out this thesis with regard to the cardinal virtues of justice, courage, and prudence his emphasis is more on motivating good behaviour from those in power than on securing obedience from those below. This is one of many signs scattered through Hooker's work of his critical attitude towards the personal qualities of those currently administering the laws he defended. His moral earnestness about the social significance of religion -- and the ill effects of irreligion -- is his strongest link with evangelical Christianity. 
Hooker's conception of the dynamics of worship shows how he expected it to achieve its aim. In instruction and prayer (including the prayer that all may be saved) there is an 'entercorse and comerce betwene God and us' ('Laws', 5.23.1) which prepares a congregation for participation in Christ in the sacraments, and Hooker accordingly thought of public worship as effecting an ongoing personal transformation shaping the whole of life. 
But for Hooker the aim of Christian worship was not limited to improvement of character for the benefit of society. In book 1 of the 'Laws' he had approached the religious dimension of life by way of the dissatisfaction felt with even the best things a purely natural existence can offer. The human soul seeks 'that which exceedeth the reach of sense; yea, somwhat above capacitie of reason, somewhat divine and heavenly, which with hidden exultation it rather surmiseth then conceyveth' ('Laws', 1.11.4). This seeking can only end 'when fully we injoy God, as an object wherein the powers of our soules are satisfied even with everlasting delight: so that although we be men, yet by being unto God united we live as it were the life of God. (ibid., 1.11.2)' It is in the centre of book 5, and in the central idea of participation in Christ, that Hooker points most directly to such a living of the life of God. The 'union or mutuall participation which is betweene Christ and the Church of Christ in this present worlde' is 'that mutuall inward hold which Christ hath of us and wee of him, in such sort that ech possesseth other by waie of speciall interest propertie and inherent copulation' (ibid., 5.56.1). Seen from a later century, the sacramentalism Hooker built on this theology of mutual participation has looked distinctively catholic, but at the time it was an authentic part of Reformed tradition. A nice sign of this is the conclusion of Hooker's discussion of the eucharist (ibid., 5.67.12), a rhapsodic translation of a twelfth-century Latin text edited by a French Reformed pastor. Most of the particulars of worship discussed in book 5 are indeed, technically, 'adiaphora', but in both its details and its Christocentric structure the book offers a theology of public devotion of extraordinary depth. 
Hooker's one known invitation to preach at court was during Lent 1598, a few months after the publication of book 5. Whether or not the queen appreciated the fact, Hooker appears to have come 'uncannily close to what we can glean of the idiosyncratic private religious opinions of this very private woman' (MacCulloch, 781). 
In his few remaining years Hooker was an exemplary pastor at Bishopsbourne, while continuing to work on the 'Laws'. After a long and painful illness, which began on a trip from London to Gravesend, he died at Bishopsbourne on 2 November 1600. He was buried in the church, under a slab that had formerly been the altar. A monument, with the most nearly contemporary likeness of him (it was the source of several engravings from the 1650s onwards), was set up by William Cowper in 1635. Hooker's estate was substantial, including what must have been a magnificent library, valued at $300. The whole amounted to nearly $1100, enough for $100 towards the dowry of each of his daughters, $3 for the pulpit at Bishopsbourne, $5 5's'. to the poor of Barham and Bishopsbourne, and a handsome residue for his wife, with which she soon made an unfortunate marriage to Edward Nethersole, a former mayor of Canterbury. 
There is good evidence that Hooker finished the last three books of the 'Laws', but it is clear that the surviving texts, though undoubtedly Hooker's work, are not in finished form. On 7 November 1600, within a week of Hooker's death, Lancelot Andrewes instructed Henry Parry, who had informed him of the event, to 'have a care to deal with his Executrix or Executor... that there be speciall care and regard for preserving such papers as he left, besides the three last books expected' ('Works of Hooker', ed. Hill, 3.xiii-xiv). Perhaps on Parry's initiative, Hooker's father-in-law, designated in his will as his overseer (with Sandys), sent his servant Philip Culme to Bishopsbourne to collect 'all such written books, writings, and written papers as he... could find' (ibid.). Churchman later called together Parry, Sandys, and John Spenser (president of Hooker's Oxford college) to examine the papers that Culme had salvaged. In a division of the papers made at another meeting, at which Andrewes was present, Spenser was given the manuscripts pertaining to the three last books, with a view to publishing them. In a note to the reader prefacing a second edition of 'Laws', books 1-5, published in 1604, Spenser testified with regard to books 6-8 that Hooker had 'lived till he sawe them perfected' and announced that, although the 'perfect Copies' had been 'smothered', 'the importunities of many great and worthy persons will not suffer them quietly to dye and to be buried', and so 'it is intended they shall see them as they are'. When and why the project was abandoned is matter for conjecture. The content of book 7 and still more of book 8 ran strongly against the tide of divine right views of episcopacy and kingship current under the early Stuarts, and this may be why the latter was first published (along with the surviving portion of book 6) only in 1648, when a more moderate conception of royal authority might reasonably have hoped for acceptance, while book 7 appeared only in 1662 under the auspices of John Gauden, bishop of Exeter. 
The status of the surviving texts of the three last books has been much debated. There are two distinct questions here. First, did Hooker actually finish these books, and if so, what happened to the 'perfect Copies'? Second and more important, are the surviving texts of 'Laws', books 6-8, genuinely Hooker's work? 
On the first question, besides Spenser's assertion in 1604 that Hooker lived to see his work completed, there is testimony to the same effect a year earlier by William Covel in his 'A Just and Temperate Defence of the Five Books of Ecclesiastical Policie'. Covel referred to the three last books 'which from his own mouth, I am informed that they were finisht' ('Works of Hooker', ed. Hill, 3.xvii). What happened, then? When Andrewes urged Parry to 'have a care' to preserve Hooker's papers, he explained that: 'By preserving I meane, that not only they be not embezelled, and come to nothing, but that they come not into greate hands, whoe will only have use of them quatenus et quousque [as far and as long (as they wish)], and suppresse the rest, or unhappily all. (ibid., 3.xiv)' Spenser in 1604 confirms what Andrewes had feared, informing his readers with regard to the three last books of the 'Laws' that 'some evill disposed mindes, whether of malice, or covetousnesse, or wicked blinde Zeale, it is uncerteine... smothered them, and by conveying away the perfect Copies, left unto us nothing but certaine olde unperfect and mangled draughts, dismembred into peeces'. 
Who might these 'evill disposed mindes' have been? There are two sets of candidates. Edmund Parbo, a London lawyer, of Staple Inn, testified in 1614 (in the suit brought against Sandys on behalf of Hooker's daughters for such proceeds as might be owing them from the sale of their father's works) that he had 'Credibly heard' that Nethersole, Joan Hooker's new husband, Roger Raven, a Canterbury schoolmaster, and a Mr Aldridge gained possession of various of Hooker's 'written woorks' and burnt or caused to be burnt all or most of them (Sisson, 138). Walton gives an account similar to Parbo's but names different culprits. Here Hooker's widow is said to have testified that she had allowed one Mr Chark and another local minister access to Hooker's study and that they burnt and tore many of his writings, assuring her that they were not fit to be seen. C. J. Sisson, whose research brought to light a wealth of information about the writing and publication of books 1-5 of 'Laws', the hard circumstances of Hooker's daughters (their mother dead in 1603 and her father bankrupt), and the suit against Sandys, was disturbed by imprecisions and inconsistencies in the preceding testimonies -- and perhaps by their degree of support for the negative picture of Joan Hooker that he had done much to efface. He accordingly argued, somewhat strainedly, not only that the tales of vandalism were baseless, but even that Covel's and Spenser's direct assertions that Hooker had finished the 'Laws' should be rejected. There had not been any 'perfect Copies'. The manuscripts divided up at John Churchman's house in 1600 contained Hooker's last words on the last books. Since Sisson wrote, however, another incident involving the defacing of books by Roger Raven has been discovered. 
The second, more material question about the surviving texts of 'Laws', books 6-8, that of their authenticity, can be dealt with more briefly. What is extant of these three last books is indeed by Hooker. There is no suggestion by Spenser that the manuscripts brought to London after Hooker's death had included addition or other alteration to what Hooker had written, only that what remained were 'olde unperfect and mangled draughts, dismembred into peeces'. The possibility of alteration in these manuscripts between their assignment to Spenser and their publication by others decades later must be addressed, but such alteration does not appear to have occurred. Each of the three books is authentic as far as it goes, and all are of some importance. 
In the plan of the 'Laws' laid out in the preface, book 6 was to deal with the presbyterian polity urged upon the English church by Travers, Cartwright, and their followers, and in particular with the power of jurisdiction enjoyed by lay elders in that scheme. From comments made on it by Cranmer and Sandys it is certain that Hooker had completed, probably by 1593, a draft of such a book. The text printed as book 6 in all editions of the 'Laws' since 1648 begins in accordance with the announced plan but soon turns into a treatise on 'the virtue and discipline of repentance'. This book 6 is certainly not a revision of the early draft. It has been suggested, however, that a discussion of penance would have been a reasonable preliminary to a revised treatment of the eldership, since, as Hooker avers at the beginning of the book as it survives, repentance is the aim of ecclesiastical jurisdiction. This suggestion receives support from a body of autograph working notes for books 6 and 8 discovered during preparation of the Folger edition of Hooker's works ('Works of Hooker', ed. Hill, 3.462-523; 6.233-48, 1055-99). These notes show him working towards an account of existing English ecclesiastical law in response to a comment by Sandys on the lost draft. Such an account, along with a revision of the earlier draft and the existing treatise on penance could have yielded an extensive but coherent book 6. The surviving treatise is largely historical; it argues against the Roman Catholic view of penance as a sacrament and differs from some Reformed conceptions in making the sinner's cure or repentance, rather than the church's purity, the aim of spiritual discipline. 
The absence of a full book 6, along with the evidence that Hooker completed the 'Laws', supports Spenser's charge of vandalism. A refutation of presbyterianism would have been the part of Hooker's work above all others that overly zealous disciplinarians would have been tempted to destroy. Conversely, there is no reason to suppose that Spenser or his associates would have wished to suppress it. 
Book 7 as it survives in Gauden's edition of 1662 is the most finished of the posthumous books. Fourteen chapters in nuanced defence of the authority of bishops are followed by eight in defence of episcopal 'honours', especially ample endowment with lands and livings. Hooker's assertion that 'if any thing in the Churches Government, surely the first institution of Bishops was from Heaven, was even of God, the Holy Ghost was the Author of it' ('Laws', 7.5.10) makes a strong claim on behalf of 'jure divino' episcopacy, but the 'if' which begins this much quoted statement should not be ignored, and even granting Hooker's probable acceptance of divine inspiration as the origin of episcopacy, it would not follow, on his principles, that the office was immutable. He makes this point in book 7 in an exegesis of St Jerome's declaration that bishops owe their power to the custom of the church, not to any commandment of the Lord. Hooker's exposition of Jerome is complex in itself; it was rendered more complex by inclusion in the text published by Gauden of what appears to be a warning comment from one of Hooker's advisers. The suggestion that episcopacy, even if of divine institution, could in some (very extreme) circumstances be abolished is compatible with Hooker's contention in his sermon on pride and in book 3 of the 'Laws' that not all divine commandments are immutable. The presence of the obscuring comment in the manuscript in Gauden's possession and some signs of hasty composition or imperfect editing elsewhere may indicate that Gauden's manuscript was not a fair copy of the book. A part of book 7 that puritans certainly would not have objected to is the beginning of chapter 24, with its scathing animadversions on the faults of contemporary bishops. 'No other apologist for the Elizabethan 'status quo' chose to be as critical as Hooker of the institution he was supposed to be defending' (Collinson, 171). Hooker's defence of episcopacy in book 7 of the 'Laws' is thus, for all its vigour, a qualified one with regard both to the office and to its present incumbents. 
Hooker's defence of the royal headship of the English church -- the 'power of Ecclesiastical Dominion as by the Lawes of this Land belongeth unto the Supreme Regent thereof' ('Laws', bk 8, title) -- is also significantly qualified. In the dedication of book 5, he had ranked 'those questions which are at this daie betweene us and the Church of Rome about the actions of the body of the Church of God' as second in importance only to the controversies over the person of Christ in the patristic period (ibid., bk 5, dedication, 3). Accordingly, book 8 and the autograph notes pertaining to it are occupied at least as much with Rome as with domestic presbyterianism. Hooker indeed emphasizes the 'body' of the English church, 'personally' identical with the 'independent multitude' which is the commonwealth of England, in his account of the royal supremacy. 'We say that the care of religion being common unto all 'Societies' politique, such 'Societies' as doe embrace the true religion, have the name of the 'Church' given unto every of them for distinction from the rest. So that every body politique hath some religion, but the 'Church' that religion, which is only true. (ibid., 8.1.2)' The royal supremacy, as Hooker saw it, was a wholly legitimate institution with which the body politic that was the English church cared for its religion. Besides depending on law emanating from the community for its initial legitimacy, the crown's power of dominion was limited in its operations by laws made in and with a parliament in which all the monarch's subjects were present either in person or by proxy. Hooker was unique among his contemporaries in his emphasis on law -- and not only divine and natural law but 'municipal' law, the law of the land -- as a restraint on royal action. He distanced himself from the newly fashionable concept of sovereignty in book 8 and has accordingly been criticized for holding an illogical notion of twin majesty, but just such a consensual idea of political authority might have been useful in the fateful political debates of the next century. 
None of the ten known manuscript versions of book 8 appears finished. If Hooker filled out some of the hints in the autograph notes, the result would have been, or perhaps was (if vandals disposed of a finished version) even more constitutionalist than the extant text. The surviving text, for example, argues for the king's exemption from ordinary ecclesiastical censure of the sort proposed by the disciplinarians. The autograph notes suggest an intention to lay out arguments on both sides of the general question of sovereign immunity, the ultimately decisive issue of the civil war. 
Besides the first editions of the preface and first four books of the 'Laws' in 1593 and book 5 in 1597, there were five early seventeenth-century editions of the first five books together, Spenser's in 1604, printed by Windet, and four printed by William Stansby (1616-17, 1622, 1632, and 1638-9). 'The answere of Mr. Richard Hooker to a supplication preferred by Mr. Walter Travers to the HH. lords of the privie counsell', edited by Spenser's associate, Henry Jackson, was printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes in 1612. Jackson also edited and Barnes published 'A learned and comfortable sermon of the certaintie and perpetuitie of faith in the elect; especially of the prophet Habbakuks faith' (1612); 'A learned discourse of justification, workes, and how the foundation of faith is overthrowne' (1612, 2nd edn 1613); 'A learned sermon of the nature of pride' (1612); 'A remedie against sorrow and feare, delivered in a funerall sermon' (1612); and 'Two sermons upon part of S. Judes epistle' (1614). The first collected edition of these writings, 'Certayne divine tractates, and other godly sermons', was printed in London by Stansby in 1618. This was issued with the 1616-17 edition of 'Laws', books 1-5, and was reprinted in 1622, 1632, 1635-6, and 1639. A fragment, possibly of a sermon, was published as 'A discovery of the causes of the continuance of these contentions touching church-government: out of the fragments of Richard Hooker' in a publication arranged by Archbishop Ussher, 'Certain briefe treatises... concerning the... government of the church' (1641). Ussher was also responsible for the first edition of 'Laws', books 6 and 8: 'Of the lawes of ecclesiasticall politie; the sixth and eighth books... now published according to the most authentique copies' (1648; reissued 1651). Fragments of book 8 were published as 'Mr. Hookers judgment of the kings power in matters of religion, advancement of bishops &c.' in 'Clavi trabales', edited by Nicholas Bernard (1661). Book 7 was first published in Gauden's edition of 'The works of Mr. Richard Hooker... in eight books of 'Ecclesiastical polity': now compleated, as with the sixth and eighth, so with the seventh... out of his own manuscripts, never before published' (1662). Numerous later editions were published, most notably that of John Keble, the first critical edition, which appeared in three volumes in 1836. The seventh edition of Keble (1888) was the standard reference text until the appearance, with new material, of 'The Folger Library Edition of the Works of Richard Hooker' published in seven volumes between 1977 and 1998 under the general editorship of W. Speed Hill. 
Hooker presents himself in the 'Laws' as offering posterity 'information... concerning the present state of the Church of God established amongst us' lest 'their carefull endevour which woulde have upheld the same' be permitted to 'passe away as in a dreame' (preface, 1.1). He is commonly read as not merely an informant but a defender of the established church: as ''par excellence' the apologist of the Elizabethan Settlement of 1559 and perhaps the most accomplished advocate that Anglicanism has ever had' (Cross and Livingstone, 789); or, in a less amiable statement, as providing 'window dressing for the command structure of Elizabethan society' (Eccleshall, 63). A closer look at the reception of Hooker's work across the centuries raises questions about such characterizations. There is the question whether he was 'not so much defensively recapitulating Anglicanism as inventing it' (Collinson, 151), and, if the latter, there is a further question as to what sort of Anglicanism it is that he invented. 
The first published reaction to the 'Laws' (that is, to the five books published in their author's lifetime) was the anonymous 'Christian Letter' of 1599. Its author or authors certainly saw something new in Hooker, not simply information about, much less defence of, the Church of England as defined by the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. The 'Letter' attacked Hooker on one article after another, to his very great annoyance. Complementing this protestant attack was the positive reception accorded the work in Catholic circles. When the crypto-papist John Good attacked puritans in the parliament of 1604 as being 'no better than Protestant sectaries' he quoted the 'absolute and unanswerable works of reverend Mr. Hooker' (MacCulloch, 787). About the same time Elizabeth, Lady Falkland, anticipated James II in attributing her conversion to Catholicism to reading Hooker. He 'had left her hanging in the air; for having brought her so far (which she thought he did very reasonably) she saw not how, nor at what, she could stop, till she returned to the Church from whence they were come. (ibid.)' Covel in his 'Just and Temperate Defence' of 1603 had sought to rescue Hooker as a loyal member of the English church, as did Henry Jackson in his editions of Hooker's sermons. Covel, however, confirms the impression of Hooker's defence of prescribed practices as being at the same time a shift in their interpretation, a sort of 'avant-garde conformism' moving away from the Reformed mainstream of the rest of Europe and towards the sacramentalism of the Laudian church. Yet in this same period Samuel Ward of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, 'a hero of the godly and a disciple of William Perkins', strongly commended Hooker's views on the eucharist as healthier than the general run of English protestant sacramental discussion (ibid., 789-90). 
Moderation has been a watchword in eulogies of Hooker, but it seems to have been the Laudians, hardly moderate by Hooker's standards in their ideas or exercise of authority, who first made much of the adjective 'judicious' which eventually came to characterize the man. Hooker's defence of reason against what might be called forensic biblicism also won him admirers in the first half of the seventeenth century. He was a hero for the group of genuinely moderate intellectuals who gathered around the second Viscount Falkland (son of Lady Elizabeth) at Great Tew; he was especially admired by William Chillingworth, author of 'The Religion of Protestants a Safe Way to Salvation'. By the outbreak of the civil war, then, Hooker had achieved iconic status in at least some respects for a remarkable range of persuasions: 'godly' as well as moderate and rationalist protestants, high-flying Laudians, and converts to Roman Catholicism. 
Publication of book 8 of the 'Laws' in 1648 significantly altered what there was to approve or reject in Hooker. Manuscripts of the book had been circulating for some years. According to Dugdale's 'A Short View of the Late Troubles', constitutionalist passages in some copies (insertions, he thought) had 'miserably captivated' many well-meaning people and drawn them to the parliamentary side. At length they 'were not ashamed, in that Treaty which they had with his Majesty [Charles I] in the Isle of Wight [1648], to vouch the authority of this venerable man, in derogation of his Supremacy, and to place the Soveraign power in the People.... Whereunto the good King answered; that 'though those three Books, were not allowed to be' 'Mr.' Hookers'; yet he would admit them so to be, and consent to what his Lordship' [William, Viscount Saye and Sele] 'endeavoured to prove out of them, in case he would assent to the judgment of' 'Mr.' Hooker', declared in the other five books, which were unquestionably his'. (Dugdale, 39)' Charles especially commended Hooker's 'Laws' to his children, though presumably not book 8. When book 7 was published at the Restoration, the stage was set for a minuet of selective appropriations of Hooker in which each claimant chose for a partner either the Hooker of books 1-5 of 'Laws', the serene expositor of orderly liturgy and an ordered society, or the ecclesio-political rationalist of the last two books. John Locke, the most influential student of Hooker's teachings on consent as the basis of political authority and law as supreme in its exercise, was careful to quote only from the undoubtedly authentic earlier books, but public awareness of the later ones could only confirm his interpretation of the others. Suspicions of the three last books, kept alive by inclusion of Walton's 'Life' in editions of Hooker's works from 1666, preserved him for tory use, however, and as an implicit nonjuring defender of the church's apostolic government. 
Hooker maintained his double identity as whig and tory into the eighteenth century, when, however, the weakening hold on political reality of his ideal of a church organically connected with the nation's civil polity led Warburton to propose in 1736, in explicit disagreement with Hooker, an 'alliance' rather than an identity of church and state. Reacting a century later against the secularization of society, Coleridge, a great admirer of Hooker, 'creatively misunderstood him'. In his 'On the Constitution of Church and State' of 1830, he saw the national church as bearer of a nation's civilization, echoing Hooker's thesis that political communities are properly concerned with goods of the soul, not merely material welfare -- but Coleridge went lightly on the divine character of the institution. In the same period there were competing Tractarian and evangelical presentations of Hooker. Keble sought to rescue Hooker from 'the rationalists... and the liberals of the school of Locke and Hoadly', but Benjamin Hanbury, in his edition, had already criticized the high-church treatment of Hooker as 'the smoke of incense obscuring the truth'. 
At the turn of the millennium perceptions of Hooker were still diverse. An American political philosopher proclaimed his importance as a pioneer of enlightenment: 'If there is any single point that must be chosen as the beginning of the English Enlightenment, as the first glimmering of its dawn, then that would have to be the publication in 1593 of the first four books of Richard Hooker's 'Of the Lawes of Ecclesiasticall Politie'. (Beiser, 46)' In a volume marking completion of the Folger edition an eminent historian of Elizabethan puritanism confirmed Lake's account of Hooker as the inventor of Anglicanism but with a negative twist. Hooker did indeed confront the English church with an original account of its identity, but it was a 'disturbing and destabilizing' one (Collinson, 181). In the same volume, however, Hooker is presented as 'an Apologist of the Magisterial Reformation in England' and his position is praised by a catholic-minded Anglican bishop as one of 'contemplative pragmatism'. 
Such an assemblage of Hooker's admirers and critics through the centuries may suggest that he was either a thoroughly confused thinker or a deeply ambiguous author. But if Hooker's work is read, rather than read about, a different impression may form. His views are complex, but they are the outcome of engagement with a wider range of ideas than those who would appropriate or reject him usually consider. His style is complex, too, but not unreadable, once both its art and its naturalness are appreciated. Hooker thought that undue concern with positioning the Church of England as an antagonist of Roman Catholicism was a distraction from the proper tasks of Christian life. Possibly the attempt to pigeon-hole Hooker himself is, similarly, a distraction from the best use and enjoyment of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 13697


Hooker, Thomas (1586?-1647), minister in America, was probably born in 1586, possibly on 7 July, the son of Thomas Hooker (died 1635), of Marfield (now Markfield), Leicestershire, a yeoman farmer and overseer of the Digby family's properties. His mother's name is unknown. Pre-seventeenth-century church records from Marfield are lost, but it is known that he had a brother, John, and two sisters, one perhaps called Anne, and Dorothy. 
At some point Hooker was sent to the grammar school endowed by Sir Wolfstan Dixie at Market Bosworth, some 10 miles from Marfield, where he prepared for Cambridge. He matriculated there at Queens' College in 1604, but soon migrated to the decidedly puritan Emmanuel College, where he graduated BA early in 1608 and proceeded MA in 1611. In 1609 he was elected to a Dixie fellowship, one of two at the college endowed by Dixie and reserved to his relatives or to former pupils of Market Bosworth School. Hooker's contemporaries included such other future puritan lights as John Cotton, Anthony Tuckney, Zechariah Symmes, Simeon Ashe, and Nathaniel Rogers. During his years at Emmanuel, Hooker experienced an extended period of spiritual struggle that eventually resulted in his assurance of God's grace. This 'most experimental acquaintance with the truths of the gospel', as Cotton Mather described it (Mather, 1.304), was later the basis for his vivid representation of the conversion process in his central series of sermons. 
The college's account books indicate that Hooker left Emmanuel College's employ in the early autumn of 1618. Fourteen years in a university setting had provided him with a thorough grounding in the literature of church history and theology. He was deeply read in the 'Bible' itself as well as in the writings of the church fathers, medieval Catholic churchmen, logicians such as Aristotle, Aquinas, and Ramus, Reformation leaders, and recent protestant commentators and disputants. His personal library at the time of his death was valued at $300, indicating a large collection that comprised more than one-quarter of the value of his estate. Yet, despite his love for scholarship, he believed that no amount of learning could bring an individual soul closer to God. As he colourfully insisted, 'A dram of spirituall wisdome... is worth a thousand cart-loads of that dung-hill, carnall wisdome' (Hooker, 'The Soules Exaltation', 1638, 86). His long experience in academic circles led him to warn that 'Men of the greatest ability for depth of brain and strength of understanding are most hardly brought to brokennes of heart' (Hooker, 'The Application of Redemption, the Ninth and Tenth Books', 1656, 98). 
After leaving Cambridge, Hooker gave occasional sermons in his home county of Leicestershire, but his first settled post-academic position was as rector of St George's in Esher, Surrey. The patrons of that church were Sir Francis Drake and Joan, Lady Drake. Hooker became an important counsellor to Lady Drake, who was spiritually distraught, believing she had committed the unpardonable sin. Despite her previous care by several puritan ministers, including the venerable John Dod, it was Hooker, apparently drawing on the experience of his own recent spiritual struggles, who succeeded in bringing her relief. The case was witnessed by one Jasper Heartwell, a London barrister, whose pseudonymous 'Trodden Down Strength' (1647) records the story, up to the moment of Lady Drake's death on 18 April 1625 in a state of assurance of her salvation. 
On 3 April 1621 Hooker had married her woman-in-waiting, Susannah Garbrand, in Amersham, Buckinghamshire, Joan Drake's birthplace. Two daughters were born to the Hookers in the early 1620s: Joanna (died 1647), named for Hooker's patron and later the second wife of the Revd Thomas Shepard (1605-1649) of Cambridge, Massachusetts, and Mary, who later married the Revd Roger Newton, pastor at Milford, Connecticut. At some point in Hooker's Esher ministry, the bishop of Winchester, Lancelot Andrewes, silenced him 'on the complaint of King James' himself (TNA: PRO, SP 16/151/12), perhaps for his criticism of Prince Charles's proposed match with the Spanish infanta, Maria. 
Some time after Joan Drake's death in 1625, Hooker accepted a post as lecturer and curate to John Michaelson, the rector of St Mary's, Chelmsford, Essex. In this location, Hooker's outspoken puritan principles soon earned him a reputation as one of England's most powerful and prominent voices of Independency. He strengthened devotion to the nonconformist cause by organizing a monthly conference of similarly inclined Essex ministers. Although as a lecturer, paid by privately donated moneys, he escaped the usual requirement of subscribing to the church's 'Act of Uniformity', he was nevertheless under the close surveillance of the church authorities. Despite great popularity and the support of many colleagues, he eventually felt the force of the established church's intolerance of puritanism. 
The earliest preserved sermon from Hooker's Chelmsford years was for the funeral of the Revd Robert Wilmott of Clare, Suffolk, a King's College graduate whom Hooker had known at Cambridge. Hooker took the occasion to lament the current crackdown by church authorities on nonconformists. It was also a period when the armies of Spain were crushing protestants in the Low Countries and an invasion of England itself was widely feared. Other sermons by Hooker from this period reflect a combination of sharp criticism of lax believers and pointed allusion to oppressions of ministers by church and state officials. This combination of spiritual and political concerns is expressed in such sermons as 'The Faithful Covenanter' (1644), 'The Stay of the Faithful' (1638), and 'The Danger of Desertion' (1641). 
Like many other puritans, Hooker was increasingly opposed to the English church's ecclesiastical hierarchy and to the use of 'human inventions' -- scripturally unauthorized ceremonies -- in the church's forms of worship. Still, his overarching message was one of spiritual encouragement. In the market town of Chelmsford, his audience included the full range of society. Hooker intentionally 'chose to be where great numbers of 'the Poor' might receive the 'Gospel' from him.' 'His lecture was exceedingly frequented' as 'his ministry shone through the whole county of 'Essex'' (Mather, 1.304). His audience included 'some of great quality among the rest', the most prominent being 'the truly noble Earl of 'Warwick'' (ibid., 1.304-5), a friend and protector of puritans, including, eventually, Hooker and his family. As Mather further notes, Hooker developed a reputation for special power in the 'Use' or 'Application' section of his sermons, the final, and often very long, section where the biblical exegesis and rational explanations of the text were 'brought home' through practical admonitions to the congregation. 
Hooker's great popularity among his listeners was based on this ability to speak the language of the people while conveying the high truths of scripture. Since his ministry in England and later in New England was always focused on encouraging his listeners to think positively and actively about realizing God's 'promise' of salvation in their own lives, he stayed close to the experiences of their lives in the figures of speech that characterized his preaching. He preached in a plain style, eschewing the use of classical languages, in which he was fluent, enlivening his sermons instead with such dramatic tools as imagined dialogue, 'character' sketches, and invitations to his listeners to imagine themselves in real-life situations to which he gave deep spiritual meaning. During his Chelmsford ministry (1625-30) he preached the sermons called 'The Poor Doubting Christian Drawn unto Christ', published anonymously in 1629. The title indicates his desire to give encouragement to those inclined to see themselves as hopeless cases. His message was directed at the 'poor soul' who 'mourns and cries to heaven for mercy, and prays against a stubborn hard heart; and he is weary of his life because his wild heart remains' (Williams and others, 185). Such listeners, in spite of human helplessness, were told they should 'expect power from Christ to pluck thee out of thyself' (ibid., 159). 'The Poor Doubting Christian' was his most popular book, going through at least seventeen editions by 1700, including a Dutch translation. 
At some point during his Chelmsford period, Hooker opened a school in his home, a farmhouse called Cuckoos, in Little Baddow. His assistant was John Eliot, later known as 'the Apostle to the Indians'. Eliot reported that it was in this place that he experienced God's saving grace and that 'when I came to this blessed family, I then saw, and never before, the power of godliness, in its lively vigour, and efficacy' (Mather, 1.305). During these years of Hooker's Essex ministry, four more children were born, two of whom, Anne and Sarah, died in infancy while a second Sarah and John both survived to adulthood. 
By 1629 Hooker's notoriety had attracted the full attention of the anti-puritan forces in Essex, including William Laud, bishop of London from 1628. Conformist ministers in the region wrote letters to the bishop warning that Hooker was acquiring great influence with the people, and in particular with the younger ministers, for whom he was 'an oracle, and their principal library' ('CSP dom.', '1628-9', 554). A letter from Samuel Collins, vicar of Braintree, warned Laud that 'all men's eares are now filled with the obstreprous clamours of his [Hooker's] followers against my Lord [Laud]... as a man endeavouring to suppress good preaching and advance Popery' (Davids, 150). Hooker had become a flashpoint in the increasingly vehement puritan struggle against the strict enforcers of conformity in the forms of worship. So prominent was Hooker's voice, and so intently were East Anglians attuned to ecclesiastical matters, that Collins claimed the question of Hooker's continuance in the active ministry 'drowns the noise of the greate question of Tonnage and Poundage... I dare be bold to say that if he be once quietly gone, my Lord hath overcame the greatest difficulty in governing this parte of his diocese' (ibid., 152). In a June 1629 meeting with Laud, Hooker expressed a willingness to depart from the diocese so long as he was not called before the court of high commission. Late in 1629 petitions to Laud both for and against Hooker's ministry followed, with over forty clerical signatures on each. When in 1630 he was finally summoned to appear before the court, he elected to forfeit bond and go into hiding. 
Despite his preference for a tone of hopeful encouragement in his preaching, one of Hooker's most powerful sermons was a rousing jeremiad. It was his farewell sermon in England, 'The Danger of Desertion', in which he warned his hearers that 'England hath seen her best days' (Williams and others, 245) and that 'As sure as God is God, God is going from England' (ibid., 244). His warning that 'God is packing up of his gospel, because none will buy his wares' (ibid., 246) carried visual immediacy in the market town of Chelmsford. His own imminent departure was implied as he further warned that: 'God begins to ship away his Noahs, which prophesied and foretold that destruction was near; and God makes account that New England shall be a refuge for his Noahs and his Lots, a rock and a shelter for his righteous ones to run unto. (ibid., 246)' His accusations of guilt for this situation include both the simple half-hearted believers in his audience who have taken God's blessings too much for granted and the king himself, about whom: 'Some may say: 'Surely kings and monarchs are exempted, they need not fear that such torments will come upon them.' But God will say, be he a king that rules or reigns, yet as he hath rejected God, so God will reject him. He is a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. (ibid., 243)' 

Pursuivants actively sought Hooker until he escaped on a vessel to the Netherlands in June 1631. He expected a call to the English church in Amsterdam's Begijnhof, whose congregation had encouraged him to come. But the incumbent minister there, John Paget, put twenty questions to Hooker to test his opinions on church government, baptism, and separatism. Paget found him too strongly congregational in his opinions on church government, so Hooker moved on to Delft and became the assistant to the Scottish minister, John Forbes, in the Prinsenhof church, where he served until 1633. Early in that year he was briefly with William Ames, the puritan exiled from Cambridge in 1609 and subsequently professor and rector at Franeker, whose earlier work had helped form Hooker's theology and ecclesiology. Hooker wrote a lengthy 'Preface' to Ames's 'Fresh Suit Against Human Ceremonies' (1633) before covertly returning to England. In a 1633 letter to John Cotton dissuading him from coming to Holland, Hooker reported a low level of 'heart religion' and 'the power of godliness' there, adding that his own affliction with ague had helped to discourage him from remaining (Williams and others, 297). On returning to England, he was reunited with his family, who had remained there on the earl of Warwick's estate during Hooker's exile. Together with Cotton, Samuel Stone, and their families, about 10 July 1633 the Hookers boarded the 'Griffin' off the Downs, arriving in Boston in the Massachusetts Bay colony eight weeks later, on 4 September 1633. 
Hooker soon settled as pastor of a new church at Newtown (later called Cambridge) while Cotton became the teacher of the already established church at Boston and Stone became the teacher at Newtown. Some of Hooker's followers from Essex, led by his friend William Goodwin, had preceded him to Newtown in 1632 and were known there as 'Mr. Hooker's company' before he arrived. Many of these same faithful again followed him just three years later when he moved to Connecticut. 
About a year after arriving in New England, Hooker was reluctantly drawn into a controversy in Salem over the impetuous John Endecott's cutting a part of St George's cross from a military banner, on the grounds that it was an idolatrous icon. When his opinion was sought by the general court of the colony, Hooker expressed reluctance to disagree with his brethren, but nevertheless rendered a lengthy opinion, thirteen pages in manuscript, 'Touchinge the crosse in the banners', in which he argued that the cross in the flag was a civil use of the symbol, not a religious one, and therefore was not idolatrous. This view, despite dissent from some colonial leaders, ultimately carried the day. At about the time this issue was resolved, Hooker's friend John Haynes, a member of his congregation, was elected governor of the Massachusetts Bay colony, placing Hooker in a position to have considerable influence in colonial affairs if he chose. But in the next year, members of the Newtown church and community, dissatisfied with what they considered inadequate land for farming, sent an advance party 100 miles to the south-west to investigate the possibility of a move to the banks of the Connecticut River. In May 1636, just as Haynes was being replaced in the governorship by the newly arrived Henry Vane, the Newtown church, led by Hooker and Stone, decided to move to the site known by the native population as Suckiaug, but renamed Hartford by the English settlers in honour of Samuel Stone's English birthplace. The reasons for this removal have been much debated. The seventeenth-century historian William Hubbard believed that Hooker and Cotton needed more geographical distance between them because 'Nature doth not allow two suns in one firmament' ('Collections', 6.306). Yet, although there were differences between them, including some of their views on the process of grace in the believer's soul and on admission to church membership, the reason Hooker gave for the move was economic -- too little good meadow and grazing land for cattle and too great constriction of Newtown residents between Watertown and Charlestown, both of which had been established and laid out before Newtown. This restriction in farmland and the consequent limitation on productivity, as the Newtowners said, made it difficult to pay their ministers adequately. 
The five-day journey to Hartford began on 31 May 1636. Hooker made occasional return visits to the Bay colony thereafter, but Hartford was his home for the rest of his life. His family at this time included five children, Samuel having been born in Newtown about 1633. The Hookers' eighth and last child, a son, had been born and died in Newtown in late 1634. Their mother, Susannah, was infirm at the time of the move and was transported to Connecticut on a litter, though she ultimately outlived her husband, dying on 17 May 1676. Hooker's ministry and his influence on civil affairs thrived at Hartford. He returned in August of 1637 to be co-moderator with Peter Bulkeley at the synod that took up the antinomian controversy then reaching full development. His reputation as both a disputant and a negotiator was well established by this time. He is known to have maintained a correspondence with both John Winthrop, governor of the Massachusetts Bay colony, and Roger Williams, the exiled radical living in Providence plantation, though fewer than a dozen of Hooker's letters have survived. 
When representatives from the new Connecticut towns met to organize a colonial confederation in 1638, Hooker preached to them on the subject of government. Although some enthusiastic historians called him the first American democrat, this is far from accurate. As Perry Miller has shown, his understanding of the relationship between people and authority is based on the model of the church covenant that every New England church adopted. But Hooker reminded his audience that civil magistrates are selected by the people they govern and that these people can limit the power of their rulers. Connecticut's fundamental orders were more liberal than the Massachusetts laws, however, in not restricting the ability to hold public office to church members, though this requirement still held for the governor. The new laws confirmed the 'status quo' of a colony already in existence for three years. 
Their reputations in England led to the invitation from members of parliament to Hooker, Cotton, and John Davenport to represent New England's churches at the newly convened Westminster assembly in 1642. Hooker firmly declined, however, realizing that they would be among a small minority of Independent churchmen, vastly outnumbered by the predominantly presbyterian views of many of the reform-minded English and Scottish churchmen. He did, however, send for publication in England four works through which he probably intended to influence the assembly's work on a confession of faith and a catechism: 'A Briefe Exposition of the Lords Prayer', 'An Exposition of the Principles of Religion' (published together), 'The Immortality of Mans Soule', and 'The Saints Guide in Three Treatises', all published in London in 1645. His strength in argument also made him a logical choice by his New England brethren to write a defence of the New England way of church organization in response to challenges from home in the mid-1640s. Specifically in answer to the Scottish presbyterian Samuel Rutherford's 'Peaceable and Temperate Plea for Pauls Presbyterie' (1642) and 'The Due Right of Presbyteries' (1644), he wrote 'A Survey of the Summe of Church Discipline' and sent it over in an ill-fated vessel that sank without survivors. He rewrote the book, which was eventually published posthumously in 1648. 
But the central work of Hooker's career, a series of sermons preached in Cambridge, Chelmsford, and Hartford, was his epic account of the psychological process of the sinner's inner journey to salvation. Anticipating John Bunyan's allegorical 'The Pilgrim's Progress', Hooker's masterful analysis of the motions of faith describes a journey from the first awareness of one's own captivity by sin beginning with the preparatory stages of contrition and humiliation, and extending through vocation, adoption, faith, justification, sanctification, and glorification. The sermons were first published from auditors' notes as 'The Soules Preparation' (1632), 'The Soules Humiliation' (1637), 'The Soules Effectuall Calling' (1637), 'The Soules Implantation' (1637), 'The Soules Exaltation' (1638), and 'The Soules Possession of Christ' (1638). Although not published from his own texts, these books often capture the dynamic force of his actual delivery. In New England, Hooker revised these sermons for publication as 'The Application of Redemption, the First Eight Books' and 'The Application of Redemption, Books Nine and Ten', both of which were published posthumously in 1656, as was his treatise on glorification, the final stage in the soul's ascent to heaven, 'A Comment upon Christs Last Prayer'. This is the fullest account of the sequence of spiritual stages in the life of the soul produced in Hooker's generation. In it, Hooker's capacity for capturing a strong sense of spiritual adventure, of the need for constant 'application' to the challenge of subduing sin and 'labouring' in the hope of receiving God's essential help in the task, is brilliantly evident. 
Hooker's importance rests on these dramatic examples of his pulpit mastery. His fellow Connecticut minister, Henry Whitfield, captured an essential characteristic in Hooker's ministry in saying: '
'That he had the best command of his own spirit, which he ever saw in any man whatever'. For though he were a Man of a Cholerick Disposition, and had a mighty vigour and fervour of spirit, which as occasion served, was wondrous useful unto him, yet he had ordinarily as much government of his choler, as a man has of a mastiff dog in a chain; he 'could let out his dog, and pull in his dog, as he pleased'. (Mather, 1.313)' Another contemporary simply said, 'He was a person who while doing his master's work, would put a king in his pocket' (ibid.). 
Although no authentic likeness of Thomas Hooker exists, he is represented in a bronze statue created by Frances L. Wadsworth in downtown Hartford, the city where he died of an epidemic sickness on 7 July 1647 and was buried in the Central Church burying-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 13698


William Dawson Hooker (1816-1840), was born at Halesworth on 4 April 1816. He graduated MD at Glasgow in 1839 and married in the same year Isabella Whitelaw Smith. In 1837 he visited Norway. He published 'Notes on Norway' (1837 and 1839) and his dissertation on cinchona before leaving for the West Indies, where he died at Kingston, Jamaica, on 1 January 1840. A second son, Joseph Dalton Hooker (1817-1911), was born on 30 June 1817, and three daughters followed. Hooker's life at this time consisted of 'brewery, books and babies' (Allan, 72), but many botanists visited him at Halesworth and consulted his herbarium. The brewery was neither successful nor congenial to Hooker, and he sought paid botanical work. Eventually, in 1820, with Banks's recommendation he was appointed regius professor of botany at Glasgow University. 


@@@@@


doc= 13699


Hooker, Sir William Jackson (1785-1865), botanist, was born on 6 July 1785 at 71-7 Magdalen Street, Norwich, the second of the two children of Joseph Hooker (1754-1845) and his wife, Lydia, 'nee' Vincent (1759-1829). Joseph Hooker was distantly related to the Baring brothers and was a confidential clerk in their Norwich office, trading in worsted and bombazine. He was also an amateur botanist and gardener, with a collection of succulent plants. Lydia Hooker came from a family of worsted weavers and artists in Norwich. William Jackson Hooker was named after his godfather William Jackson (1757-1789), his mother's cousin, and son of John Jackson (1710-1795), a wealthy brewer and farmer, three times mayor of Canterbury, Kent. He bequeathed his estate to William Jackson Hooker who inherited in 1806 when he was twenty-one. 
Hooker attended Norwich grammar school from about 1792 until 1802 or 1803. He then went to Starston Hall, 18 miles south-east of Norwich, as a pupil in estate management, probably so that he could manage the estates inherited through his godfather. Hooker's father encouraged his interest in natural history, especially in botany and entomology; he made many field trips in Norfolk and Suffolk and got to know the principal naturalists in East Anglia. His most important patrons were Sir James Edward Smith (1759-1828), who owned Linnaeus's herbarium and library; Dawson Turner (1775-1858), banker and botanist, who became Hooker's friend and father-in-law; and Sir Joseph Banks (1743-1820), president of the Royal Society, to whom Dawson Turner introduced him in 1806. In 1805 Hooker made his first important botanical discovery when he found a species of moss not previously recorded in Britain, 'Buxbaumia aphylla', at Rackheath, near Sproston, Norfolk. He studied mainly mosses, liverworts, and ferns, and became an expert in a difficult group of liverworts, the Jungermanniae, on which in 1816 he published a monograph. 
On his election to the Linnean Society of London in 1806 Hooker felt committed to a life of botany. He read his first paper to the society in 1807, on the mosses of Nepal from Buchanan Hamilton's specimens in Smith's herbarium. He toured Scotland, the Hebrides, and the Orkneys in 1807 and 1808. In 1809 he went to Iceland to make a botanical survey for Banks; his collections were lost in a fire at sea on the way home but with the aid of Banks's notes from his own journey there in 1772 Hooker was able to produce an account which was published in 1811. Sir James Smith named a new genus of mosses ('Hookeria') after him. 
Hooker helped Turner with his botanical work, preparing 234 of the 258 coloured plates in Turner's book on seaweeds ('Fuci', 4 vols., 1808-19), which went unacknowledged. In 1809-20 he managed a brewery in Halesworth, Suffolk, for Turner. He made his first visit to Kew Gardens on 5 June 1811; with Thomas Taylor (1786-1848) he began work on a new book on mosses, 'Muscologia Britannica' (1818; 2nd edn, 1827; 3rd edn, 1855). In 1812 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London. 
In 1814 Hooker travelled in Europe for nine months, going to Paris with the Turner family, then continuing alone to Switzerland, the south of France, and Italy. On this tour he met with leading botanists and laid the foundations of many long-term friendships. In Paris Baron von Humboldt invited him to write up the cryptogamic plants he had collected in South America; Hooker's text and plates were published in 1816 as 'Plantae cryptogamicae, quas in plaga orbis novi aequinoctali collegerunt &c.', with some mosses being published in his 'Musci exotici' (1818-20). 
On 12 June 1815 Hooker married Turner's eldest daughter, Maria Sarah (1797-1872). Their first son, 
When Hooker arrived at Glasgow there were thirty botany students and 8000 plants in the botanical garden in Sauchiehall Street; when he left in 1841 he had more than 100 students and the garden had been relocated and contained 20,000 plants. Many years later his son said: 'He had never lectured, nor even attended a course of lectures;... the botanical chair was and always had been held by a graduate in medicine... his appointment was... unfavourably viewed by the medical faculty.... But he had resources that enabled him to overcome all obstacles: familiarity with his subject, devotion to its study, energy, eloquence, and a commanding presence with urbanity of manners, and above all the art of making the student love the science that he taught. (J. D. Hooker, 'Opening of the new botanical department', 551)' Some of his students went on to achieve fame at home or overseas; many were to make valuable contributions to his herbarium and library in later years. Hooker was always prompt to thank them and to respond to their queries. Thousands of herbarium sheets were added to his herbarium every year, all identified, labelled, and filed. 
In Glasgow Hooker lectured and took his students on field trips. He wrote 'Flora Scotica' (1821), prepared 'Botanical Illustrations' (1822) as a pioneering visual aid, and initiated summer courses in botany for the general public. He was awarded the university's LLD in 1821. Between 1823 and 1840 he prepared and illustrated seven major works, on the plants of Frederick Beechey's voyage of 1825-8 to the Pacific and Bering's Strait, on the plants of North America, and on ferns. He described numerous new plants and in 1827 became editor of 'Curtis's Botanical Magazine', a journal which described plants from round the world suitable for cultivation in Britain, with a finely drawn coloured plate for each. In 1829 Hooker started 'Botanical Miscellany -- Journal of Botany', which continued with some title modifications until 1857, and 'Icones plantarum' in 1834 which continued until 1990. He employed Walter Fitch (1817-1892) to prepare drawings for reference and publication, training him in the requirements of botanical work, and employed helpers to curate his herbarium. During this time Hooker wrote a 'Catalogue of the Plants in the Royal Botanic Garden of Glasgow' (1825), 'Directions for Collecting and Preserving Plants in Foreign Countries' (1828), 'The British Flora' (1830; 7th edn, 1855), and 'Perthshire illustrated, a series of select views... a general introduction illustrative of the scenery, botany &c.' (1833). He was knighted in 1836 in the Royal Guelphic Order by William IV, in recognition of his work at Glasgow and services to botany. 
Throughout the years in Scotland Hooker remained hopeful of employment in London or East Anglia. His dream was Kew, which had a magnificent collection of plants; it had been founded in 1759 by Princess Augusta, but after the deaths of George III and Banks had declined. A parliamentary working party set up in 1838 to review the management and expenditure of the various royal gardens recommended the development of Kew as a national botanical garden providing information and plants to the new colonies, and aiding the mother country, Britain, in everything useful in the vegetable kingdom. In April 1841 Sir William Hooker was appointed the first full-time director of the royal gardens at Kew. He was now fifty-seven, but he told Turner he felt 'as if I were going to begin life over again' (Allan, 109). 
The botanic garden at Kew then comprised 11 acres. In his first year Hooker extended the opening hours, and that year 9174 visitors went. By 1845, 271 acres had been added, a new arboretum planted, glasshouses repaired and extended where possible, and a new palm house begun, built to pioneering design in wide-span wrought iron by Decimus Burton (1800-1881) and Richard Turner ('c'.1798-1881), to replace the old Great Stove designed by William Chambers (1723-1796). Queen Victoria and Prince Albert both took a keen practical interest in Hooker's work at Kew, visiting on many occasions with their children. Hooker continued his worldwide correspondence, received plants from every continent, sent out plant collectors to gather specifically for Kew, and established further education lectures and a reading-room for Kew's gardeners. The public loved it all, and went in their thousands: in 1851, the year of the Great Exhibition in London, 331,210 people went to Kew Gardens; in 1865, the year he died, there were 529,241. 
Hooker's annual reports from 1844 detailed the progress made, the plants and herbarium specimens received, the books and periodicals acquired, and the research visitors who came to consult his collections which from 1847 increasingly included samples of plant products for the new Museum of Economic Botany. He continued to edit 'Curtis's Botanical Magazine', still illustrated by Fitch who had accompanied him from Glasgow. It covered a wide range of plants from round the world, including many orchids, and the giant water lily, 'Victoria amazonica'. Hooker wrote many of the articles himself with the horticultural notes contributed by John Smith (1798-1888) until 1852. Smith, a fern enthusiast, had worked at Kew since 1820, then as curator from 1841 to 1864. Joseph Hooker said that it was entirely due to him 'that the Royal Botanic Gardens maintained any position... between the death of Sir Joseph Banks in 1820 and the appointment of the new Director in 1841' (J. D. Hooker, 'Sketch', xlvii). Smith was experienced, knowledgeable, and outspoken, but sometimes clashed with Hooker. On one occasion, when Hooker and his landscaper William Nesfield ignored his advice on the siting of the palm house in relation to the pond, Smith was proved right. Smith and Fitch commiserated with each other on the perceived injustices they suffered, but stayed and were invaluable in the development of the gardens and its useful publications. 
The contacts Hooker had already developed at Glasgow with governments, the India Office, and the colonies benefited Kew considerably, and enabled it to take on its new role quickly. A highly significant and effective worldwide network of botanical gardens and herbaria grew up, centring on Kew but also communicating directly with each other. Hooker was consulted when they needed senior staff, and often recommended young Kew-trained gardeners for posts overseas, or to accompany exploring expeditions. Kew became the botanical arm of the Foreign Office and was always consulted when questions arose about plants, new crops, forestry, and useful natural products. These questions all presumed the accurate identification of plants, and to assist in this critical work Hooker initiated a series of inexpensive colonial flora volumes describing the plants of various territories, written for the educated layman. He was also appointed local commissioner for the Great Exhibition in London in 1851, advising particularly on economic botany. 
Useful new plants were propagated and sent to the botanical gardens overseas where they were most likely to flourish, and many became regular crops. One of the most important was the transfer of 'Cinchona' plants to India in 1859-60 at the request of the India Office, as a remedy for malaria. Hooker also established contacts outside the colonies, notably in Japan. In Britain, Kew-trained gardeners took up appointments in other botanical gardens and the new municipal horticultural departments. Kew propagated plane trees for distribution to London boroughs, and sent suitable new plants to both private and public gardens elsewhere. 
The donation of the herbarium and library of W. A. Bromfield (1801-1851), a former student at Glasgow, permitted Hooker to move Kew's herbarium specimens and his own collections from his former home at West Park, Mortlake, into Hunter House on Kew Green, while Hooker himself took up residence in another nearby house. This brought the collections closer to hand, gave space for expansion, and demonstrated the government's commitment to botany; it also attracted other donations, including George Bentham's library and herbarium in 1854. During this time the need grew for an assistant director; Hooker eventually succeeded in getting the post created, and his son Joseph appointed. It was one of Hooker's main ambitions to see his son take over as director at Kew. Father and son worked closely for many years, and is not always easy to attribute responsibility for development at Kew correctly. 
Sir Joseph Dalton Hooker described his father as over 6 feet tall: 'erect, slim, muscular; forehead broad and high but receding, hair nearly black, complexion sanguine, eyes brown, nose aquiline -- it had been broken in a school fight; his mobile face, and especially mouth, was the despair of artists... He was a vigorous pedestrian, covering 60 miles a day with ease. (J. D. Hooker, 'Sketch', lxxxv)' The marble bust of William Hooker by Thomas Woolner in 1859 was regarded by his son as an excellent likeness. He was generally very healthy, but a little deaf after an attack of scarlet fever in Glasgow, and subject to eczema and throat infections. In character he was well-mannered, affable, and immediately impressed people with his energy and ability. He had a good memory and worked fast, was prudent and judicious, and knew his strengths. He worked long hours throughout his life, usually until midnight. He was not often seen at great social functions, society meetings, or on committees and suchlike -- he did not enjoy them and anyway had his own very wide network of contacts. Besides his Glasgow degree and his knighthood, Hooker received the DCL from Oxford in 1845, and was a corresponding member of the Academie Francaise, and companion of the Legion d'honneur of France, as well as a member of other leading academies in Europe, Russia, and America. 
In summer 1865 there was an epidemic of septic disease of the throat, probably caused by streptococcal bacteria. On Monday 7 August Hooker and his son walked about 5 miles to Battersea Park, to see some sub-tropical plants, and later he showed people around the gardens at Kew; the next day he fell ill. His family were on holiday at Yarmouth, as it had been very hot in London: Lady Hooker was summoned home, but everyone else was advised to stay away for fear of infection. Joseph then became ill with a bad attack of rheumatic fever (also probably caused by 'Streptococcus') and close friends were called in to help; Sir William died on Saturday 12 August, from a septic paralysis of the throat. He was buried in the family tomb in St Anne's churchyard, Kew Green, on 17 August, and commemorated by a Wedgwood plaque within the church. His wife, Maria, died at Torquay in 1872. 
George Bentham and Thomas Thomson completed Hooker's unfinished articles for the next issue of the 'Botanical Magazine'. In accordance with Hooker's will, his personal herbarium and library were offered for sale to the nation, and were purchased for Kew in 1866; they contained over 1 million herbarium specimens, 4000 volumes of publications, and about 29,000 letters dating from 1810 from over 4400 correspondents, bound in 76 volumes. 


@@@@@


doc= 13700


Hookes, Nicholas (1632-1712), poet, was born in London, the son of Thomas Hookes of London. He was a king's scholar at Westminster School under Richard Busby. He was elected to a scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1649; his tutor was Alexander Akehurst and he took his BA degree in 1653. 
In his graduation year Hookes published 'Amanda, a sacrifice to an unknown goddesse, or, A free-will offering of a lovinge heart to a sweet-heart', dedicated to Edward Montagu, a fellow 'alumnus' of Westminster School and an undergraduate at Sidney Sussex College, the son of Lord Montagu of Boughton. There are commendatory verses by Richard Moyle, Charles Ireton, and Thomas Adams, all of Trinity College, and Matthew Palmer of the Middle Temple. The last three had attended Westminster School. Hookes attempted to secure the attention of two potential patrons; in addition to Edward Montagu he addressed a pair of poems to Sir Thomas Leventhorp, an undergraduate at Christ's College (54-6, 81-3). In the same year as 'Amanda', Hookes also published 'Miscellanea poetica'; they are usually found bound together. The latter volume mainly consists of Cambridge elegies in Latin. Most of 'Amanda' consists of verses on various occasions addressed to an imaginary mistress. For the most part they are unexceptional exercises in the amatory Cavalier mode, varied with moments of idiosyncrasy, such as the lines from 'To Amanda Going to Bed': '
Make me thy maiden-chamber-man, 

Or let me be thy warming-pan 

... Then i'th morning ere I rose 

I'd kisse thy pretty pettitoes. 

' However, the very act of publishing verses in this overtly royalist style was potentially very provocative in the 1650s.Hookes's bids for patronage and college preferment (the ostensible aim of 'Miscellanea poetica') were unsuccessful, and after his 'annus mirabilis' of 1653, nothing more is known of him until his death almost sixty years later. He died in Lambeth on 7 November 1712 and was buried in St Mary's, Lambeth, on the south side of the north aisle. A Latin inscription describes him as 'virum qui summam dubiis probitatem sincera in Deum pietate, spectata in utrumque Carolum fide, eximia in omnes charitate, moribus suavissimis et limatissimo ingenio, omnibus elegantioris literaturae ornamentis exculto, mire adornavit' ('a man who wonderfully adorned his age in sincere piety towards God, in the greatest probity towards men, in outstanding loyalty to both Charleses, in exceptional charity towards all, by the great elegance of his wit and his great cultivation in all things that adorn the 'belles-lettres''). The phrasing of the epitaph suggests that he must have died in comfortable circumstances. Hookes's wife, Elizabeth (died 1692?), was buried in the same grave, as were other family members. 


@@@@@


doc= 13701


Hoole, Charles (1610-1667), schoolmaster and author, was born in Wakefield, the son of Charles Hoole. He attended Wakefield Free Grammar School under Robert Doughty, and in 1628, supported by his kinsman Robert Sanderson (the future bishop of Lincoln), entered Lincoln College, Oxford. He graduated BA in 1632, proceeded MA in 1636, and was ordained. Through Sanderson's influence he was appointed master of the free grammar school at Rotherham and began the work which was to make him one of the most noted of seventeenth-century teachers and educational writers. In 1642 he became rector of Great Ponton in Lincolnshire, but his royalist sympathies led to his sequestration and departure for London about 1646, although he was cited before the committee for plundered ministers on 21 July 1647 for trying to collect tithes from his former parish. On his returning to educational work, he was successively master of two private grammar schools in London, one off Aldersgate and the other in Lothbury, near the Royal Exchange. At an unknown date he seems to have married: the preface to his 1659 publication mentions a child who had died. 
Hoole's numerous educational works comprise grammars, translations, and a book on educational method and structures. His adaptation of Lily's 'authorized' grammar, 'The Latine Grammar Fitted for the Use of Schools' (1651), is more attractively presented than the original, with English and Latin on opposite pages. This method is also used in his 'Aesop's Fables, English and Latin' (1689) and 'Publii Terentii Carthaginiensis Afri': Six Comedies of... Terentius' (1676). In 1659 he published a translation of Comenius's 'Orbis sensualium pictus' and recommended the pictorial method for the teaching of younger children as an antidote to the prevailing manner of '[teaching them] as we do parrots, to speak they know not what' ('Orbis pictus', preface). 
Hoole's most notable work, 'A New Discovery of the Old Art of Teaching Schoole' (1660), not only sets out his views on what education should be but also paints a vivid picture of education as it actually was in the mid-seventeenth century and is an essential source for educational historians of the period. The book stresses the value 'to Church and Commonwealth' of an efficient and progressive system of education with widely available elementary instruction and, alongside the grammar schools, practical schools for older children who lacked the academic bent. His ideas on the curriculum were traditional -- Greek, Latin, and some Hebrew for the grammar school; English and Latin grammar for the 'petty school'; and basic English and arithmetic for the 'writing school'. However, he insisted that the means of instruction must vary to fit the capacity of the scholar, and teachers must rely on proper preparation and method rather than (particularly for younger children) the rod. 
In 1660 Hoole became chaplain to Sanderson, who tried on 5 March 1661 to get him a prebend at Lincoln. He gained the rectory of Stock, near Chelmsford, and died there on 7 March 1667. He was buried in the chancel of the parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 13702


Hoole, Elijah (1798-1872), missionary, was born in Manchester on 3 February 1798, the second son of Holland Hoole, shoemaker and lay Wesleyan preacher, and his wife, Sarah. He was educated at Manchester grammar school (1809-13) and he then studied Greek and Hebrew privately. He was a devout Wesleyan and in 1819, after he had served as a probationer with the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society (WMMS) in London, the society selected him to found a mission at Bangalore in south India. He was shipwrecked on the outward voyage and settled initially at Negapatam, but in May 1821, with seven months of intensive Tamil study behind him, he finally arrived at Bangalore. Barely ten months later, however, he was ordered to Madras to work on a new Tamil translation of the 'Bible' for the Bible Society and in September 1822 he became secretary of the society's translations committee. 
In 1828 ill health forced Hoole back to Britain. While recuperating he wrote up his journal, 'Personal Narrative of a Mission to the South of India' (1829; 2nd edn, 1844), and then accepted the job of superintending the Wesleyan schools in Ireland. He was appointed assistant secretary to the WMMS in 1834, and in 1836 general secretary, a post he held until his death. In 1835 he married Elizabeth, third daughter of Charles Chubb (1772-1846), lock- and safe-maker of London; they had two sons, Charles Holland and Elijah. Elizabeth became effectively the women's secretary of the WMMS. She played mother to the many missionaries passing through her house, corresponded with their wives all over the world, and for twenty years edited 'Juvenile Offering', the Wesleyans' first missionary magazine for children. 
Hoole's efficiency and diligence in transacting WMMS business were universally admired; nevertheless, in correspondence he could be abrasive and he often intervened forcefully in controversial issues such as the baptism of polygamists. Outside the WMMS he was honorary secretary of the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews and of the Home for Asiatics in London. He was also a member of the Royal Asiatic Society, in whose journal he published several pieces on Tamil philology and folklore. He frequently edited the 'Wesleyan Missionary Notices', as well as several individual missionary memoirs and histories. 
Hoole died at his home, 8 Myddleton Square, Pentonville, London, on 17 June 1872, and was buried in Highgate cemetery on 22 June. His widow held office in the WMMS women's auxiliary until 1878; she died on 3 June 1880, aged seventy-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 13703


Hoole, John (1727-1803), translator, was born in December 1727 in Moorfields, London, one of six children of Samuel Hoole ('b'. 1692), mechanician, and his wife, Sarah ('c'.1700- 'c'.1793), daughter of James Drury, clockmaker, of Clerkenwell, London. He attended James Bennet's school at Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire, after being educated by an uncle (the ''metaphysical taylor'', according to Johnson; 'Boswell's Life of Johnson', 4.187). Hoole enjoyed languages and studied Italian for pleasure. After an unsuccessful attempt to join the theatre, he went as clerk to the East India Company in 1744 where he gained promotion to auditor, wrote 'Present State of the English East India Company's Affairs' (1772) and remained there until his retirement. 
On 25 May 1757 he married Susanna Smith ('c'.1730-1808), a 'handsome Quakeress' (W. Foster, 156) of Bishop's Stortford. They had one son, Samuel Hoole. In 1760 John Hoole's first publication 'A Monody: to the Memory of Mrs Margaret Woffington' appeared. However, it was his interest in translating Italian literature, encouraged by George Oldmixon, a colleague and Italian scholar, as well as his friendship with Dr Samuel Johnson, that forwarded Hoole's reputation. In 1763 he published 'Jerusalem Delivered' (a translation of Tasso's 'Gerusalemme liberata'), having had the first book printed in 1761 for his friends. His labours on Tasso's works ('Rinaldo' was published in 1792) earned him the nickname Tasso Hoole. Although 'Jerusalem Delivered' was generally favourably received, Sir Walter Scott, introduced to Tasso 'through the flat medium of Mr Hoole's translation', said the translator was 'a noble transmuter of gold into lead' (Lockhart, 1.29 and 5.9). Charles Lamb, wishing to 'gain some idea of Tasso from this Mr Hoole, the great boast and ornament of the India House... found him more vapid than smallest small beer 'sun-vinegared'' (Fitzgerald, 1.357). Hoole's later 'Works of Metastasio' (1767) pleased Metastasio himself, although the poet expressed the difficulty of translating Italian poetry effectively. 
Samuel Johnson was introduced to Hoole by John Hawkesworth in 1761, and helped the translator's literary career, participating in nearly every publication in some way. He wrote dedications to 'Jerusalem Delivered' and 'Works of Metastasio', urged Warren Hastings, then governor of Bengal, to promote Hoole's works, and encouraged Hoole to adapt plays for the stage. In return Hoole gathered members 'who were not 'patriots'' ('Boswell's Life of Johnson', 4.87) for Johnson's City Club, belonged to the Essex Head Club which, dominated by literary figures, had its rules set by Johnson and, with his wife and son, the Revd Samuel Hoole, attended Johnson on his deathbed. Jeremy Bentham viewed such intimacy cynically, calling Hoole one of Johnson's 'lickspittles' ('Letters of Samuel Johnson', 2.363). Johnson bequeathed a book apiece of their choosing to Hoole and his son, while in his own will Hoole left a writing desk formerly belonging to Johnson. Following Johnson's death Hoole published a detailed narrative of his friend's last days. 
Hoole's three tragedies, 'Cyrus' (first performed 1768), 'Timanthes' (1770), and 'Cleonice' (1775), were enacted at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden. The failure of 'Cleonice', in spite of Johnson's being sure of its success, prompted Hoole to return much of the advanced copyright money for he reasoned that, it being unlikely to be profitable for booksellers, it should not be a loss. 'Cyrus' and 'Timanthes' were reasonably successful due, contemporaries implied, to the popularity of the cast members, Mrs Mary Ann Yates in particular. 
Having lived in and around London at Wandsworth, Clement's Inn (about 1768), then Shire Lane (1775), Hoole moved to Great Queen Street. From here in 1783 he published his translation of Ariosto's 'Orlando Furioso'. Included in this first edition was his portrait by Frances Reynolds (sister of Sir Joshua) who temporarily lived with the Hoole family at Great Queen Street. In 1785 Hoole added a biographical sketch to John Scott's 'Critical Essays' (1785). The following year, having retired from the East India Company, he moved with his wife to live with their son at Abinger, near Dorking, where Samuel had a curacy. Short-sighted, 'of middling stature and of athletic make', a contemporary described Hoole as 'gentle, unassuming and affectionate' (W. Foster, 162). Several portraits were made, including one engraved by his nephew Anker Smith. Most of Hoole's works were reprinted several times but now he is regarded primarily as one of Johnson's circle rather than for his own endeavours. He died on a visit to Dorking on 2 August 1803 and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 13704


Hooper, Edmund (c.1553-1621), organist and composer, was born in Halberton, near Tiverton, Devon. He was brought up at nearby Bradninch, and at Greenwich, where he received his schooling. By 1582 he had joined the choir of Westminster Abbey and on 3 December 1588 he succeeded Henry Leeve as master of the choristers. He was appointed abbey organist by patent dated 9 May 1606. His responsibilities included repairing the organ and copying music for the choir. The abbey muniments suggest that his appointment was not an unqualified success. In December 1603 there was indiscipline among the choristers, and Hooper may also have been involved in financial irregularities; in 1606 he was relieved of the teaching of the choristers. He remained as organist, however, and the patent renewing his organist's post for life, which was drawn up in 1616, refers to his 'good and faithful service' (Shaw, 328). On 1 March 1604 he was sworn in as a gentleman of the Chapel Royal, holding this post in plurality with that at Westminster. He received part of the salary due to John Bull, the first Chapel Royal musician to be entitled organist, when Bull left to work abroad in 1613. In an entry dated 2 November 1615 in the Chapel Royal cheque book Hooper is named as joint organist with Orlando Gibbons, although he may already have been partially performing the functions of that office for several years. 
Except for a small number of keyboard pieces, Hooper's surviving music is exclusively for liturgical use. Much of it is in the 'verse' style, exploiting soloists in addition to full choir. The presence of his compositions in virtually every pre-Restoration source of Anglican church music attests to their popularity. Several of his more elaborate works, such as 'Hearken, ye nations' (for gunpowder treason day) and 'O God of Gods' (for the anniversary of the king's accession), are incomplete. He contributed two pieces to Sir William Leighton's 'Teares or Lamentacions of a Sorrowful Soule' (1614), and three anthems were printed posthumously in John Barnard's 'First Book of Selected Church Musick' (1641). Hooper died in London on 14 July 1621 and was interred two days later beside his first wife (who had died by 1604) in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey. His will, which dates from 1620, was proved on 31 July 1621 by his second wife, Mary (died 1652). It contains a legacy to sixty-seven poor people, and probably reflects his age. Judging from other bequests of property and money, he would appear to have been a person of substance. 


@@@@@


doc= 13705


Hooper, George (1640-1727), bishop of Bath and Wells and scholar, was born on 18 November 1640 at Grimley, Worcestershire, the son of George Hooper, of a lesser landed gentry family, and his wife, Joan, daughter of Edmund Giles of White Ladies Aston, Worcestershire. The Hoopers were royalist, but the Giles family was parliamentarian by inclination -- Hooper's uncle became a master in chancery under Cromwell. 
Hooper was educated briefly at St Paul's School, London, and then from about 1653, as king's scholar, at Westminster School. Richard Busby, the headmaster, well known for his exacting standards, thought highly of him: 'the boy is the least favoured in features of any in the school, but he will be the most extraordinary of any of them' (Cassan, 2.172). Later he described Hooper as 'the best scholar, the finest gentleman and will make the completest bishop that was ever educated at Westminster' ('DNB'). Here Hooper first learned Hebrew, Arabic, and Aramaic, which were to be for him a lifelong pursuit. He entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1657 as a scholar, graduated BA in 1660, and became a don. He proceeded MA in 1663, BD in 1673, and DD in 1677. He now not only developed into a competent classical and mathematical scholar, but under Edward Pococke, the leading Arabist of his day, Hooper also became a notable oriental linguist. He played his full part in college life, while in the university he deputized for the public orator, and in 1669 for both Thomas Willis, Sedleian professor of natural philosophy, and John Wallis, Savilian professor of geometry. During that year he also wrote a mathematical treatise which interested Nicholas Mercator. A recently discovered brass Gunter quadrant, made by him and bearing his inscription, confirms his proficiency in that field. He was still writing to Robert Hooke about quadrants in 1676. Already a multifaceted academic, Hooper had also been ordained deacon on 23 December 1666 and priest early in 1668 by Walter Blandford, bishop of Oxford. 
Apart from his scholarly work Hooper's career for thirty years after 1670 followed two other intertwining paths -- as cleric and as royal confidant. In 1670 George Morley, bishop of Winchester, invited him to be his chaplain and a year later rector of Havant. But the damp there soon so affected his health that his fellow chaplain Thomas Ken, destined to be a close friend and colleague for the next forty years, vacated East Woodhay, Hampshire, in his favour in November 1672. As incumbent there until 1691 and assisted by a competent curate, he earned an exemplary reputation as parish priest. In fact, Isaac Milles, incumbent at nearby Highclere, always admired him: he was 'the perfect gentleman, the thorough scholar and the venerable and skilful divine' (Milles, 92-3). His time as Morley's chaplain, however, ended abruptly. Hooper's daughter, Abigail Prowse, records how Archbishop Sheldon cajoled Morley into releasing him to be his chaplain at Lambeth. Nevertheless letters of autumn 1672 emphatically suggest otherwise. Morley, a staid bachelor, was so appalled at the possibility of Hooper's marriage to a Winchester woman that he determined to be rid of him, and persuaded the primate to promote him. 
Consequently in 1673 Hooper went to Lambeth as Sheldon's chaplain. This was to be a key moment in his career. In October 1675 the primate likewise offered him the rectory of St Mary, Lambeth, which he held until 1703. Here Hooper was much respected, and the church underwent major refurbishment. In the long run this move to Lambeth paid handsome dividends, for it introduced Hooper to London's exceptionally gifted clerical circle -- the future archbishops Tillotson, Tenison, Wake, and Sharp were his fellow incumbents -- whose spirituality, scholarship, and dedicated pastoral care provided a 'luminous interlude', a 'Small Awakening' in the church (Rupp, 51). Significantly, Hooper's move introduced him to the royal family. Circumstantial evidence suggests he may even have joined Gilbert Burnet's discussions with Tsar Peter the Great at Lambeth in 1698. 
In spring 1678 Bishop Compton of London chose Hooper to succeed William Lloyd at The Hague as almoner to Princess Mary, recently married to William III of Orange. He was to preserve Mary's Anglican faith from Dutch Calvinist contagion, an essential task because Mary seemed likely to inherit the English throne. More punctilious than Lloyd, whom several contemporaries suspected of letting her attend English Congregationalist meetings at The Hague, Hooper provided suitable reading matter, including Eusebius and Hooker, and a chapel complete with Anglican furnishings which Mary used twice daily. William jibbed at these fripperies and frostily kicked the altar steps, asking what they were for and, when told, 'he answered with a hum' (Prowse, 5). Later he showed his disapproval: 'Well, Dr. Hooper, you will never be a bishop' (ibid., 6). On 2 May 1679 Hooper married Abigail Guilford (1654/5-1726), daughter of Richard Guilford, a notable Lambeth brewer. Soon after his marriage, in October 1679, he left for England. Ken succeeded him. 
Hooper's contacts with royalty developed further. In 1681 he became chaplain to the king. In 1685 James II asked him to accompany the duke of Monmouth with Tenison, Ken, and Lloyd the night before his execution. Hooper talked privately with the duke, solely to prepare him for death, and was one of the four who witnessed his declaration of illegitimacy. As Monmouth was to die the next morning Hooper 'thought it teasing rather than necessary' to try to get a confession of rebellion from him (Prowse, 9). All were with the duke the next morning on the scaffold. 
Ken, now bishop of Bath and Wells, was Hooper's guest in 1688 during the trial of the seven bishops and during the Convention Parliament the following spring. One night Hooper almost persuaded Ken to swear allegiance to William and Mary, but eventually they agreed to differ. Though a high-churchman, Hooper took the oaths. Nevertheless his relations with William were at best cool, but he remained on close terms with Mary and her sister, Anne. Though clearly in line for a bishopric, Hooper's fortunes only changed after William's death in 1702. 
In 1677 Hooper had been appointed precentor of Exeter Cathedral, a post he held until 1704. His spells of duty, though infrequent -- once every two or three years -- were lengthy, up to three months. By the standards of the day he certainly fulfilled his role, and often presided at chapter meetings in the dean's absence. Then in 1691, during William's absence abroad, Mary hastily appointed him dean of Canterbury, much to the king's later irritation. Regular in attendance at chapter meetings, unlike at Exeter, he masterminded extensive cathedral refurbishment. Significantly he was often host to William and Mary -- and after Mary's death in 1694 to William alone -- when they were 'en route' for the Netherlands. 
In 1701 Hooper achieved notoriety as prolocutor of the lower house of the revived convocation, a position where Ken hoped he would take a lead in church affairs. This predominantly high-church body set out to thwart the upper house, presided over by Archbishop Tenison. In the ensuing dispute Hooper displayed not only competence, but combative and high-handed belligerence in defying the primate. His actions momentarily earned Atterbury's acclamation, but once the session was over Hooper returned to his usual restraint. He not only joined Henry Aldrich in writing 'A Narrative of the Proceedings of the Lower House of Convocation', less strident than Atterbury's pamphlets, but he refused to stand for re-election as prolocutor for 1702. To a disgusted Atterbury this was treachery; he heaped vitriolic abuse upon him. Hearne later branded him as 'a Complyer'. 
With William dead and Anne queen, Hooper's relationship with Robert Harley, the speaker and now the mainspring of ecclesiastical preferments, became more intimate. This soon yielded fruit. In 1703, after reluctantly accepting and being consecrated to the impecunious Welsh see of St Asaph on 31 October 1703, he was nominated to the more prestigious bishopric of Bath and Wells in succession to Richard Kidder. At first he refused, hoping that Ken, the nonjuring bishop deprived in 1689, would return to the see, now that both William III and the 'usurping' Kidder were dead. But Ken, already in poor health at Longleat, approved of Hooper as one 'most able and willing to preserve the Depositum' (Plumptre, 2.141) and agreed to cede the bishopric to him. Ken no longer signed himself 'Thomas Bath and Wells', thereby personally acknowledging the cession to Hooper (LPL, MS 2872, fols. 76 and 78). Though extreme nonjurors felt a sense of betrayal, Hooper was enthroned by proxy on 3 April 1704. In later years Ken visited Hooper at Wells. 
Hooper was a conscientious pastor of his diocese. He conferred orders, usually at least twice every year, on fifty-five occasions, all in the diocese. Even in June 1727, shortly before his death, he ordained nine priests and three deacons. He was meticulous but considerate over ordinands' academic standards; only 14 of the 369 he ordained were non-graduates. An underachiever would return home for further study, encouraged by 'guineas in his pocket to subsist on' (Prowse, 34). The few visitation records that remain show that he fulfilled visitations regularly throughout his episcopate, and in his use of patronage he normally gave benefices only to those from within the diocese. A competent administrator, he pursued rights over episcopal manors, broke down nepotism in the cathedral chapter and defended the rights of the College of Vicars. His relationships with recusants, nonjurors, and rationalists, such as Whiston, were not only firm, but humane and tolerant. One incumbent, Thomas Coney, writing soon after Hooper's death, recorded that he was always accessible to his clergy: each 'had the favour of a son, the access of an equal and the reception of a friend' (Coney, appendix, 31). 
Above all Hooper was a scholar -- linguist, mathematician, and theologian -- with an insatiable thirst for all types of knowledge. Noted as such by Busby at Westminster, and also at Oxford, he earned applause from many quarters. Reportedly he refused the regius professorship of divinity in 1680. Twells, Pococke's biographer, claimed that Hooper had no superior in 'piety, extent of learning and every good quality that could adorn a bishop, a gentleman or a scholar' (Twells, 273). Ken, who wrote a poem in his honour, regarded him as one of the most eminent intellects he knew, who could do 'excellent service to our sinking church' (Marshall, 95). As an ecclesiastical lawyer, linguist, and theologian, he could hold his own against the best in the country, but he was far from being a dilettante. 
Hooper's use of Arabic was significant throughout his life. Using it to help solve problems in the 'Bible', he was still actively working with Arabic in the 1720s when he was over eighty years of age. He was then buying and annotating recently printed books in Arabic, a psalter and 'The Life and Activities of the Prophet Mohammed'. Furthermore, his study of 'Genesis' 49, published at his request after his death, but first conceived before 1681, owed much to his Arabic. Mathematics was still an active interest then too. As late as 1721, at the age of eighty, he published 'An Enquiry in to Ancient Weights and Measures, the Attic, the Roman and the Jewish'. The library of almost 300 books he bequeathed to Wells Cathedral confirms his remarkable breadth of interest. Besides books in Latin and Greek, tools usual for a scholar, there are many in Arabic, including some on medicine. There are also books in Hebrew, annotated by him, Syriac, Anglo-Saxon, even a 'Grammatica Russica', and books on optics and astronomy. 
Apart from two brief poems written in 1660, Hooper's first publications did not appear until the 1680s. These related to the major uncertainty of the day, the threat from Rome -- 'The Church of England Free from the Imputation of Popery' (1682), 'The Infallible Guide' (1689), and the 'Credibility of Human Testimony' (1699). Other academic studies followed: 'A Discourse Concerning Lent' (1695), 'De Valentinianorum haeresi conjecturae' (1711), and 'De benedictione patriarchae Jacobi Gen. XLIX conjecturae'. Though Hooper was no Romanist, scholarly enthusiasm drew him into friendly contact with Catholic academics in France. His study of the origins of the Benedictines caught the attention of the order, especially the congregation of St Maur in Paris, among whom were Bernard Montfaucon and Edmond Martene, with whom he corresponded and whose books he possessed. Likewise he corresponded with a French Jesuit, Tournemaine, to whom latterly he sent a copy of each work as it was published. Other writings included 'The Parson's Case under the Present Land Tax' (1689) and his 'Narrative of the Proceedings of the Lower House of Convocation'. 
Hooper had a notable reputation as a preacher. John Evelyn, who often heard his sermons, regarded him as 'one of the first rank of pulpit men in the nation' (Evelyn, 4.260). Of the eight sermons Hooper published, probably the most notable was that preached in St Paul's on 7 July 1713 to celebrate the end of the war. In this he supported the contemporary tory policy of peace. Later, when the Hanoverian succession hung in the balance, he preached a sermon on 13 June 1714, significantly anti-Roman in tone. Two manuscript volumes of other sermons still exist. 
Politically Hooper was no enthusiast. In the turbulence of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries he was a moderate, at most a reluctant, politician. Hearne's accusations of trimming are unjust, for Hooper was more interested in his scholarship and his diocese; but in politics, so far as it concerned him, he was a pragmatist. Though no admirer of William and close in his thinking to Ken, Hooper's pragmatism persuaded him to swear allegiance to the joint monarchs. In the 1690s his intimacy with Harley, the rising country tory, was the source of mutual support. Indeed the two had several clandestine discussions on a boat in mid-river. In 1701 as prolocutor he found himself miscast as a hostile, pugnacious assailant of the whig episcopal bench, a role totally foreign to him. As soon as he could, he withdrew from such exposure. In 1702 Godolphin had vetoed Rochester's nomination of him as primate of Ireland -- Hooper then lacked the necessary episcopal experience -- but it was Harley who was instrumental in his elevation to the episcopate in the following year. Though initially Hooper was punctilious in attending the Lords -- he voted for the second 'Occasional Conformity Bill' (1703) -- he soon displayed a prickly independence, much to the irritation of Godolphin and Harley. He defected, voting and speaking more with the high tory opposition over such matters as 'the Church in Danger' and Scottish union. From 1707 his Lords attendance declined dramatically. Refusing repeated requests from Weymouth and, after 1710, from Harley, now earl of Oxford, he rarely attended the Lords. In fact, a lack of political enthusiasm, combined with his refusal to answer frequent government calls for support in the Lords, cost him the prestigious sees of both London and York. Nevertheless, as problems with the succession to Anne grew larger, he adhered once more to Oxford, still a friend, and began to attend more regularly. In speech and sermon he solidly supported the Hanover tories in their peace strategy in Europe and for a Hanoverian succession in England. Had he been prepared to involve himself more politically, he would indeed have scaled greater ecclesiastical heights in the service of the 'sinking church', as Ken had envisaged. 
Hooper was primarily a scholar and a diocesan bishop. Believing in political moderation and pragmatism, he was a man of consistency, moral rectitude, and humanity in an age of turbulence and change. Of his nine children only two survived childhood. Rebecca, the younger daughter, died aged twenty, but the elder, Abigail, who married John Prowse of Axbridge, survived to write the 'memorandums' on her father's life. Hooper died at Berkeley, Gloucestershire, on 6 September 1727, a year after his wife. He was buried in Wells Cathedral ten days later alongside her and their younger daughter. A memorial was erected in the cloister. 


@@@@@


doc= 13706


Hooper, John (1495x1500-1555), bishop of Gloucester and Worcester and protestant martyr, was born some time between 1495 and 1500. Little can be said for sure about either his place of origin or his parents. According to Hooper himself, his father was wealthy; there is some evidence to suggest that he had prospered in the cloth trade. Tradition has always claimed that Hooper was a native of Somerset, but there is little evidence to support this assertion, first made by Thomas Tanner in 1748 and repeated ever since. There is, however, good reason to suppose that Hooper was born and raised either in Devon or Oxfordshire. Whatever the exact location of his birth, Hooper's connections with the west country seem sure. 
Hooper was educated at Oxford, graduating BA in 1519. His college is unknown, and his association with Merton College is the result of confusion with another John Hooper (died 1522), sometimes wrongly thought to be a relation. Foxe claims that Hooper was 'a student and graduate in the university... after the study of sciences wherein he abundantly profited' (Foxe, 2.1502). But there is little evidence to indicate that Hooper proceeded beyond a BA, although he was styled 'professor of divinity' by Edward VI and on the patent rolls, usually a reliable source. Speculation that he received a doctorate at a continental university is also without foundation, despite the claim made by Richard Hilles in the 1540s, that Hooper was studying at Zurich. 
The period between his BA at Oxford and his emergence as a heterodox thinker in 1539 remains vague. Foxe places Hooper at Oxford for most of this period where he encountered difficulty at the time of the 'Act of Six Articles' (1539) from 'certain rabbins', most especially Dr Richard Smith (Foxe, 2.1502). However, it is known from the charges brought against him in 1555 that Hooper was a Cistercian monk at the monastery in Cleeve, Somerset, and he seems to have been resident there. Hooper himself kept silent about this part of his life, but it is likely that he left Oxford some time after 1519 and entered the monastery at Cleeve, leaving in 1537 after the visitation of Sir Thomas Arundell, one of Cromwell's commissioners for the suppression of religious houses. This possibility is strengthened by Hooper's being found in 1538 as rector of Liddington, Wiltshire, a benefice in Arundell's gift. He was certainly a non-resident incumbent, for he appears to have served Arundell as his steward. His conflict with Smith and other Oxford 'rabbins' may date from this period but is more likely to have occurred later, when he was in the service of Sir John St Loe after his flight to and return from Paris. 
While in the service of Arundell, Hooper encountered the works of Huldrich Zwingli and Heinrich Bullinger for the first time and they changed his life. Hooper himself regarded his encounter with the writings of the Swiss reformers as a kind of 'road to Damascus' experience and he was eager thereafter to portray himself as a reprobate renewed and rescued from living 'too much of a court life at the palace of our king' by the works of these two divines (Robinson, 'Original Letters', 1.33-4). Quite how much of a reprobate Hooper had in fact been must remain open to question -- he had little time or opportunity to experience much of court life. But Hooper seems always to have been a rather severe personality and a harsh judge of the behaviour of others and himself. His conversion to a Zwinglian form of reformed Christianity seems to have served to reinforce and affirm his harsher qualities, ones which all too often made him irascible, stubborn, uncompromising, and even unapproachable. 
Arundell was conservative in his religious views, and some time between June 1539 and November 1540 he became concerned about Hooper's new opinions and sent him to Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, for examination and correction. Their encounter lasted four or five days and was a highly charged affair: neither man had an easy personality, and Hooper's characteristic refusal to alter or compromise his opinions only served to enrage the bishop. Despite Gardiner's promise that he would send Hooper back safely to Arundell, Hooper received intelligence that he was now in danger. According to Foxe, Hooper fled to Paris for an unspecified period, before returning to England and entering the service of Sir John St Loe, constable of Thornbury Castle, Somerset, and a man of evangelical sympathies despite being Arundell's nephew. Hooper himself records nothing of any of these events. 
It was not long before Hooper found himself in danger again, though the reasons for his subsequent flight from England remain obscure. It may be that his controversy with Richard Smith at Oxford took place at this time. Despite the protection offered him by Arundell and his affinity, Hooper's encounters with ecclesiastical authorities tended to be explosive, and he seems to have found it impossible not to speak his mind regardless of the consequences. This second flight from England appears to have occurred some time in 1544, and he was certainly in Strasbourg by 1546, in the company of English expatriates and merchants like Richard Hilles, John Burcher, and John Butler. His associations with merchant communities were lifelong and there is some evidence to suggest that Hooper supported himself, at least in part, by trading in cloth. By now he had established contact with most of the major protestant thinkers in Basel, Strasbourg, and Zurich, including Martin Bucer, Theodore Biliander, Simon Grinaeus, and Conrad Pelican. But the most important and long-lasting contact he made was with Heinrich Bullinger. 
By January 1546 Hooper had already decided to move to Zurich permanently. First, however, he returned to England to secure his inheritance from his father, a man he knew to be hostile to reforming ideas. Hooper claimed that he was imprisoned twice while in England (probably at Exeter) and that this depleted his fortune significantly, but there is no other record of these imprisonments. His account also suggests that he became involved in lecturing or preaching to underground protestants. After leaving England he married Anne de Tscerlas ['see 'Hooper, Anne], a Belgian attached to the household of Jacques de Bourgogne, seigneur de Falais. The marriage probably took place in February 1547. They had two children: Rachel, born in 1548, and Daniel, born some time after they returned to England in 1549. Anna Hooper died on 7 December 1555 at Frankfurt during an outbreak of plague and was followed shortly afterwards by her daughter. Daniel seems to have survived only a little longer: nineteenth-century claims for direct descendants from Hooper are without the least foundation. 
Once he had returned to the continent Hooper quickly moved to Zurich, where he lived near and studied with Bullinger, developing a deep and lasting friendship. Hooper remained in Zurich for two years, during which he published three books, 'An Answer to my Lord of Wynchesters Booke Intytlyd a Detection of the Devyls Sophistry' (1547); 'A Declaration of Christ and his Office' (1547); and 'A Declaration of the Ten Holy Commandments' (1548). He appears to have been in no hurry to return to England, although he was aware of the changes in religion begun following the accession of Edward VI. In Zurich he found a Christian community that most closely matched his own ideas of the pure and primitive church and it was an environment that he admired. Here he developed his ideas on theology and church polity, influenced by Zwingli and Bullinger, that he brought back with him to England and, eventually, to his dioceses. By 1549, however, Hooper was coming under pressure to return to England, and there seems to have been some expectation that he would be made a bishop. 
Hooper arrived in London on 3 May 1549 and was immediately taken into the household of the duke of Somerset. This was probably by prior arrangement, as Hooper seems to have been gathering intelligence for the government about the emperor Charles V as he passed through Brussels, and he was also in contact with the English ambassador Sir Philip Hoby. Once settled in London, Hooper became a leader among the more advanced protestants and his influence appears to have been decisive in the foundation of the two 'Stranger Churches' for Dutch and French refugees in London and Glastonbury, which were considered to be models of the Zwinglian form. Hooper was friendly with both the duke of Somerset and the earl of Warwick (later duke of Northumberland) and was useful to them in a variety of ways. Apart from his extensive contacts among the foreign protestant community, most notably his friendship with John a Lasco, he took part in the trial of Bishop Bonner in 1549 as a witness for the prosecution, an act which Bonner seems never to have forgiven. 
Hooper was very popular in London as a preacher and lecturer, although the enthusiasm with which Anabaptists flocked to his addresses annoyed and embarrassed him. So effective was he in the pulpit that his old adversary Richard Smith reported that he was regarded as 'a prophet, nay they looked upon him as some deity' (Strype, 'Ecclesiastical Memorials', 2/1.66). He took part in several disputes, including a long and bitter argument with Bartholomew Traheron on predestination -- a doctrine with which Hooper seems to have had a great deal of difficulty, leading to accusations of Pelagianism. He also worked to move Thomas Cranmer to a more Zwinglian position theologically, and to mitigate the influence of Martin Bucer -- a man for whom Hooper had only the most grudging respect. 
Untouched by the fall of the duke of Somerset in October 1549, Hooper still enjoyed favour at court where his sermons before the king during Lent 1550 moved Edward to offer him the see of Gloucester. The programme of reform that he outlined in his Lenten sermons on the book of 'Jonah' was clear on two points: the oath bishops were required to take and ecclesiastical vestments. Hooper found both impious and papistical and declined the king's offer. While references to the saints in the oath were expunged by the king in person, the issue of vestments proved more difficult, and underlined the extent to which Hooper's aggressive stands on matters of principle and his desire to see all reforms instituted immediately could make him a difficult ally. Generating considerably more heat than light, the dispute -- a considerable embarrassment to the church establishment -- involved most of the leading divines of the day. A caustic debate between Hooper and Ridley saw Ridley emerge as the clear winner and the support that Hooper had counted on from Bullinger, Pietro Martire Vermigli, and Bucer evaporated; only John a Lasco stood by him. Cranmer and Ridley successfully managed to shift the focus of the debate away from the vestments themselves and on to the question of authority and good order. Against the background of the risings of 1549, this argument proved decisive. When Hooper obstinately refused to shift he was imprisoned early in 1551, first at Lambeth Palace and then in the Fleet. However Bullinger, like most of the other divines, did not see the vestments issue as worth the division it was causing. His intervention finally induced Hooper to relent and he was consecrated bishop on 8 March 1551, in vestments (though whether these ever saw the light of day again is doubtful). 
Hooper arrived in his diocese soon after Easter 1551. Hardly on the cutting edge of the Reformation, the diocese had a limited protestant presence although part of it had been under Hugh Latimer's direction from 1535 to 1539. A relatively new diocese (founded in 1541), it had been administered without much vigour by Bishop John Wakeman, and the clergy, when not openly hostile, did no more than acquiesce in the changes brought about under Edward VI. Hooper brought with him fifty articles of religion, thirty-one injunctions, twenty-seven interrogatories to be asked of the clergy, and sixty-one interrogatories to be asked of the laity. These articles and interrogatories served as the foundation for Hooper's programme of reform within the diocese and went beyond anything seen before, anywhere in England. They have much in common with the forty-two articles, promulgated in 1552, which Hooper had a hand in formulating. 
Hooper also drew up a further nine questions to put to the diocesan clergy. The findings of this examination have been interpreted in the past as justifying a reformer's criticism of an ignorant clerical body, but this overstates the case. Few incumbents were disciplined or removed following this examination, but Hooper did institute a programme of clerical education and also took steps to improve communications between the parish clergy and their bishop. Sensibly recognizing that it would be impossible to create a church in Gloucester along the lines he had known in Zurich, Hooper's injunctions concentrated on creating an environment in his parishes that would encourage piety, church attendance, and good order. His advanced reforming ideas are clear in his articles but he was judicious about enforcing them. He was undoubtedly responsible for the destruction of altars, images, and other components of traditional worship, but he was not an indiscriminate purifier and expressed detestation for those who enriched themselves by despoiling churches. 
Hooper's moderation and personal attention to his diocese made him popular and respected there, if not loved. He was no respecter of status and applied his principles to all classes equally. A violent altercation with Sir Anthony Kingston of Painswick, who refused to attend a hearing in the bishop's court after being accused of adultery, came to blows but Hooper was not intimidated: Kingston later claimed that Hooper had changed his life. 
In April 1552, after the deprivation of Nicholas Heath, bishop of Worcester, the diocese of Gloucester was dissolved and created as an archdeaconry within the diocese of Worcester to which Hooper was translated. The change meant a net loss for Hooper as he had to surrender much of the income of Gloucester to the government. By December 1552, Gloucester and Worcester were united as one diocese, 'like that of Coventry and Lichfield or that of Bath and Wells' ('CPR', '1550-53', 231). Hooper was to spend half the year in each diocese and to provide for preaching and services in the church from which he was separated. 
Hooper attempted to institute the same reforms in Worcester as in Gloucester and undertook a similar visitation. Although he met stiff resistance in Worcester, his efforts in his two dioceses were herculean. He made two circuits of each between 1551 and 1553 in addition to fulfilling his responsibilities in parliament and acting as a member of commissions to review ecclesiastical laws and to survey and inventory parish goods in the city of Gloucester. He seems also to have been involved in preparing the 1552 prayer book and in the planned revision of the canon law. 
Following the death of Edward VI on 6 July 1553, Hooper opposed Northumberland's attempt to put Jane Grey on the throne and supported Mary Tudor both in writing and materially, sending Sir John Talbot and William Ligon with a troop of horse to her aid. Nevertheless, by August Hooper had been summoned before the privy council and by 1 September he was imprisoned in the Fleet. As the law had not as yet been changed to allow his arrest for heresy, he was imprisoned on the charge of owing the crown $509 5's'. 5died in unpaid first fruits. Hooper denied this and claimed that he was himself owed more than $80 by the government. The truth of the claims and counter-claims in this dispute was irrelevant and everyone knew it: Hooper was in custody because of his radical protestant views. Although he had ample time to escape, he chose to remain in England and face certain imprisonment and possible death. His wife and children, however, escaped to Frankfurt where they remained until their deaths. 
Hooper remained in custody until his death. His imprisonment was harsh and he suffered a variety of physical ailments, notably sciatica. He was able to communicate with the outside world with surprising ease and encouraged the formation of protestant cells in London; notable among these was a congregation that met in Bow churchyard. In all some thirty letters survive from the period of his imprisonment and he probably wrote considerably more that were intercepted, lost, or otherwise destroyed. 
On 15 March 1554 Hooper was deprived of his bishopric. A concerted effort was made to discredit him by circulating rumours that he had recanted, but the effort failed. On 22 January 1555 he was arraigned at St Saviour's Church; examined on the 28th, he proved obstinate. Next day the sentence of the court was read by Stephen Gardiner, and along with John Rogers Hooper was taken to Newgate to await execution. On 4 February he was degraded by Bonner and left for Gloucester early the next morning. He was burnt at the stake at 9 o'clock in the morning on 9 February 1555, his sufferings protracted by faggots of green wood which long failed to catch fire. 
A copious writer, Hooper's books and letters were collected into two volumes by the Parker Society (1843, 1845). Additional correspondence was published in 'Original Letters Relative to the English Reformation' (1846-7). All attest the radical and uncompromising personality which made him as much an enigma to his contemporaries as he remains today. 


@@@@@


doc= 13707


Hooper, Robert (1773-1835), physician and medical writer, son of John Hooper of Marylebone, was born in London and educated by Dr William Rutherford of the academy at Uxbridge. After a course of medical study in London Hooper was appointed apothecary to the Marylebone workhouse infirmary, where he made an extensive collection of anatomical preparations. He entered Pembroke College, Oxford, on 24 October 1796, graduated BA in 1803, and MA and MB in 1804. Some difficulty -- instigated, it is said, by members of the Royal College of Physicians who would not 'tarnish its hallowed walls with the flame of the workhouse laboratory' ('Lancet', 494) -- prevented his proceeding DM at Oxford, but he was created MD of St Andrews University on 16 December 1805, and admitted LRCP in London on 23 December 1805. After settling in Savile Row, he lectured there on the practice of medicine for many years to large classes. 
Hooper built an extensive practice and was a prolific writer, and his books had a large sale. His writings include 'Observations on the structure and economy of plants; to which is added the analogy between the animal and vegetable kingdoms' (1797), and 'A compendious medical dictionary, containing an explanation of the terms in anatomy, physiology, surgery' (1798), of which numerous American editions were issued. The edition of 1811 was issued as a new edition of John Quincy's 'Lexicon medicum', a work of long-standing repute which had gone through thirteen editions and had been largely copied by Hooper. Subsequent editions bore the title 'Lexicon medicum, or, Medical Dictionary', without reference to Quincy. 'The anatomist's vade mecum, containing the anatomy, physiology, and morbid appearances of the human body' (1798) was published in America in Boston in 1801 and 1803. Other works were 'Anatomical plates of the bones and muscles, reduced from Albinus, for the use of students and artists' (1802), 'The London Dissector' (1804), and 'The physician's vade mecum, containing the symptoms, causes, prognosis, and treatment of diseases' (1809). 
Hooper retired from practice in 1829, having made a fortune, and lived at Stanmore, Middlesex. He died from a disease of the bladder in Bentinck Street, Manchester Square, London, on 6 May 1835. He left a fine collection of paintings, part of the estate bequeathed to his brothers. 


@@@@@


doc= 13708


Hooper, William Hulme (1827-1854), naval officer, after passing his examination at Portsmouth was in November 1847 appointed mate of the 'Plover', under Commander Thomas E. L. Moore. 'Plover' was one of the earliest vessels sent out to search for and relieve Sir John Franklin. Her orders were to pass through the Bering Strait and examine the coast eastwards. She sailed from Plymouth on 30 January 1848, and from Honolulu on 25 August. On 15 October she was off Chutsky Nos, and the next day went into Port Providence, where she wintered. Hooper led a party along the coast as far as Cape Atcheen, and through the winter mixed with the local people, whom he called Tuski, and whose language he learned. The following summer the 'Plover' moved over to Kotzebue Sound, and near Icy Cape, on 25 July 1849, her two boats, under the command of Lieutenants Pullen and Hooper (who, though he did not know it, had been promoted lieutenant on 12 May), left the ship for a voyage along the coast. This they examined as far as the mouth of the Mackenzie River, and, going up it, Hooper wintered (1849-50) on the shores of Bear Lake, close to Fort Franklin; Pullen travelled a little further up the river and wintered at Fort Simpson. In the summer of 1850 they travelled down river and examined the coast as far as Cape Bathurst. They returned to Fort Simpson, where they both wintered (1850-51). Leaving their boats they later travelled overland to New York, and reached England in October 1851. 
Hooper's health had given way under the hardships of three Arctic winters, and he became a confirmed invalid, relieving the tedium of his illness by writing an account of the expedition: 'Ten months among the tents of the Tuski, with incidents of an Arctic boat expedition in search of Sir John Franklin' (1853). Hooper died, reportedly from the effects of his Arctic service, at Brompton, London, on 19 May 1854, aged twenty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 13709


Hooppell, Robert Eli (1833-1895), antiquary and Church of England clergyman, born in the parish of St Mary, Rotherhithe, London, on 30 January 1833, was the son of John Eli Hooppell, carpenter, and his wife, Mary Ann. He was educated at Queen Elizabeth's Free Grammar School, Horsleydown, and was admitted sizar at St John's College, Cambridge, on 30 June 1851. He was also a scholar of the college. In 1855 he graduated BA, being fortieth wrangler in the mathematical tripos, and in 1856 he obtained a first class in moral science. He proceeded MA in 1858, LLD in 1865, and was admitted 'ad eundem' at Durham in 1876. He married at Broxbourne, Hertfordshire, on 20 June 1855, Margaret, daughter of Samuel and Elizabeth Hooppell of Fishleigh, Devon. 
From 1855 to 1861 Hooppell was second and mathematical master at Beaumaris grammar school. He later used his mathematics for a statistical paper on the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' read to the British Association in 1871. He was ordained deacon in 1857 and priest in 1859, and from 1859 to 1861 he served as English chaplain at Menai Bridge. In 1861 he was appointed first principal of Winterbottom Nautical College, South Shields, and he remained in that position until 1875, when he was instituted to the rectory of Byers Green, co. Durham. For the last year or two of his life he was in delicate health, and wintered at Bournemouth. 
Hooppell served on the committee which superintended the excavation of the Roman camp at South Shields. His paper on the discoveries there ('Natural History Transactions of Northumberland', 7, 1882, 126-42) was the prelude to a lecture, published in 1879, on 'Vinovium, the Buried Roman City at Binchester', between Bishop Auckland and Byers Green, and in 1891 'Vinovia, a Buried Roman City', with thirty-eight illustrations. The substance of this treatise appeared in the journal of the British Archaeological Association, and he contributed to the same journal for 1895 a paper on 'Roman Manchester and the roads to and from it'. From 1877 he read papers on the names of Roman stations to the Newcastle Society of Antiquaries, and he contributed to the 'Archaeologia Aeliana' and the 'Illustrated Archaeologist'. His work on Vinovia has been largely superseded by later scholarship. His address, as president of the Tyneside Naturalists' Field Club, is in the 'Natural History Transactions of Northumberland' (7.187-206), and after his death there was published in 1898 a volume entitled 'Rambles of an Antiquary', comprising papers published in the 'Newcastle Courant' in 1880 and 1881, chiefly on the antiquities of Northumberland and Durham. 
Hooppell also published, in addition to several individual sermons, 'Reason and Religion, or, The Leading Doctrines of Christianity' (1867; 2nd edn, 1895) and 'Materialism: Has it any Real Foundation in Science?' (2nd edn, 1874). He died at The Burlington, Oxford Road, Bournemouth, on 23 August 1895, and was buried in Bournemouth cemetery. His wife, two sons, and a daughter survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13710


Hooten, Elizabeth (d. 1672), Quaker preacher, first appears as Elizabeth Carrier on 11 May 1628 at Ollerton, Nottinghamshire, when she married Oliver Hooten (died 1657), a prosperous farmer. Their son Samuel was baptized at Ollerton on 4 May 1633, but they subsequently moved to Skegby near Mansfield. There were at least five other children: Thomas ('bap'. 1636), John ('bap'. 1639), Josiah ('bap'. 1641), Oliver, and Elizabeth. 
After leaving the Church of England at an unknown date, Hooten appears to have been active in her local Baptist community and perhaps as a preacher, but according to her son Oliver, writing years later in 1686 or 1687, 'after some time finding them that they were not upright hearted to the Lord but did his work negligently' (Mack, 146), she parted company with them. She may have been the first person to be 'convinced' by George Fox about 1647. Initially, Oliver Hooten seems to have opposed his wife's new beliefs 'in so much that they had like to have parted' (ibid., 197), but some time in the next decade he turned Quaker himself, for his death is recorded in the Quaker digest registers for the Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire quarterly meeting. Fox wrote in his journal that about 1649 Elizabeth's 'mouth was opned to preach ye gospell' (Fox, 'Journal', 2.325). Gerard Croese noted in 1696 that she 'was the first of her sex among the Quakers who attempted to imitate men, and preach' and suggested that she was a role model for women: 'after her example, many of her sex had the confidence to undertake the same office' (Croese, 37). Hooten was obviously very close to Fox in the late 1640s and an important figure in the incipient movement. About 1649 or 1650 he appointed a meeting at her home in Skegby, where he miraculously healed a woman. 
Hooten soon troubled the authorities with her preaching and her protestations against the corruption of the clergy and magistrates. Her first recorded imprisonment appears to have been in Derby about 1651 for reproving a minister. In 1652 she was imprisoned in York Castle for admonishing a minister and his congregation in Rotherham at the close of their worship. With other Quakers, including Mary Fisher and Thomas Aldam, she was a signatory to 'False Prophets and False Teachers' (1652), a tract attacking paid ministry, written in the castle. Her experiences at York led her to write to Oliver Cromwell criticizing the legal system. She noted that many murderers 'escaped throughe frends & money, & pore people for Lesser facts are put to death', while lamenting that in prison many 'Lighe worse than doggs for want of strawe' (Manners, 10). In 1653 Fox was imprisoned in Carlisle for preaching with other leading Quakers including Hooten, James Nayler, and William Dewsbury. After delivering the Quaker message at a church in Beckingham, Lincolnshire, in 1654, Hooten was imprisoned for five months, becoming the first to suffer for Friends in that county. She served a further three weeks in Lincoln in 1655 for 'exhorting the people to repentance' (Besse, 1.346). Harsh treatment by a female gaoler prompted her to write once again 'to him in Authority' (presumably meaning Cromwell), condemning prison conditions (Manners, 15). In 1660 Hooten was back in Nottinghamshire where a man named Jackson, the minister for Selston, violently assaulted her, allegedly without provocation, while she was walking along the road. 
Hooten's husband died on 30 June 1657. Four years later, in 1661, she travelled to America with Joane Brooksup or Brooksop. Her son Samuel opposed the undertaking, but later supported her decision and eventually preached in America himself. Arriving at Boston, via Virginia, they were imprisoned by Governor Endicott and then driven for two days out into the wilderness and left to starve. They managed to make their way to Rhode Island, from where they obtained a passage to Barbados, before returning once again to Boston 'to testify against the spirit of persecution there predominant' (Besse, 2.229). Apprehended by a constable, they were then put on board a ship for Virginia and eventually returned to England. 
Once there, Hooten repeatedly petitioned Charles II in the hope that she would be able to live more comfortably on a proposed return trip to America. In 1662 she handed letters to the king in St James's Park, causing a stir among bystanders because she did not kneel. Receiving no reply, she continued to harangue Charles and was, she recalled, 'moved to goe amongst them againe at Whitehall in sacke-cloathe and ashes' (Manners, 37). Hooten eventually obtained a royal licence to settle in any of the American colonies, and sailed to Massachusetts with her daughter, Elizabeth. She asked the Boston authorities on numerous occasions for a house, a place for Friends to meet, and land for a burial-ground, but was refused in spite of the king's recommendations. Hooten afterwards travelled eastwards and was imprisoned first at Hampton and then at Dover for her activities against ministers. Next, at Cambridge, she called people to repentance as she walked through the streets and was imprisoned yet again for two days and nights in 'a noisome, stinking dungeon', without food or water (Bishop, 99). A magistrates' order that she be whipped through the three towns of Cambridge, Water Town, and Dedham 'was rigorously executed' (Besse, 2.229). Once again she was sent out into the wilderness on horseback yet managed to make her way back to Rhode Island, later returning to a place near Cambridge with her daughter and an old woman named Sarah Coleman. After further whippings, Hooten returned to Boston, where she was sent to the house of correction, then again whipped through three towns (Roxbury, Dedham, and Medfield) and cast out into the wilderness. After further imprisonment in Boston and Rhode Island she was warned that she faced execution or branding should she ever return. In 'Some more of the sufferings of Elizabeth Hooten' in George Bishop's 'New England Judged' (1667) she described how she was able to withstand this constant string of punishments, writing through God-given strength. 
Hooten then returned to England and resumed her work as an itinerant preacher. The Quaker historian William Sewel noted at the time that he had 'several times seen her in England in a good condition' (Sewel, 570). In 1663 she suffered the distraint of three mares and other losses which made it very difficult for her to continue farming. In 1667 she wrote a letter to Friends condemning John Perrot, the Quaker schismatic, and his followers and linked them with Ranterism. In 1670 she published an address of her own in Thomas Taylor's 'To the King and both Houses of Parliament', in which she criticized the authorities for the severity of persecution against Quakers ensuing from the second 'Conventicle Act'. Hooten was a fairly prolific letter writer, who often petitioned the authorities, as she did the king for the release of Margaret Fox from Lancaster Castle. Her letters, which include many to other Friends, are of considerable importance for the insights they provide into the 'radicalism' of early Quakerism. Perhaps surprisingly, she published very little; apart from the aforementioned works, she was signatory to a testimony for William Simpson contained in 'A Short Relation Concerning the Life and Death of William Simpson' (1671). 
On 11 August 1671 Hooten crossed the Atlantic for the last time, on this occasion with George Fox and other Friends, including Solomon Eccles and William Edmunson. They passed from Barbados to Jamaica, where at Port Royal Hooten died in February 1672. Her cause of death is unclear, though a testimony from the Quaker James Lancaster recorded that her body was weak and swollen and she was unable to speak. She was buried in Jamaica. 


@@@@@


doc= 13711


Hooton, Charles (1810?-1847), novelist and journalist, was probably born on 10 May 1810. According to later applications submitted to the Royal Literary Fund, Hooton studied at the Royal Academy of Arts, London. In 1836, while editing a newspaper in Leeds, Hooton published 'The Adventures of Bilberry Thurland'. In 1837 he moved to London and published in 'Bentley's Miscellany' a novel called 'Colin Clink' (republished 1841). As the sub-editor of the 'True Sun', Hooton wrote a series of articles on the subject of political economy. In 1840 he edited another short-lived paper, 'The Woolsack', in which he attacked the abuses of the court of chancery. Following the collapse of 'The Woolsack', Hooton left for Texas, where for nine months he attempted to live off the land, farming, hunting, and fishing. He afterwards undertook newspaper work in New Orleans, New York, and Montreal, but his failing health prompted him to return to England. He wrote a series of ballads for the 'New Monthly Magazine' illustrative of American life and literature, and a novel called 'Launcelot Wedge', which was running in 'Ainsworth's Magazine' at the time of his death (republished 1849). Hooton's account of his experiences in the United States and Canada was published posthumously as 'St Louis' Isle, or, Texiana' (1847). With his wife, Emily (died after 1847), he had a child; the Royal Literary Fund archive records that his wife left him after he had attempted to kill her and their child. He died on 16 February 1847 from an overdose of morphine at his father's residence in Nottingham, to which he had been moved having been certified insane while in Texas. According to a late twentieth-century assessment of his writing, 'his sub-Dickensian fiction, though quirky, has its powerfully atmospheric and comic moments' (Sutherland, 305). 


@@@@@


doc= 13712


Hope, Sir Alexander (1769-1837), army officer, was born on 9 December 1769, the second son of John Hope, second earl of Hopetoun (1704-1781), who had been lord of police for Scotland, and his third wife, Lady Elizabeth (1737-1788), the second daughter of Alexander Leslie, fifth earl of Leven and Melville. Hope was educated at home, and, together with his elder half-brother John Hope, afterwards the fourth earl, he travelled on the continent with their tutor, Dr John Gillies (1747-1836). 
In 1786 Hope became an ensign in the 63rd foot, was made lieutenant in the 64th foot two years later, and in 1791 raised an independent company, which was called up. On 20 July 1791 Hope was appointed lieutenant and captain 1st foot guards. He was one of the officers selected to serve in the light infantry companies which were first added to the regiment in 1793. He served in Flanders in 1794 as brigade major of the guards, under Major-General Gerard Lake, and afterwards as aide-de-camp to Major-General Sir Ralph Abercromby. In the same year he became a major in the 81st foot, and a lieutenant-colonel in the 2nd battalion of the 90th foot from where he transferred in December to the 14th foot while still with the retreating army in the Netherlands. He commanded the 14th during the attack from Buren on Gueldermasen on 8 January 1795. During this action, Hope was severely wounded by a ball which lodged deep in his shoulder, destroying his arm and causing permanent lameness. He received a pension as a consequence. 
Hope, who was a strong supporter of the younger Pitt, sat as MP for Dumfries in 1796. He went on to represent Linlithgowshire between 1802 and 1834. He married Georgina Alicia, the daughter of George Brown of Ellistown, on 23 October 1805; they had five sons and a daughter. 
He was appointed lieutenant-governor of Tynemouth and Cliff Fort in 1797, and then of Edinburgh Castle in 1798. He was brigade major and assistant adjutant-general of the eastern district in 1798-9. Aged thirty, he was exceptionally young to hold this post. He became a brigadier-general in 1807, and a major-general in 1808. In June 1811 Hope, who was then deputy quartermaster-general at the Horse Guards, under Sir Robert Brownrigg, was appointed governor of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. In January 1813 he was sent on a special mission to Sweden to determine the strength of the forces that could co-operate in the forthcoming allied campaign in Germany. Back at Sandhurst, Hope proposed changes in the entrance exam and raising standards for commissioning, given his belief that many applicants 'from want of education in childhood either failed to enter, or are rejected after the probationary year' (Shepperd, 43). In 1819 Hope left Sandhurst to return to his previous post as lieutenant-governor of Edinburgh Castle. He became lieutenant-governor of Chelsea Hospital in 1826, and after serving as colonel of the 5th West India regiment, then of the 74th (Highland) regiment, became colonel of the 14th foot in 1835. 
On 30 June 1824 Oxford conferred on Hope the honorary degree of DCL. On the same day, his eldest son, John Thomas Hope, of Christ Church (who died while lieutenant-colonel of the Fife militia in 1835), recited his Newdigate prize poem, 'The Arch of Titus'. James Robert Hope-Scott of Abbotsford was his third son. 
It has been reported that Hope held rank in the Austrian army (Ornsby, 59-60). The Austrian war office did not maintain an army list before 1820; but the archives of the financial department confirm that no officer of the name served between 1773 and 1840. Hope died, a full general and GCB at the lieutenant-governor's house, Chelsea Hospital, London, on 19 May 1837; he was buried in the family vault at Abercorn, Linlithgowshire. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13713


Hope, Alexander James Beresford Beresford (1820-1887), politician and author, was born on 25 January 1820, the youngest son of Thomas Hope (1769-1831), art collector, of Deepdene, Surrey, and his wife, Louisa (died 21 July 1851), youngest child of William Beresford, first Baron Decies, archbishop of Tuam. Louisa Hope later married, on 29 November 1832, William Carr Beresford, Viscount Beresford (1768-1854). Henry Thomas Hope was his elder brother. On inheriting the English estates of his stepfather, Alexander Hope took the additional name of Beresford before that of Hope (30 May 1854). After a prize-winning career at Harrow School and Trinity College, Cambridge (matriculated 1837, BA 1841, MA 1844), he became MP for Maidstone (1841-52; 1857-65), for Stoke-on-Trent (1865-8), and eventually for Cambridge University (1868-87). He married, on 7 July 1842, Lady Mildred Arabella Charlotte Henrietta Cecil (1822-1881), eldest daughter of James, second marquess of Salisbury, and sister of Robert, third marquess of Salisbury, later prime minister. She was for many years a leader of London society; they had three sons and seven daughters. 
Describing himself as a 'Conservative, yet liberal and unshackled by party', Beresford Hope consistently supported the established church, 'both as a divine institution, and as an estate of the realm' ('WWBMP', 31). He voted for agricultural protection in 1846, 'on the ground 'solely' of a previous appeal not having been made to the constituencies'; and he opposed a graduated income tax in the 1840s, secret ballots in the 1850s, and electoral reform in the 1860s ('Dod's Parliamentary Companion', 1858, 1870, 1881). Throughout his career he strongly supported church rates and denominational education, and was conspicuously hostile to the disestablishment of the Irish church. He spoke out for the rights of the south as well as the north in the American Civil War, and he vehemently attacked successive bills to legitimize marriage with a deceased wife's sister. In all this he seldom adopted an orthodox party line, and he often opposed Disraeli, as in April 1867 when he famously described the tory leader as an 'Asian mystery'. Such attitudes hardly made for a successful parliamentary career, and towards the end of his life he readily acknowledged his failure. 'I could have imagined myself', he admitted, 'measuring swords with Gladstone, or Disraeli, or Carlyle, or Tennyson, or Montalembert. Now I shall die a second rate notoriety... 'the rich Mr. Beresford Hope'' (Law and Law, 126, 232). 
Beresford Hope was a prolific journalist and an architectural pundit of considerable influence. Having inherited a fortune in 1841, a great London mansion (Arklow House, Connaught Place) in 1843, and sizeable estates in Kent and Staffordshire (Bedgebury Park and Beresford Hall), he placed his resources at the service of the Gothic revival. He was an outspoken president of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1865-7, co-proprietor of -- and regular contributor to -- the 'Saturday Review' from 1855, and for many years a committed chairman (1846 onwards) and president (1859 onwards) of the Ecclesiological (previously Camden) Society. In all these roles he aimed to expand the language of architectural form, linking English and European styles, and hoped even to integrate the practice of architecture and engineering. He was William Butterfield's patron at St Augustine's, Canterbury -- in 1844 he had purchased the ancient buildings as a college for missionary clergy -- and (not without quarrels) at All Saints, Margaret Street, London; he was Gilbert Scott's advocate in the battle for the Foreign Office design in 1858; and he was William Burges's champion in the law courts competition of 1867. And even when the Gothic revival began to wane, he remained in church-building matters an adherent of 'creative restoration'; in fact he denounced William Morris's 'anti-scrape' doctrine as 'a Gospel of Death' ('The Athenaeum', 571). Beresford Hope's support for Burges's plan to complete St Paul's Cathedral with a full-blown scheme of mural decoration was too 'creative' for most classicists. And his support for Butterfield's abstracted polychromy proved too 'progressive' for many Goths. Yet although he was a Gothicist to his heart's core, he eventually discovered Gothic principles -- of skyline, composition, and planning -- in Venice and Amsterdam alike, and in seventeenth-century Paris and fifteenth-century Bruges. Almost everywhere, in fact, except in Palladianism and neo-classicism. The result was a new, assimilative approach to style which he formulated in a series of articles and pamphlets, and which he christened 'progressive eclecticism' (A. B. Hope, 'The Common Sense of Art', 1858). Ironically, it was this approach -- fusing medieval and Renaissance traditions in pursuit of a new synthesis -- which first recreated the Gothic revival in the 1860s, then destroyed it in the 1870s. Modern Gothic gave way to Queen Anne. 
In the politics of ecclesiology Beresford Hope played an ambivalent role. Although he will be forever linked with Benjamin Webb and John Mason Neale -- the high-church trinity of Trinity College, Cambridge -- his churchmanship was rather different to theirs. He was less of a sacramentalist than Neale, less of a ritualist than Webb. He was, after all, a layman. His Anglicanism was establishmentarian, moderate, paternal, tory. He was a high-churchman of the Hook and Hooker type -- rather different from being a ritualist. 
In private Beresford Hope could be humorous, even quixotic; but as a public figure he was not helped by an awkward manner and an over-elaborate style of speech. Disraeli sarcastically alluded to his 'Batavian graces', a reference to Hope's Dutch ancestry and stilted delivery (Kebbel, 1.600). Even so, as a churchman, as a critic, most of all as a patron, he has his place in architectural history. 
Besides numerous essays, reviews, and pamphlets -- notably 'Public Offices and Metropolitan Improvements' (1857), 'The Common Sense of Art' (1858), 'The Condition and Prospects of Architectural Art' (1863), 'The World's Debt to Art' (1863), and 'The Art Workman's Position' (1864) -- Beresford Hope was the author of 'The English Cathedral of the Nineteenth Century' (1861), 'Worship in the Church of England' (1874), and two novels, 'Strictly Tied Up' (1880) and 'The Brandreths' (1882). He was a privy councillor (1880), a trustee of the British Museum and the National Portrait Gallery, and a fellow of various learned societies; he was awarded honorary doctorates by Oxford (1848), Cambridge (1864), Washington (1879), Tennessee (1879), and Dublin (1881). Beresford Hope died at Bedgebury Park, Cranbrook, Kent, on 20 October 1887, and was buried six days later at Kilndown, Kent. His fortune had been great, but after a lifetime of patronage he left only $78,270. 


@@@@@


doc= 13714


Hope, Anne (1809-1887), historian, was born on 7 September 1809 at Calcutta, where her father, John Williamson Fulton (1769-1830), was a merchant; he was a founder of the firm of Mackintosh, Fultons and McClintock. Her mother was Anne (1780?-1845), daughter of Robert Robertson and widow of Captain John Hunt of the Bengal army. The younger Anne was the third of five daughters; she had two brothers. At an early age she was sent from India to Lisburn, co. Antrim, where her father's family resided, and on her parents' return home in 1820 settled with them in 4 Upper Harley Street, London, where she met friends of her father, who included Daniel O'Connell, John Lawless, and other Irish parliamentary leaders. 
On 10 March 1831 Anne Fulton married James Hope MD (1801-1841), a physician at St George's Hospital specializing in heart disease; she assisted him with some of his publications. After his death in 1841 she prepared a memoir of him, which was edited by Dr Klein Grant and published in 1842. Anne Hope devoted herself to the education of her only son, Sir Theodore Cracraft Hope ('b'. 1831), who joined the Bombay civil service in 1853. Letters which she addressed to him were published in 1843 under the title 'On Self-Education with Formation of Character'. 
Ill health compelled Hope to spend much time in Madeira between 1842 and 1850, and she remained an invalid for the rest of her life. She became interested in ecclesiastical history, and completed in 1850, but did not publish, a work on the early Christian church. This research interest led her to convert to Roman Catholicism about 1846. She met W. G. Ward and John Dalgairns, fellow converts. She developed close links with the Oratorians, of which congregation Dalgairns was a member, and, for a while, she lived in Edgbaston, near the Birmingham Oratory, where John Henry Newman and Dalgairns were then based. Dalgairns became her chief literary adviser and counsellor. In a spirit of devotion to her adopted church, she published 'The Acts of the Early Martyrs' (1855), which was based on Paul de Ribadeneira's 'Flores sanctorum', and intended for the use of oratory schools. It was republished several times within three years. This frankly hagiographical volume was followed in 1859 by a life of St Philip Neri, the founder of the Oratorians. Hope's next two publications were her most substantial: the 'Life of St Thomas a Becket' (1868) and 'The Conversion of the Teutonic Races' (2 vols., 1872). Both were scrupulously based on medieval chronicles and saints' lives, and showed wide reading, but exhibited little critical sense, being as credulous as they were learned. Dalgairns contributed a preface to each work. In 1878 she published 'Franciscan Martyrs in England' and between 1874 and 1878 she also wrote seven contributions to the 'Dublin Review', including a reply to J. A. Froude's attack on Thomas a Becket. She spent her later years in Torquay, at the Hermitage, St Mary Church, and continued to work in old age, employing an amanuensis. She was examining material relating to the recently beatified English martyrs within a week of her death at home on 12 February 1887. The Catholic historian, Abbot Francis Gasquet, edited and published this manuscript as 'The First Divorce of Henry VIII' (1894). 


@@@@@


doc= 13715


Archibald Hope, Lord Rankeillor (1639-1706), was lord of session in 1689 and lord of justiciary in 1690. Adopting the title of Lord Rankeillor, he was appointed to the privy council in 1696, and was a commissioner to parliament in 1706. With his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Aytoun, he had a son, Sir Thomas Hope, eighth baronet. He died on 10 October 1706. 


@@@@@


doc= 13716


Hope, Charles, first earl of Hopetoun (1681-1742), politician, was born on 14 August 1681 into a distinguished legal family, the only son of John Hope of Hopetoun (1650-1682), landowner, and Lady Margaret Hamilton (1649-1711), eldest daughter of John, fourth earl of Haddington. Helen Hope, countess of Haddington, was his elder sister. He was educated in Edinburgh and attended the university from 1692, though he did not graduate. On 31 August 1699 he married Lady Henrietta Johnstone (1682-1750), only daughter of William, first marquess of Annandale; they had four sons and nine daughters. 
Hope was elected a parliamentary commissioner for Linlithgowshire in 1702. From 6 July 1704 he sat as a peer, having been created on 15 April 1703 earl of Hopetoun, Viscount Aithrie, and Lord Hope and sworn of the privy council. He was a strong supporter of the Union. From 1715 to 1742 he was lord lieutenant of the county of Linlithgow, and in 1723 was appointed lord high commissioner to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. He was a Scottish representative peer from 1722 to 1742; a lord of police from 1734; invested in the Order of the Thistle in 1738; and governor of the Bank of Scotland from 1740. A ministerial dependant, in 1721 Hopetoun received $3000 from the secret service fund. 
Hopetoun died at his home, Hopetoun House, Linlithgowshire, on 2 February 1742, and was buried at Abercorn church, Linlithgowshire, on 26 February. He was survived by his wife, who died on 25 November 1750, and by his second son, John (1704-1781), who succeeded him to the earldom. 


@@@@@


doc= 13717


Hope, Charles, Lord Granton (1763-1851), judge, was born on 29 June 1763, the eldest son of John Hope (1739-1785), MP for Linlithgowshire (and great-grandson of Charles Hope, first earl of Hopetoun), and his wife, Mary (1741/2-1767), only daughter of Eliab Breton of Forty Hill, Enfield, and granddaughter of Sir William Wolstenholme, bt. Sir John Hope, army officer, and Vice-Admiral Sir William Johnstone Hope were his brothers. He was educated at Enfield grammar school, and afterwards at Edinburgh high school, where in 1777 he became the Latin dux. After studying law at Edinburgh University he was admitted an advocate on 11 December 1784, and on 25 March 1786 was appointed a depute advocate. Although not an outstanding lawyer he was an accomplished public speaker at tory political meetings. On 5 June 1792 he became sheriff of Orkney, and in the following year, on 8 August 1793, he married his cousin, Lady Charlotte Hope (1771-1834), the second daughter of John, second earl of Hopetoun, and his third wife, Lady Elizabeth Leslie, second daughter of Alexander, fifth earl of Leven and Melville. They had four sons and eight daughters; the eldest boy was John Hope (1794-1858), and the youngest girl was Louisa Octavia Augusta Hope (1814-1893). 
In June 1801 Hope was appointed lord advocate in the Addington administration in place of Robert Dundas of Arniston and shortly afterwards was presented with the freedom of the city of Edinburgh for his assistance to the magistrates in obtaining a bill for the poor of the city. At the general election in July 1802 he was returned to the House of Commons for Dumfries district, but resigned when Henry Dundas was made a lord, and was returned unopposed for the city of Edinburgh in January 1803. As lord advocate Hope saw through the House of Commons the 'Scotch Parochial Schoolmasters' Act' which compelled heritors to build houses with two rooms for the schoolmasters. His only speech to be reported in the 'Parliamentary Debates' was delivered in his own defence in the debate on Whitbread's motion for the production of papers relating to Hope's censure of a Banffshire farmer named Morison, who had dismissed his servant for attending drills of a volunteer regiment. Hope made an ingenious defence, and gave a lively description of the duties of his office. Though the case against him was strong, the motion was defeated by 159 to 82. 
On 20 November 1804 Hope was appointed an ordinary lord of session and lord justice clerk in the place of Sir David Rae, Lord Eskgrove, and assumed the title of Lord Granton. He took his seat on the bench on 6 December 1804. On 12 November 1811 he succeeded Robert Blair of Avontoun as lord president of the court of session, being succeeded as lord justice clerk by David Boyle. In 1820 he presided at the special commission for the trial of high treason at Glasgow and his 'Charge Delivered to the Grand Jury of the County of Stirling on 23 June 1820' was published (1820). On 17 August 1822 he was admitted to the privy council at Holyroodhouse. On 29 July 1823 he was appointed, together with his eldest son John, on the commission of inquiry into the forms of process and the course of appeals in Scotland. His 'Notes by the Lord President on the Subject of Hearing Counsel in the Inner House' were published as a pamphlet (1826). When James Graham, third duke of Montrose, died in December 1836, Hope became lord justice general, when the post was combined by statute with the office of lord president of the court of session. 
Hope was a man of imposing presence, with a magnificent voice, which, according to Lord Cockburn, 'was surpassed by that of the great Mrs Siddons alone' ('Memorials', 160). Though politically partisan, and without tact or judgement, 'his integrity, candour, kindness, and gentlemanlike manners and feelings gained him almost unanimous esteem', according to Cockburn ('Journal', 1, 308-9). His charges to juries were persuasive and impressive. Lockhart left a graphic account of Hope's imposing bearing on the bench in 'Peter's Letters to his Kinsfolk' (2, 1819, 102-8). 
When the volunteer movement began during the Napoleonic wars, Hope enlisted as a private in the first regiment of Royal Edinburgh volunteers. He was afterwards appointed lieutenant-colonel of the corps, and performed his duties for several years, until the regiment was disbanded for the second time in 1814. He daily inspected the volunteers on duty at Edinburgh Castle while the regular troops were on duty in the western counties. Hope's famous regimental orders of 18 October 1803 are given at length in Cockburn's 'Memorials' (pp. 187-94). 
Hope retired from the bench in the autumn of 1841 and was succeeded as lord president by David Boyle. He died at his home, Granton House, 12 Moray Place, Edinburgh, on 30 October 1851 and was buried on 4 November in the mausoleum at Hopetoun House. His wife predeceased him on 22 January 1834. 


@@@@@


doc= 13718


Hope, Frederick William (1797-1862), entomologist and collector of insects and engravings, was born on 3 January 1797 at 37 Upper Seymour Street, Portman Square, London, the second son of John Thomas Hope (1761-1854) of Netley Hall, Shropshire, and Ellen Hester Mary, only child of Sir Thomas Edwardes, seventh baronet, rector of Frodesley, Shropshire, and Tilston, Cheshire. He was privately educated under the Revd Delafosse of Richmond, Surrey, and after entering Christ Church, Oxford, in 1817, graduated BA in 1820, and MA in 1823. He then took holy orders, becoming for a time curate of the family's living at Frodesley. 
At Oxford, Hope became interested in natural science, especially entomology, and with his considerable means was able to accumulate a great collection of insects. He also collected prints, amassing 140,000 portraits, 70,000 topographical engravings, and more than 20,000 natural history engravings. On 6 June 1835, at Marylebone church, Middlesex, Hope married Ellen (1801-1879), younger daughter of George Meredith of Nottingham Place, Marylebone; they had no children. 
Hope travelled to France, Switzerland, Germany, and Holland but owing to his poor state of health was compelled at times to reside on the Mediterranean. From 1840 to 1862 he spent most of his time at Naples and Nice, bases which provided him with the opportunity to study fish and Crustacea. These studies formed the basis for his work 'Catalogo dei crostacei Italiani e di molti altri del Mediterraneo' (1851). 
In 1849 Hope executed a deed of gift giving his collections of fish, Crustacea, birds, shells, books, and 230,000 pictures to the University of Oxford. However, the original deed of gift was not accepted by convocation until April 1850, owing to almost continual, and at times frustrating, discussion between Hope and the university over the details. For many years afterwards both Hope and his wife (who shared his interest in natural history) continued to add entomological and other zoological specimens to the Oxford collections. In 1855, when construction of the new museum at Oxford was started (later the Oxford University Museum of Natural History), Hope was awarded the honorary degree of DCL by the university, no doubt in recognition of his generous donation. 
Hope was also keen to establish a new chair of zoology at Oxford. Negotiations had begun by 1856, and in 1860 endowment for the Hope professorship of zoology was agreed. In January 1861 John Obadiah Westwood was nominated by Hope and appointed as first Hope professor of zoology; in turn the Hope department of zoology was founded. Furthermore in 1857, in line with Hope's recommendations, Westwood took up the curatorship of the Hope entomological specimens. 
Hope's correspondence with naturalists was extensive, and his London residence was often used as their meeting-place. He often associated with Charles Darwin, with whom he would go 'entomologizing', and he contributed valuable information to the works of others, including Gravenhorst, Shuckard, and Schonberr. He was author of about sixty papers on entomology, chiefly in the Entomological Society's 'Transactions'. Hope's major work was probably 'The Coleopterist's Manual' (1837-40); his entomological collection also formed the basis of Westwood's catalogues of Hemiptera (1837-1842?), and lucanoid Coleoptera (1845). 
Hope was early elected a fellow of the Linnean Society (1822) and the Royal Society (1834), and took an active part in founding the Zoological and Entomological societies (1826 and 1833, respectively). He served as treasurer, then vice-president (1833-4, 1837-8, and 1841-3), of the Entomological Society, and was its president in 1835-6, 1839-40, and 1845-6. He also received many awards and honours from a number of institutions both at home and abroad. 
Hope died at his residence, 37 Upper Seymour Street, Portman Square in London, on 15 April 1862. In accordance with his wishes, his widow, Ellen, gave an additional endowment to the professorship which he had founded at Oxford, a stipend for the keeper of his collection of engravings, and further funding for maintaining and expanding the portrait and entomological collections. Hope's print collection later went to the university's Ashmolean Museum; in the late 1990s a vast number of his entomological specimens and archives could still be found in the Hope department at Oxford University's Museum of Natural History. 


@@@@@


doc= 13719


Hope, George (1811-1876), agriculturist, was born on 2 January 1811 at West Fenton, East Lothian, the second of the seven sons and a daughter of Robert Hope (died 1852), tenant farmer, and his second wife, Christian, 'nee' Bogue, daughter of a farmer of Stevenson Mains. The Hopes were descended from a Dutch officer who had come over with William of Orange and afterwards settled near Edinburgh. Robert Hope was a great reader and his children had access to more books, newspapers, and periodicals than was normally the case in a household impoverished by the low prices resulting from poor weather and the corn laws. From his earliest days George found himself opposed to the shorter catechism, which he failed to master at Dirleton and Haddington schools, preferring mathematics, and toryism, whose sentiments he encountered in 'Blackwood's Magazine'. 
Hope left school at fourteen to work for Alexander Donaldson, a lawyer, and attended classes in the evenings. After four years he was obliged to take over Fenton Barns (near Gullane, East Lothian), 653 acres previously farmed by his late half-brother, but he always considered his time with Donaldson to have been of great value. After two or three years he had the offer of a good situation in Australia, but he declined this as his mother was unwell and did not want him to leave the district. Fenton Barns was on heavy clay soil, which yielded a poor crop in good years and nothing worth harvesting in wet years. The remedy lay in under-drainage, but so costly a cure had to wait until money was available; meanwhile George Hope set about improving his land by means of crop rotation, assisted by generous applications of the new manure, Peruvian guano. Soon his yields increased and his livestock flourished. 
Hope found many influential men in Scotland and England who shared his strong unitarian and political opinions, and he counted Richard Cobden and John Bright among his friends. He supplemented his income by reviewing for 'The Scotsman', and his prize-winning essay opposing the corn laws was published in 1842; this brought him $30, and was inserted in whole or in part in many other newspapers. On 8 July 1844 Hope married Isabella Peterkin, daughter of an Edinburgh solicitor; they had several children, some of whom died in childhood from diphtheria and scarlet fever. 
Continuous manuring, the installation of land drains, and careful husbandry eventually brought Fenton Barns to prosperity and Hope even leased additional nearby land to cultivate. His fame spread, bringing visitors from the United States of America, Sweden, Denmark, and Russia. In 1870 he received a diploma constituting him a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Agriculture. He was one of the deputies of the Highland Society, taking livestock to the International Show in Paris, in June 1856. At home Hope opposed the game laws, which denied tenants the right to take game on their land. He was also against the Scottish law of hypothec, which allowed a landlord to distrain the produce of any tenant who failed to pay his rent, even when that produce had passed into other hands. 
Hope stood twice for parliament. In 1865 he contested East Lothian, where he lost to Lord Elcho, a candidate with local influence; in 1875 he contested East Aberdeenshire, where he was not well known, and where his outspoken and unorthodox religious opinions, along with his support for disestablishment, roused the clergy to a furious canvass against him. The seat was easily won by Sir Alexander Gordon, second son of the fourth earl of Aberdeen. Hope's stand for parliament cost him dear. Like all tenant farmers, he lacked security of tenure: in 1875 his lease at Fenton Barns was due to expire and his application to renew was refused. The news of the treatment meted out after the Hope family had transformed the sour land of Fenton Barns into one of Britain's model farms, admired across northern Europe, caused a sensation throughout the land, reaching even to the houses of parliament. George Hope took a new farm at Bordlands, near Noblehouse, Peeblesshire, and ran an outlying sheep farm at Glencotho, Lanarkshire. But although in the last summer of his life he managed to visit both Glencotho and his son's border farms, he grew weaker; and by the autumn he had lost all interest in his former concerns. He died at Bordlands on 1 December 1876 and was buried at Dirleton, East Lothian. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 13720


Hope, Sir Henry (1787-1863), naval officer, was the eldest son of Captain Charles Hope RN, who died commissioner at Chatham on 10 September 1808, and his wife, Susan Anne (died 1802), daughter of Admiral Herbert Sawyer. He was cousin of Sir William Johnstone Hope, and great-grandson of Charles Hope, first earl of Hopetoun. Hope entered the navy in 1800 on the 'Kent', commanded by his cousin, W. J. Hope. After serving off the Egyptian coast, he was moved into the 'Swiftsure' with Captain Hallowell, and was made prisoner when she was captured on 24 June 1801. He afterwards served in the 'Leda' on the Mediterranean and home stations, and in 1804 in the 'Atlas', again with his cousin, W. J. Hope. 
On 3 May 1804 Hope was promoted lieutenant of the 'Adamant'. In 1805, in the 'Narcissus', he was present at the capture of the Cape of Good Hope, and on 22 January 1806 was made commander and appointed to the sloop 'Espoir' in the Mediterranean. On 24 May 1808 he was posted to the 'Glatton', and afterwards commanded the frigates 'Leonidas', 'Topaze', and 'Salsette', all in the Mediterranean, cruising successfully against French privateers. During the latter half of 1811, in the 'Salsette', he was senior officer in the Greek archipelago, and at the request of Stratford Canning, the ambassador at Constantinople, on 29 November, drove on shore at Nauplia a French privateer which had taken refuge under the guns of the Turkish batteries. 
In May 1813 Hope was appointed to the 'Endymion' (48 guns); this was one of the few British frigates carrying 24-pounders, and it was thought it might contend on somewhat equal terms with the large American frigates. After eighteen months on the North American station, on the morning of 15 January 1815, she was in company with a small squadron under Captain John Hayes off Sandy Hook, New Jersey, when they sighted the American frigate 'President' (56 guns). The accident of position and her superior sailing enabled the 'Endymion' to bring her to action, while the other British ships were some distance astern. It was already dusk, and it seemed possible that the 'President' might escape in the dark. The 'Endymion', however, stuck closely to the fleeing enemy even though her own rigging was so cut that about nine o'clock she was obliged to drop astern to repair damages. By then the 'President' had received such damage that, on the 'Pomone' and 'Tenedos' coming up an hour later, she at once surrendered. To claim that the 'Endymion' took the 'President' single-handedly is an absurd exaggeration. Although her consorts had a very small share in the action, their close proximity, especially that of the 'Majestic', a cut-down 74-gun ship, terribly hampered the 'President''s manoeuvres and, by compelling her to defend herself in a running fight, enabled the 'Endymion' to take up a deadly position on her quarter. Otherwise the result might have been different: the 'Endymion' was smaller, less heavily armed, with a weaker crew; and, gallant officer and fine seaman as Hope was, Commodore Stephen Decatur, who commanded the 'President', also had a high reputation in the United States Navy. Despite this the victory, the first by a British force over one of the American super-frigates, was very welcome in Britain. Hope was the popular hero of the episode. The Admiralty gave him the gold medal, and the war medal to the 'Endymion' alone. The merchants of Bermuda presented Hope with a complimentary letter and a silver cup, and the officers with a second cup, 'to be considered as attached to that or any future ship which might bear the gallant name of 'Endymion''. In June 1815 Hope was nominated a CB, but he had no further service. 
Hope married, on 21 July 1828, his first cousin, Jane Sophia, youngest daughter of his mother's brother, Admiral Sir Herbert Sawyer KCB. There were no children, and she died in August 1829. Hope served as naval aide-de-camp to the sovereign from 1831 to 1841; he became rear-admiral in 1846, vice-admiral on 2 April 1853, KCB on 5 July 1855, and admiral on 20 January 1858. He died at Holly Hill, Southampton, on 23 September 1863. Hope left personal property valued at under $70,000, of which he bequeathed nearly half to religious and charitable societies, including $4000 each to the Church Missionary Society, the Bible Society, and the London City Mission. 
The capture of the 'President' was deemed an event worthy of celebration; the 'Endymion' was rebuilt and remained in service until 1860, while a replica of the 'President' was added to the navy list. Both ships were frequently sent to the North American station as talismans. Hope was also a talisman, although he had a large fortune, and chose not to go to sea again; his contemporaries believed he had won 'perpetual fame' (O'Byrne, 438). 


@@@@@


doc= 13721


Henry Philip Hope (1774-1839), art collector, was the youngest son of John Hope and his wife, Philippina Barbara van der Hoeven. He was born in Amsterdam and educated privately at home; he probably spent some time in Brunswick with his governor before studying at Leiden University. At fifteen he was described as 'the angel of the family -- an excellent heart and amiable disposition' (Ingram, 428). He was in Rome between 1795 and 1796 with his two brothers. He visited Pacetti's studio where he purchased some antiquities, a group of 'Bacchus and Hope', and a 'Hermaphrodite'. Henry returned to Italy between 1796 and 1798, when he visited a number of northern cities, Naples and Rome. He was in London for the sales of the Orleans collection of paintings where he purchased approximately seven paintings to the value of $2500. He became a member of the Society of Dilettanti in 1807. 


@@@@@


doc= 13722


Hope, Sir James, of Hopetoun, appointed Lord Hopetoun under the protectorate (1614-1661), industrialist and political radical, was born on 4 July 1614, the youngest of six sons (of whom four survived to adulthood) of Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall, lord advocate (1573-1646), and Elizabeth (died 1660), daughter of John Bennet of Wallyford, Haddingtonshire. Sir John Hope and Sir Thomas Hope of Kerse were his brothers. Entering Edinburgh University in 1632, he graduated on 25 July 1635 and continued his studies in law at Orleans from February 1636 to October 1637. On 14 January 1638 he married Anna (died 1656), daughter of the wealthy Edinburgh merchant and goldsmith Robert Foulis, an heiress through whom he acquired several mining properties in Lanarkshire commonly known as the Leadhills. Hope's mercantile concerns were extensive. He had an abiding interest in mining, trade, shipping, and technology, in many ways anticipating the improvers of the eighteenth century: extensive material survives at Hopetoun House detailing his business interests, including contracts (usually to supply lead ore to Holland), bonds, directives to his factors about building and draining mines, mending the highway leading from the mines to port, and a strikingly wide range of titles, assignations, discharges, translations, declarations, and investments. Given his expertise in metals and technology, it is hardly surprising that the covenanting government appointed him master of the mint in 1641. That year he was also knighted. 
Like his father and most of his brothers, Hope was deeply religious and an active participant in the covenanting revolution, but by the late 1640s an apocalyptic spirituality led him and his elder brother John to expectations of far-reaching reform. Both eventually became republicans and ardent supporters of the British Commonwealth that emerged in 1652. James Hope has the unique distinction of being part of what can only be called the 'left opposition' in the most radical parliament in Scottish history (the Whiggamores Parliament of 1649) where he became 'persona non grata', and shortly thereafter a member of the 'left opposition' within the most radical parliament in English history (Barebone's Parliament of 1653), from which he was ejected at gunpoint. In both parliaments he served on the centrally important law reform committees. He was directly involved in the administration of the state in both countries, serving on the committee of estates in Scotland, on the council of state in England. 
Between 1649 and 1651 both Hopes opposed Scotland's treaty with Charles II, foreseeing rightly that it would lead to a disastrous war with the new English republic. They repeatedly urged the marquess of Argyll and Charles to come to terms with the London government, proposals that very nearly landed the brothers in gaol. Argyll denounced Hope as 'a maine enemie to king and kingdom' and a 'plotter and contriver, assister and abettor of all the mischiefs that hes befallen the kingdom', while Charles subsequently threatened to hang the brothers from the other end of the same rope by which he would hang Oliver Cromwell ('Historical Works of Balfour', 4.173). 
It is against this background of self-deception and the political catastrophe deriving from it, that in late December 1651 Hope and John Swinton of Swinton agreed to join John Hope at Craighall, his home in Fife, to consider a new beginning for Scotland. On 1 January 1652 they were joined by major-generals John Lambert and Richard Deane and other leading English officers for 'consultations about politique affairs'. It is unfortunate and yet not altogether surprising that the extensive entry in Hope's diary about the Craighall meeting has been mutilated, but it is likely that the matters discussed ranged from the practical (the surrender of Dumbarton Castle which was commanded by Hope's brother-in-law Sir Charles Erskine of Alvath), to the establishment of a new structure of government within Scotland, the tender for union, and the larger aspirations and apocalyptic hopes which all of these people shared (Firth, 'Scotland and the Commonwealth', 30, 43). 
In May 1653 Hope joined his brother on the commission of justice for Scotland -- the republic's equivalent to the court of session, the members of which were addressed in the manner of the lords of session. Cromwell, who had met Hope during the Scottish campaign, also wanted him in the new 'British' assembly which would now replace the Long Parliament. Hope arrived in London just in time for its opening on 4 July. Shortly thereafter he made what has been described as a 'speech for the Jews' -- undoubtedly a plea for Jewish readmission into the newly emerging Britain. His remarks clearly spoke to the universal reconciliation expected at the 'end of days' and provide an indication of his apocalyptic hopes. Such a speech fitted the mood in Barebone's Parliament and must have shared much with Cromwell's well-known and highly prophetic address to it. It is not surprising then that Hope joined the council of state ten days later. The only Scot on the council and with unique legal expertise, he served, effectively, as the secretary of state for Scotland. 
In addition to serving on the controversial committee to codify the law, Hope was extremely active in a broad spectrum of the Commonwealth's administrative matters, ranging from military supply to censorship, mental health, legal procedures, and specialist Scottish business. He and his three Scottish colleagues were inevitably concerned to introduce emergency measures to repair the shattered Scottish economy and 'the destitute conditione' of the Scottish people ('CSP dom.'). In all of this there was the central preoccupation of a new Scotland within a new world, and an act of union would naturally be all important. Inescapably, the debates about the Anglo-Scottish union would be protracted and complex, and, as he noted to Erskine on 24 September, he did not expect a bill to emerge before December, if then (Erskine-Murray MSS, 5155, fol. 151). Such devotion to duty went well beyond the standards of seventeenth-century parliaments; like more radical members (and in contrast to traditional attitudes), Hope appears to have viewed his office as a public trust rather than as property. 
Similarly Hope appears to have associated himself consistently with far-reaching reform: he was personally and presumably politically attracted to the Kent radical Thomas St Nicholas. On 1 November 1653 both failed to secure re-election to the council as a result of their radicalism. In the parliament's famous final division, the Scottish votes made the difference (three radicals, one conservative), a circumstance which inevitably provoked considerable comment. In contrast with that of his three colleagues, the forcible dissolution of parliament forever ended Hope's public career. He apparently had a confrontation with Cromwell on the matter, so spectacular that he was immediately disgraced and discharged from all public office. As he commented in a private petition to the protector two years later, he had hoped to find 'in my private statione a hydeing place untill the indignation should be overpast' (Hopetoun House, Linlithgow MSS, bundle 648). More important, as with so many people in Britain, the failure of this parliament had cooled his prophetic vision and qualified his hopes: incremental improvement, not revolution; 'present dispensations', not a new heaven, a new earth. Probably as much as anyone Hope embodies the disappointments and transvaluations of the 'British revolution'. He now focused his formidable energies into commercial and industrial activity, and his concern with government was limited to personal matters: securing his family's traditional immunities from lead ore export duties and acquiring government support for new mining ventures. Mineral discoveries at home might compensate for the failure of the republic's 'Western Design' at Hispaniola. 
Hope was a respected and apparently a genuinely likeable man -- even Cromwell continued to like him. His old colleague John Swinton let him know in 1657 that no less a figure than Major-General Lambert had regretted his removal from public office. Not surprisingly, Hope's name came up from time to time as a possible appointment to the Scottish commission -- only to be specifically rejected in 1655 by the president of the new Scottish council, the conservative Lord Broghill. By this time Hope avowed he had 'no scruple to serve under this or any other power whatsoever in such publict imployments', an outlook a long way from his earlier stance. Regarded by English republicans as 'a knowne Commonwealthes man', in March 1660 Hope was at last appointed once again to the commission, but neither he nor his fellow appointees ever actually served the rapidly disintegrating regime (Firth, 'Scotland and the Protectorate', 385). 
His first wife having died in 1656, Hope had married on 29 October 1657 Lady Mary, eldest daughter of William Keith, sixth Earl Marischal. On 23 November 1661 he died at the Granton home of his elder brother Alexander from a fever contracted during a trip to Holland, and was buried at Cramond church. His second wife survived him, and his son John (1650-1682) succeeded to the Hopetoun estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 13723


Johnstone, James Hope-, third earl of Hopetoun and 'de jure' fifth earl of Annandale and Hartfell (1741-1816), landowner and army officer, was born James Hope on 23 August 1741 at Hopetoun House, Linlithgowshire, the second son and fourth child of John Hope, second earl of Hopetoun (1704-1781), and his first wife, Anne Ogilvy (1717-1759), second daughter of James, fifth earl of Findlater and second earl of Seafield. He was educated at home by his tutors John Ritchie and John Tainsh. Commissioned as ensign in the 3rd regiment of foot guards in 1758, he fought at the battle of Minden in 1759. From 1762 to 1766 he travelled with his ailing brother Charles, Lord Hope, around Europe, including Italy, and then to Carolina and Jamaica. Charles died in 1766, after which Hope took the courtesy title Lord Hope. On 25 August 1766 he married Lady Elizabeth Carnegie (1750-1793), daughter of George, sixth earl of Northesk. Together they had six daughters. 
During the 1760s and 1770s Hope spent his time managing his father's estates, attending to his family's education, and preparing for a political career. His family was often ill, and this placed Hope in frequent contact with the famed botanist Dr John Hope (1725-1786), who was both a relative and the family physician. Hope succeeded to the earldom on his father's death in 1781 and was soon nicknamed 'the Improving Earl' for his efforts to increase the economic potential of his land. He was duly elected vice-president of the Highland Society of Scotland in 1791. His lead mines in Leadhills, Lanarkshire, were arguably the largest in Scotland and attracted the mineralogical interest of naturalists like Thomas Pennant, R. E. Raspe, and John Walker (1731-1803). Likewise, Hopetoun made donations to Edinburgh University's natural history museum and was involved in the politics surrounding the foundation of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1783. 
From 1784 to 1790 Hopetoun served as a Scottish representative peer. He was an independent voter, opposing the 1788 'Regency Bill' and arguing against the taxation of Scottish distilleries. On 18 May 1787 Hopetoun successfully introduced a motion to reaffirm the 'Scottish Peerage Bill' of 1709 -- effectively limiting the power of the government by preventing Scottish peers with British titles from being representative Scottish peers. He was not re-elected in 1790 and, along with several other Scottish peers including Dunbar Douglas, fourth earl of Selkirk, unsuccessfully contested the election. In 1792, upon the death of his maternal great-uncle George Johnstone, third marquess of Annandale, who had been declared a lunatic by chancery in 1748, he inherited a $12,000 p.a. estate. Hopetoun took the additional surname of Johnstone and in 1795 proceeded to claim the earldom of Annandale and Hartfell, a subsidiary title of his great-uncle, as senior heir female of the first earl. His claim was unsuccessful but began a series of attempts to secure the peerage by his descendants over the next 190 years; this ended in 1985 when his great-great-great-great-grandson, Patrick Hope Johnstone, was recognized as eleventh earl. Hopetoun's wife died on 19 August 1793. In that year he raised and commanded the Hopetoun fencibles, one of seven Scottish home regiments commissioned by George III in response to the French Revolutionary Wars. The fencibles served in both Scotland and England and, at one point, refused to be transported in ships for fear of being sent to the continent. In 1794 Hopetoun was made lord lieutenant of Linlithgowshire, raised both a yeomanry corps and a volunteer infantry regiment, and was re-elected to the House of Lords, where he served until 1796. The fencibles were disembodied in 1798, but Hopetoun's collective military efforts won him the British title of Baron Hopetoun in 1803. 
After leaving parliament, Hopetoun concentrated on Scottish politics, where he used his influence in Linlithgowshire to ensure that Henry Erskine failed to be elected there in 1806 and 1807, Erskine finally withdrawing in 1812. He spent the last years of his life as an invalid and died at Hopetoun House on 29 May 1816; he was buried on 5 June 1816 at Abercorn kirk. During his life, Hopetoun was known as a religious man, and it was appropriate that Hugh Meiklejohn, Edinburgh's professor of church history, gave his funeral address. His half-brother John Hope, Baron Niddry, inherited the British barony and Scottish earldom of Hopetoun. Hopetoun's only surviving child, Anne (1768-1818), who had married Admiral Sir William Johnstone Hope in 1792, inherited Hopetoun's Annandale estates and his claim to the earldom of Annandale and Hartfell. 


@@@@@


doc= 13724


Hope, James (1801-1841), physician and cardiologist, was born at Stockport, Cheshire, on 23 February 1801, son of Thomas and Ann Hope. His father was a wealthy merchant and manufacturer. After attending Macclesfield grammar school from 1815 to 1818 Hope entered Edinburgh University in 1820, received his medical degree in 1825, and immediately spent some months at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London, whence he obtained a year later the diploma of the Royal College of Surgeons. This was followed by a year at La Charite in Paris as a clinical clerk of M. Chomel. He subsequently spent another year on a medical tour of the continent, visiting Switzerland, Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands. Having returned to England in 1828 he rapidly established himself in practice in the fashionable part of London, at 13 Lower Seymour Street, Portman Square. At the same time he continued his studies as a pupil at St George's Hospital and passed with ease the Royal College of Physicians examinations as a licentiate. Having learned of the value of Laennec's discovery of auscultation while in Paris, Hope championed its use from his very first days in practice. His acute hearing and aptitude for discerning the nuances of musical tones and rhythms worked to his advantage in the new art of auscultation. 
Hope's interests encompassed the exciting and rapidly developing elements of physical diagnosis, clinicopathological correlations, and a pathophysiological approach to clinical diagnosis. What Laennec did for the clinical diagnosis of pulmonary disease, Hope did for diseases of the heart and aorta. 
Hope's doctoral thesis, 'Aneurism of the aorta', contained illustrations and descriptions rivalling those of Scarpa in scope and accuracy of anatomical details. While engaged as house physician and house surgeon to the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, he completed in 1829 four papers on aneurisms of the aorta for publication in the 'London Medical Gazette', based on his personal observations. The same journal published a year later four more papers dealing chiefly with the sounds of the heart and their physiological basis. On 10 March 1831 he married Anne (1809-1887) ['see 'Hope, Anne], the well-educated daughter of John Williamson Fulton, a prosperous merchant then of Harley Street, London, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Robertson. 
Meanwhile Hope was busy with his own private dispensary. He also discharged his duties as physician to the Marylebone Infirmary where, from 1831, he was in charge of ninety beds, and gave lectures in his home, at St George's Hospital, where he was assistant physician from 1834, and at the Aldersgate Street school of medicine. Despite this heavy load, which eventually took a toll on his health, he managed to publish during 1833 and the following year his 'Principles and Illustrations of Morbid Anatomy'. It is ironic that this great physician, who described so well so many anatomical abnormalities, had a marked aversion to dissection, but through unremitting discipline made dissection part of his daily routine. 
Hope was the first accurately to time the first and second heart sounds. His report that the second sound was related to the closure of the aortic and pulmonic valves antedated phonocardiographic and electrocardiographic evidence. Hope's continuing investigations into the cause of heart sounds involved vivisection, which led to a controversy in 1835 with C. J. B. Williams. Four years later this controversy erupted into opposition, albeit briefly, on the part of Williams towards the appointment of Hope as full physician at St George's Hospital. From this time on Hope's health declined dramatically owing to consumption, until he was unable finally to fulfil his duties. 
Hope was well aware of the different physiological pathways for the development of myocardial dilatation or hypertrophy. He agreed with his contemporaries that a stenosed valve caused thickening of the muscle because of the increased force needed to drive the blood through the constricted orifice, while a valve that leaked during diastole brought about a softening of the muscle wall due to volume overload and the wall's stretching, with a resultant dilatation of the chamber. However, he was unaware that a common cause of hypertrophy was systemic hypertension. He introduced semantic confusion with the term 'myosclerosis'. Acknowledging it as another cause of myocardial enlargement, he failed to delineate precisely what the term meant or what its aetiology was. 
Hope's most important contribution was probably his tome on cardiovascular physiology and clinicopathological correlations. Published initially in 1832 it was entitled 'A treatise on the diseases of the heart and great vessels, comprising a new view of the heart's action'. It was widely acclaimed and went through three editions during his lifetime. A fourth edition was published eight years after his death in a much reduced form and without the highly valued plates of the previous editions. The treatise was based on a thousand cases, and is a good example of how systematic clinical observation can be used to further the understanding of pathophysiology. Of note was the detailed information on acute pericarditis and inflammatory pericardial effusion and the association of both with rheumatic fever. He also emphasized that mitral stenosis was often associated with an irregular pulse. The text described in detail the volume and contour of the arterial pulse in the presence of other valvular lesions, and outlined the quantitative relationship between the aortic and mitral lesions and pulse volume. Corrigan's classic account of the rapid pulse of aortic insufficiency was anticipated by Hope. He was also the first to note the early diastolic pulmonary murmur heard in association with pulmonary hypertension, later called the Graham-Steell murmur. At one time this murmur carried the eponym of Hope. He antedated apex cardiography with his excellent descriptions of precordial movements in the presence of aortic aneurism as well as in a number of cardiac abnormalities. Hope also described the employment of the fingers as a pleximeter in percussion of the chest, considering it superior to all other methods; his method is still in use today. Finally, the treatise contained a clear presentation of the materia medica favoured in the treatment of heart disease at the time. However, he followed the blood-letting practice of the age. 
Hope was elected FRS in 1832; he was also a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and a corresponding member of several foreign societies. His non-cardiological publications included 'Inflammation of the Brain', which appeared in Tweedie's 'Library of Medicine', and 'Notes on the Treatment of Chronic Pleurisy', which he finished just four days before his death, on 13 May 1841 at Clare House, Hampstead, from pulmonary tuberculosis. He was buried at Highgate cemetery. His widow wrote a memoir that went through four editions. Sir Theodore Cracraft Hope (1831-1915) was their only surviving child. 


@@@@@


doc= 13725


Hope, James (1764-1847), United Irishman, son of a fugitive highland covenanter who had settled in the north of Ireland as a linen weaver, was born in the parish of Templepatrick, co. Antrim, on 25 August 1764. With only fifteen weeks of formal schooling, he was apprenticed to linen weaving at the age of ten. In due time he became a journeyman weaver. The commercial distress prevalent in the north of Ireland, as a result of the American War of Independence, convinced Hope that the fundamental question of the time was social rather than political, and only to be solved by restoring to the people 'their natural right of deriving a subsistence from the soil on which their labour was expended'. But it was the religious feuds between the Peep-o'-Day Boys and the Defenders, nowhere more bitter than in his own neighbourhood, that first seriously attracted his attention to politics. He threw himself with enthusiasm into the movement for a union between the Roman Catholics and Presbyterians, aimed at an extension of civil and religious freedom among all classes of the community, and he became a member of the Roughford volunteer corps, and at a later period a member of the Mallusk Society of United Irishmen. On the reconstruction of the United Irish Society in 1795, he consented, though reluctantly, to take the oath of secrecy and fidelity, and was appointed a delegate to the upper baronial committee of Belfast. 
Firmly in the confidence of United Irish leaders such as Henry Joy McCracken and Thomas Russell, Hope's chief role in the society was as a messenger and organizer, extending the movement outside Ulster. In the spring of 1796 he was sent to Dublin to spread the principles of the society among the workers of the capital. For a time he lived at Balbriggan, working as a silk weaver; but his motives were suspected by the Orangemen in the factory, and he moved to Dublin, to work in the liberties as a cotton weaver. Here he managed to found a branch society, but when he was suspected of being a castle spy, he narrowly escaped assassination, and returned to Belfast. On the outbreak of the rebellion in Ulster in 1798 he remained true to his principles, and took part in the battle of Antrim (7 June). After lurking about in the neighbourhood of Ballymena and Belfast for four months, he made his way undetected to Dublin in November 1798. Here he was joined in the following summer by his family; but for four years he lived in continual expectation of being arrested. While in Dublin he became acquainted with Robert Emmet in 1803, and assisted him in his plot, but he took no part in the insurrection, being at the time engaged with Russell in organizing a rising in co. Down. After the failure of Emmet's rebellion he avoided arrest, and on the political amnesty that followed the death of Pitt and the accession to office of Fox and Grenville in 1806, he returned to Belfast, and resumed his work as a linen weaver. For a time he was employed by Mary Ann McCracken, the sister of Henry Joy McCracken, and later as a clerk for Joseph Smyth, publisher of the 'Belfast Almanac'. In 1843 he wrote his memoirs at the request of R. R. Madden. 
Hope was of medium height, slightly but firmly built, and of a modest and retiring disposition, known among his comrades as the Spartan. He married the daughter of his first employer, Rose Mullen, who died in 1831, after bearing four children. He died in Belfast in 1847 and was buried at Mallusk, co. Down. 
Hope's 'Memoirs', printed in Madden's 'United Irishmen', provide a rare testament to the social radicalism and expectations of lower-class supporters of the United Irish movement. A persistent theme is the betrayal of the rank-and-file members by timid but opportunistic middle-class leaders. His firsthand account of the battle of Antrim appears in Madden's chapter on Henry Joy McCracken. 


@@@@@


doc= 13726


Hope, Sir James (1808-1881), naval officer, born on 3 March 1808, was the son of Rear-Admiral Sir George Johnstone Hope (1767-1818), who as a captain commanded the 'Defence' at Trafalgar, and his first wife, Lady Jemima Hope Johnstone, fifth daughter of James Hope Johnstone, third earl of Hopetoun. Admiral Sir Henry Hope (1787-1863) was James Hope's first cousin. In August 1820 Hope entered the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth, and in June 1822 was appointed to the frigate 'Forte' going out to the West Indies; afterwards he served in the 'Cambrian' in the Mediterranean and was promoted lieutenant on 9 March 1827. On 16 September he was appointed to the 'Maidstone', but a fortnight later was transferred to the 'Undaunted', which carried Lord William Bentinck out to India as governor-general. In August 1829 Hope was appointed flag lieutenant to the earl of Northesk, then commander-in-chief at Plymouth, and on 26 February 1830 he was promoted commander. From 1833 to 1838 he commanded the 'Racer' on the North America and West Indies station and was posted on 28 June 1838. On 16 August 1838 he married the Hon. Frederica Kinnaird, daughter of Charles Kinnaird, eighth Lord Kinnaird; the couple had no children. In December 1844 he commissioned the steam frigate 'Firebrand' for service on the South American station, and on 20 November 1845 played a prominent part in the engagement with the batteries at Obligado on the River Parana in Argentina. Hope was nominated a CB on 3 April 1846. During the Crimean War from 1854 to 1856 he commanded the 'Majestic' in the Baltic, but without opportunity of personal distinction. On 19 November 1857 he attained the rank of rear-admiral. In March 1859 he was appointed commander-in-chief in China and on 16 April reached Singapore, where he relieved Sir Michael Seymour. 
The Second Opium War had formally ended in a treaty signed at Tientsin (Tianjin) on 26 June 1858, the ratifications of which were to be exchanged at Peking (Beijing) within a year. It was, however, rumoured at Shanghai that the British and French ministers would not be permitted to go to Peking. On 17 June 1859 the 'Chesapeake', flying Hope's flag, anchored in the Po Hai (Bohai), and Hope went at once in the gunboat 'Plover' to the mouth of the Peiho (Beihe) to inform the governor of the forts of the ambassadors' approach and to see for himself what the passage was like. He found that it was blocked and the forts guarding it strengthened. On 19 June the allied ministers arrived off the bar of the Peiho, but as the obstructions prevented their passing up the river, and they were told to go to the Pehtang (Beitang), 9 miles further north, contrary as they thought to the terms of the treaty, they formally requested Hope to clear the way for them. This accordingly he undertook to do, and on 25 June he attempted, and failed, to force the passage. The Chinese defended resolutely. Three British ships were sunk and more disabled; 89 men were killed and 345 wounded, including Hope, who was seriously injured. It was a significant rebuff to British arms. 
This repulse of British forces gave rise to the allegation that they were treacherously attacked, and that the guns were manned by Europeans -- Russians more especially -- or Americans. Such allegations were unfounded: for even admitting that the attack was a violation of the treaty, it was understood by Hope that the treaty was to be violated; and he approached the boom knowing that he would have to fight his way. The passage which Hope tried to force had been forced by Seymour only the year before; and it had often been pointed out that to attack the Chinese forces twice in the same way on the same ground was likely to lead to serious fighting. Despite the tactical error, which led the prime minister, Lord Palmerston, to doubt his suitability for such a high command, Hope's exploits aroused great popular enthusiasm in Britain. It was decided that the treaty must be ratified at Peking, and a strong military expedition was sent out by the allied powers. Hope had meantime gone to the vicinity of Ningpo (Ningbo), where he remained to revive his health. In 1860 he oversaw local transport arrangements, and by the end of June the troops were landed at the mouth of the Pehtang. By 1 August all was ready for the advance. On 20 September they attacked and stormed the fort on the north side of the Peiho. When that was captured the southern forts were at once evacuated, the obstacles were removed from the mouth of the river, and on the 23rd Hope went up to Tientsin, where he for the most part remained until the treaty was signed at Peking on 24 October. On 9 November 1860 he was nominated a KCB and in the following year received the grand cross of the Legion d'honneur. In the spring of 1862 he co-operated with the Chinese imperial troops under Ward, the American general, in driving back the Taipings from the areas near Shanghai and Ningpo. Several of their positions were taken by storm, and on different occasions there was severe though irregular fighting during which Hope was wounded by a musket shot. The situation was still very unsettled when, in the autumn, he was relieved by Rear-Admiral Kuper. 
Despite reservations about his diplomatic skills, towards the end of 1863 Hope was appointed commander-in-chief in North America and the West Indies, where the American Civil War was still raging. His command there was uneventful. He became vice-admiral on 16 September 1864, GCB on 28 March 1865, and returned to England in spring 1867. From 1869 to 1872 he was commander-in-chief at Portsmouth and was thus, in October 1870, called on to preside at the court martial which inquired into the loss of the 'Captain'. He became admiral on 21 January 1870; was appointed principal aide-de-camp in February 1873; was retired, on reaching seventy, in March 1878; and on 15 June 1879 was advanced to the honorary rank of admiral of the fleet. In 1877 he married his second wife, Elizabeth Reid Cotton, daughter of General Sir A. Cotton; she survived him. During his later years his health was poor, and he lived in comparative retirement. He died, childless, at his home, Carriden House, Bo'ness, Linlithgowshire, on 9 June 1881. Hope was an officer of great personal courage but lacked the intellectual and diplomatic skills required for high command. 


@@@@@


doc= 13727


Hope, Sir James Archibald (1785-1871), army officer, was the son of Lieutenant-Colonel Erskine Hope, 26th (Cameronians) regiment, and great-grandson of Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall, Fife, eighth baronet. In January 1800 he was appointed ensign in the 26th (Cameronians), then at Halifax, Nova Scotia, of which his father was junior major. He became lieutenant in the regiment in 1801 and captain in 1805. He served with his regiment in Hanover in 1805-6, was a deputy assistant adjutant-general under Lord Cathcart at Copenhagen in 1807, and was on the staff of Sir John Hope, later fourth earl of Hopetoun, in Sweden in 1808, in Spain in 1808-9 (including the battle of Corunna), and with the Walcheren expedition. He was aide-de-camp to General Thomas Graham at Barossa, and brought home the dispatches and the 'eagle' captured by the 87th regiment. He was afterwards with Graham at Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz. 
When Graham went home on sick leave during Wellington's advance against the forts of Salamanca, Hope was appointed an assistant adjutant-general, and he was present at Salamanca, Burgos, Vitoria, San Sebastian, and the passage of the Bidassoa. He was afterwards selected to act as assistant adjutant-general and military secretary to Marshal Beresford, who was in command of an army corps. With this corps Hope saw the later campaigns, including the battle of the Nivelle, Nive, Orthez, and Toulouse. He was made a brevet major in March 1811 and lieutenant-colonel in January 1813, and was promoted on 25 July 1814 from the Cameronians to captain and lieutenant-colonel 3rd foot guards. In that regiment he served twenty-five years, retiring on half pay unattached on 1 November 1839. He became brevet colonel in 1830 and major-general in 1841, and was employed as major-general on the staff in Lower Canada, 1841-7; he was appointed colonel in the 9th regiment in 1848, becoming lieutenant-general in 1851 and general in 1859. 
Hope was a GCB, and had the Peninsular gold cross and clasp for Vitoria, Nivelle, Nive, Orthez, and Toulouse. He was married, and had three children. He died at his residence, Balgowan House, Pittville, Cheltenham, on 30 December 1871, aged eighty-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 13728


Hope, Sir John, Lord Craighall (1603x5-1654), advocate, was the eldest son of Thomas, later Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall, Fife (1573-1646), lord advocate, and Elizabeth (died 1660), daughter of John Bennet of Wallyford, near Haddington; Sir Thomas Hope (1606-1643) and Sir James Hope (1614-1661) were his younger brothers. He was educated for the law, and rapidly acquired a thriving practice. In 1632 Hope was knighted and appointed an ordinary lord of session, assuming the title of Lord Craighall, and taking his seat on 27 July. He married Margaret, daughter of Sir Archibald Murray of Blackbarony, in the same year. The couple had two sons and six daughters. 
In common with his father, Craighall was sympathetic to the aims of the national covenant. He was a close associate of Archibald Johnston of Wariston (a leader of the covenanting movement, and lord advocate in 1646), who attended the baptism of his daughter Helen in June 1638. In September, Craighall refused to subscribe Charles I's alternative king's covenant, unless the general assembly approved the document. In 1640 he was a member of the committee of estates charged with the defence of the kingdom against Charles, and in 1641 was reappointed ordinary lord of session. Craighall was one of the commissioners for the visitation of St Andrews in 1644 (at which date he succeeded his brother Sir Thomas Hope of Kerse as a commissioner for the plantation of kirks), and was appointed to the privy council in 1645. 
Latterly, Craighall joined the Cromwellian administration of Scotland, and was reputedly of the opinion that Charles II ought 'to treat with Cromwell for the one halff of his cloake before he lost the whole' (Anderson, 'Scot. nat.', 2.490). In May 1652 he was one of eight commissioners appointed by the new regime to manage Scottish affairs. The appointment caused a rift with his former colleague Johnston of Wariston, who wrote that Craighall gained little 'comfort' from his employment, 'which he took to provyde his children, [but] in al apearance hes lost mor be the superiorities [than] gotten be his fees'. Indeed, he noted, the family 'looked very ruynous' by 1654. Nevertheless, on hearing of Craighall's 'fayling and wearying away' of a violent 'seaknesse' Wariston joined a 'great multitude about [his old friend's] bed' in Edinburgh ('Diary of Sir Archibald Johnston', ed. Fleming, 167, 240-43). Craighall died, at 'about midnight', on 28 April 1654, and was survived by his wife. 
Their second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 13729


Hope, John (1739-1785), writer and politician, was born on 7 April 1739, the second son of Charles Hope (afterwards Hope-Vere) and Catherine Weir, and grandson of Charles Hope, first earl of Hopetoun. He was educated at the Revd Andrew Kinross's academy at Enfield, Middlesex, and was sent to Holland in 1752 to learn business with distant kinsmen, the Hopes of Amsterdam. He returned in 1759 and engaged in mercantile pursuits in London, apparently with no great success. On 2 June 1762 Hope married Mary (1741/2-1767), only daughter of Eliab Breton of Forty Hill, Middlesex. Mary committed suicide at Brockhall, Northamptonshire, on 25 June 1767, at the age of twenty-five, and was buried nearby at Norton. Her husband erected a monument with a rhyming epitaph to her memory in the south transept of Westminster Abbey (Neale, 2.257). Their three sons, Charles Hope (1763-1851), John Hope (1765-1836), afterwards knighted; and William Johnstone Hope (1766-1831), also afterwards knighted, are separately noticed. 
In 1768 Hope was chosen by the influence of his uncle, John Hope, second earl of Hopetoun, to succeed his father as MP for Linlithgowshire. The earl allowed him an annuity of $400 to defray his expenses. In 1770 he was unseated on the petition of his opponent, James Dundas. He had lost favour, both with his patron and with the majority of the House of Commons, for his equivocal support for the government in the Wilkes affair. This was demonstrated by his voting for Wilkes on the question of the Middlesex election on 8 May 1769, and to this he attributed the loss of his seat. 'It was chiefly in your cause I suffered', he wrote to Wilkes (letter to John Wilkes, BL, Add. MS 30871, fol. 132). 
The majority of Hope's writing appeared in print after the end of his political career -- although his first book of poetry and his first contributions to periodicals are dated as early as 1769. He wrote on a variety of contemporary issues in a wide range of genres, but was primarily an essayist and a poet. Almost all of Hope's work originally appeared unsigned, under his initials, or pseudonymously, in popular periodicals of the day -- in the 'Public Advertiser' (1769-72), 'Town and Country Magazine' (1769-84), 'Westminster Magazine' (1773-81, under the name The Leveller), and the 'Lady's Magazine' (1776-8). Some of these contributions he later reprinted under his own name in his 'Thoughts in Prose and Verse Started in his Walks' (1780). Pitcher notes, however, that Hope 'contributed more to the magazines than he cared to preserve' and attributes to him the anonymously published satire 'Sketches from Nature in High Preservation' (1779) ('N&Q', new ser., 45/1, 1998, 77-81). In this work, which went through fourteen editions in its first year in print, a sketch of 'John H -- e, esq.' appears in two scenes, representing 'Patience' and 'Paul Writing to the Ephesians and Philippians, while Prisoner at Rome'. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' also credits Hope with the authorship of the 'New Margate Guide' (1780). Hope died on 21 May 1785 at Newcastle upon Tyne of a 'mortification in his bowels' ('GM', 1st ser., 55/2, 1785, 665). 


@@@@@


doc= 13730


Hope, John (1725-1786), physician and botanist, was born in Edinburgh on 10 May 1725, the son of Robert Hope (died 1742), surgeon, and Marion Glass of Sauchie, Stirlingshire, and grandson of Archibald Hope, Lord Rankeillor (1639-1706), judge of session. He was educated locally and from the age of about fifteen read medicine, partly under Charles Alston at Edinburgh University, and about 1748-9 in Paris, where he studied botany under Bernard de Jussieu at the Jardin du Roi. In 1750 he was awarded MD at Glasgow University and, in 1762, elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. He married Juliana, daughter of John Stevenson, later professor of physic at Glasgow, on 28 February 1760. They lived close to the junction of High School Yards and High School Wynd. Hope practised medicine in Edinburgh, being appointed a physician to the Royal Infirmary and, in 1784, became president of the college. He was active in inducing the town council to improve the sanitation of the city and became a governor of the Orphan College, a member of the university senate and a foundation fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He was a member of the Hollandsche Maatschappij der Wetenschappen, Haarlem, and was elected FRS 1767. 
With David Hume, Adam Smith, and others, Hope was a founder, in 1754, of the Select Society, inaugurated by Allan Ramsay: his intellectual passion was botany. In 1761 he was appointed Alston's successor as professor of botany and materia medica and also king's botanist for Scotland and superintendent of the royal garden in Edinburgh. In the winter sessions he lectured on materia medica, in the summer on botany, being, with Thomas Martyn at Cambridge, the first in Britain to teach the Linnaean system. After seven years he persuaded the council to divide his duties between two professors, so that he gave up the former and was appointed regius professor of medicine and botany in 1768. Besides medical income, he was earning some $300 (sterling) a year -- from course fees, the chair ($77), and the garden post ($50), now assured for life. 
Hope established a botanical garden to replace the polluted Royal Abbey Garden and the Town Garden at Trinity Hospital, which was on swampy ground (now Waverley Station). He moved the rarer plants to a 5 acre site with poor but varied soil north of Leith Walk, receiving grants from the Treasury in 1763, 1774, and, with the lobbying of Joseph Banks, 1781. This garden (now the Royal Botanic Garden) was not merely for the demonstration of materia medica but had greenhouses, ponds, and groves and, as in Paris, was arranged on botanical rather than medical principles. He introduced uniform Linnaean nomenclature ahead of Paris and, in 1779, at his own expense, set up to Robert Adam's design a monument to Linnaeus. In 1763-4 he organized the first British syndicate for importing plant material, especially from North America, where its first collector was John Bartram of Philadelphia, who had been recommended by Benjamin Franklin; in 1766 Hope toured English gardens to gather more. He was particularly concerned to introduce the medicinal Chinese rhubarb ('Rheum palmatum') and asafoetida ('Ferula persica'), publishing on these topics, if little else, though he intended to prepare a Scottish flora with the help of his students. Hope advised Banks on botanists, notably his pupil Archibald Menzies, for voyages of exploration and for the growing network of botanical gardens centred on Kew: William Wright on Jamaica, George Young (died 1803) on St Vincent, and a certain Munro on Grenada were all his pupils, as were Richard Pulteney, Richard Salisbury, James Edward Smith, Francis Buchanan-Hamilton, and William Roxburgh. 
Hope's contribution to science was the building up, in little more than twenty years, of an influential school of botanists, some of whom were to be the driving force for forest conservation in India, and one of the leading botanical gardens in Europe. His attempt to develop a natural classification of plants matured through another pupil, his successor, Daniel Rutherford, who in turn lectured to Robert Brown who re-established the natural system in 1810. Hope's lectures, which stressed the importance of anatomical and physiological work, though not oratorical, were scholarly and well attended; in 1780 some fifty-nine students took his botany course. 
Hope was known for his common sense and generosity and for his simple and unostentatious lifestyle. He died in Edinburgh on 10 November 1786 and was buried in the family plot in Greyfriars churchyard there. He was survived by four sons, the third of whom, Thomas Charles Hope, became professor of chemistry at Glasgow and later Edinburgh. Hope's estate, some $12,000 Scots, went to his wife, who already owned land near the botanical garden. Hope was commemorated in 'Hopea', first used for the tropical tree genus now called 'Symplocos', but later applied by Roxburgh, as today, to a south-east Asian genus of timber-trees ('Dipterocarpaceae'). 


@@@@@


doc= 13731


Hope, John, fourth earl of Hopetoun (1765-1823), army officer, the son of John Hope, second earl (1704-1781), and his second wife, Jean (died 1767), daughter of Robert Oliphant of Rossie, Perthshire, was born at Hopetoun House, Abercorn parish, Linlithgowshire, on 17 August 1765. He was the elder half-brother of generals Sir Alexander Hope and Charles Hope (died 1825). Educated at home, he travelled on the continent with his brother Alexander and their tutor, Dr John Gillies, who later became the historiographer royal for Scotland. 
Hope is reported to have served for a short time as a volunteer. He was appointed cornet in the 10th light dragoons on 28 May 1784. He then became a lieutenant in the 100th foot, and later in the 27th Inniskillings, a captain in the 17th light dragoons (later lancers) in 1789, major in the 1st Royals foot in 1792, and lieutenant-colonel of the 25th foot on 26 April 1793. A tory, he was elected MP for Linlithgowshire in 1790, and again in 1796. 
When the Mediterranean and channel fleets under lords Hood and Howe put to sea in April-July 1793 the 25th foot was one of the regiments that embarked so as to compensate for the shortfall in marines. Hope remained in headquarters at Plymouth until December 1794, by which time independent companies had been drafted into the regiment, increasing it to two battalions. On 9 February 1795 he sailed as commander of ten companies of the regiment for the West Indies. On reaching Grenada on 30 March he was invalided home. He returned to the West Indies in 1796 as adjutant-general under Sir Ralph Abercromby. He took part in the capture of the French and Spanish West Indies in 1796-7, and was repeatedly praised by Abercromby and other senior officers. He returned home in 1797. 
In August 1799 Hope was deputy adjutant-general of the advanced force sent to the Netherlands under Abercromby. However he received a severe wound in the ankle during the landing on The Helder, and was sent home. On 27 August 1799 he was promoted from the 25th foot to colonel of the North Lowland fencible infantry (raised in 1794 and disbanded in 1802). At the end of September he returned to the Netherlands as adjutant-general of the main body of the expeditionary force under the duke of York. He was present at the second battle of Bergen (2 October) and the battle of Castricum (6 October). He was also one of the officers assigned to arrange the convention of Alkmaar. 
Hope was adjutant-general to Abercromby in the Mediterranean in 1800, and in the Egyptian expedition of 1801. At the battle of Abu Qir (20 and 21 March) Hope was severely wounded; Abercromby was killed. On his recovery he asked for the command of a brigade, and was appointed to one composed of two of the army's most distinguished regiments, the 28th foot and 42nd highlanders. His brigade joined the army outside Cairo, and he was sent by General Hutchinson to arrange the terms of surrender of the French garrison. He later did the same in Alexandria. Hope had married first, on 17 August 1798, his cousin, Elizabeth, fifth and youngest daughter of the Hon. Charles Hope-Vere of Craigiehall, and sister of John Hope (1739-1785). She died childless on 20 March 1801. He married second on 9 February 1803, Louisa Dorothea (died 1836), daughter of Sir John Wedderburn, bt. They had eleven children. 
Hope became a major-general in 1803, commanded a brigade in the eastern district of England under Sir J. H. Craig during the invasion alarms of 1803-5, and in 1805 was appointed lieutenant-governor of Portsmouth, resigning in the same year to join the expedition to Hanover under Lord Cathcart. He became a lieutenant-general in 1808, was deputy commander of the troops sent to Sweden under Sir John Moore, and in August 1808 he landed in Portugal. He was in command at Lisbon when the French evacuated the city, and had the difficult task of restraining the local population from exacting revenge upon their erstwhile occupier. He was present during the negotiations of the controversial convention of Cintra (24 August 1808). 
When Moore advanced into Spain, Hope commanded one of the army's two divisions. Having crossed the River Tagus he was forced to make a circuitous 380-mile journey through Elvas, Badajoz, Talavera, and Escorial with all twenty-four of Moore's guns, his trains and his few cavalry. During this period Hope negotiated with representatives of the Spanish junta, but refused to take his troops into Madrid. He linked up with Moore near Salamanca on 4 December and confirmed that Napoleon was concentrating on Madrid and had no immediate intention of moving west. Hope then took part in the retreat to Corunna. He commanded the British left at the battle of Corunna (January 1809), and succeeded to overall command when Moore fell and Baird was wounded. He 'wisely decided to pursue the object for which the battle had been fought, a safe re-embarkation' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 6.390). It is said that he personally visited every street in the port, to ensure that no one was left behind. He received the thanks of parliament, and was made a KB. 
Hope commanded the reserve in the Walcheren expedition of 1809. Landing at Ter Goes he took up a position from which the western Scheldt was covered for the duration of the operations. He realized after only a few days that the expedition's objectives were unattainable. In 1812 he became commander of the forces in Ireland. In 1813 he was appointed to succeed Sir Thomas Graham in the Peninsular army. Instructions were received that he was to be given the command of at least a division and placed next in seniority to Wellington, though not his second in command. Hope commanded the first division at the battle of Nivelle (10 November) and at the battles of the Nive (10-13 December) in which he was wounded. Wellington wrote of him: 'I have long entertained the highest opinion of Sir John Hope, like everybody else, I suppose, but every day more convinces me of his worth. We shall lose him if he continues to expose himself as he did during the last three days. Indeed, his escape was wonderful. His coat and hat were shot through in many places, besides the wound in his leg. He places himself among the sharpshooters, without sheltering himself as they do' ('Dispatches of the Duke of Wellington', 203). 
In February 1814 Hope, with the left wing of the army, crossed the Adour. The operation to cross the river was beset with difficulties, and the French forces opposing the crossing were intimidated by the use of the Congreve rocket. Hope next blockaded the important fortress of Bayonne, an operation that lasted until the end of the war. In the final sortie of the French garrison on 14 April 1814, a futile gesture which caused needless bloodshed given that a truce had been agreed elsewhere, Hope had his horse shot under him, was wounded, and briefly taken prisoner. The surrender did not take place until 27 April 'thanks to an obdurate Bonapartist commander who demanded to see Soult's written orders' first (James, 236). 
Hope's wounds prevented him from accepting command of the forces sent to America in 1814. After the war Hope was made a peer as Baron Niddry of Niddry Castle, Linlithgowshire. In 1816 he succeeded his elder half-brother, James Hope-Johnstone, third earl of Hopetoun, in the family title. He became a full general in 1819. He had been appointed colonel-commandant of a battalion of 60th Royal Americans in 1806; from this regiment he had transferred to the colonelcy of the 92nd Gordon Highlanders, and from the 92nd, in 1820, he was appointed colonel of the 42nd highlanders. Among his many offices were those of lord lieutenant of Linlithgowshire, governor of the Royal Bank of Scotland, and captain of the royal archers. In 1822 he was offered the post of lieutenant-general of the ordnance by Wellington, then master-general, but he declined it. Hopetoun's last public duty was to attend George IV, during the king's visit to Scotland in 1822, as captain of the royal archers and gold-stick for Scotland. He entertained the king at Hopetoun House during the visit. 
The pupil and friend of Abercromby, the friend of Moore, and, in Wellington's words, 'the ablest man in the Peninsular army' ('Dispatches of the Duke of Wellington', 7.22), Hopetoun also distinguished himself in civil life, in which his soldierly mien, polished bearing, high ideal of duty, and strong common sense rendered him generally popular. He died in Paris on 27 August 1823, and was buried in the family vault at Abercorn on 1 October. 
The eldest of Hopetoun's nine sons succeeded him as fifth earl of Hopetoun. Others served in the navy and army. The youngest, Brigadier-General the Hon. Adrian Hope (1821-1858), of the 60th rifles and 93rd highlanders, served until distinction in the Crimea, and commanded a brigade at the siege of Lucknow, where he was killed on 14 April 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 13732


Hope, Sir John (1765-1836), army officer, was born on 15 July 1765, the son of the author John Hope (1739-1785), and his wife, Mary (1741/2-1767), the only daughter of Eliab Breton of Norton, Nottinghamshire, and Forty Hill, Enfield. Charles Hope, lord president of the court of session, and Vice-Admiral Sir William Johnstone Hope were his brothers. 
In November 1778 Hope was appointed a cadet in Houston's regiment of the Scottish brigade serving the Dutch. Having first served as a corporal and sergeant he was made an ensign in the regiment, stationed at Bergen op Zoom, in December 1779, and marched with it to Maastricht. After a period at home he rejoined the regiment at Maastricht on the day of his promotion to captain, 26 April 1782, and withdrew from the Dutch service, receiving British half pay. 
In 1787 Hope was placed on full pay as captain of the 60th Royal Americans, but his company was soon reduced. In 1788 he was appointed to a troop in the 13th light dragoons, and from November 1792 he served as aide-de-camp to Sir William Erskine (died 1795) in the Flanders campaigns and in Germany. On 25 March 1795 Hope became a major, and on 20 February 1796 lieutenant-colonel of the 28th Duke of York's light dragoons. He commanded this regiment at the Cape of Good Hope before returning home. 
In April 1799 Hope was appointed to the 37th foot in the West Indies, and in November 1804 he transferred to a battalion of the 60th foot at home, and was temporarily the assistant adjutant-general in Scotland. He was deputy adjutant-general under Lord Cathcart in Hanover in 1805, and at Copenhagen in 1807. On 20 September 1806 he married Mary, the only daughter and heir of Robert Scott of Logie. She died on 19 March 1813; they had three daughters. Hope's second marriage, on 21 April 1814, was to Jane Hester, the daughter of John Macdougall; they had five sons and five daughters and she survived her husband. 
After serving as a general officer on the staff in Scotland and in the Severn district, Hope proceeded to the Peninsula, and in July 1812 commanded a brigade of the 5th division at Salamanca. He was invalided home soon afterwards, causing Wellington to write: 'Major-General Hope I am sorry to lose, as he is very attentive to his duties' ('Dispatches', 56, 73). 
Hope went on to hold brigade commands in Ireland and Scotland until being promoted to lieutenant-general in 1819. He was made colonel of the 92nd highlanders in 1820, and transferred to the 72nd highlanders in 1823. A GCH in 1820, Hope was made a knight bachelor on 30 March 1821. He died at his seat in Scotland in August 1836, aged seventy-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 13733


Hope, John (1794-1858), judge, was born in Edinburgh on 26 May 1794, the eldest son of Charles Hope (1763-1851), lord president and lord justice-general of the court of session, and his wife, Charlotte (1771-1834), daughter of John Hope, second earl of Hopetoun. The lawyer James Hope was his younger brother, and Louisa Hope was his sister. His grandfather was John Hope (1739-1785), MP for Linlithgowshire. He was educated partly at Edinburgh high school and he was admitted as an advocate in November 1816. Hope married Jessie Scott (died 1872), daughter of Thomas and Isabella Irving of Shetland, in 1824 or 1825, and they had a son who survived to maturity. 
Appointed an advocate-depute under Sir William Rae, Hope came early to prominence as a defender of the then tory administration of justice in Scotland. On 25 June 1822 James Abercromby moved (unsuccessfully) in the House of Commons for the appointment of a committee of inquiry into the conduct of the lord advocate and the other law officers of the crown in Scotland in relation to their connections with the press. Specifically it was felt that an article in the 'Glasgow Sentinel' attacking James Stuart of Dunearn, a whig, had shown too strong a link between the law officers and the tory press. This article had resulted in the death of the author in a duel and the trial of Stuart at the insistence of the lord advocate. Together with a colleague Hope sent Abercromby a letter of protest couched in such terms that only a warrant for their, and Abercromby's, arrest prevented further bloodshed. Hope was subsequently heard at the bar of the House of Commons in his own defence, on 17 July 1822, but, though found guilty of a breach of the privileges of the house, no further proceedings were taken in the matter. 
This early incident contains good indications of Hope's character. Sir Walter Scott described Hope as 'the most hopeful young man of his time' (Lockhart, 587), talented, ambitious, and popular. On the other hand Scott commented on Hope's hot and rather hasty manner, which would get him into difficulties if not amended. In November 1822 Hope, after only a few years at the bar, was appointed solicitor-general for Scotland in Lord Liverpool's administration. He held this post until the formation of Lord Grey's ministry in 1830, when he was succeeded by Henry Cockburn. 
In December 1830 Hope was elected dean of the Faculty of Advocates in succession to Francis Jeffrey, in whose favour Hope had waived his claims to this position in the previous year. As an advocate, therefore, Hope appears to have been popular among his contemporaries at the bar. He enjoyed a high reputation and a successful practice. His powerful memory, however, appears to have been used to accumulate a mass of detail. As a pleader he was not nimble, but rather a traditionalist who favoured overwhelming an opponent's argument with a battery of precedents. On paper he was accused of a lack of clarity and of being verbose. Cockburn, on a visit to an English court, made the following comparative comment on Hope's style as an advocate: 'I heard no voice strained, and did not see a drop of sweat at the bar in these eight days. Our high-pressure Dean screams and gesticulates and perspires more in any forenoon than the whole Bar of England (I say nothing of Ireland) in a reign. ('Journal of Henry Cockburn', 1.114)' Hope's importance in Scottish history lies in the role he played in the conflict in the Church of Scotland in the period leading up to the Disruption of 1843, a role which earned him much negative comment. He was described by the Free Churchman Robert Buchanan as 'the author of the Disruption' (Buchanan, 1.315). A stout defender of the established church, whose rights and privileges he regarded as having been conferred by the state, Hope was the solitary elder who tabled fourteen reasons for dissenting against the 'Veto Act' at the general assembly of 1834. This act gave parishioners in Scotland the power to block a patron's presentee to a vacant parish. At this point Hope apparently questioned neither the church's right to pass the act, nor its jurisdiction over spiritual appointments, but rather its right to determine who might receive a civil benefice. In 1835 Hope became legal adviser to Robert Young, the rejected presentee at Auchterarder, in a test case on the act. He then took matters on to the much more dangerous and contentious plane of church-state relations by asking the court of session to declare that the assembly's 'Veto Act' was illegal, and that if a presentee was found to be qualified then the presbytery was bound to admit him in spite of any objections raised at parish level. The case was heard in late 1837, and the court -- presided over by his father, Lord Justice-General Charles Hope -- decided in early 1838 by a majority of eight to five in favour of Hope's arguments. 
Hope intervened at other points in this continuing controversy, always to argue that the established church was subject to the civil authority. He achieved most public attention with the publication in 1839 of his pamphlet 'A letter to the lord chancellor, on the claims of the Church of Scotland in regard to its jurisdiction, and, on the proposed changes in its polity'. Described by W. E. Gladstone as fearfully long (it ran to 290 pages), it nevertheless reached a wide and influential audience both within and outside Scotland, including key figures in the Conservative Party to whom Thomas Chalmers, Hope's leading non-intrusionist opponent in the church, was increasingly looking. Gladstone told Sir James Graham that it convinced him of the threatening nature of the Scottish church question. Graham, who was home secretary at the time of the Disruption, for his part appears to have been influenced by Hope's pamphlet into thinking that the church was affected by an undesirable democratic excitement. 
Less publicly, but more effectively, Hope increasingly had the ear of Lord Aberdeen, who in 1839 and 1840 was involved in discussions with Thomas Chalmers to try to find a legislative solution to the church's problems that would save it from the interference of the civil courts. In a voluminous correspondence and in personal meetings with Aberdeen, Hope was responsible behind the scenes for souring relations between Aberdeen and Chalmers. Aberdeen, in fact, was making Hope privy to the correspondence which he was conducting with the non-intrusionist leader. Hope apparently also tried to isolate Aberdeen from other church contacts and played a part in blocking changes to his proposed legislative measure of 1840, which Robert Buchanan claimed would have averted the Disruption. Furthermore, in the months immediately preceding the Disruption in 1843, Hope continued mistakenly to advise Aberdeen, and through him the prime minister, Sir Robert Peel, that any secession from the Church of Scotland would be insignificant in size. This may have played a part in ensuring government inactivity in the matter. Small wonder that epithets such as 'mole' and 'wily and devious Kirk agent' (Maciver, 93, 110) have been applied to Hope. 
These more negative views of Hope continued after he became a judge in 1841, succeeding David Boyle as lord justice-clerk and president of the second division of the court of session. This very rapid elevation excited some comment. One explanation was that Hope at the outset of his career had been offered the post of lord advocate by Canning, but had stepped aside at that point in favour of Sir William Rae. As a judge Hope was regarded as having a contempt for public opinion and a love of precedent. He was known for an arrogant manner and for making his personal dislikes obvious. His decisions were questioned on equitable if not on legal grounds. Even so, his opinions on civil questions and in medical jurisprudence enjoyed a firm reputation. 'The Scotsman' thought that as a judge Hope was neither hard-hearted nor unable to pity misfortune. He also presided at nearly all the criminal trials of importance which took place in the high court of justiciary during his seventeen years in office. These included the celebrated trial of Madeline Smith for murder in 1857. 
Hope died at his home, 20 Moray Place, Edinburgh, on 14 June 1858, from a sudden attack of paralysis, and was buried five days later at Ormiston Hall, near Tranent, in East Lothian. His widow died on 26 January 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 13734


John Williams Hope (1757-1813). This young Cornishman, born at St Ewe and employed in Hopes' counting house as a clerk, was the son of William Williams, rector of St Ewe, and of Elizabeth, daughter of Francis Gregor of Trewarthenick. He deeply impressed Henry, who encouraged his marriage in 1782 to his heiress, Anne (1763-1820), daughter of his sister Henrietta Maria and her husband, John Goddard of Rotterdam and Woodford Hall, Essex. Williams thereupon changed his surname to Williams Hope and was admitted a partner. John Williams Hope failed to meet expectations, however, excelling as a 'desk man' who 'ran the office precisely and with pleasure' (Buist, 17) yet who lacked the dynamism and enterprise which were to be found in his wife. This imbalance of temperament made for a turbulent marriage, culminating in Anne's elopement in 1808 with Baron von Dopff, whom she married in 1813. There were at least two children from the marriage of John Williams Hope and Anne: Henrietta, who married the seventh earl of Athlone, and 


@@@@@


doc= 13735


Hope, Sir Thomas, of Kerse (1606-1643), politician and judge, was born on 6 August 1606, the second son of Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall (1573-1646), future lord advocate, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1660), daughter of John Bennett of Wallyford, Haddingtonshire. Sir James Hope of Hopetoun and Sir John Hope, Lord Craighall, were his brothers. He graduated from the University of Edinburgh in 1625 and was admitted advocate on 17 July 1631. He had received a grant of the lands and barony of Kerse in 1625 and was knighted, as Sir Thomas Hope 'of Wester Granton', by Charles I at Innerwick on 16 July 1633. He married Helen, third daughter and coheir of Adam Rae of Pitspindie. 
Hope played an active part in public affairs, sitting in the Scottish parliament of 1639-41 as commissioner for Clackmannanshire. In 1639, during the first bishops' war, he held joint command of General Leslie's lifeguard, raised by the college of justice, and in 1640-41 commanded the general's lifeguard of horse, again raised from the college, and won praise for his conduct at Newburn. He was named to the 1640 committee of estates, and as collector-general of the tenth and twentieth pennies, raised in 1640-41 to support the Scottish war effort. In September 1641 he proposed in parliament, as speaker for the barons or freeholders, that the estates should appoint officers of state and privy councillors by ballot, though the proposal was lost. He was prominent in opposing Charles's demand for a public inquiry into the 'incident', and was the author of the compromise effected between the king and the estates with reference to the appointment of Loudoun as chancellor. On 13 November 1641 the estates agreed his appointment as an ordinary lord of session, one of four chosen to replace royalist incumbents, and he was named lord justice-general by the king. At the same time he was chosen as one of the conservators of the peace, the body established under the treaty of London to liaise with the English parliament, and acted as a commissioner to treat with Westminster for the suppression of the Irish rising. He was a member for Stirlingshire in the convention of estates of 1643 and was chosen to negotiate with English parliamentary representatives, negotiations which would culminate in the solemn league and covenant. He was, however, replaced owing to ill health and died at Edinburgh on 23 August 1643. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Thomas, who was himself succeeded by his younger brother, Alexander, first baronet. Hope left two legal works in manuscript, the 'Law repertorie' and a two-volume commentary on books 12-24 of Justinian's 'Digest', held by the National Library of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 13736


Hope, Sir Thomas, of Craighall, first baronet (1573-1646), advocate and politician, was the son of Henry Hope, an Edinburgh merchant of French descent, and his wife, Jacqueline de Tott (or de Jott). The couple witnessed the St Bartholomew's day massacre of Huguenots in Paris before fleeing to Scotland. His father was dead by the time of his graduation, as master of arts at Edinburgh University on 12 August 1592, and his mother subsequently returned to France for nearly thirty years. 
Hope committed himself to a career in law, but lack of means to finance further study meant that his progress was at first slow. By 21 March 1600 he had made sufficient progress to be appointed by the general assembly of the Church of Scotland to be the church's solicitor and advocate, and about the same time he entered the service of his cousin John Nicolson of Lasswade, a well-established Edinburgh writer (solicitor). Shortly before his own death he was to remember Nicolson as 'my maister, under quhom I learnit not only my calling as a citizen, but my calling as a Christian' (Fraser, 1.xxxv). 
Hope married Elizabeth (died 1660), daughter of John Bennet, in or before 1602 (their first child being born in June 1603), and he was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in Edinburgh on 7 February 1605. He quickly made a name for himself through being one of the four advocates for the defence at the trial at Linlithgow on 10 January 1606 of six parish ministers accused of treason for declining to acknowledge the authority of the privy council of Scotland over the general assembly of the church. The lawyers urged their clients to submit as they had no defence, and on their refusal to do so the two most senior advocates withdrew from the case. Hope, however, led such an eloquent defence that, though his clients were found guilty, his boldness and skill made his reputation. He won for himself 'the estimatioune both of a guid man and of a guid advocate' (J. Melvill, 'Autobiography', ed. R. Pitcairn, 1842, 621). 'His pleading that day procured him great estimatioun and manie clients; and his credite has ever grown sensyne [since]' (D. Calderwood, 'History of the Kirk of Scotland', ed. T. Thomson, 8 vols., 1842-9, 6.379). 
This trial 'laid the foundation of a phenomenally successful professional career' (Hope, 'Major Practicks', 1.vii), and already by 1608 Sir Thomas Hamilton, the lord advocate, who had led the prosecution at the 1606 trial, could refer to Hope as one of 'the most learned and best experienced' advocates in Scotland (J. Maidment, ed., 'State Papers... of Thomas Earl of Melros', 2 vols., 1837, 1.50). Much of the profit from his lucrative legal practice was invested in land, including the estate of Craighall in Fife, and he also remembered his old college, paying for the building of two chambers for the use of Edinburgh University in 1625-6. Hope also found time for writing, drafting his 'Minor Practicks' -- by, according to family tradition, dictating the text to his sons while he was dressing (T. Hope, 'Minor Practicks', new edn, 1726, vii) -- and compiling the 'Major Practicks', a comprehensive digest of statutes and decisions interspersed with 'practical observations' (H. Mackechnie, ed., 'Introductory Survey of the Sources and Literature of Scots Law', 1936, 36). He also published a Latin poem on the accession of Charles I, and translations into Latin of the 'Psalms' and the 'Song of Solomon' and a genealogy of the earls of Mar are also attributed to him. 
With the accession of Charles I in 1625 Hope added public business to his private practice, being given a central role in the king's plans to revoke grants of church property to subjects. The main achievement of the complicated investigations and negotiations that followed was a settlement of the chaotic matter of teinds (tithes) in Scotland. Eventually most other property which had passed to the nobility and gentry was confirmed in their hands in a settlement ratified by the Scottish parliament in 1633. In these years Hope emerged as one of the most active and talented of the king's Scottish servants, ready to use all his skills to uphold the king's powers. His services were acknowledged by his appointment on 29 May 1626 as joint lord advocate with the elderly Sir William Oliphant (died April 1628). His appointment was evidently not popular with the court of session, which was rebuked by Charles I for its treatment of him in December 1626. Further royal favour brought him admission to the Scottish privy council on 10 January 1628, and appointment as a baronet of Nova Scotia on 19 February the same year. 
Hope's rise was closely connected to that of William Grahame, earl of Menteith, who was appointed president of the Scottish council in February 1628. When Menteith claimed the ancient earldom of Strathearn he was advised and encouraged by Hope, and the king recognized his title in July 1631. Hope received his reward in favours to his family. His second son, Thomas, was knighted in 1631, and his youngest, James, was appointed a judge of the court of session in 1632 -- though only after a delay during which Hope bombarded Menteith with grovelling pleas on his son's behalf, terrified by rumours that the post would go to a rival and begging the earl not to treat him with 'contempt and ignomie' by allowing him to be so disgraced (Fraser, 2.128-9). A major threat to Hope's reputation emerged when allegations were made that possession of the earldom of Strathearn, which he had gained for his patron, implied a claim to the throne. This led to the earl's disgrace in 1633, when he was stripped of his offices and his new title. Hope was left open to allegations that in his advice to Menteith he had put the earl's interests before those of the crown, but he survived this crisis and had the courage to help his former patron to reach a settlement with the king. A political enemy, Lord Napier, charged him with being 'a base follower of greatness, and maliciously eloquent' (M. Napier, 'Memoirs of Montrose', 2 vols., 1856, 1.110), but he showed loyalty to one fallen from greatness in a way that could have damaged his own career. 
In 1634 Hope acted for the crown in the prosecution of Lord Balmerino, who was charged with leasing-making for being connected with an unpublished text critical of royal policy in religion. Hope secured Balmerino's conviction and condemnation to death on 14 November, though he was later pardoned. Thus Hope played leading roles in enforcing all the main policies -- the revocation, religious reform, and the suppression of aristocratic dissent -- which were central to the alienation of Scotland's landowners from the crown. But though he was zealous in upholding the civil powers of the crown, at heart he was sympathetic to those who opposed the changes in church government and worship which Charles I wished to impose. He probably expressed his reservations in council, for it seems likely that it was more than coincidence that a week after the privy council approved preliminary orders for the introduction of a new prayer book (20 December 1636) Hope heard rumours that he was to be removed from office, or have a joint lord advocate appointed to work with him. He indignantly protested, stressing 'my sufferings' and great losses -- estimated at over $100,000 Scots (presumably lost private practice revenue) -- in the king's service. He attributed the move to replace him to the earl of Traquair, the treasurer and Charles I's most influential Scottish adviser, who was becoming notorious for his bullying of anyone who opposed him. A report in January 1637, however, suggests that it was Hope's disagreement with Traquair over a private case that led the earl to threaten him with dismissal from office. 
Such early indications of Hope's crisis of conscience lend credibility to the allegation that in April 1637 he was present at a meeting at which demonstrations to be held when the prayer book was first used were planned. Certainly in that month he went to Pencaitland to take communion according to traditional forms, and this was regarded as a public enough declaration of his dissent to earn him a rebuke from William Laud, the archbishop of Canterbury. In the months that followed the first riots against the prayer book on 23 July 1637, Hope became a major embarrassment to the regime. In September he stated that although he had consented to the imposing of the prayer book 'he meant not an active but a passive obedience to the King's desyre, and that he never intended to accept it as warrantable' (J. Gordon, 'History of Scots Affairs', 3 vols., 1841, 1.14). When in November those supplicating the king on grievances began to elect commissioners to meet in Edinburgh, he infuriated the king's supporters by declaring that their proceedings were legal, and as a privy councillor he refused to sign a proclamation of 20 February 1638 denouncing the king's opponents on the grounds that in it Traquair had exceeded the king's orders. At the end of the month he refrained from signing the national covenant, but joined other lawyers in declaring it legal and justifiable. In the opinion of royalists, he now became the covenanters' 'oracle', advising them on their policies ('Memoirs of Henry Guthry', 26, 130). 
When the marquess of Hamilton arrived in Scotland as the king's representative in May 1638 to try to reach a settlement, 'one of the greatest troubles' was that many lawyers, and especially Hope, supported the covenanters. Hamilton was ignorant of Scottish law while Hope 'was as skilled as much as any ever was', and in the privy council frequently ruled that actions proposed by Hamilton were illegal (Burnet, 53). On the issuing of the 'king's covenant' as a rival to the national covenant Hope indeed signed it, and urged others to do so. But he then declared that, contrary to the king's intentions, the new covenant bound its signatories to reject the innovations in religion that he was seeking to enforce. When the covenanters none the less decided to oppose the king's covenant, Hope declared himself 'almost stupefeit' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.474) with disappointment, because he had thought that his stratagem of imposing his interpretation of the new covenant would have forced the king to back down. 
Hamilton ordered Hope to attend the Glasgow assembly in November 1638 and defend episcopacy, but he refused. When threatened with dismissal from office, he replied that Hamilton could not remove him, as his appointment had been ratified by parliament. Hamilton furiously denounced him as 'A bad and most wicked instrument', warning the king that while Hope remained in office, with his great influence in the privy council 'no thing will goe a right in your service conserning the Churche; nay, so pernicious is he, that I doe confes... that I take him to be a woorse instrument then anie Covenanter' (S. R. Gardiner, ed., 'Hamilton Papers', CS, new ser., 27, 1890, 50-51). Hope 'should be removed, for he is ill dispposed' (P. Yorke, earl of Hardwicke, 'Miscellaneous State Papers', 2 vols., 1778, 2.117). However, one of the peculiarities of Charles I was that he sometimes retained men in office even though he knew they were opposed to his plans, confident that he could make them obey. With Hope this proved a disastrous miscalculation. Not until January 1640 did he act against Hope -- and even then he only banished him to his own house of Craighall. Hope responded dramatically 'I am to goo to morrow to the place of my confyning And to remayne and die thair, if so be youre majesty's plesure' (NA Scot., GD 406/1/1285, 1286). He seemed to royalists a traitor, betraying the king's regime from within, but in his own mind he was a loyal servant in civil matters, and indeed an upholder of royal power, but considered that in religion obedience to his interpretation of God's will had to overrule allegiance to the crown. In accordance with this stance he urged the earl of Rothes in January 1640 not to press the king on 'civill pointis' (constitutional reform) because this would allow the king to win support by claiming that the covenanters were attacking monarchy. 'For civill points, luik nevir to haif me to go with yow' (Hope, 'Diary', 115-16). 
Charles I, climbing a new peak of political folly, accepted Hope's distinction between civil and religious affairs sufficiently for him to believe it safe to release Hope from his confinement so that he could represent the crown by implementing an order to postpone the session of the Scottish parliament which was due to meet on 2 June 1640. But Hope, citing technical problems about the validity of the commission under which he was supposed to act, failed to prevent parliament meeting. To royalists this was further betrayal, and the legislation subsequently passed by the parliament aimed at achieving a massive reduction in the powers of the crown. This, however, was in fact as little to Hope's taste as it was to the king's. One act abolished the civil right of officers of state, including the lord advocate, to sit in parliament, and when Hope tried to take his seat in August 1641 he was removed. He complained furiously at the loss of a traditional right of the crown's legal agent, and it was eventually conceded that he could be present in parliament when called for, to give advice or plead, but not to vote. However, when he was duly summoned his arguments in parliament were a source of irritation to the covenanters. His 'idle curiositie' -- which may be interpreted as regard for legal technicalities -- blocked legislation on schools and stipends. Far more significantly, at the end of the 1641 session when the king was ready to assent to legislation which amounted to a constitutional revolution at the expense of royal power, Hope urged him to include a statement reserving the crown's rights, thus indicating that royal prerogative remained undamaged. Robert Baillie interpreted this as 'idlenesse' or irresponsibility ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.394, 397), but it was far more than that. It was a clear statement of Hope's constitutional beliefs in civil matters. Charles, however, ignored his advice, for making any such reservation would have led to the collapse of settlement between him and the Scots, which was vital to the king to free him to turn his attention to crises in England and Ireland. 
Hope's support for royal authority led him to oppose the covenanters again in 1643. They summoned a convention of estates after the king refused permission for the Scottish parliament to meet to discuss the crisis caused by the English civil war, but Hope joined Hamilton in protesting that this could not be done without the king's sanction. It was perhaps partly this stand that led to the appointment of Hope to act as king's commissioner to the general assembly of the church which was due to meet on 2 August, though the main reason was evidently that no royalist nobles were willing to act. It was clear that, in the prevailing mood in Scotland, the assembly would favour intervening in the English war on the side of parliament, and whoever acted as commissioner would then be blamed by the king for not preventing it from doing so. The assembly proceeded to draft the solemn league and covenant. By one account Hope failed to execute the king's instructions, being so influenced by his two covenanter sons 'that he resolved to say nothing to the Church or countrey's prejudice' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 2.83-4), but in fact he tried to continue balancing his conflicting religious and civil allegiances, declaring 'his personal heartie consent' to the new covenant, but then as king's commissioner assenting to it only so far as it concerned religion and the liberties of the church, and refusing to accept civil alliance with the English parliament. However the covenanter leaders 'did so alwayes overawe his Grace, that he made us not great trouble' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 2.95-6). 
Hope's actions as king's advocate in 1637-43 were hugely damaging to Charles I, frequently preventing effective action and giving the covenanters the propaganda advantage of being able to claim that the king's senior legal adviser supported their interpretations of the law. On the occasions when he tried to support the crown's civil power he was ignored. In public he expressed his support for much of what the covenanters did concerning religion in terms of interpreting the law, but in private his religious zeal revealed itself in emotional outbursts on paper. Thus when episcopacy was declared unlawful by the 1639 general assembly Hope recorded this as being 'to the unspeakabill joy of all of them that feiris the Lord, and waittis for his salvatioun' (Hope, 'Diary', 104). However, his diary also bears evidence of the strain of trying to reconcile duty to God and king when the two were in conflict. From April 1639 he was strengthened by a voice that spoke to him, which he came to accept as divine. After praying that the king would spare the Scots from the rage of their enemies, the voice said 'I will preserve and saiff [save] my peopill'. When he prayed that God would take pity on the kirk, the voice said 'I will pitie it' and 'I will arisse' (Hope, 'Diary', 89, 96, 98). In 1641 his fear of the consequences of his actions led to bad dreams in which he was lost in mist or darkness, or was accused of treason. An unsympathetic nineteenth-century editor reacted to Hope's voices and dreams by denouncing him for being 'degraded... by strange and humiliating indications of weakness and credulity' (Hope, 'Diary', v), but they may now be recognized as symptoms of the intense conflicts of loyalties he was experiencing. 
In his last years Hope played little part in public affairs: the covenanting regime which ruled the country employed their own procurators of state in legal matters. In February 1646, in anticipation of his death, he recommended that he be succeeded as lord advocate by Thomas Nicolson, his cousin, because of ties of blood and Hope's respect for Nicolson's dead father and uncle. If he declined, Sir Archibald Johnston of Wariston was to have the office (Fraser, 1.xxxv). In the event Wariston was appointed -- but Nicolson succeeded him in 1649. On 1 October 1646, in Edinburgh, after a few days' illness, Hope died 'about 10 a clocke at night' (J. Hope, 'Diary', 'Miscellany of the Scottish History Society', 9, 1958, 194) after giving his blessing to his family. Contemporaries agreed in accepting that he had been a remarkably talented and successful lawyer, but disagreed as to whether he had treacherously betrayed his king, or admirably put conscience before any worldly considerations. His diary makes clear his love and concern for the advancement of his family. Six of his children reached adulthood. The two daughters married a knight and a lord; three sons -- Sir John Hope, Lord Craighall (1603x5-1654), Sir Thomas Hope of Kerse (1606-1643), and Sir James Hope of Hopetoun (1614-1661) -- became judges in the court of session, and the fourth the king's cupbearer. This was to be the foundation for a remarkable dynasty of eminent Scottish lawyers in the following centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 13737


Hope, Thomas (1769-1831), art collector and connoisseur, was born in Amsterdam on 30 August 1769, the eldest of the three sons of John Hope (1737-1784) ['see under 'Hope family (per. c.1700-1813)] and his wife, Philippina Barbara van der Hoeven ('c'.1738-1789), daughter of Rotterdam's burgomaster. John Hope was a member of an immensely wealthy and prestigious family of Amsterdam merchants of Scottish descent, a partner in their highly successful firm, Hope & Co., and a leading figure in Dutch politics and society. 
In 1784, aged fifteen, Thomas Hope shared his father's fortune with his brothers Adrian Elias ('b'. 1772) and Henry Philip (1774-1839), and seemed destined for leadership of Hope & Co. In 1790, following his mother's death, he briefly worked as a partner in its counting-house, but he was never active in its management. Indeed it appears that at some stage his mother and others had turned him against the Hope partners. Instead he took up the study of classical architecture and civilization and from 1787, apart from short periods in Amsterdam, spent eight years travelling and studying architecture in countries bordering the Mediterranean. The austere simplicity of classicism impressed him greatly but he was also infused with the romanticism of Mediterranean culture; in Turkey, for example, he adopted local dress and abandoned his Christianity. His romantic novel, 'Anastasius' (1819), first published in French but subsequently in thirteen editions and in four languages, was based on the experience of these travels. He published it anonymously and for a while it was thought to be the work of Lord Byron. 
In 1795, at the time of the French occupation of Amsterdam, like most of his family, Hope settled in London, living in Duchess Street from 1799 and winning recognition as a scholar, collector, writer, proponent of neo-classicism, and enlightened patron of young and promising artists and craftsmen. He said of himself that he was entirely 'devoted to the arts' (Watkin, 13); above all else he sought to influence taste. To this end he employed, systematically, his immense fortune, intellect, and energy. All was done on a grand scale and with magnificence. 
On 16 April 1806 Hope married a woman of modest means, Louisa (died 1851), the beautiful daughter of William de la Poer Beresford, archbishop of Tuam and later first Baron Decies, and niece of the first marquess of Waterford. They had at least one daughter and four sons, the former and one of the latter predeceasing Thomas. Their youngest son, Alexander James Beresford Beresford Hope, became a notable politician and author. Louisa emerged as a glittering society hostess and their set came to include the prince and princess of Wales (later George IV and Queen Caroline), and the duke and duchess of Clarence (the future William IV and Queen Adelaide); Queen Adelaide appointed Mrs Hope a woman of the bedchamber. Thomas's preference was for the intellectual circles of exalted connoisseurship. 
Hope was admitted to the Society of Dilettanti in 1800 and a year later received his first invitation to the annual dinner of the Royal Academy. Membership of the Royal Institution, the Royal Society, the Society of Arts, and the British Institution, and not least of their influential committees, followed as his reputation as an informed scholar grew. They provided him with a platform from which to influence taste and he was only held back by his widely acknowledged conceit, lack of tact, and unprepossessing appearance; he was described as ill-looking and effeminate in manner. He damaged his cause by openly lobbying the duke of Wellington, when prime minister, for a peerage. 
Hope's concerns, according to his biographer Watkin, were with 'antique and modern art and with the attempt to influence the character of the latter by promoting knowledge of the former' (Watkin, 35). At the heart of his ambition was the wish to influence modern design through knowledge of the art of the ancients. Hope mastered the vast knowledge of classical art and architecture accumulated in the eighteenth century in order to interpret and publicize it. He did as much as anyone in England to promote neo-classicism but his interests were wider and more complex; he was equally a proponent of the English picturesque and linked both as valid components of a wider Romantic movement. 
Hope had started to collect by 1795 when in Rome. Then, and on his many subsequent tours through southern Europe, he purchased sculpture, vases, and other antiquities. Most notably, he acquired in 1801 for $4500 a magnificent collection of classical vases from Sir William Hamilton, and by 1806 he possessed over 1500 of the highest quality. There were also examples of the very best Greek and Egyptian sculpture and, on a much smaller scale, Renaissance and baroque paintings purchased at London sales. The sculpture included magnificent Greek statues of Hygeia and Athene, regarded as the work of Pheidias or his school, discovered at Ostia in 1797. 
Hope encouraged and acted as patron of little-known artists of promise. As a young man in Rome, he early recognized the great neo-classical sculptors Bertel Thorvaldsen and John Flaxman, and provided them with important commissions. By his death Hope had no fewer than eleven works by Thorvaldsen including bas reliefs of himself, his wife, and his children. From Flaxman came a marble of the 'Apollo Belvedere', a group of 'Aurora and Cephalus', and, most notably, a series of 109 drawings as illustrations to Dante's 'Divine Comedy', which confirmed Flaxman as the pre-eminent English neo-classical artist. He also commissioned works from Antonio Canova, most notably a 'Venus' delivered in 1822, and from painters. Here his interests included great neo-classical history canvases commissioned from artists such as Benjamin Robert Haydon, Louis Gauffier, and Richard Westall. But in contrast, his picture purchases also encouraged the picturesque and sentimental; he acquired works from young artists such as Thomas Daniell, John Martin, and Robert Smirke. 
Hope sought out and sponsored craftsmen of merit to make furniture and objects according to his own neo-classical designs for installation in his Duchess Street showcase; those who made furniture included Francis Chantrey. He also extended his patronage to innovatory engravers such as Edmund Aikin and Henry Moses and to silversmiths such as Paul Storr. Of greater note was his encouragement of the architect William Wilkins. In 1804 Hope had vigorously and successfully promoted the purity of Wilkins's Greek designs for Downing College, Cambridge. In his outspoken pamphlet 'Observations on the Plans... for Downing College' (1804), Hope laid down his opposition to the Roman Doric design put forward by James Wyatt, then president of the Royal Academy; Wyatt's defeat marked Hope out as a force to be reckoned with in architectural judgement. 
Hope's collection was exhibited at his town and country houses for the instruction of visitors. His Duchess Street mansion, originally designed by Robert Adam, was greatly altered and extended with the ground and first floors being equipped with large galleries of neo-classical design; one visitor referred to the house as a 'temple of art'. It was, in fact, neither home nor museum, more a place where the rich and informed were to be influenced. The rooms and galleries were lined with sculpture and paintings, vases, and other antiquities, all of exquisite quality. In 1807 he acquired a country home at Deepdene, near Dorking in Surrey, which he greatly extended in the style and setting of the picturesque. A mausoleum along with additional wings and a tower were completed in 1818 and a sculpture gallery and conservatory followed in the 1820s. All appear to have been the work of William Atkinson, with significant contributions from Hope himself. 
So systematic was Hope's approach to the use of his collection as a didactic tool that entrance, at least to Duchess Street, was by admission ticket. He issued his first tickets in 1804. The recipients were sixty Royal Academicians who would be permitted, along with three friends each, to enter Duchess Street between February and March. This highlighted the seriousness with which Hope aimed to pursue his desire to influence taste, although on this occasion the absence of personal invitations along with the seeming impertinence of their young issuer was to leave the Academicians outraged. He also endeavoured to effect influence through his writings. 'Household Furniture and Interior Decoration' (1807) was perhaps his most didactic and influential work and it was followed by 'Costumes of the Ancients' (1809). On his deathbed he completed 'Essay on the Origin and Prospects of Man' (1831). 
In 1831 Hope fell seriously ill and died on 2 February at Duchess Street. On 12 February he was laid to rest in the mausoleum at Deepdene. Throughout his life Hope maintained his fortune; it is estimated to have been about $200,000 on his death. Although Duchess Street was demolished in 1851, most of its contents were retained at Deepdene and in a new London family house in Piccadilly. The major dispersal of Hope's collection occurred in 1917, when his descendants sold Deepdene and disposed of its contents by auction at Christies; Deepdene itself was demolished in 1969. 


Henry Hope appears to have been close to his brother, Thomas. The latter commissioned a portrait bust of him from Flaxman, for the dining-room at Deepdene, and Henry purchased the neighbouring estate of Chart Park for Thomas. In 1819 Henry lent Thomas the Hope collection of nearly 100 paintings he had inherited. Henry also patronized contemporary artists, purchasing John Martin's 'The Fall of Babylon' (exh. British Institution, 1819) for 400 guineas. He died, unmarried, in 1839. In his will, proved with two codicils on 5 May 1840, Henry Hope bequeathed most of his art collection to his nephew, Henry Thomas Hope. 


@@@@@


doc= 13738


Hope, Thomas Charles (1766-1844), chemist and educationist, was born on 21 July 1766 in Edinburgh, the third of four sons and a daughter of John Hope (1725-1786), professor of botany at the University of Edinburgh, and his wife, Juliana, daughter of a Dr Stevenson, an Edinburgh physician. Educated mainly at the high school, Edinburgh, in 1779 he entered the university where he gave much attention to botany and chemistry. On his father's death he applied unsuccessfully for his chair. The following year, 1787, he graduated MD at Edinburgh, and through the influence of his uncle, Alexander Stevenson, professor of medicine in the University of Glasgow, was elected lecturer in chemistry and materia medica at Glasgow. In 1788 he ceased to teach materia medica and lectured on chemistry alone until 1791. Although previously a believer in the phlogiston theory, in 1788 he became the first in Britain to teach the alternative views of Lavoisier, to whose opinions he was converted by Sir James Hall (1761-1832). 
In 1789 his uncle secured for Hope appointments as his assistant and successor. On Stevenson's death in 1791 Hope assumed the chair of medicine which he held until October 1795. He was physician and clinical lecturer to the Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, opened in 1794, but continued to conduct private research in chemistry. In 1793 he communicated to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, of which he had become a fellow in 1788, his paper on the first known compound of strontium. Joseph Black, professor of chemistry and medicine at Edinburgh, was so impressed by this discovery of a new chemical element that he secured for Hope, his former pupil, the post of assistant professor from November 1795. In 1797-8 Hope took over all Black's lectures and succeeded him in 1799. 
As professor at Edinburgh, Hope did not neglect medicine. For several years he lectured on clinical medicine and, having been elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, Edinburgh, in 1796, was its secretary (1798-1803), treasurer (1803-9), and president (1815-19). He wrote the chemical part of the tenth edition of its 'Pharmacopoeia' (1817). In 1810 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London. As a chemist, he was initially innovative in teaching and research. He continued to promote the new chemistry of Lavoisier, and for several years he was the only Scottish professor who advocated the geological views of James Hutton. In 1805 he published his discovery that the maximum density of water occurs not at the freezing point, 32 degree F, but around 39 degree F. He was also active as a consultant. In 1806 Thomas Thomson, Andrew Coventry, and he reported to the Scottish excise commissioners the results of two years' work on the differences between English and Scottish barley. In 1813 he investigated the water supply of Edinburgh so thoroughly that in 1817 he was given the freedom of the city. 
However, after 1806, Hope devoted his talents mainly to improving his teaching. He had the advantage of succeeding the illustrious Black whose impeccably neat lecture demonstrations had attracted an audience of about 200. Receiving no salary, dependent on the fees paid by members of his class, and having to meet its costs, Hope sustained a testing programme: for six months for five days a week he gave spectacular and punctiliously organized lecture-demonstrations using large apparatus specially designed for the purpose. Spurning the rewards of writing textbooks, Hope reached his peak in the 1820s: his clear if pompous lectures, given from 1820 in his big room in the new Adam-Playfair building, attracted an audience of over 500 and fees of about $2000 per annum from his exceptionally heterogeneous class, which was open to any man who could pay. Numerous foreigners, from princes to ancient historians, were impressed by his chemical drama. In spring 1826 he reached the zenith of his popularity when he gave a course to which women and their beaux were admitted; the fees from the audience of over 600 enabled him in 1828 to give $800 to found a university chemistry prize. In 1826 Hope was a conspicuous protagonist in the professorial quarrelling which was endemic at Edinburgh. Publicly reviled by one colleague as a mere showman, he himself had to pay $500 to another for defamation. In 1823 he became a vice-president of the RSE. 
Until 1823 Hope provided no opportunities for students to do practical work. He then grudgingly arranged for his own lecture assistant, John Wilson Anderson, to run a practical class at his own responsibility and risk. By the early 1830s Hope was under threat. In 1833 David Boswell Reid (1805-1863), then in charge of the practical class, lobbied Edinburgh town council, which supervised the university, to create a separate chair of practical chemistry. This proposal was successfully opposed by the university senate and by Hope who vigorously defended his professorial monopoly. By this point, indifferent to research, to practical chemistry, and to contact with industry, he resisted any addition to the lecturing which had brought him esteem and wealth for three decades. Next year the town council seriously considered but rejected the establishment of a separate lectureship in practical chemistry. 
Hope maintained his control of practical chemistry at the cost of publicly displayed ill will, the discrediting of the university's course of practical chemistry, and a severe drop in the size of his class and income from 1833. He continued to teach until summer 1843 when he resigned his chair; his last class numbered only 118. A wealthy bachelor, he remained a leading figure in Edinburgh's polite society, and was reputed to be capable of eating eight plates of turtle. He lived in Moray Place, a select part of Edinburgh's New Town, enjoyed his vice-presidency of the Edinburgh Royal Society, and in 1837 presided by invitation over the centenary dinner of the Royal Medical Society of Edinburgh. After a long illness Hope died of paralysis on 13 June 1844 at his home. He was buried at Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh, on 18 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 13739


Hope, Sir William Johnstone (1766-1831), naval officer and politician, third son of John Hope (1739-1785) of Craigiehall, Linlithgow, Scotland, a London merchant, and his wife, Mary 'nee' Breton (1741/2-1767), was born at Finchley, Middlesex, on 16 August 1766. Charles Hope, judge, and Sir John Hope, army officer, were his brothers. He was first cousin of Admiral Sir Henry Hope. He attended Edinburgh high school from 1774 to 1776. In January 1777 he entered the navy under his uncle, Captain Charles Hope (died 1808), on the 'Weasel', and served with him in different ships on the home, Lisbon, and Newfoundland stations until, in October 1782, he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Daedalus', serving on the Newfoundland and home stations. In 1785 he rejoined his uncle as lieutenant of the 'Sampson', guardship at Plymouth, and in March 1786 was appointed to the frigate 'Pegasus', commanded by Prince William Henry, with whom he quarrelled, in the West Indies. In May 1787 he was moved to the 'Boreas', with Nelson as captain, and in her returned to England. In 1789 he went to Newfoundland in the 'Adamant' with Sir Richard Hughes, who, in 1790, promoted him commander, and appointed him acting captain of the 'Adamant'. 
Hope married, on 8 July 1792, Lady Anne Hope Johnstone (died 28 Aug 1818), eldest daughter of James Hope Johnstone, third earl of Hopetoun; they had two daughters and four sons, of whom Sir William James Hope-Johnstone, rear-admiral, died in 1878. 
In 1793 Hope commanded the fireship 'Incendiary' in the channel, and on 21 March 1794 was posted to the 'Bellerophon', flagship of Rear-Admiral Pasley, with whom he served in the battle of 1 June 1794 in the north Atlantic. In January 1795 he was appointed to the 'Tremendous', but in March was moved into the 'Venerable' as flag captain to Admiral Duncan. An accidental blow on the head compelled him to resign this command in September 1796; he did not serve again until February 1798, when he was appointed to the 'Kent', again as flag captain to Lord Duncan. 
On the surrender of the Dutch Texel fleet on 28 August 1799, Hope was sent to England with the dispatches, when he was presented by the king with $500 for the purchase of a sword. He was shortly afterwards made a commander of the knights of St John by the tsar, whose fleet had been co-operating with the British. The 'Kent' then went to the Mediterranean to join the fleet under Lord Keith, and in November 1800 received Sir Ralph Abercromby on board at Gibraltar, to sail to Egypt. In the early operations of the 1801 campaign Hope was present, but he resigned his command when the 'Kent' was selected by Sir Richard Bickerton as his flagship, and returned to England. 
In 1800 Hope had been elected member of parliament for the Dumfries burghs, and in October 1804 was returned for the county of Dumfries, which he continued to represent until 1830. Both constituencies were under the patronage of Henry Dundas, Lord Melville. Hope was rarely active in the house. 
In the summer of 1804 Hope commanded the 'Atlas' in the North Sea, but was obliged by failing health to resign. From 1807 to 1809 he was one of the lords of the Admiralty under Lord Mulgrave; in August 1812 he attained his flag, and from 1813 to 1818 was commander-in-chief at Leith. In 1815 he was appointed a KCB; in August 1819 he became a vice-admiral; and from 1820 to 1828 he was at the Admiralty, later becoming a member of council of the lord high admiral. 
A well-connected Scottish conservative politician and sea officer, part of the 'Dundas despotism', Hope served as senior naval lord in the last decade of the unreformed Admiralty. In this period naval policy was largely developed by the controller of the navy, Admiral Sir Thomas Byam Martin, under the authority of the first lord, Lord Melville. The first naval lord's duties were light, and in peacetime predominantly political. Hope's unremarkable talents and advanced years proved unequal to the political tensions of the period following the collapse of Lord Liverpool's administration in 1827, and he was replaced by the more astute and effective Sir George Cockburn in March 1828. He was appointed treasurer of the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, and, when that office was abolished, became one of five commissioners for managing the hospital. 
On 30 October 1821 Hope married Maria 'nee' Eden, dowager countess of Athlone (1769/70-5 March 1851), widow of Frederik Willem van Reede, sixth earl of Athlone. They had no children. He was nominated GCB in 1825. He resigned his parliamentary seat in 1830 and died the following year, on 2 May, in Bath; he was buried at Johnstone church, Johnstone, Dumfriesshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 13740


William Williams Hope (1802-1855). Inheriting a large fortune, W. W. Hope purchased Rushton Hall in Northamptonshire, but spent most of his life in fashionable Paris. A noted eccentric, he was said to possess a magnificent set of diamonds, which he often wore on his own person. Detesting male society, W. W. Hope was also reputed to maintain a coterie of eighteen ladies, distinguished by their musical or artistic attainments. He died at his mansion, 131 rue Dominique, Faubourg St Germain, Paris, on 21 January 1855. 
From the 1780s, Henry [iii] Hope reigned supreme over his house, his only rival, from the 1790s, being 


@@@@@


doc= 13741


Scott, James Robert Hope- (1812-1873), barrister, born on 15 July 1812 at Marlow, Buckinghamshire, was the third son of General Sir Alexander Hope (1769-1837) of Rankeillour and Luffness, and grandson of John Hope, second earl of Hopetoun. His mother was Georgina Alicia (died 1855), third and youngest daughter of George Brown of Ellerton, Roxburghshire. Hope's childhood, from 1813 to 1820, was spent at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, of which his father was the founder and first governor. James Hope (as he then was) then joined his parents and a tutor, William Mills, of Magdalen College, Oxford, on a continental tour which took in Dresden, Lausanne, and Florence. After a year at Kepier grammar school, Houghton-le-Spring, under the Revd William Rawes (1823-4), he entered Eton College at Michaelmas 1825. There he was a pupil of the Revd Edward Coleridge. He left Eton in December 1828 and spent much of the following year in Paris as the guest of the duchesse de Gontaut, governess to the French royal family. He went into residence at Christ Church, Oxford, at Michaelmas 1829 and graduated BA in November 1832 with an honorary fourth class in classics. On 13 April 1833 he was elected a fellow of Merton College, and early in 1835 began legal studies at Lincoln's Inn under the eminent conveyancer John Hodgkin (1800-1875), a Quaker, and William Plunkett, conveyancer of the Temple. 
A new era in Hope's life began in 1836 with the beginning of an intense friendship with W. E. Gladstone, his slightly older contemporary at Eton and Christ Church, and with the lawyer Edward Badeley (1803-1868). He was now one of a group of devout young laymen practising a strict rule of life and dedicated to philanthropic activity on behalf of organizations such as the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, and the Children's Friend Society for Emigration. As fellow and bursar of Merton College he developed an interest in its early history, and in 1838 produced a report urging a return to the ideals of its founder as expressed in its statutes. His ideas on the religious reformation of the university in the spirit of Walter de Merton and William Waynflete were expanded in an article on the Magdalen College statutes which he wrote for the 'British Critic' in 1840, at the request of J. H. Newman. His long friendship with Newman began in 1838. 
Hope held Gladstone in thrall by the fascination of his personality, and exercised a strong influence on Gladstone's mind and actions over a period of fifteen years (1836-51). It was he who saw Gladstone's work on church-state relations through to publication in 1838. Between 1840 and 1843 he was closely involved with Gladstone and H. E. Manning in plans for the foundation at Glenalmond, Perthshire, of a college for the education of the Scottish Episcopalian clergy. On an Italian tour with Badeley, from September 1840 to May 1841, he made a close study of ecclesiastical education and developed an admiration of the Society of Jesus. He had designed Trinity College, Glenalmond, which opened in 1847, to be a seminary, but in the event it came to function primarily as a public school. 
On 24 January 1838 Hope graduated BCL at Oxford, and two days later was called to the bar at the Inner Temple. In 1840 he was junior counsel on behalf of the deans and chapters petitioning against the 'Ecclesiastical Duties and Revenues Bill', and when on 24 July the bill came before the Lords on second reading he made his reputation by a masterly speech of three hours' duration before a full house. Gladstone later recalled it as the most impressive display of oratory he had heard in his lifetime. In August 1840 Hope was appointed chancellor of the diocese of Salisbury. It might have been expected that he would make his career as an ecclesiastical lawyer, but instead he chose the more neutral ground of the parliamentary bar, specializing in railway legislation. He rapidly built up an immensely lucrative practice, in due course becoming standing counsel to almost every railway company in the United Kingdom, and his representations to parliamentary committees largely helped to establish railway law. In one year alone he saw twenty-five bills through parliament for the London and North-Western Company. He achieved a notable triumph in 1857 as counsel for the corporation of Liverpool in their opposition to the 'Mersey Docks and Conservancy Bill'. Here he indulged in an uncharacteristically florid encomium of Liverpool, enquiring whether it was to become 'forsooth, the Piraeus of such an Athens as Manchester' ('Memoirs', 2.115). His manner in committee was normally imperturbable and brisk. 
In the early 1840s Hope was closely identified with the Tractarian movement and became J. H. Newman's confidant. The establishment of the Anglo-Prussian see of Jerusalem in the winter of 1841 prompted him to publish a vigorous protest. On 10 February 1845 he resigned the chancellorship of Salisbury, but the process of his separation from the Church of England was long drawn out. The Gorham trial and judgment of 1849-50 and Newman's lectures on the difficulties of Anglicans in 1850 brought his religious crisis to a head. He was received into the Roman Catholic church at Farm Street, west London, along with his friend H. E. Manning, on 6 April 1851. His conversion was a grievous blow to Gladstone, who owned to feeling 'unmanned and unnerved' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 4.325). Hope was dropped as Gladstone's executor, and the friendship never recovered its former intimacy. 
On 19 August 1847 Hope married Charlotte Harriet Jane Lockhart (died 1858), only daughter of John Gibson Lockhart (1794-1854) and his wife, Sophia Scott (1799-1837), and granddaughter of Sir Walter Scott. She became a Catholic soon after his own conversion. In August 1848 he became the tenant of Abbotsford, which he rented from his wife's brother, Walter Lockhart Scott. At the latter's death on 10 January 1853 he became, by right of his wife, the owner of Abbotsford, and thereupon assumed the surname of Hope-Scott. He made substantial alterations to the house. In 1855 he purchased the estate of Dorlin, near Loch Shiel, in an area of the west highlands largely populated by Catholics, and built a house there. In all, he spent some $40,000 during the last thirteen years of his life on the building of Catholic churches and schools in Scotland. In 1859 he was involved with his friend and fellow convert Serjeant Edward Bellasis (1800-1873), and with J. H. Newman, in the foundation of the Oratory School, Birmingham. Hope-Scott was the main adviser and major fund-raiser in this project to establish a Catholic public school. 
Charlotte Hope-Scott died in childbed on 26 October 1858, and their new-born child on 3 December; Walter Michael, the infant son and heir (born on 2 June 1857), died eight days later. On 7 January 1861 Hope-Scott married again, his second wife being Lady Victoria Alexandrina (died 1870), eldest daughter of Henry Granville Fitzalan-Howard, fourteenth duke of Norfolk (1815-1860). The duke had died on 25 November 1860, leaving Hope-Scott guardian of his heir, who was still a minor. He and Edward Bellasis were also joint trustees of Lord Edmund Howard, to whom the Alton Towers estates had been devised by Bertram Arthur Talbot, seventeenth earl of Shrewsbury. After much litigation, a considerable portion of the property was secured to Lord Edmund. 
On 22 August 1867 Queen Victoria visited Abbotsford. In the same year Hope-Scott bought the Villa Madona at Hyeres, in the south of France, where much of his later life was passed. In 1867 he wrote the magisterial statement which contributed to the repeal of the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Act'. His second wife died in childbed on 20 December 1870, nine days after giving birth to a son, James Fitzalan: from this second blow Hope-Scott never recovered. He withdrew from his legal practice and his health declined. In his final years he occupied himself with an abridgement of Lockhart's 'Life of Sir Walter Scott', published in 1871 with a preface addressed to Gladstone. He died at his London home, 7 Hyde Park Place, on 29 April 1873. Newman preached at the requiem at Farm Street on 5 May and the interment took place at St Margaret's Convent, Edinburgh, on 7 May. 
Hope-Scott's only surviving child from his first marriage, Mary Monica ('b'. 1852), married in 1874 Joseph Constable Maxwell, third son of William, Lord Herries, who assumed the name of Scott in right of his wife as heir of Abbotsford. From his second marriage Hope-Scott left a son, James Fitzalan Hope, later created Baron Rankeillour (1870-1949), and three daughters. 
Strikingly handsome in appearance, fastidious and reserved in manner, decisive in the conduct of his profession, and possessed of a strong sense of duty, Hope-Scott was a man who preferred to exercise influence rather than power, and seemed detached from worldly success. It is a paradox that the disciple of Walter de Merton and Walter Scott should have made his fortune as the leading advocate of the railway age. Something of the spell which he cast in his youth can be felt in the posthumous tributes of his closest friends, Gladstone and Newman ('Memoirs', 2.252-65, 2.273-87). 


@@@@@


doc= 13742


Hopkin Hopkin (1737-1754), known as Hopcyn Bach (Little Hopkin), was exhibited to various groups in London, including some members of the royal family. His weight never exceeded 17 lb, and he died in Glamorgan, 'seemingly of old age' on 19 March 1754, when he was in his eighteenth year ('GM'). His suit, 'court coat', and gauntlet are now kept in the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff. 


@@@@@


doc= 13743


Hopkin, Lewis (1707/8-1771), poet and artisan, was the youngest son of Lewis Hopkin ('c'.1675-1756) of Peterston-super-montem, Glamorgan, and Joan (1674/5-1753), daughter of William Thomas of neighbouring Penrhiw-fer. One of his ancestors was the gentleman-poet Hopcyn Tomas Phylip (died 1597) of Gelli'r-fid, Llandyfodwg, Glamorgan, an author of free-metre religious carols called 'cwndidau'. When he was still a young man Hopkin moved to the parish of Llandyfodwg, the birthplace of many of his ancestors, and it was there, at Hendre Ifan Goch, that he lived until his death. Trained as a carpenter, he became skilled in other crafts as well, including those of glazier, stonemason, and wire-worker. In the latter part of his life he took to farming, and he also owned a fairly large country shop. According to his son, many sought his services in surveying, planning, measuring, calculating, and writing law documents. He built a house and furnished it himself. 
Lewis Hopkin became a nonconformist and was a member (and possibly a deacon) of the Independent Congregational assembly at Cymer, Porth. He married Margaret (died 'c'.1775), daughter of Thomas Bevan, a member of a family of staunch Quakers. His eldest son, Lewis (1734-1789), who became minister of the Independent church at Bromyard, Herefordshire, maintained that he was so zealously religious in his latter years that he held meetings on sabbath day evenings from house to house to expound the scriptures, and that he had a pulpit from which he preached whenever he held services in his barn at Hendre Ifan Goch. He was a figure of considerable importance in the nonconformist circles of Upper Glamorgan. 
Hopkin was also a prominent and influential figure in the literary revival that occurred in Glamorgan in the early eighteenth century. As a boy he had received instruction in English, writing, and mathematics, and later, by dint of his own efforts, he acquired a reasonably good knowledge of Latin, to which he also added a wide acquaintance with English literature. He also mastered the Welsh bardic craft and played a prominent role in organizing local eisteddfodau. Some of his poems appeared in various eighteenth-century almanacs and in the journal called 'Trysorfa Gwybodaeth' (1770), and an elegiac 'cywydd' by him was published in Carmarthen in 1769. In 1813 his son-in-law, John Miles, published a collection of his poetry under the title 'Y fel gafod'. His verse reflects the resolute efforts he had made to master the intricate rules relating to 'cynghanedd' and the twenty-four strict metres. He also composed some verses in English and made splendid Welsh translations of 'The Ballad of Chevy Chase' and of James Thomson's 'The History of Lavinia'. The letters he addressed to his son Lewis reflect a devout and cultured mind and clearly testify to his firm command of English. Among the works he had in his possession were English and Welsh books of a literary and devotional nature, volumes on law and medicine, 'The Spectator', and some Latin and French books. Both Edward Evan (1716-1798) and Edward Williams 
(Iolo Morganwg; 1747-1826)
were instructed by him in the bardic craft. 
Hopkin died on 17 November 1771, aged sixty-three, and was buried with his children and ancestors in Llandyfodwg churchyard. Among the elegies addressed to him are those composed by Edward Evan in 'Afalau'r awen', and by Iolo Morganwg under the title 'Dagrau yr awen' (1772). 
Only four of Lewis Hopkin's eleven children lived to maturity. Two of those who died very young were dwarfs, who grew no taller than 32 inches. The girl, named Joan, died of smallpox when she was thirteen. The boy, 


@@@@@


doc= 13744


Hopkins, Charles (1671?-1700), poet and playwright, probably born in Dublin, was the elder son of the Rt Revd Ezekiel Hopkins (1634-1690), bishop of Derry, and his first wife, Alice ('bap'. 1645, died 1681), the daughter of Samuel Moore and niece of Sir Thomas Vyner, a goldsmith. His younger brother was John Hopkins (b. 1675), the writer. A number of eighteenth-century authorities state that Hopkins was born in Exeter, perhaps in 1664, but the well-documented career of his father, who left London and became the minister of St Mary Arches, Exeter, in 1666, and who accompanied John, Lord Robartes of Truro, to Ireland as the lord lieutenant's chaplain in 1669, makes this account difficult to sustain. On 7 July 1685, moreover, when his age was recorded as fourteen, Hopkins was admitted to Trinity College, Dublin. He continued his education at Queens' College, Cambridge, where he was admitted pensioner on 14 May 1687. He graduated BA in 1688/9. 
Following the events of 1688, Hopkins returned to Ireland. Over his loyalties records again differ, but it is probable that he fought for the protestant cause. He subsequently settled in London, where he led a fashionably dissolute life. Although he was admitted to the Middle Temple on 17 August 1695, he moved in predominantly literary circles, counting among his acquaintance William Wycherley, William Congreve, and Thomas Southerne. Hopkins published 'Epistolary Poems on Several Occasions' (1694), a collection of verses addressed to friends and patrons, including Charles Sackville, earl of Dorset, and Walter Moyle, and translations of Ovid's 'Metamorphoses', and the 'Elegies' of Tibullus, which he dedicated to Anthony Hammond, the poet and pamphleteer. He further published 'The History of Love. A Poem in a Letter to a Lady' (1695), dedicated to Isabella FitzRoy, duchess of Grafton, a selection of renderings from the 'Metamorphoses', and 'Heroides', which attracted Dryden's favour and which was subsequently appended to 'Ovid's Art of Love' (1709), a popular compendium of translations and paraphrases by Dryden, Congreve, Nahum Tate, and Arthur Maynwaring; 'White-Hall, or, The Court of England' (Dublin, 1698), dedicated to Mary Butler, duchess of Ormond, an effusive but able Williamite panegyric which was reprinted in London the following year as 'The Court-Prospect', and which may have suggested itself to Alexander Pope during the composition of 'Windsor-Forest' (1704-13; published 1713); and 'The Art of Love: in Two Books: Dedicated to the Ladies' (1700), a paraphrase of parts of 'Ars amatoria', not to be confused with 'The History of Love'. 
The anonymous prose tract 'A Letter to A. H. Esq; Concerning the Stage' (1698), a sensible contribution to the dispute which had arisen from Jeremy Collier's views on the 'immorality' of the English stage, has also been attributed to Hopkins (the initials have been thought to denote Anthony Hammond). He certainly enjoyed a parallel career as a playwright. 'Pyrrhus King of Epirus' (published 1695), a tragedy -- this was his only dramatic genre -- appears to have been written by November 1693, but it is likely that it was first performed at Lincoln's Inn Fields in August 1695, a month when the capital was thinly peopled, as the prologue, by Congreve, elaborates. 'Neglected Virtue, or, The Unhappy Conquerour' was performed at Drury Lane to no greater success, probably in February 1696, and published anonymously that same year, under the supervision of Hildebrand Horden, who took the part of Artaban, a Parthian general. 'Boadicea Queen of Britain' (published 1697) played to applause at Lincoln's Inn Fields, however, probably in November 1697. Hopkins ascribed its success to the versification; he was, Dryden wrote, 'a poet who writes good verses without knowing how, or why; I mean he writes naturally well, without art or learning, or good sence' ('The Letters of John Dryden', 1942, 124), a just, if faintly ironic, appreciation of Hopkins's undoubted abilities. 
Dryden's comments, in a letter of 7 November 1699, were prompted by the opening night of what was to be Hopkins's final play, 'Friendship Improv'd, or, The Female Warriour' (published 1700). It is unlikely that the author saw the production: the dedication to Edward Coke of Norfolk, written in Londonderry and dated 1 November 1699, attests to his poor health. In 'A Select Collection of Poems', John Nichols reprints a none the less characteristically poised hymn written 'about an hour before his death, when in great pain'. Hopkins died in the parish of Templemore, Londonderry, from the effects, it was stated, of a dissipated life, and was buried, presumably in Templemore, on 7 March 1700. 


@@@@@


doc= 13745


Hopkins, Edward (c.1602-1657), colonial governor, was probably born in Elton parish, Herefordshire, one of the seven children of Edward Hopkins and his wife, Katherine, who was the sister of Sir Henry Lello, a prosperous overseas trader. A benevolent uncle without children of his own, Sir Henry patronized his sister's family. He probably paid to educate the elder son, Henry, at Cambridge, he dowered his nieces, and he financed Edward's start as a merchant with a gift of $400. At Lello's death in 1629, Edward's brother Henry inherited the manor of Thickoe in Essex and became warden of the Fleet prison and keeper of the palace of Westminster, an ancient and profitable government sinecure that Lello had purchased for about $15,000. Edward himself inherited shares in the East India Company. 
At some time in his youth Hopkins rejected 'the mixt fellowships, and other pollutions' of the Church of England and attached himself to the puritan movement (E. Hopkins and W. Goodwin, 'The epistle to the reader', [T.] Hooker, 'A Survey of the Summe of Church-Discipline', 1922). He solidified that connection in 1631 when he married Ann Yale (1615-1698), a young woman noted in puritan circles for her intense piety. She was the daughter of Thomas Yale and Ann Yale ('nee' Lloyd), and by 1631 the stepdaughter of Theophilus Eaton, one of the founders of the Massachusetts Bay Company. Unfortunately, Ann Hopkins suffered from debilitating fits of depression that led eventually to insanity. Hopkins and his wife tried various cures, including medicinal waters, but nothing worked and Hopkins was never entirely able to resign himself to 'this sad and great tryall which almost overwhelmes my spiritt' (Edward Hopkins to John Winthrop, 21 June 1648, 'Winthrop Papers', 5.231). Hopkins and his wife had no children. 
Hopkins joined the puritan exodus to New England in 1637 and soon settled in Hartford in the Connecticut River valley. He was involved in the emerging government of the river settlements and from 1640 he was elected almost every year as governor or deputy governor of Connecticut, often serving alongside, or in alternation with, John Haynes. He was especially important in developing the colony's economy, in helping to establish the confederation of New England, in negotiating secure boundaries with the Dutch in New Netherland, and in adding the Saybrook settlement to Connecticut. Never entirely happy in New England, Hopkins returned to England in 1652 and was quickly employed by the Commonwealth government as a naval commissioner, in which capacity he impressed sailors, collected medical supplies, paid wages, and inspected timber, among other numerous duties. He performed so well that he was named an admiralty commissioner in 1655, with a rise in salary. That same year, on the death of his brother Henry, he inherited the manor of Thickoe and the wardenship of the Fleet prison. Elected to the House of Commons for Dartmouth in 1656, he served usefully on various committees concerned with trade and the war with Spain but did not sign the protest against the way the parliament had been packed and took no part in the debate about offering a crown to Cromwell. 
Hopkins probably contracted tuberculosis in his youth and his health was in rapid decline by late 1656. On 7 March 1657 he wrote his will and within a week, on 13 March, he died. He had amply provided for his 'deere distressed' wife so that she lived out a widowhood of forty years in material comfort until her death on 14 December 1698 ('New England Historical and Genealogical Register', 38.315-17). Hopkins also left a large trust fund for the education of young men in New England, part of which was used to found the Hopkins Grammar School in New Haven, Connecticut. 
Hopkins was fortunate to start life under the patronage of a rich uncle but he greatly improved that advantage. Energetic and competent, he could have wanted no better epitaph than the words of an associate: 'Mr. Hopkins... whom we all know to be a man that makes conscience of his words as well as his actions' (Edward Winslow to John Winthrop, 2 Aug 1644, 'Winthrop Papers', 4.453). 


@@@@@


doc= 13746


Hopkins, Ezekiel (1634-1690), bishop of Derry, son of John Hopkins, curate of Sanford, and later rector of Pinhoe, Devon, was born at Crediton on 3 December 1634. He was educated first at Merchant Taylors' School from 1646 to 1648, then Magdalen College, Oxford, where he became a chorister in 1649, before matriculating on 19 November 1650 and graduating BA on 17 October 1653. Two years later he became an usher in the college school, and was appointed chaplain of the college in 1656, the year he proceeded MA. 
At the restoration of Charles II, Hopkins travelled to London, where he became an assistant to Dr William Spurstow, one of the authors of the Smectymnuus tracts, and at that time minister of St John's, Hackney. Hopkins, who conformed after the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662, was elected preacher of St Edmund's, Lombard Street, or, according to one authority, St Mary Woolnoth. In 1663 he published a sermon on the death of Grevill. In 1666 Hopkins left charred and smoking London for his home county of Devon, where he was shortly afterwards chosen minister of St Mary Arches, Exeter. In 1668 he published a 'Treatise on the vanity of the world', dedicated to his wife, Alice ('bap'. 1645, died 1681), only daughter of Samuel Moore of London, a niece of London goldsmith Sir Thomas Vyner. 
At Exeter the eloquence and wit of Hopkins's preaching attracted the favourable attention of John, Lord Roberts, baron of Truro, who, on being appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1669, made Hopkins his domestic chaplain. On 22 November 1669 Hopkins became archdeacon and treasurer of Waterford, and on 8 December he was instituted as prebendary of Rathmichael, though he was never installed there. His entry into the established church of Ireland was sufficient to protect his career prospects from the rapid decline of Lord Roberts in the king's estimation, and his replacement as chief governor. 
On 2 April 1670 Hopkins was appointed dean of Raphoe, and on 29 October in the following year was consecrated bishop there. The same year, 1671, he published a sermon on submission to rulers and religious conformity which he had preached the year before at Christ Church, Dublin. In it, he inveighed against a generation of men who 'thought the debate of a rite, or the mode of discipline, cause enough to warrant arms, and blood, and the ruin of kingdoms' (Greaves, 102). Such sentiments were rather more in keeping with those of the new lord lieutenant, Lord Berkeley, than they were with those of his predecessor. Hopkins resided constantly in his diocese. He was translated to the bishopric of Derry on 11 November 1681. He contributed largely to the adornment of the cathedral of his new diocese, furnishing an organ and handsome communion plate. He also kept a sharp eye out for the discovery of presbyterian plotting. 
In 1685 Hopkins married his second wife, Lady Araminta (or Aramintha) Roberts ('bap'. 1655), daughter of his former patron. On the outbreak of the rebellion in support of James II in 1688 Hopkins fled to England, having offended the apprentice boys of Londonderry by suggesting, in company with many of the leading citizens there, and in accordance with his lifelong commitment to the principle of non-resistance, that they reopen the city gates to admit Tyrconnel's garrison. In May 1689 Hopkins was attainted of treason in his absence by the patriot parliament. That September he was elected preacher of the parish church of St Mary Aldermanbury in London. Hopkins died on 19 June 1690, and was buried on the 24th in the church where he then served. He was survived by two sons by his first marriage, Charles Hopkins and John Hopkins. His funeral sermon was preached by Dr Richard Tenison, bishop of Clogher. Despite at least one contemporary complaint that Hopkins's preaching style was uninspiring, his works long survived him. A volume of his sermons was published by the bishop of Cork and Ross in 1692, and aside from a number of other volumes an edition of his works appeared in 1701. To these were added in 1712 his 'Doctrine of the two covenants', 'Doctrine of the two sacraments', and 'Death disarmed of sting'. An edition of his works was published in four volumes by Josiah Pratt in 1809. 


@@@@@


doc= 13747


George Hopkins (1620-1666), clergyman and ejected minister, then vicar of All Saints, Evesham. It is not certainly known whether the wife who survived George Hopkins, Margaret, was also William's mother. George Hopkins was born at Bewdley, Worcestershire, on 15 April 1620, the son of William Hopkins (died in or after 1641), who was described by Richard Baxter as 'the most eminent, wise, and truly religious magistrate of Bewdley' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.92). George matriculated from New Inn Hall, Oxford, in 1638, graduating BA in 1641 and proceeding MA in 1648. Vicar of Evesham from 1642 he also served in the parliamentarian armies, presumably as a chaplain. Hopkins was, like his father, a friend of Baxter, who wrote a preface for his 'Salvation from Sin' (1655) and later cited him as the authority for 'the certainest and fullest instance of witchcraft that ever I knew' ('Calamy rev.', 275). In the 1650s George Hopkins was an assistant to the Worcestershire commission of ejectors and an active member of the Worcestershire association of ministers. He was ejected from his living in 1662 under the 'Act of Uniformity', and moved to Dumbleton, Gloucestershire. There he took the so-called Oxford oath to avoid further proscription under the 'Five Mile Act' of 1665. He died between 2 March (when he made his will) and 30 June 1666 (when it was proved). 


@@@@@


doc= 13748


Hopkins, John (1520/21-1570), psalmodist and Church of England clergyman, was born at Wednesbury, Staffordshire. Nothing is known of his family or early life. He is probably identifiable with the John Hopkins who supplicated for the degree of BA at Oxford in March 1544 (he 'determined' in 1545). After Oxford Hopkins seems to have migrated to London and become acquainted with Edward Whitchurch, printer of the 1549 'Book of Common Prayer' and Thomas Sternhold's 'Certayne Psalmes' in English metre ('STC' 2419). On 22 August 1549 Whitchurch was one of the witnesses to Sternhold's will. On 24 December 1549 he published 'Al such Psalmes of David as Thomas Sternehold late grome of the kinges majesties robes, didde in his life time draw into English metre', in which Sternhold's texts were followed by a preface to the reader, signed I. H., and a separate sequence of 'Psalms' 30, 33, 42, 52, 79, 82, and 146 (in later editions attributed to John Hopkins). These, Hopkins explained, were added 'especially to fyll up a place... that the booke maye ryse to his juste volume', implying a commission by the printer (T. Sternhold, 'Al such Psalmes', sig. G2'v'). There is no evidence that Hopkins knew Sternhold personally and no likelihood that they collaborated; Whitchurch provided the link between them. 
Whitchurch worked in Fleet Street, which provides circumstantial evidence for identifying the psalmist with the John Hopkyns ordained deacon on 2 November 1551, and priest, on 15 May 1552, by Nicholas Ridley, bishop of London. The ordination record of 1551 gives his age (thirty) and place of birth, and describes him as resident in the parish of St Bride's (Fleet Street), London, for the past four years. Nothing is known of Hopkins's whereabouts between his ordination and his institution to the parish of Great Waldingfield, Suffolk, on 12 August 1561 by John Parkhurst, bishop of Norwich; on 11 May 1563 Hopkins was also instituted into the living of the neighbouring parish, Chilton. 
During the 1550s, if not before, Hopkins may have been a schoolmaster. Edward Hake's dedication of 'A Compendious Fourme of Education' (1574) reminds John Harlowe how they were 'trained up' together 'with the instructions of that learned and exquisite teacher, Maister John Hopkins, that worthy Schoolemaister, nay rather, that most worthy parent unto all children committed to his charge of education'. Hake ('b'. 'c'.1544) came from Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, and may have been at school there. He appears to be name-dropping in mentioning Hopkins, who was widely known from 1562, when John Day printed 'The whole booke of Psalmes, collected into Englysh metre by T. Starnhold, J. Hopkins & others': an amalgamation of his two earlier collections of eighty-two psalms (1561; 'STC' 2429) and 'The residue of all Davids psalmes in metre, made by John Hopkins and others' (1562; 'STC' 2429.5). 
By 1562 Hopkins had composed fifty-four new psalm versions replacing twelve of William Kethe's versions printed in 1561 ('Psalms' 27, 36, 47, 54, 58, 62, 70, 85, 88, 90-91, 94) and three of William Whittingham's ('Psalms' 50, 67, 71), whereby it seems that contributions by Marian exiles were being demoted. Hopkins also composed versions of 'Psalms' 24, 26, 28, 31, 35, 38-40, 45-6, 48, 55-7, 59-61, 64-5, 69, 72, 74, 76-7, 80-81, 83-4, 86-7, 89, 92-3, 95-9, and 102. 
Hopkins's reputation has been distorted by association with former Anglo-Genevan exiles who became the focus for non-conformity in the Elizabethan church. In part this is because, as with Sternhold, his literary reputation as a metrical psalmist was based on texts which were substantially revised by Whittingham and others for the use of the Anglo-Genevan community in 1556 ('STC' 16561; and 'STC 1475-1640', 2.87-90, table of liturgies; for the unrevised London editions printed up to 1553, see chart of editions in 'STC, 1475-1640', 1.99-103). 
Hopkins's will, dated 10 October 1570, made his wife, Anne, his principal heir and sole executor, and shows a concern for the supervision of his son's education, making it more likely that the rector of Great Waldingfield was Hake's former schoolmaster. For five years after his death Hopkins willed that his son John should be brought up in learning, at the grammar school, at his wife's costs. Thereafter he left $20 'to be bestowed uppon hym in Learninge' under the supervision of Thomas Spencer, rector of Hadleigh, Suffolk (who had supplicated for his BA degree the same date as Hopkins) or Edward Colman of Waldingfield. He also bequeathed to his son all his Latin books. He left $10 to each of his daughters, Martha and Sara, and also ten lambs to Martha 'to be delivered to her when her mother shall se good', indicating that this Suffolk pastor also tended real sheep. There were small bequests to servants and friends, and, significantly, provision of 6's'. 8died for some learned man to preach a funeral sermon in Waldingfield on the day of his burial. To Colman, who was to supervise the will, he gave his copy of 'master bolinger his sermondes uppon the 'Revelacon' in english' (H. Bullinger, 'A Hundred Sermons upon the Apocalyps', 1561), which Parkhurst had directed ministers in his diocese to procure. Hopkins was buried at Great Waldingfield on 23 October 1570. 
Hopkins's literary reputation in print began with John Bale who referred to him in 1559 as 'not the least significant of British poets of our time' and one who would make the 'Psalms' known to his posterity 'by the elegant, harmonious arrangement of words in English measures' (Bale, 'Cat.', 113). Thomas Fuller (1662) celebrated the English metrical psalms and Alexander Pope allowed that 'Hopkins and Sternhold glad the heart with 'Psalms'' but saw their 'pathetic strains' as the means by which the 'Boys and Girls whom charity maintains / Implore your help' (A. Pope, 'Imitations of Horace's Epistles', bk 2, no. 1, lines 230-32). Sternhold and Hopkins were never partners in life, but in death their names have been inseparable. Thomas Warton's 'History of English Poetry' (1774-81) suggested that Hopkins was a better English poet than Sternhold, but generally, the ballad measures and popular diction of these lyrics alienated those who aspired to more refined poetic fashions. From 1562 until the 1690s the Elizabethan metrical psalms were the best-known English verses because every English man, woman, and child sang them in church. Hopkins was the author of the largest number, 61 out of 150 psalms. 


@@@@@


doc= 13749


Hopkins, John (b. 1675), poet, was born on 1 January 1675, the second son of Ezekiel Hopkins (1634-1690), bishop of Derry, and younger brother of Charles Hopkins. A John Hopkins was admitted sizar at Jesus College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1693-4, and proceeded MA in 1698. This John Hopkins was ordained deacon at Norwich in March 1698, and priest at York in September that year. 
In 1698 Hopkins published two Pindaric poems: 'The triumphs of peace, or, The glories of Nassaw... written at the time of his grace the duke of Ormond's entrance into Dublin', and 'The Victory of Death, or, The Fall of Beauty', on the death of Lady Cutts. In the following year he issued 'Milton's 'Paradise Lost' imitated in rhyme, in the fourth sixth and ninth Books: containing the primitive loves, the battel of the angels, the fall of man', apologizing in the preface for his audacity on the ground that ''when I did it, I did not so well Percieve the Majesty and Noble air of' Mr. Milton's 'style as now I do'' (J. Hopkins, 'Milton's 'Paradise Lost'', 1699, 1). 
Hopkins's last work was a collection of indifferent love-verses and translations from Ovid, 'Amasia, or, The Works of the Muses' (1700), with an 'Epistle Dedicatory' to the duchess of Grafton, and dedications of particular sections to various persons of distinction. Referring in the preface to his brother's renderings of Ovid ('very well perform'd') he observes, 'mine were written in an other Kingdom before I knew of his' (sig. A4). The author's portrait, engraved by F. H. Van Hove and subscribed with his assumed name, Sylvius, is prefixed to this work. 


@@@@@


doc= 13750


Hopkins, John Larkin (1819-1873), organist and composer, the son of a musician, Edward Hopkins, was born in Westminster on 25 November 1819. The organist Edward John Hopkins (1818-1901) was his cousin. Two further cousins, as well as his uncle and at least one brother, were also musicians. He sang for several years as a chorister in Westminster Abbey under the supervision of James Turle, organist and master of the choristers. After leaving the abbey choir Hopkins devoted himself to the study of music, and particularly of the organ, with such success that in 1841, at the age of twenty-two, he was chosen to succeed Ralph Banks as organist of Rochester Cathedral. In 1842 he took the degree of MusB at Cambridge. He published 'Five Glees and a Madrigal', followed by a collection of the words of anthems used in Rochester Cathedral, which was published in collaboration with Revd S. Shepherd in 1847. Hopkins was also the author of 'A New Vocal Tutor' (1855), cathedral services in C[flat] and E[flat] (1857), 'A Collection of Anthems', and several other services, songs, anthems, glees, and carols. In 1856 he was elected organist of Trinity College, Cambridge, and he resigned his appointment at Rochester. He took the degree of MusD in 1867. 
Hopkins died at Ventnor, Isle of Wight, on 25 April 1873. He was survived by his wife, Mary Matilda Hopkins, who was said to have been Russian by birth and a friend of Wagner. Their son Edward Larkin Hopkins (died 9 July 1910) became a priest. 


@@@@@


doc= 13751


Hopkins, Matthew (d. 1647), witch-finder, was the son of James Hopkins (died 1634?), vicar of Wenham in Suffolk. His collaborator John Stearne described Matthew as 'the son of a godly minister' (Stearne, 61). James's will, proved in 1634, mentions six children, only two of whom (Thomas and James) were named. The will entrusted the upbringing of the remaining children to the clergyman's widow, which implies that Matthew was then a minor, and hence in his twenties when he flourished as a witch-finder between 1645 and 1647. Practically nothing more is known of his earlier life, and the persistent tradition that he had received legal training is apparently unfounded. But in the last two and a half years of his life Hopkins enjoyed a brief prominence in eastern England, and he is remembered as the most notorious individual in English witchcraft history. 
By the winter of 1644-5 Hopkins was resident at Manningtree in Essex and, on his own account, became troubled by the activities of seven or eight supposed witches living in the town. From March 1645 these and other suspected witches were apprehended and taken to be examined by local justices of the peace, with Hopkins giving detailed evidence against several of them. Thirty-six suspected witches, all women, were eventually tried at the Essex assizes in July 1645, of whom nineteen were executed. A further nine died of disease in gaol, and six were still in prison in 1648. Only one of the accused was acquitted and released, another, Rebecca West, escaping punishment after she became the leading witness for the prosecution. 
This was a serious enough local witch-hunt by English standards, but it marked the first stage of a major persecution. Witchcraft accusations spread from Manningtree to Suffolk, where over a hundred alleged witches were identified and at least forty executed, and to Norfolk, where another forty witches were tried, of whom perhaps half were executed. There were trials in Huntingdonshire, in Cambridgeshire, in a number of counties in the eastern midlands, and in several boroughs, notably Great Yarmouth, King's Lynn, Stowmarket, and Aldeburgh, with the last accusations coming in the Isle of Ely in 1647. It is likely that at least 250 people were tried as witches or subjected to preliminary investigation during this witch panic. Of these at least a hundred were executed. 
The fact that the phrase 'the Hopkins witch panic' is used to describe the trials of 1645-7 demonstrates that a central role is normally attributed to Hopkins, aided by John Stearne. But even if Hopkins was a catalyst, it is clear that the necessary preconditions for a major episode of witch-hunting were present. The influences which had hitherto prevented large-scale witch persecution in England, where both trials and demonological writings had apparently passed out of fashion by the 1630s, were absent in East Anglia in the early 1640s. During the first civil war local justices of the peace were concerned mainly with keeping the war effort going and thus a major witch craze could gather momentum in the absence of their normal restraining hand. Moreover, the war was increasingly being seen in ideological terms, with a consequent encouragement of popular godliness. Moderate ministers had been purged in both Essex and Suffolk, and it is probably no coincidence that one of the zones of Suffolk which was to experience heavy witchcraft accusations in 1645 was the area where the iconoclast William Dowsing had been active a year earlier. 
Thus Hopkins's and Stearne's claims that they operated mainly in towns which had requested their services, although perhaps overstated, are evidently not without foundation. Even during the early accusations at Manningtree, Hopkins was only one of ninety-two witnesses giving evidence against the alleged witches. It remains clear, however, that their investigative techniques were reprehensible. Suspects were 'watched', primarily to prevent them from having contact with their familiar spirits, a practice which amounted to their being subjected to severe sleep-deprivation. This, allied to interrogations which depended heavily on leading questions, led to numerous confessions of doing harm by malefic witchcraft, meeting and making a pact with the devil, having sexual intercourse with him, and varied dealings with familiar spirits. Critics, correctly, identified the advent of witch-finders as something new to England: 'such a profession or occupation', wrote the clergyman John Gaule in a pamphlet published in June 1646, 'has not been heard of heretofore' (Gaule, 88). 
Hopkins's motives in witch-hunting remain obscure. There is a strong tradition, dating from the period of the trials, that his main motive was to make money. Certainly Hopkins did receive payments from some communities for his witch-finding, but often much of the money took the form of expenses for himself, Stearne, and Mary Phillips, a Manningtree woman who acquired a considerable reputation for being able to find the witch's mark. Hopkins, as many would have thought appropriate for the son of a godly country minister, had a genuine concern about witchcraft and may well have been, initially at least, surprised to find himself the central figure in a major witch-hunt. By the time John Gaule wrote, however, Hopkins was probably growing in self-confidence and self-importance. In May 1647 he issued 'The discovery of witches in answer to severall queries, lately delivered to the judges of the assize for the county of Norfolk. And now published by Matthew Hopkins, witch-finder, for the benefite of the whole kingdome'. 
The East Anglian trials of 1645-7 were the only major English witch-hunts and witch-hunting in the Hopkins mode, with its unleashing of enthusiastic popular godliness and the coming to prominence of an obscure man, became one of the symbols of what polite post-Restoration society regarded as the dreadfulness of the 1640s and 1650s. To later generations Hopkins's name has become associated with bigotry and harshness, especially after the making of the 1968 film 'Witchfinder General' (directed by Michael Reeves), in which Vincent Price gave a memorably robust performance as Matthew Hopkins. 
There is a pleasing tradition, still repeated in modern works of reference, that Hopkins was himself swum and subsequently executed as a witch. In fact he died, according to Stearne, 'after a long sicknesse of consumption' (Stearne, 61) at Manningtree, and the parish register of Mistley with Manningtree records his burial there on 12 August 1647. 


@@@@@


doc= 13752


Hopkins, Richard (b. c.1546, d. in or before 1596), Roman Catholic exile and translator, son and heir of Richard Hopkins, was admitted to the Middle Temple on 9 October 1560. He was a commoner of Magdalen College, Oxford (not St Alban Hall, as sometimes stated) by 1564. About 1566 Hopkins became 'wearied with the heresy' of Middle Temple, according to Anthony Wood (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.567), and he went into exile at Louvain, where he was befriended by Thomas Harding. After a period of study in Spain he returned to Louvain by 1579, when he lodged with Anne, Lady Hungerford, the sister of Jane Dormer, duchess of Feria. 
Following the advice of Thomas Harding, who had earlier urged Hopkins to undertake the translation of Spanish devotional works as being spiritually more profitable than controversy, he published at Paris in 1582 a translation of part one of the 'Libro de la oracion y meditacion' by the Spanish Dominican Luis de Granada. This was dedicated to the benchers of the inns of court, as was his translation of part one of the same author's 'Memorial de la vida Christiana', published at Rouen in 1586. The two works, based on a scholarly recension of the Spanish text, illustrated and designed for the use of the laity, enjoyed wide popularity. The first work, 'Of Prayer and Meditation', went into eleven protestant editions between 1592 and 1634, and at least three protestant editions of the 'Memoriall of a Christian Life' had been published by the end of Elizabeth's reign. The florid devotional style is thought to have influenced the language of Crashaw and Vaughan. Hopkins's translation of part two of the 'Memorial' was published after his death in John Heigham's 'Six Spirituall Bookes' (1611). 
From 1579 Hopkins was a close associate of William Allen, and he was a leading member of the English Catholic emigre community in Flanders. As Allen's agent Hopkins was possibly involved in clandestine negotiations for peace between England and Spain about 1594. In a report drawn up for the Archduke Ernest, governor of the Low Countries, in 1594, Hopkins was described as 'a man of great loyalty and zeal in the service of God and the King' (Loomie, 'Creswell's 'Informacion'', 472, 476). In 1596, having died in Louvain, he was listed as a deceased pensionary of the Spanish crown. 


@@@@@


doc= 13753


Hopkins, William (fl. 1674), stenographer and writing master, wrote 'The flying pen-man, or, The art of short-writing by a more easie, exact, compendious, and speedy way' (1674), using a system related to those of Thomas Shelton, Jeremiah Rich, and especially Theophilus Metcalfe. Beautifully engraved with ornamental borders and a frontispiece portrait of Hopkins by Jan Drapentier, the volume contains laudatory poems by Albertus Warren, E. Coles (possibly Elisha Coles, the stenographer), and E[dward?] Beecher. The poem by Warren below the portrait notes the 'mild but serious visage' of the handsome, austere, and scholarly Hopkins, whose 'tongue for Speed' is stated to be 'matched by the pen'. Hopkins is depicted writing 'Psalm 117' in shorthand as he sits before a bookcase containing the titles of ten works by stenographic predecessors, among them John Willis, William Folkingham, William Mason, Rich, and Shelton. Hopkins's own subtitle pays tribute to Theophilus Metcalfe. 
While 'The Flying Pen-Man' contained 'nothing new in the art' (Pitman, 19), the work does present a clear exposition of his system. Hopkins provides a useful dictionary of common words, showing how they would be spelt if sounded in his shorthand system and what letters were to be omitted, and also a list of phrases commonly used in sermons, demonstrating the close link between religion and seventeenth-century stenography. In his preface, Hopkins makes an oblique reference to the advantageous secret uses of shorthand by protestant travellers and merchants abroad, stating that: 'twas a maine part of my designe in this... to accomodate our Merchants and others English in the parts beyond the Seas, with this Succinct Secret and Litle Pocket Consort, that there, in dispite of Misguided Zeal the Doctrine which is only necessary (but forbidden to be read in our Native Language on the other side of the water) may be read secretly and at pleasure with safetie because Secret.' The preface suggests that Hopkins was a fervent admirer of Sir Walter Raleigh ('Sr W R'). 


@@@@@


doc= 13754


Hopkins, William (1647-1700), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was born at Evesham, Worcestershire, on 2 August 1647, and baptized on 28 August, the son of 
William Hopkins was educated at Evesham grammar school and matriculated as a commoner of Trinity College, Oxford, in October 1661. He moved to St Mary Hall in 1666, and proceeded MA in 1668. In 1671-2 he accompanied Henry Coventry (1619-1686) as his chaplain on an embassy to Sweden. Coventry returned to become secretary of state, Hopkins returned with an enthusiastic interest in the languages and history of the Germanic north. With Coventry's support he was appointed a prebendary of Worcester Cathedral, where he was installed in March 1675. He married Averill (died 1691), daughter of Thomas Martin, on 3 February 1678. 
From that time Hopkins worked closely with the dean of Worcester, the learned George Hickes, the nonjuror, both in the cathedral chapter and in pioneering studies of Old English. He did not, however, immediately take up residence in Worcester. The dean and chapter appointed him to the curacy of Mortlake, Surrey, in June 1678, and in 1680 he was afternoon preacher at St Lawrence Jewry, London, then newly rebuilt by Wren. He exchanged Mortlake for the vicarage of Lindridge, Worcestershire, in 1686, and then went to live in the city. He was appointed master of St Oswald's Hospital, Worcester, in 1697 but surrendered his salary there to establish an endowment for the hospital. His wife, Averill, died in 1691; he married for a second time in 1699 Elizabeth, 'nee' Bromley, widow of Dr Thomas Whitehorne of Tewkesbury. 
Hopkins proceeded DD on 5 July 1692. He had combined his theological and his historical interests in 1686 in publishing Bertramnus of Corbie's eucharistic tract 'De sanguine et corpore domini' as 'The Book of Bertram or Ratramnus Concerning the Body and Blood of the Lord', with Latin text and an English translation. In 1691 he ventured into religion and politics in 'Animadversions on Mr Johnson's Answer to Jovian'. By that time George Hickes had been deprived of his deanery for not taking the oaths to William and Mary, and 'Animadversions' was a contribution to a convoluted exchange on divine right and unconditional obedience between Hickes, writing as Jovian, and Samuel Johnson (1649-1703), the author of 'Julian the Apostate'. Hopkins's intervention was largely a mark of his friendship with Hickes, which was evidently not impaired by his own conformity to the new regime. He was generally more concerned with scholarship than politics. He assisted Edmund Gibson, later bishop of London, in preparing 'Chronicon Saxonicum' (1692) and Gibson's first translation of Camden's 'Britannia'. He also provided Anthony Wood with lists of Worcester clergy and other notes for Wood's 'Athenae Oxoniensis', and collected material for a history of Worcester Cathedral. 
Hopkins died at Worcester of a fever on 18 May 1700, and was buried in the cathedral. There was a memorial there to him, which seems to have named only his first wife. It was later removed and lost, but was replaced in 1910 by a small brass inscription in the north transept, which probably marks the site of his grave. George Hickes published 'Seventeen Sermons', from Hopkins's papers, in 1708, prefaced by a memoir of his friend's life and work. 


@@@@@


doc= 13809


Horsa (d. 455?). Bede identified them as the leaders of the Germanic forces invited to Britain by Vortigern, as described by Gildas, and he calculated that they had arrived in 449. By the ninth century an elaborate saga existed describing the history of the relations between Hengist, Horsa, and Vortigern which appears in attenuated form in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' and in rather more detail in a ninth-century Welsh compilation, known as the 'Historia Brittonum', where the defeat of the British is attributed in part to Vortigern's love for Hengist's daughter. Superficially the chronicle narrative in particular appears convincing, with named battles and protagonists. But even stripped of the names of personalities and places, the notion of the originally peaceful settlement of Germanic contingents in a military context may be supported by the archaeological evidence. In Kent, and other parts of southern Britain, apparently peculiarly Germanic inhumation burials can be dated to the first half of the fifth century, and the goods found in them include belt furniture of a kind worn by Germans in Roman military service. That such mercenary captains should turn on their erstwhile employers is highly plausible. The chronicle relates that Hengist and Horsa fought Vortigern at 'AEgelesthrep' in 455, with the result that Hengist became king; Horsa was slain in the battle and Bede reports that a monument bearing his name could be seen in the eastern part of Kent. 
In spite of such details it seems very likely that Hengist and Horsa were mythical founders rather than real personages. Their alliterating names recall other founding figures of Indo-European legend such as Romulus and Remus. The names mean 'stallion' and 'horse', and the possibility that they were in origin equine deities receives some support from accounts that in nineteenth-century Saxony protective roof-finials in the shape of horse-heads were known by their names. The Hengist who appears in Old English poetry as a Jutish leader is no doubt intended to be the same person as the founder of the Kentish royal house, for Bede says that the Germanic settlers in Kent were of Jutish stock. However, the literary references cannot be seen as independent confirmation of Hengist's existence as a real person, as they may have been influenced by the development of his legend within England. 
Hengist is said in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' to have succeeded to the kingdom in 455 with his son 


@@@@@


doc= 14352


Ibar mac Lugna (d. 500/01), bishop, is the most shadowy of the four Munster pre-Patrician saints. His feast day is placed on 23 April in the martyrologies and he is reputed to have died in 500 or 501. He is remembered as the founder of a monastery at Beggerin Island (Becc Eriu, Inis Fail) in Wexford harbour, which survived despite being plundered by the vikings in 813; in 1182 it was granted to St Nicholas's Monastery in Exeter. Ibar makes many appearances in the lives of other saints, particularly in the lives of Declan and Ailbe, the late seventh-century life of Mo Ninne (Dar Erca, Monenna) and the roughly thirteenth-century Latin life of Abban. A brief text, concerning Ibar, in the twelfth-century 'Book of Leinster' adds little. In the life of Ailbe, Ibar acknowledges Ailbe's precedence, a prudent claim since Emly was called Imlech Ibair ('Emly of Ibar'), suggesting the primacy of Ibar. In the life of Declan, Ibar is a companion of the other pre-Patrician bishops. 


@@@@@


doc= 14442


Iorwerth ap Bleddyn (d. 1111), a son of Bleddyn ap Cynfyn and, according to later medieval pedigrees, a daughter of Brochwel, supported Robert de Belleme in his revolt against Henry I in 1102; however, during the siege of Bridgnorth later that year he was won over to Henry's side by gifts and by promises of the Welsh lands of Belleme and his brother, Arnulf of Montgomery. His defection played an important part in ending the revolt, after which he soon seized and imprisoned his brother Maredudd and then granted Ceredigion and a portion of Powys to his brother Cadwgan. However, Henry refused to grant Iorwerth the lands he had promised him in and around Dyfed and in 1103 had him tried at Shrewsbury and imprisoned. Iorwerth was released in 1110 and restored to his portion of Powys. The decision to free him was probably prompted by the threat posed by Owain ap Cadwgan, who had joined forces in Powys with his cousin, Madog ap Rhiryd: Iorwerth soon expelled Owain and Madog from his territory. In revenge Madog had Iorwerth killed in Caereinion in 1111 with the help of Llywarch ap Trahaearn of Arwystli. 


@@@@@


doc= 14495


Ite ingen Chinn Fhalad (d. 570/77) of Killeedy (Cluain Credail, Cell Ite) was far and away the most important of the Ui Fhidgeinte saints. She is commemorated on 15 January in 'Felire Oengusso', where she is called 'grian ban ban Muman', 'the white sun of Munster's women'; the annals of Ulster record her death in either 570 or 577. She was regarded as the patron of Munster and had an unusually high standing for a female saint. This is reflected in her hagiographical dossier which includes two major revisions of a probably eleventh-century Latin life that is no longer extant. The notes of 'Felire Oengusso' preserve a late ninth-century Old Irish poem, 'Isucan', put into her mouth. According to the genealogies and the life preserved in 'Codex Kilkenniensis', Ite was a member of the Desi. Her father is named Cenn Faelad in the genealogies of the saints. The life follows the example of Brigit in describing the opposition Ite meets in pursuit of her vocation. It is no surprise when the hagiographer explicitly calls Ite a second Brigit. The genealogies of the saints even make Ite's mother, Necht, a daughter of Dallbronach, and thus a sister of Brigit's mother. Her life says that Ite eventually founded the church of Killeedy in Ui Fhidgeinte, where she was buried, with the co-operation of the royal family of the Ui Chonaill Gabra. 


@@@@@


doc= 14665


Iarlaithe mac Loga (fl. 6th cent.), patron saint of Tuam (Tuaimm da Gualann), whose feast day is 25 or 26 December. This concern would fit a twelfth-century date, when, for example, the abbot of Clonfert and the archbishop of Tuam were among the three envoys of Ruaidhri Ua Conchobair, king of Connacht, who concluded the treaty of Windsor in 1175 with Henry II. Yet if the original life lying behind the extant versions were as late as the twelfth century, it might have been expected that less attention would be given to Brendan's Munster background, since the rulers of Munster and Connacht were then inveterate enemies. Moreover, the life preserves the memory of Brendan's foundation on the island of Tiree, under Norse control since 'c'.800. 


@@@@@


doc= 15269


Sir Robert Keith (d. 1343/4) succeeded to the lands and office of marischal in 1293. He was appointed warden of the forest of Selkirk in August 1299, and in the same year he joined in the raid into that forest, acting in the interests of the guardians of Scotland against the English. In 1300 Keith was captured during a skirmish in Galloway, and he submitted to Edward I in 1303, receiving the office of sheriff of Aberdeen in 1304. In 1305 he was one of ten Scots chosen to represent Scotland in the English parliament held by Edward I at Westminster, and on 26 October 1305 Edward I appointed him one of four deputy wardens of Scotland, with the office of justiciar north of Forth. Keith was ordered to aid the English against Robert Bruce in September 1307, but he had espoused King Robert's cause by Christmas 1308, and attended his first parliament at St Andrews in 1309. According to Barbour, Keith commanded the Scottish cavalry, consisting of 500 light horse, at Bannockburn, where he led a fierce charge which broke the ranks of the English archers. In the Perth parliament of 1320 Robert I rewarded the marischal with a substantial grant, consisting of the forest of Kintore and of lands in Buchan forfeited by the Comyns, while his brother, Edward Keith (who succeeded him as marischal), also received lands in Buchan. As a result, the Keiths' landed influence shifted to the north-east of Scotland. 
Keith was a signatory to the declaration of Arbroath on 6 April 1320, and was later involved in helping the young David II to escape to France, accompanying him there in May 1334 and returning with him in June 1341, although he was back in Scotland in the interim, as his name appears frequently in the records as sheriff of Aberdeen between 1335 and 1342. He married Barbara Douglas, and had a son, John, who, however, was dead by November 1324. As a result it was Sir Robert's grandson, another Robert, who was designated the marischal's heir, although he did not survive his grandfather who appears to have died in either 1343 or 1344, when he was succeeded by his brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 15275


Sir William Keith (d. in or after 1407), Sir Edward's eldest son and heir, is recorded as marischal in 1354. He was named as one of the commissioners negotiating for the release of David II in 1357 and travelled to England on the king's business in 1358. On 5 June that year he witnessed a charter of King David's at Edinburgh. Keith was present at the coronation of Robert II at Scone in 1371, and was one of the signatories to the second 'Act of Settlement' in 1373. In August 1390 Keith was a witness, as both marischal and a significant member of the north-eastern nobility, to Earl Alexander of Buchan's conditional release from the excommunication which he had incurred for his attacks on Elgin and Forres earlier that year. 
Keith acquired the barony and castle of Dunnottar in Kincardineshire, probably at the time of his marriage (which had taken place by 1359) to Margaret Fraser, daughter and heir of John Fraser and Mary Stewart, sister of Robert I. Dunnottar had been owned by William, fifth earl of Sutherland; Keith and Margaret subsequently granted it to Sir William Lindsay of the Byres ['see under 'Lindsay family of the Byres], probably as part of their daughter Christian's dowry when she married Lindsay before 27 December 1375. On 8 March 1392 Keith and Margaret agreed with Lindsay to exchange the lands of Pittendreich and West Markinch for Dunnottar, which became thereafter the Keith family's principal seat. However, Keith's construction of a tower on the rocky promontory led Walter Trail, bishop of St Andrews, to excommunicate him on the grounds that he had encroached upon consecrated ground, previously occupied by a parish church, even though this had been moved elsewhere by the end of the fourteenth century. Keith protested that his tower at Dunnottar was necessary for securing the safety of his people and possessions, in view of the tribulations and hostility faced by him at the time, and that his use of Dunnottar was in no way harmful either to the new church or to its rector. His excommunication was rescinded on 14 June 1395 by a papal bull issued by the Avignon pope Benedict XIII. 
The tribulations alluded to by Keith involved a conflict between Sir James Lindsay and Robert Keith, son of the marischal, which caused considerable disruption in the north-east at this time; Wyntoun describes a battle fought at Bourtrie in the Garioch in 1395, when Lindsay, leading a force of 400 men, sought to rescue his wife, besieged in Fyvie Castle by her nephew, Robert Keith. Keith's force was defeated, but the local feuding had national repercussions, as both men had close associations with rival factions in the royal household -- Keith with Robert Stewart, earl of Fife, later duke of Albany, who had married, as his second wife, William Keith's daughter Muriel and Lindsay with Fife's nephew, John Stewart, earl of Carrick, later King Robert III. When the council ordained in 1399 that Robert III's eldest son, David, duke of Rothesay, was to govern with the advice of twenty-one wise councillors, the composition of the council represented a distinct bias towards those with northern interests and connections with the duke of Albany. The choice of William Keith, although a reasonable one by virtue of his marischal's office, certainly demonstrated this bias. On 2 May 1407 Keith granted a charter for the lands of Aboyne, and probably died soon afterwards. 



@@@@@


doc= 15321


Kemble, John Mitchell (1807-1857), philologist and historian, was born on 2 April 1807, the elder surviving son of the actor Charles Kemble (1775-1854) and his wife, Maria Theresa Kemble, nee De Camp (1777-1838). He was a nephew of John Philip Kemble (1757-1823) and of Sarah Siddons (1755-1831), and a brother of the singer Adelaide Kemble and Frances Anne (Fanny) Kemble (1809-1893), an actress and writer, whose 'Record of a Girlhood' provides lively glimpses of his youth. Kemble's early passion for grammar and language, kindled by his father and his uncle John, was reinforced by his early education at the school run by the lexicographer Charles Richardson at Clapham. As a boy he acquired a taste for chemistry, and enjoyed making toy theatres, and acting plays with Fanny. He then went to King Edmund's Grammar School at Bury St Edmunds, under Dr Benjamin Heath Malkin, where among his contemporaries were Malkin's son Frederick, Edward FitzGerald, James Spedding (the later biographer of Bacon), and William Bodham Donne, Kemble's lifelong friend. In June 1824 he was admitted as a pensioner to Trinity College, Cambridge, but did not go into residence until the Michaelmas term of 1825. He held a Hewer exhibition from his school and great things were expected of him. 
At Cambridge, Kemble's enthusiasm for rifle-shooting, rowing, and fencing was matched by the attractions of speaking in the union club (of which he was president in Lent 1828) and the private debating society. His fine physique, handsome appearance, expressive voice, and brilliant talk made him extremely popular. He contributed verse and prose to 'The Athenaeum' and in 1826 became a member of the celebrated Apostles (officially the Cambridge Conversazione Society, founded in 1820). His friends, here and later, included, according to Fanny, 'Arthur Hallam, Alfred Tennyson and his brothers, Frederick Maurice, John Sterling, Richard Trench, William Bodham Donne, the Romillys, the Malkins, Edward FitzGerald, James Spedding, William Thackeray and Richard Monkton Milnes' (Kemble, 'Record', 1.299). Eleven of these were Apostles, who exalted liberalism, imagination, and friendship, maintained by annual dinners and copious correspondence. 
At Cambridge, Kemble's strongly independent spirit was shown in his neglect of mathematics, his devotion to language studies, and his passionate involvement in radical politics, including a 'fanatical admiration for Jeremy Bentham, and Mill' (Kemble, 'Record', 1.293). He entered at the Inner Temple in June 1827 and worked alongside F. D. Maurice but confined his studies to those parts of English law that illustrated history or ancient customs. This academic independence and his reference to Paley as 'a miserable sophist' and to Locke's 'loathsome infidelity' led the Cambridge examiners early in 1829 to defer his degree. During the long vacation of 1829 he visited Germany with his Trinity friend Charles Barton, and having left him at Heidelberg went on to Munich and the Tyrol, and began a serious study of German philology. In early 1830 Kemble was impelled to return home, partly by reading of Fanny's triumph as Juliet (in a successful bid to rescue the desperate family fortunes), and partly by his father's securing for him an opportunity in the church. He took his degree on 25 February, rejected a career at the bar, and determined to take orders (an aspiration pleasing to Fanny and to his father), but found he would have to wait for divinity lectures until the Michaelmas term. He spoke frequently in the union, and in March acted Dogberry in 'Much Ado', with Hallam as Verges and Milnes as Beatrice. Kemble's priestly aspiration prompted Tennyson's sonnet 'To J.M.K.', which sees him as 'a latter Luther, and a soldier-priest' ('The Poems of Tennyson', ed. C. Ricks, 1972, 1.280). In July 1830, however, he joined an ill-fated Spanish expedition designed to topple Ferdinand VII, launched by Sterling's cousin, John Boyd, Richard Chenevix Trench, and other young Englishmen. (The affair is described in Thomas Carlyle's 'Life of John Sterling', ix, x, xiii.) By October, Kemble was with Trench in Gibraltar, where he spent his leisure discussing German metaphysics. From the beginning the uprising was a miserable failure; Trench returned in February 1831. Kemble held on another three months but returned to London on 21 May. Eventually, in December 1831, Torrijos and fifty-two of his followers, including John Boyd, were captured and shot. 
Having abandoned his idea of taking orders, Kemble spent the period from Michaelmas 1832 to the summer of 1835 mostly in Cambridge, 'acquiring a more intimate knowledge of the manuscript sources for Old English literature and history than any scholar had since Wanley' (Dickins, 11). His vacations were spent in the British Museum, where he studied Jacob Grimm's 'Deutsche Grammatik'. He opened his academic career with a somewhat premature edition of 'Beowulf' (1833), and in 1834 personally arranged a course of language lectures at Cambridge. His enthusiasm and eloquence initially attracted a large audience, but his Germanic rigour deterred all but the more serious students. In a review of Benjamin Thorpe's 'Analecta Anglo-Saxonica' (which he commended), he launched a scathing but intemperate attack on the current state of Anglo-Saxon studies in Oxford, complaining of its 'idle and ignorant scholars' ('GM', 1834, 1.391). This provoked a caustic counter-attack in a pamphlet entitled 'The Anglo-Saxon Meteor', possibly emanating from the Netherlands and Joseph Bosworth, in which Kemble's credentials are questioned and he is depicted as slavishly following the Danes and the Germans. Letters by Sir Frederick Madden and Dr Ingram continued the controversy ('GM', 1834, 2.483; 1835, 3.43). Bosworth's detailed attack on Kemble's treatment of verbs was not well based and Kemble's reputation survived. Yet Kemble's career prospects were fatally blighted. No professorship of Anglo-Saxon was forthcoming, and at Cambridge he later failed to obtain the post of principal librarian, and that of regius professor of modern history. 
Kemble wrote to Jacob Grimm on 30 June 1832, opening a scholarly correspondence which lasted until 1852, and in August 1834 spent three weeks with him in Gottingen, Grimm finding him very learned in the Anglo-Saxon tongue. On this visit he met his future wife, Natalie Auguste (died after 1857), daughter of Professor Amadeus Wendt (1783-1836) and Henriette, 'nee' Dolitzch (1789-1859). In March 1835 Kemble wrote to her father, asking for Natalie's hand in marriage, and on a later visit he married her by special licence in a Lutheran house ceremony at Gottingen on 24 July 1836 (Wiley, 12). They had three children: Gertrude, who was to marry Charles Santley, the singer; Henry Charles, who later became a colonel in the 2nd Bengal cavalry; and Mildred, who became the first wife of the Revd C. E. Donne, son of her father's friend. 
Since 1836 Kemble had deputized for his ailing father as examiner of plays, and in 1840 he was appointed to this post, which he held until his death. Kemble was then living in London, engaged in literary work, and researching, in the British Museum and various college and cathedral libraries, the Anglo-Saxon charters that formed the basis of his major work, the 'Codex diplomaticus' (6 vols., 1839-48), containing over 1400 documents. This was a foundational work, which well displays Kemble's mastery of Anglo-Saxon and his skill in deciphering documents. It provided the sound basis for his next and most popular major work, 'The Saxons in England' (2 vols., 1849). This had its faults, but benefited from Kemble's ability to relate his findings to the work of German scholars on other branches of the Germanic family of languages. 
For its first few years Kemble's marriage appears to have been happy, but in 1847 he parted from his wife. In letters to Grimm he attributes this to drunkenness and repeated adultery on her part (Wiley, 31-3, 36). At this time he was living with his children in a small house near Rickmansworth in Hertfordshire and was advertising for pupils, since he was earning little from his publications. These were to include many editions and translations of Anglo-Saxon texts and a variety of articles in such periodicals as the 'British and Foreign Review' (which he edited from 1835 to 1844), 'Archaeologia', and latterly 'Fraser's Magazine'. This editorship, which he used to foster the work of his friends, brought him $400 a year, and when it ended he was in dire poverty. The Apostles rallied to his support and paid the premium of his life insurance policy, but he had to sell his library. 
From 1848 Kemble moved to Hanover, seeking a divorce, which presumably he obtained. (The records were destroyed in wartime action.) He delegated his duties as examiner to Bodham Donne, who performed them gratis. Donne became acting examiner in 1849, and succeeded to the post in 1857. At Hanover in 1854 Kemble turned his attention to prehistoric archaeology, and rearranged and catalogued the collections in the Royal Museum, the curators of which employed him for five months to excavate funeral barrows on Luneburg Heath and its environs. He took to archaeology ardently and, though untutored as a draughtsman, rapidly acquired the requisite skills. He made a large number of careful drawings of prehistoric antiquities in the museums of Munich, Berlin, and Schwerin. By this time he was a member of numerous European learned societies. On his return to England he sent accounts of his discoveries to the Society of Antiquaries and the Archaeological Institute, and issued the prospectus of a book to be published by subscription, with the title 'Horae ferales'. This was intended to provide a systematic account of northern archaeology, and supply the means of relating it to other ages and countries. 
At this point the committee of the Manchester Art Treasures Exhibition employed Kemble to collect and arrange Celtic and Roman antiquities, and in February 1857 he delivered an address, 'On the utility of antiquarian collections', before the Royal Irish Academy in Dublin. While there he caught cold, developed an inflammation of the lungs, and died at the Gresham Hotel on 26 March 1857. He was buried in the cemetery of Mount Jerome. His wife survived him for some years. Several Apostles contributed to a fund for the care of his children. It remained for R. G. Latham to edit 'Horae ferales' from Kemble's incomplete papers. The work appeared in 1863, with an introduction by A. W. Franks to the splendid collection of plates, along with translations of Kemble's lecture at the opening of the Hanoverian Museum, and his address to the Royal Irish Academy. 


@@@@@


doc= 15322


Kemble, John Philip (1757-1823), actor, was born in Prescot, then a small Lancashire town between Liverpool and Warrington, on 1 February 1757, the second child and first son of Roger Kemble (1722-1802) and Sarah Ward (1735-1807). 
Although Kemble's parents owe their posthumous recognition to their children, they were not undistinguished in their own time. Roger Kemble was the son of a Hereford barber and the inheritor of a notable Roman Catholic tradition. A recent ancestor, Father John Kemble, had been executed in 1679 for his supposed part in the Popish Plot, and the Captain Richard Kemble who was with Charles II's army at the battle of Worcester in 1651 was Roger Kemble's grandfather or great-grandfather. Roger Kemble was already thirty when he abandoned barbering for the theatre. In 1752-3 he joined a company of players under the management of John and Sarah Ward. Ward was an Irishman with a reputation as a disciplinarian. His company, though sometimes known as the Warwick Players, toured extensively: to Coventry, Worcester, Leominster, Hereford, Gloucester, Brecon (where Roger Kemble's first child, later famous as Mrs Siddons, was born in 1755), Carmarthen. Surprisingly, in view of the later reputation of Methodists, he was also an early supporter of John Wesley's call for spiritual renewal. By 1753 he was entrusting the female juvenile leads to his daughter Sarah, already tall, stately, and refined while still in her teens. Like most of the children she would later have, young Sarah Ward was headstrong on the matter of marriage. Her father may have wanted a fine husband for her, may even have extracted a promise that she would never marry an actor, but her head was quickly turned by the handsome bachelor from Hereford. On 6 June 1753, evidently without parental approval and perhaps after the sentimental romance of an elopement, they were married in Cirencester. 
According to Kemble family legend, John Ward comforted himself by saying that Roger Kemble was no actor. If that is true, it is all the more surprising that he took the young couple back into his company. The probability is that he needed them. He had expansive ambitions. During the 1750s his company performed as far south as Bath and as far north as Liverpool. The birthplaces of the first five of the Kembles' children (Brecon, Prescot, Kington, Hereford, Warrington) chart the itinerary of touring players. But Roger Kemble had ambitions of his own. From 1761 to 1763 he broke away from his father-in-law to set up a company of his own, and in 1766, when Ward retired, he took over the management, sustaining it to general approval until his own retirement in 1781. The Kemble children were born into the theatre; and they were born, also, into a family of religious compromise. Their parents agreed that the sons would be brought up in Roger's faith and the daughters in Sarah's. It was from their mother that the best-known of the children inherited their strong features and physical grace, but an inbred awareness of alternative and equally powerful pulls is a discernible influence on their approach to dramatic character. 
Roger Kemble did not intend his eldest son for the theatre, though the exigencies of management led him to cast the ten-year-old John as the young Duke of York in William Havard's 'King Charles the First' at the King's Head in Worcester on 12 February 1767. Discretion may have been overruled by necessity on other occasions, but a Catholic education was the priority. In November 1767 Kemble entered Sedgley Park School, near Wolverhampton, to begin a period of intense study that would culminate at the English College in Douai from 1771 to 1775. Fluent in French, and grounded in Latin and Greek, he developed literary ambitions rather than the calling to the priesthood that his father had probably envisaged. When he returned to England in 1775, it was with a determination to act and to write. It was probably his sister Sarah Siddons (1755-1831), already making her way in the theatre, who negotiated his engagement with a minor touring company, and he made his adult debut at Wolverhampton on 8 January 1776 in the purple-versed title role of Nathaniel Lee's 'Theodosius'. Over the next eighteen months he had first-hand experience of the strolling player's hand-to-mouth rootlessness and developed the habit of palliative drinking that was his lifelong bugbear. 
Kemble's first secure employment was with Joseph Younger's company, based in Liverpool. Younger had the wit to recognize the young actor's hunger and the acumen to exploit it. Between June 1777, when he and Sarah (already married to William Siddons) went together to Liverpool, and September 1778, Kemble accumulated an impressive portfolio of roles in tragedy and comedy, including Othello (to Sarah's Desdemona), Laertes (to Sarah's Hamlet), King Lear, Brutus, Shylock, Posthumus in 'Cymbeline', Pierre in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd', Ranger in Benjamin Hoadly's 'The Suspicious Husband', and Archer in George Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem'. All these were listed in the repertory of 126 roles (sixty-eight in tragedy, fifty-eight in comedy) that he sent to Tate Wilkinson at York in a letter of application dated 21 June 1778. (The letter is now in the collection of manuscript letters in the Folger Shakespeare Library.) 
The shrewdest of all provincial managers, Wilkinson had already benefited from the quality of Mrs Siddons, and he cherished his reputation as a starmaker. He would come to value Kemble as 'a choice root from my botanical garden' (Wilkinson, 4.75), but the relationship over the three years from 1778 to 1781 was not uniformly easy. Kemble's quest for personal dignity made him prickly, even as a young man, and his response to anything he considered an insult was unyielding. Wilkinson recounts a potentially dangerous confrontation in the York theatre in April 1779. A Mrs Mason was making her debut opposite Kemble in Arthur Murphy's 'Zenobia', and their performances were audibly derided by the daughter of a local baronet in the stage-box. With her continuing laughter accompanying the death throes of the final act, Kemble 'made a full and long stop' and, when urged to go on, 'with great gravity, and a pointed bow to the stage-box, said he was ready to proceed with the play as soon as 'that' lady had finished her conversation, which he perceived the going on with the Tragedy only interrupted' (Wilkinson, 2.20-21). Confident of support from most of the audience, Kemble refused the call for an apology clamorously led by officers of the North Riding militia. The scandal rumbled on for a week, though Kemble knew well that he could bring it to an end by apologizing for the 'lese-majeste' of a mere player. But he, not the lady, was the aggrieved party. In the end, to his gratification, the York audience exonerated him without an apology. By the time he left Wilkinson's company he had won the admiration of audiences at York, Leeds, Hull, and, briefly, Edinburgh. He had also presented himself as a playwright, with his tragedy 'Belisarius' (manuscript in the Huntington Library), which had been earlier performed in Liverpool, and a farce called 'The Female Officer', first performed for his own benefit at Manchester on 25 March 1778. A small collection of his poetic 'Fugitive Pieces' was published in York in 1780, to his later, justifiable, embarrassment. 
Kemble had still a lot to learn about his own strengths and limitations when he left York in the winter of 1781 to work for $5 per week with Richard Daly's company at the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin. He was tall, dark-eyed, strong-featured, and athletically graceful. Importantly, too, he had acquired a habit of diligent study in preparation for the performance of major roles, which he would always copy out for himself. Tate Wilkinson was one of the earliest to observe that he excelled 'where sternness is requisite, more than in the tender passions' (Wilkinson, 2.6). Romeo, then, was not a part for him, but neither, in general, was he suited to comedy. Perhaps envious of Garrick's famed versatility, or that of his own near-contemporary John Henderson, Kemble would never abandon comedy, but it was as Hamlet that he made his Dublin debut on 2 November 1781, to modest approval. As Sir George Touchwood, though, in Hannah Cowley's 'The Belle's Stratagem', he was at best damned with faint praise. Significantly, it was as Raymond in 'The Count of Narbonne', Robert Jephson's dramatic treatment of Horace Walpole's Gothic novel 'The Castle of Otranto', that Kemble first caught the imagination of the Dublin public. The Gothic was a mode that suited him well -- he was a master in the portrayal of brooding intensity, as he later demonstrated in roles he made his own: Penruddock in Richard Cumberland's 'The Wheel of Fortune', Octavian in the younger George Colman's 'The Mountaineers', above all the eponymous Stranger in Benjamin Thompson's version of a play by Kotzebue, in which, according to James Boaden, 'he bore... a living death about him' (Boaden, 2.215). Kemble's friendship with Jephson gave him access to the cream of Dublin society, and his stock rose higher in the wake of Mrs Siddons's trumpeted triumph at Drury Lane in October 1782. These were early signs of a durable social acceptability. 
The Dublin company included such seasoned professionals as West Digges and Anne Crawford, but it was with younger members that Kemble's future would be linked. His sentimental attachment to Elizabeth Inchbald, which dated back to his earliest year on the stage, had matured into mutual admiration. She later painted an impressionistic portrait of him as Dorriforth in her novel 'A Simple Story' (1791), a portrait that would mingle with the Byronic hero in influencing Charlotte Bronte's creation of Mr Rochester in 'Jane Eyre'. A much better actress than Inchbald, though never so sterling a friend to Kemble, was the youthful Dorothy Francis -- soon, as Dorothy Jordan, to become the acknowledged queen of English comedy. Never assured in his relationships with women, Kemble was too solemnly self-important for her taste. Nor did he succeed in his pursuit of the young singer Anna Maria Phillips. In her years of fame, when, as Mrs Crouch, she was the acknowledged mistress of the brilliant tenor Michael Kelly, she was Kemble's hostess on many a convivial evening, but in Dublin she was the resistant partner in what even James Boaden, a reticent biographer, admits was 'a very zealous friendship, perhaps a little romantic on his side' (Boaden, 1.46). On balance, though, the Dublin seasons served Kemble's career well. By the end of the theatrical year 1782-3 Daly had doubled his salary, and he was ready to join his sister in London. 
Mrs Inchbald was away from London when Kemble arrived in mid-August 1783, but she made her rooms in Leicester Fields available to him for the preparation of his Drury Lane debut as Hamlet on 30 September 1783. It was not the most sensational of occasions, but most critics were respectful, and the rival theatre in Covent Garden felt sufficiently challenged to put up its star, John Henderson, as an oppositional Hamlet. Compared with Henderson, Kemble was slow and deliberate, his speaking of the familiar lines punctuated with pauses, designed to carry the meaning across to the audience. 'To be critically exact', wrote Boaden, 'was the great ambition of his life' (Boaden, 1.158). Always indolent in his management of Drury Lane, Sheridan allowed his new acquisition a range of Shakespearian opportunities: not only Hamlet, but also Richard III, King John (with Mrs Siddons as Constance), and Shylock. His benefit on 13 April 1784 brought him $290, less house charges of $107. There were, as there would always be, cavillers. People who looked back to Garrick, or across to Henderson at Covent Garden, complained of a lack of fire, of a studiousness that toppled sometimes into tedium. Already as Hamlet, Kemble was developing his own particular style, which Bertram Joseph has defined as 'his way of working himself into a part, of pulling it together into one overwhelmingly concentrated and classical drive forward' (Joseph, 214), and not everyone had the patience to wait to see what he was driving towards. 
Even so, it was undeniable that Kemble had made an auspicious beginning, and his second Drury Lane season maintained the momentum. After returning to Liverpool and Joseph Younger for the summer of 1784, he negotiated with Sheridan a salary increase to 10 guineas per week, and opened as Hamlet on 21 September 1784. Equally significant was his success in the title role of Joseph Addison's 'Cato', the first of the Roman heroes with whom he became increasingly identified. Hazlitt, with a mixture of exasperation and admiration that characterized his commentaries on Kemble's acting, later described his Cato as 'a studied piece of classical costume -- a conscious exhibition of elegantly disposed drapery, that was all: yet, as a mere display of personal and artificial grace, it was inimitable' (Rowell, 17). Not short of the necessary vanity of the major actor, Kemble not only looked good but also knew he looked good in a toga. He had the Roman nose and handsome head to match it. He also had the confidence to put himself forward as an adapter of plays. The 1784-5 season saw the first of well over thirty performed reworkings of 'old' English plays, most of them Shakespearian. Twenty-six were published in the collected edition of 1815. 
Towards the end of his second season at Drury Lane, Kemble played a 'not easily moved' Othello to his famous sister's Desdemona, and, for his benefit on 31 March 1785, Macbeth to her Lady Macbeth. The production coincided with the publication of Thomas Whately's influential 'Remarks on some of the Characters of Shakespeare'. Kemble was sympathetic to Whately's argument that the individual is a product of the interplay between a predominant principle of behaviour and coincidental subsidiary qualities. He made no secret of the fact that his study of Shakespearian character aimed to identify the leading passion of each tragic hero. But he disagreed with Whately's presentation of Macbeth as the 'type' of a coward. The Scottish tyrant was, for him, a victim of his own unvarying intrepidity: his crimes were consistent with his acts of heroism. Kemble's publication of 'Macbeth Reconsidered' in 1786 -- an articulate, if sometimes confused, rebuttal of Whately -- added to his scholarly reputation. Henderson's untimely death in 1785 had made Kemble the almost undisputed leading tragedian of the London stage, though he had not yet played either King Lear (21 January 1788) or the role which was, by general consensus, his finest, Coriolanus (7 February 1789). But he did not wish to be confined to tragedy, and his new roles in the 1786-7 season were mostly in comedy. In General John Burgoyne's 'Richard Coeur de Lion' (24 October 1786) he even sang, though the popularity of this piece owed more to the voices of Mrs Crouch and Mrs Jordan. In 'Cymbeline' on 29 January 1787, with his sister as Imogen, he played 'by a thousand degrees, the best Posthumus of my time' (Boaden, 1.344) and, on 14 April 1787, another Gothic brooder in Robert Jephson's 'Julia'. 
At the age of thirty Kemble was near the top of his stressful world. There were, however, problems. His winter performances were particularly affected by a troublesome cough and his summer performances by asthma, and he dosed himself with alcohol and opium. Furthermore, Sheridan's erratic management led often to the non-payment of wages; a few years later, according to a manuscript in the British Library, Kemble was owed $1367 in back pay. And, though convivial outside the theatre, he was lonely. It was probably this last condition that lay behind his precipitate marriage on 8 December 1787. The wife he chose was an undistinguished Drury Lane actress, the widow of William Brereton and the daughter of a Drury Lane prompter, William Hopkins. The marriage survived until Kemble's death, but the overwhelming impression is that Priscilla Kemble (1758-1845) never deeply engaged her husband's emotions. He did nothing to promote her career, and did not oppose -- indeed, he may even have proposed -- her retirement from the stage in 1796. If he were to continue to rise in society he needed a hostess, and that is a job the childless Priscilla managed tidily. Marriage to Kemble was a step up for her, and his awareness of that was evidently important to him. But the theatre was more important. Drury Lane needed him, and when, at the end of the 1787-8 season, Sheridan's exasperated acting manager Thomas King resigned, Kemble agreed to replace him. In his manuscript journal he wrote against the date of 23 September 1788, 'This day I undertook the management of D. L. Theatre' (BL, Add. MS 31972). 
As acting manager of Drury Lane, Kemble had every intention of restoring the glory of the Garrick years. It was to be the home of the classic drama, above all of Shakespeare. The new drama mattered much less to him. Kemble signalled his intentions on 25 November 1788 with a lavish production of 'Henry VIII'. In his own performance (initially as Thomas Cromwell, later as Cardinal Wolsey), in the demands made on scene and costume designers, and in his careful disposal of the hoards of extras he was at last able to experiment with 'visual rhetoric' (Bate and Jackson, 99). Odell's claim that Kemble was 'the first great 'producer' of Shakespeare on the English stage' (Odell, 2.85) has substance. There was further evidence of that with the opening of 'Coriolanus' on 7 February 1789. There was virtual unanimity of acclaim for Kemble's playing of the title role, and he would certainly have repeated it throughout the 1790s had not political events in France rendered the play unpalatable to the English censors. 

'Henry VIII' and 'Coriolanus' were by no means isolated triumphs of Kemble's management. Joseph Donohue has itemized his opulent 1794 production of 'Macbeth' (Donohue, 'Kemble's production of Macbeth'), with its sixteen painted scenes and seven scene painters, and David Rostron has shown the care he took over the 1795 staging of 'King Lear' (Richards and Thomson, 149-70). Despite the cares of management, he continued his private study of the roles he assumed. He was playing to audiences who applauded the detailed 'points', vocal and gestural, of leading actors, and it was in detail that he excelled. 'He never pulls out his handkerchief without a design upon the audience', wrote Leigh Hunt (Rowell, 11). But the decorum he valued in performance and in his public life concealed personal stress. There was the rebuilding of the condemned theatre to cope with, and the rehousing of the company from 1791 until the reopening on 12 March 1794. It was a period of extreme national tension, and Kemble was anathema to whigs and radicals. His Shakespearian productions implicitly harnessed the national poet to traditional values, and his personal aloofness often offended. Try as he might, he could not avoid scandal. He fought a farcical duel with the actor James Aickin in 1792, outraged the whig Sheridan by cancelling a performance on 25 January 1793 as a sign of respect to the executed Louis XVI, and lapsed all too frequently into bouts of excessive drinking that exacerbated the gout from which he was beginning to suffer. The abiding problem, though, was Sheridan, whose interventions at Drury Lane were as unpredictable as his failures to act in a crisis were predictable. With the grand new theatre opened in March 1794, and the style of spectacular staging that its massiveness demanded launched, Kemble was approaching the end of his tether. 
The problems were not immediately apparent. On 9 June 1794 Kemble's own musical afterpiece 'Lodoiska' began a successful run which continued into the 1794-5 season. It is a Gothic farrago which, while pandering to popular taste, reveals more of Kemble's own taste than is generally recognized. His Penruddock in Cumberland's 'The Wheel of Fortune' belongs to the same genre. Before that play's triumphant opening on 28 February 1795, Kemble had been forced to make a public apology for his assault, perhaps attempted rape, of a young actress. Undoubtedly he was drunk on that evening in January 1795, and certainly he was ashamed of himself, but the episode had a disturbing sequel. Maria De Camp, victim of the assault, fell in love with Kemble's younger brother Charles Kemble (1775-1854). Their betrothal was announced in 1800, but it is claimed that Kemble opposed the match, forcing a delay until Charles reached the age of thirty. The couple were eventually married on 2 July 1806. Whatever the detailed facts, behind this broad outline there is an emotionally troubled man. Kemble escaped to Ireland with his wife at the end of the 1794-5 season, earning, as he had felt forced to do every summer, a star's money in the provincial theatre. 'Though he is not a miser', wrote Tate Wilkinson, 'yet I believe he will own he does not 'hate' money' (Wilkinson, 3.66). 
When he returned to London in August 1795 Kemble was about to experience the worst year of his theatrical life so far (worse was to come with the Old Price riots). Beset by debts, Drury Lane was in crisis, and the season was a flat one until the opening of the younger Colman's 'The Iron Chest' on 12 March 1796. Kemble and Colman had been friends at least since 1793, when the playwright's 'The Mountaineers' had provided the actor with one of his finest roles, but Kemble found nothing to please him in the Gothic guilt of Sir Edward Mortimer in 'The Iron Chest'. Disdain as well as illness and opium contributed to his disastrous performance, and Colman was probably justified in attacking him in print when the second edition of the play was published. Kemble did not defend himself, but the episode took the heart out of his resistance to Sheridan's determination to stage 'Vortigern'. This Shakespearian manuscript, 'discovered' by a youthful admirer of Chatterton called William Henry Ireland, had been denounced as a forgery by Kemble's friend the Shakespeare scholar Edmond Malone, but Sheridan cared more about the publicity than the manuscript. Bound by contract to play the title role, Kemble mischievously suggested that they should open on April fool's day, but it was on 2 April 1796, before a crowded house, that the travesty was enacted. According to eyewitnesses, Kemble's weighty delivery of the fifth-act line 'And when this solemn mockery is o'er' convulsed the audience, but he was sensitive to the insult to his status as a Shakespearian. He had been threatened with imprisonment for debts that were properly Sheridan's at the end of the previous year. 'Vortigern' was the last straw. At the end of the 1795-6 season Kemble resigned from management and sailed for Dublin. 
This was not the end of Kemble's Drury Lane career. He bargained with Sheridan for a weekly salary of $24 and continued as leading actor until the end of the 1801-2 season. He was even enticed, by promises of the right to purchase a share, to resume the management in 1800. During his final season he faced, for the first time since the death of Henderson, serious competition from Covent Garden in the person of the erratic George Frederick Cooke. His annual money-making forays into the provinces augmented a Drury Lane salary that, in 1799-1800, amounted to $1112. Openly ambitious to share the financial control of one of the patent theatres, he was bent on building his resources, and when his negotiations with Sheridan fell through he accepted the offer of a one-sixth share in Covent Garden, then under the principal management of Thomas Harris. The price was $22,000, of which $10,000 was to be paid in cash (borrowed from his banker friend Robert Heathcote) and the remaining $12,000 set against salary and future profits. 
Kemble's years at Covent Garden ought to have been, and in some ways were, his finest. He was a partner in, as well as acting manager of, a strong company which he had the personal pull to augment almost at will. To begin with, though, he needed a holiday. Leaving his wife to care for his ageing parents (her widowed mother had died in October 1801) and to manage the fine house in Great Russell Street that he had bought some years earlier, he set off with Robert Heathcote in July 1802 for a tour of the continent that would last until March 1803. The trip included a visit to the sadly dilapidated college at Douai, the start of an abiding friendship with the leading French actor Talma, hobnobbing with the nobility in Paris (since the revolution there were more English than French aristocrats there), and crossing the Pyrenees to visit Madrid and to sojourn with Lord Holland in Valencia. He was in Spain when he heard news of the death of his venerable father, and there is genuine affection in the letters he wrote to his brother Charles in response. The Kembles were a close family, so ready to promote each other's interests as to stimulate critics into charges of nepotism. 
On his return to London, Kemble completed negotiations with Thomas Harris that would assure him a management salary of $200 per year and an acting salary of nearly $38 per week. Since the season would not open until September 1803 he spent part of the summer performing in Bath and Bristol and part, according to Boaden, buying books. Over the years Kemble accumulated a theatrical library that was unrivalled. After his retirement he sold his collection of 4000 plays and forty volumes of playbills to William Cavendish, sixth duke of Devonshire, and they now provide the nucleus of the Devonshire collection at the Huntington Library. A residue of 1677 titles, 181 prints and drawings, as well as manuscripts and notebooks, was auctioned by Evans in Pall Mall over ten days from 26 January 1821. 
Kemble made his Covent Garden debut as Hamlet on 24 September 1803. He later played Richmond to Cooke's Richard III, the King in '2 Henry IV', Ford in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' (still hankering after versatility), and Antonio to Cooke's Shylock. Despite a tactful preparedness to play second fiddle to Cooke, Kemble could not win over all of the Covent Garden old guard. Theatres are jealous places, and there was predictable hostility to his importation of his brother Charles and his nephew and niece Henry and Harriet Siddons. No one, surely, would have dared voice an objection to the additional presence in the company of Henry's mother. 
It was evidently among the Covent Garden employees that the nickname Black Jack began to stick to Kemble, whose pleasure in his second season was seriously marred by the craze for the Young Roscius, Master Betty. His motives for promoting the thirteen-year-old Betty at Covent Garden were solely commercial, and he was taken aback by the public's adulation of the beautiful boy. The seasons of 1805-6 and 1806-7 were largely devoted to re-establishing for Kemble and his theatre a reputation for serious devotion to the classics. It was as Prospero in his own mangled version of 'The Tempest' (8 December 1806) that he risked the ridicule of audiences by insisting on pronouncing 'aches' ('Fill all thy bones with aches') as a two-syllable word, 'aitches'. The reason, as with most of the curious pronunciations for which he was notorious, was metrical, but his stubbornness was ominous. As his health failed through the 1807-8 season, when gout and the telling cough -- or the alcohol and opiates he consumed to appease them -- reduced his appearances, there were signs that his popularity was on the wane. The new century, as the old king's hold on reality weakened and the heir to the throne caroused with the whigs, was less wedded to decorum and propriety than the old one had been under the eyes of Beau Nash and the earl of Chesterfield. Kemble, perhaps, suffered by association: 'his patrician air became less representative as England became more industrial' (Bartholomeusz, 150). 
Disaster may have been imminent, but when it struck it was by accident. On 20 September 1808 Covent Garden was destroyed by fire. Insurance covered less than half of the $100,000 loss. It was the generosity of friends and their own Sheridan-free speed of reaction that saved the proprietors. Just less than a year later, on 18 September 1809, a new Covent Garden, designed to represent Kemble's classical taste by the Greek revivalist Robert Smirke, was ready to open with Kemble and Mrs Siddons in 'Macbeth'. 
The sixty-seven nights that followed are famous in the history of popular intervention as the Old Price riots. They followed the decision of the proprietors, taken on the grounds of predictable income, to raise prices for the pit and boxes and, with a dangerous hint of elitism, to reduce the capacity of the gallery by introducing an additional twenty-six private boxes. Marc Baer selects, as the two key elements in gathering support for the rioters, 'the sense that an important didactic function of theatre was being undermined; and that something of the English character was at stake in this conflict' (Baer, 192). Not immediately, but increasingly and then almost exclusively, Kemble became the object of mob hatred and mass ridicule among the astonishingly well-organized rioters. He was caricatured as King John and Black Jack in the viciously satirical prints that proliferated. Popular songs were rewritten to incorporate him: '
Your displeasure and groans he regards as mere trash, 

And he spits in your face while he pockets your cash. 
(Baer, 71-2)' His hunger for aristocratic recognition was pilloried: '
With Lord O'Straddle I drink hop and nob, 

And I am hand and glove with my Lord Thingumbob. 
(ibid., 72)' Confronted each night by a mob set on drowning the play with their chanting, Kemble did his best to respond with dignity, but his body language was read as disdain. It was like York in 1779, but on a much larger scale and without the assured support of the majority of the audience. What had begun as a theatrical dispute had developed into a trial of the nation's liberty, and the outcome, however long delayed by Kemble's stubbornness, was inevitable. On 14 December 1809 Kemble formally accepted the demands of the rioters at a banquet in the Crown and Anchor tavern. The Old Price riots had widened the split between whigs and tories, and it was only the whig papers that announced John Bull's triumph over King John. 
It took all of Kemble's considerable courage to play out the remnant of the 1809-10 season. Over the summer he rested and drank with his friend Francis North, fourth earl of Guilford, in the North family's opulent home, Wroxton Abbey, near Banbury. Kemble was gratified by the warm reception given him at Covent Garden in 1810-11, but the season was essentially one of recuperation and the playing of familiar roles. It was not until 29 February 1812 that he attempted his next, and last, new role, that of Brutus in 'Julius Caesar'. As always with Shakespeare, Kemble radically reworked the text in order to present it in the shape he had predetermined, but the outcome, however questionable by Shakespearians, was 'one of the most significant revivals in the play's history.... Throughout the next eighty years audiences saw no production which did not owe a direct and profound debt to the 1812 revival' (Ripley, 73). Kemble's intelligence may not have been strictly literary, but it was still formidable. Mrs Siddons retired at the end of the 1811-12 season, making her farewell as Lady Macbeth opposite her brother. Kemble's tears on the occasion may have been tinged with envy. He was about to resign from active management and take two years leave from Covent Garden. Apart from a short visit to Paris in autumn 1813 it was not a leave from acting. Having failed to find a buyer for his share in Covent Garden he filled his purse with provincial appearances in Liverpool, Edinburgh, Dublin, Bath, Bristol, and Dublin again. He was preparing for retirement, and his final seasons at Covent Garden had a valedictory air. Even fully fit, he would have been hard-pressed to meet the challenge of Edmund Kean at Drury Lane. Only twelve days separated Kemble's return to Covent Garden as Coriolanus on 15 January 1814 from Kean's sensational debut as Shylock on 27 January. For Leigh Hunt, under the spell of Kean, Kemble 'appears to submit everything to his judgement, and exhibits little of the enthusiasm of genius' (Rowell, 8). For his farewell performance as Coriolanus on 23 June 1817, Kemble shrugged off the ill health that had dogged him. Rapturous applause and shouts of 'No farewell!' followed the fall of the curtain. Four days later there was a dinner in his honour at the Freemasons' Tavern (Kemble had been a mason since 1808): 336 people paid 2 guineas each for a ticket. 
Mostly through sheer hard work, Kemble had saved enough for a comfortable retirement. After some months of travel in Scotland and through France, he and his wife settled in Toulouse early in 1819. His fragile health improved: 'I have never had a cough since I have been at Toulouse', he wrote on 27 February 1820, 'my spitting of blood has, I am willing to persuade myself, entirely ceased; and my fits of the gout have been for this twelvemonth past so slight, that I make a pish at the sufferance' (Boaden, 2.566). Relations between France and England, though, were still tense in 1820, and the Kembles thought it prudent to move to Lausanne in the spring. The death of Thomas Harris in November 1820 brought Kemble back to London, where he took the opportunity to make his will. The disposal of his Covent Garden interests, though, was not so easy. In the event he made a gift of his share to his brother Charles. 'My father received the property with cheerful courage and not without sanguine hopes of retrieving its fortunes', wrote Fanny Kemble many years later, 'instead of which it destroyed him and his family' (Ransome, 11). There was no malice in the gift, but it was typically canny of Kemble to rid himself of an awkward entanglement. He was back in Lausanne for Christmas 1820, settling in to a routine of reading, gardening, and receiving occasional visitors. In autumn 1822 he paid a reverential first visit to Rome, but the trip tired him. Back in Lausanne he suffered a stroke on 24 February 1823, and he died there on 26 February. Boaden, on no very convincing evidence, believes that he had converted to protestantism before his death (Boaden, 2.580). He was buried in the Lausanne cemetery, and a statue in the character of Cato, after Flaxman, was erected in Westminster Abbey, where it remained until 1865. His widow received an annuity of $1000 per annum and the interest from $17,000 as well as household goods. After her husband's death she returned to England, where she lived in comparative seclusion until her death in 1845. 
Because he came between Garrick and Kean, Kemble has suffered by comparison with both, not least because historians have tried to pin him to a single style. He is presented as coldly classical, surrounded on either side by 'hot' actors: '
Precise in passion, cautious ev'n in rage, 

Lo Kemble comes, the Euclid of the stage. 
(Kelly, 193)' His mastery of Roman characters has counted against his posthumous reputation, spreading a picturesque stillness that is wholly imaginary over every role he performed. The probability is that he adapted his technique to the vast new Drury Lane in 1794. Audibility was a problem there, even for actors untroubled by breathing difficulties and a persistently threatening cough. The energetic movement that characterized his early performances would have made things worse. 
A hugely attractive subject for painters, Kemble came to represent the transition from Reynolds to Lawrence. He was, at his most tragically impressive, both representative of what is typical in human nature and what is splendid. At a time when history painting was rated above all other kinds, he pictorialized himself as history in an honest quest for the sublime, and if he sometimes mistook Gothic gloom for sublimity he was not alone in that. 
Kemble was an immensely thoughtful actor, but his thinking preceded his playing. Leigh Hunt, who found much in his acting to criticize, conceded that 'no player, perhaps, understands his author better' (Rowell, 11). But it is important to recognize the aim of Kemble's study. Believing that all human behaviour is explicable, he sought to discover the ruling passion that dictated the reactions (more often than the actions) of the character he was to play. Once that discovery had been made, he reshaped the text to show that passion in conflict with circumstance. It was an intensifying of human experience, but representative of it. As Hazlitt recognized, Kemble aimed always to build intensity towards an explosive climax. Psychologically drawn and physically suited to stoical Romans, he excelled also where pathos and melancholy were dominant and with the fierily single-minded (he was a fine Hotspur). As Joseph Donohue has keenly argued, Kemble strove, both as actor and producer of plays, to present in dramatic form the essence of human nature and its relationship to the outside world as the Romantic age consistently viewed it. No actor is for all time, but Kemble was the supreme actor for an age. 


@@@@@


doc= 15323


Kemble, Maria Theresa (1777-1838), actress, was born in Vienna on 17 January 1777, the eldest of the six children of George Lewis De Camp, a musician, and his wife, Jeanne Adrienne Dufour, a dancer. She was brought to England as a child, and at the age of eight appeared at the King's Theatre as Cupid in a ballet of Noverre. After playing in a theatre directed by M. Le Texier Zelie in a translation of Madame de Genlis's 'La Colombe', she was engaged to dance for the Royal Circus. On the alleged recommendation of the prince of Wales she was subsequently engaged by Colman for the Haymarket, where she appeared in a ballet entitled 'Jamie's Return'. She was then secured for Drury Lane, where, as Miss De Camp, on 24 October 1786, she played Julie in Burgoyne's 'Richard Coeur de Lion'. She remained there for the following five seasons, performing in speciality dances and other small parts, though she also appeared at the Haymarket during the summers. Her father, who died in Germany in 1787, had taught her no English, and the few words she spoke were acquired by imitation. According to the 'Biographia dramatica', reading, writing, and arithmetic were taught her by Viscountess Perceval, and music and Italian by a Miss Buchanan. 
Maria Theresa first attracted public attention on 15 August 1792 at the Haymarket, when, in 'The Beggar's Opera', she performed Macheath to John Bannister's Polly, in one of the experiments of changing the sex of the exponents then in vogue at that theatre. Biddy in 'Miss in her Teens', Adelaide in 'The Count of Narbonne', and Gillian in 'The Quaker' were then assigned her; and she also played some original parts, including Lindamira in Cumberland's 'Box Lobby Challenge', Judith in 'The Iron Chest', and Irene in 'Blue Beard'. In singing parts she was allowed at times to replace Anna Storace and Anna Maria Crouch, and was considered a pleasing vocalist. She continued performing at Drury Lane in the winters, but did not appear at the Haymarket after 1800, travelling instead to theatres in Birmingham, York, Edinburgh, and other towns. In 1795 she received a public apology in the newspapers from her London manager, John Kemble, for his attempt to rape her behind the scenes. Rescued by her theatrical colleagues, De Camp was vindicated in the press and by Kemble himself, who acknowledged her character to be irreproachable. 
For her benefit, on 3 May 1799, De Camp gave at Drury Lane her own unpublished play 'First Faults'. In the same year William Earle jun. printed in octavo a poor piece called 'Natural Faults', and accused De Camp in the preface of having stolen his plot and characters. In a letter to the 'Morning Post', dated 10 June 1799, she positively denied the charge, and asserted that her play was copied by Earle from recitation. In 'Some Account of the English Stage', Genest observed that Earle's statement 'has the 'appearance' of truth'. 
After a lengthy courtship, and some delay given the disapproval of his family, Maria Theresa De Camp married Charles Kemble (1775-1854) on 2 July 1806 at St George's, Bloomsbury. She then accompanied him, and the rest of the Kemble clan, to Covent Garden, where she made her first appearance as Maria in 'The Citizen'; she remained there for the rest of her acting career. During the years that followed, she wrote three additional comedies, and performed in them for either her own or her husband's benefits. Only 'The Day after the Wedding, or, A Wife's First Lesson' and 'Smiles and Tears, or, The Widow's Stratagem' were printed, but critical comment about these and her other works was gentle. Genest described the latter's comic scenes as good, but thought 'the serious scenes... rather disgusting than pleasing'. Among the parts assigned to her were Ophelia, Violante in 'The Wonder', Beatrice in 'Much Ado about Nothing', and Mrs Ford in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'. An admirable actress of chambermaids, she was also excellent as Mrs Oakley and Lucy Lockit. She was good-looking, intelligent, and so industrious that she was said in her early life to have almost lived at Drury Lane. A writer for 'Blackwood's Magazine' (April 1832) spoke of her as 'a delightful dark-eyed, dark-haired girl, whose motion was itself music ere her voice was heard', and commented on her remarkable charm. 
Mrs Kemble performed rarely after 1814-15, but did not officially retire until she played Lady Julia in 'Personation' (9 June 1819). A single reappearance was made at Covent Garden as Lady Capulet on the debut of her daughter Fanny Kemble as Juliet, on 5 October 1829. Maria Theresa Kemble died at Addlestone, near Chertsey, Surrey, on 3 September 1838. She was survived by her husband and their four surviving children: John Mitchell Kemble, Henry Vincent James Kemble (1812-1857), Fanny, and Adelaide Kemble. 


@@@@@


doc= 15324


Kemble, Priscilla (1758-1845), actress, was born in London on 17 December 1758, the younger daughter of two struggling actors, William Hopkins (died 1780) and Elizabeth Barton (1731-1801). It was not until after her birth that her father became established as prompter to, and her mother as an actress in, the Drury Lane company. It was at her parents' benefit on 19 April 1773 that she made her first appearance on the Drury Lane stage, delivering a specially composed 'Address to the town' at the conclusion of 'As You Like It'. In his final season of 1775-6, Garrick employed her fairly regularly in minor roles, most challengingly as Celia in William Whitehead's 'The School for Lovers', but also as the young Prince Edward for his own final appearances as Richard III. At the end of her second season, 1776-7, she and her sister were awarded a joint benefit, where receipts amounted to a gratifying $237 (less house charges of $65). While she was not an outstanding beauty, Priscilla Hopkins was petite and lively enough to win a summer engagement at the increasingly fashionable theatre in Bath, principally as a soubrette. She was probably already infatuated with the talented but erratic William Brereton (1750/51-1787), some eight years her senior. In August 1777 what may have been an attempted elopement on her part, and a mere seduction on his, was foiled, and the couple were formally married in Bath on 24 September 1777. Just what should be read in her continuing to perform as Miss Hopkins during the 1777-8 season at Drury Lane is uncertain. The marriage was probably doomed from the start, but the Breretons acted together at the Crow Street Theatre in Dublin during the summer of 1778, and it was as Mrs Brereton that Priscilla appeared during the next eight seasons at Drury Lane. Substantial roles included Mistress Ford in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' and the widowed Anne in 'Richard III'. The couple's son, Thomas (died 1832), was born in King's county, Ireland, and later joined the army, rising to the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
By 1784, with William Brereton drinking heavily, increasingly unstable, and probably desperately in love with an unmoved Sarah Siddons, the marriage was effectively over. He attempted suicide more than once, and was finally incarcerated in the Hoxton Lunatic Asylum when he threatened Priscilla's life. He died there on 17 February 1787. Presumably consolable, his young widow continued her engagement at Drury Lane, and on 8 December 1787 she made a second startling marriage. Her new husband, John Philip Kemble (1757-1823), was the leading tragedian of his generation, and could certainly have found a more impressive partner. 
None of Kemble's biographers has had much to say about the marriage. James Boaden, who knew the couple best, credits the wife whom Kemble generally called Pop with 'quiet manners, steady principle, and gentle temper' (Boaden, 1.374), and the survival of the partnership, despite Kemble's frequently disorderly drinking, occasional philandering, and tumultuous theatrical career, must say something about her tolerance. What is surprising, given the Kembles' preparedness to promote each other's careers, is Priscilla's lack of advancement, even after her husband's promotion to manager of Drury Lane in September 1788. There is an odd perfunctoriness even about the wedding day: that same evening Priscilla appeared as Louisa Dudley in Richard Cumberland's 'The West Indian'. If she had talent as a performer, it would seem almost as if Kemble, either carelessly or intentionally, suppressed it. If she had not, he was never so starry-eyed as to deceive himself. By the season of 1795-6 her salary at Drury Lane had risen to $6 per week, but that was her last year as an actress. On 23 May 1796 she made her farewell appearance, as Flavia in her husband's adaptation of Dryden and Cibber's 'The Comical Lovers': the play was sufficiently altered to merit the new title of 'Celedon and Florimel'. From then until Kemble's death in 1823, Priscilla seems to have been content to serve as a prop to his glittering social and theatrical career, accompanying him on most, but not all, of his travels until his retirement in 1817. There were social advantages, certainly. Neither as Miss Hopkins nor as Mrs Brereton would she have been invited to Wroxton Abbey as a guest of the earl of Guilford or to Haddo House, Lord Aberdeen's Scottish home. A sense of social achievement breathes through the letter she wrote to Elizabeth Inchbald after her 'every way triumphant' management of the marquess of Abercorn's amateur theatricals at Bentley Priory in 1802 (Kelly, 143-4), while Kemble was in Paris with his banker friend Robert Heathcote. 
From 1818 to 1820, doctors having advised the asthmatic John Philip to escape the English damp, the Kembles lived in Toulouse, and from 1820 until his death in Lausanne. They had sold their house in Great Russell Street and could afford to live comfortably. After Kemble died his widow returned to England, assured of a $1000 annuity and the income from any goods and properties she chose to sell. She lived initially at Heath Farm in Hertfordshire, where she was visited by her niece Fanny Kemble. Fanny enjoyed the riches of her aunt's library, reading Byron and Jeremy Taylor 'on the mossy-cushioned lawn under a beautiful oak tree, with a cabbage leaf of fresh-gathered strawberries and a handful of fresh-blown roses beside me' (Ransome, 19). At some time in the 1830s Priscilla moved to Leamington, where she devoted herself to good works and continued to read avidly. She died there on 13 May 1845, at the age of eighty-six, and was buried in the private chapel of the Greatheed family in St Mary's, Warwick. Her principal beneficiary was her brother-in-law Charles Kemble. In January 1832 her son by her first marriage, Thomas Brereton, committed suicide while standing trial by court martial for his conduct during the Bristol riots of October 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 15325


Kemble, Roger (1722-1802), actor and theatre manager, was born in Hereford on 1 March 1722, the son of Roger Kemble, a tolerably prosperous barber, respected in Hereford despite the family's Roman Catholicism and rumoured Jacobite sympathies. The Father John Kemble who was executed in 1679 for suspected complicity in the Popish Plot was probably the barber's great-uncle. Nothing, beyond the fact that she had at least four children, is known of the elder Roger Kemble's wife, and it is only supposition that his parents were opposed to the younger Roger's decision, in 1752, to abandon the barber's trade for the stage. 
Kemble's first known engagement was with a company based in Canterbury, where he soon formed a liaison with the actress Elizabeth (Fanny) Furnival (fl. 1731-1752). Although she called herself Mrs Kemble (sometimes Campbell), it is unlikely that the couple married, and they were anyway separated when Kemble joined a Warwick-based company under the management of John Ward. The details of the whirlwind romance between the thirty-year-old Kemble and the manager's tall and handsome daughter Sarah (1735-1807) are obscure. According to Jane Williamson, drawing on unpublished family memoirs, they eloped (Williamson, 12). They were certainly married in Cirencester on 6 June 1753. Sarah was seventeen, headstrong and in love, and her father, however angry, was sufficiently fond (as well, perhaps, of her acting talent as of herself) to receive the young couple back into the company. The probability is that Kemble was a lesser actor than his wife, and that the theatrical dynasty they founded owed more to her than to him. The first five of their twelve children were born between 1755 and 1761, while they were touring with John Ward's company, and their various birthplaces (Brecon, Prescot, Kington, Hereford, Warrington) record a theatrical itinerary. Briefly, from 1761 to 1763, the Kembles set up a touring company of their own, but they were with Ward again from 1763 to 1766, when Ward retired and Kemble took over the management. 
For the next fifteen years the Kemble company toured, predominantly in the Worcester region and along the Welsh border, straying occasionally into Wales. The playwright, novelist, and radical Thomas Holcroft, who was with the company in 1771-2, and whose novel 'Alwyn' draws on the experience, describes a travelling company of comedians as 'a small kingdom, of which the manager is the monarch' ('Memoirs of Thomas Holcroft', 93), but his 'Memoirs' acknowledges that the Kemble company 'was more respectable than many other companies of strolling players'. Even so, 'it was not in so flourishing a condition as to place the manager beyond the reach of the immediate smiles or frowns of fortune' (ibid., 90). It is doubtful whether Kemble would have been able to retire in 1781, having sold his theatrical stock and interests to John Boles Watson, had it not been for the prospect of future support from his two eldest children, soon to be famous as Sarah Siddons and John Philip Kemble. His daughter Ann Julia Hatton became an actress and writer. 
The marriage of Kemble and Sarah Ward seems to have been a harmonious one, despite the fact that he was Catholic and she protestant. Their sons, it was agreed, would be brought up in their father's faith, and their daughters in their mother's. All the evidence suggests that the children retained love and respect for their parents and did their best to ensure that their retirement would be a comfortable one. Kemble was at Drury Lane on 10 October 1782 to see Mrs Siddons triumph as Isabella in Garrick's adaptation of Thomas Southerne's 'The Fatal Marriage', and dined with her after the performance, as she gushingly recalls in her 'Reminiscences': 'My Father enjoyed his refreshments, but occasionally stop'd short, and laying down his knife and fork, and lifting up his beautiful and venerable face, which was partly shaded by his silvered hairs hanging about it in luxuriant curls, let fall such abundant showers of delicious tears, that they actually poured down into his plate. (Kelly, 20)' On 26 August 1788, for the benefit of his son Stephen Kemble's wife at the Haymarket Theatre, Kemble came out of retirement for his only known London performance in a forgotten trifle called 'The Miller of Mansfield'. Outshone as an actor by most of his children, he was staunchly supported by his wife. James Boaden, who visited the Kembles in their old age at their cottage in Kentish Town, was informed by Sarah that her husband was 'the only 'gentleman' Falstaff that I have ever seen' (Boaden, 1.6). He recalls Kemble, his silver curls covered by a quaint silken cap to protect him against catching a cold, as a man of great polish and exquisite manners. 
Basking in the reflected glory of his eminent elder children, Kemble had applied for, and been granted, a coat of arms in 1792, no longer a strolling player but a gentleman. He died on 6 December 1802 in John Philip Kemble's grand house at 89 Great Russell Street. It is not known where he was buried, but a letter from John Philip Kemble (who was in Madrid when his father died) to his younger brother Charles Kemble agreed that 'his remains should be protected by a simple stone; but I beg that in the plain memorial inscribed on it, his AGE may be mentioned. Long life implies virtuous habits, and they are real honours' (Boaden, 2.367). In a will dated 14 January 1802 he left his stocks, his household goods, his money out on mortgages, and his five renter's shares in the Drury Lane Theatre Royal to his widow, with instructions on the disposal of the property to their surviving eight children after her death. Sarah died on 24 April 1807 and was buried at the church of St Marylebone on 29 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 15326


Kemble, Stephen George (1758-1822), actor and theatre manager, was born on 3 April 1758 at Kington, Herefordshire, the second son of the eight surviving children of Roger Kemble (1722-1802) and his wife, Sarah (1735-1807), the daughter of the theatre manager John Ward and Sarah Butcher. Both his parents were performers in John Ward's touring company, which Roger managed from 1766. Because of this peripatetic beginning Stephen received little formal education, although his brothers John Philip Kemble and Charles Kemble were educated at Douai. At the age of fourteen he was briefly apprenticed to a chemist in Coventry, 'but stimulated by the example of his brothers and sisters, then on the stage, sought for theatrical glory in an itinerant company' ('Thespian Dictionary'). He appears to have served his theatrical apprenticeship with Mark Moore's troupe at Painswick. In 1781 he joined Tate Wilkinson's company, and played the Earl of Essex at Doncaster in October and the title role in 'St Ignatius' at York in December. In 1782 he toured to Cork, playing Pyrrhus in Ambrose Philips's 'The Distrest Mother' and Wellborn in Philip Massinger's 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts', before transferring to the Capel Street Theatre, Dublin. 
On 24 September 1783 Kemble made his London debut, as Othello, at Covent Garden. Sardonic biographers suggest he was employed in error for his elder brother, John Philip, who joined Sarah Siddons at the rival house in Drury Lane. The author of 'The Secret History of the Green Rooms' was less than charitable about his Othello: 'Never was the heroic Moor so literally murdered. Many exclamations excited laughter; and so fond was he of Miss Satchell, the gentle Desdemona, that in embracing her he would have a kiss; the collision left one side of her face quite black, much to the entertainment of the audience. (Haslewood, 248)' The managers at Covent Garden were not taken with him, but Elizabeth Satchell (1762/3-1841) ['see 'Kemble, Elizabeth] was. She married him on 20 November 1783 at St George's, Bloomsbury. Kemble saw out the season playing Bajazet in Nicholas Rowe's 'Tamerlane', Richmond in 'Richard III', Colredo in Henry Jones's 'The Heroine of the Cave', and other minor roles, and was paid a modest $95 for 190 performances. He fared best with the critics as Sealand in Richard Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers'. The 'Theatrical Review' thought 'his countenance... manly, agreeable, and expressive; and his voice particularly adapted to give energy to such paternal feelings, as Sealand is described to have. His greatest deficiency is -- a taste of manner, and elegance of person' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). These criticisms were to be repeated throughout his career. 
The Kembles left London and toured the provinces, making their debut at Edinburgh, as Othello and Desdemona, on 23 February 1786. Stephen played several leading roles, including King John, Chamont in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan', Don Carlos in Edward Young's 'The Revenge', and Old Norval in John Home's 'Douglas', in a season marred by the death of the couple's first child, George. The Kembles established a regular pattern of winter seasons in Edinburgh and summer seasons at George Colman's Haymarket in London, where 'he [was] merely useful in sentimental 'Old Men'' (Haslewood, 248), including Dominick in Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar', Bonniface in Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem', Mr Sturdy in 'Half an Hour after Supper', and a favourite, Sir Christopher Curry in Colman the younger's 'Inkle and Yarico'. 
In 1790, with two small children to support, Kemble began his management career at Coventry. The following spring the Kembles played Freeport and Amelia in the elder Colman's 'The English Merchant', at the new Theatre Royal in Newcastle, managed by his brother-in-law, Charles Edward Whitlock. Kemble assumed the management of Newcastle and the circuit of Chester, Lancaster, and Sheffield theatres in March 1791 for $300 a year rent and $1000 for properties. He enthusiastically programmed new plays and enticed London performers north, but without permission to raise house prices to cover the increased expenses. He escaped to the Haymarket for the summer, where Elizabeth Kemble chose his two-act farce entitled 'The Northern Inn, or, The Days of Good Queen Bess', adapted from Heywood, as her much needed benefit. 
Back in Newcastle for the autumn and unperturbed by initial set-backs, Kemble expanded and leased the Edinburgh and Glasgow theatres from John Jackson for $1350 a year. The 'Newcastle Chronicle' (5 November 1791) thought this would enable 'the manager, whose spirited exertions have always kept pace with the contingencies of his situation, to maintain a better company, and pay greater salaries, than any other connection out of London could support' (Robinson, 138). Initially Edinburgh promised much, netting more than $470 over its first four nights, but Kemble and Jackson, the previous manager, fell out over the terms of the lease and patent. The arguments are documented in such publications as 'A Statement of Facts... Relative to the Theatre Royal of Edinburgh' (1792) and 'A Comparative View of the Rights and Merits of Mrs Harriet Esten and Mr Stephen Kemble' (1793). In brief, when Kemble reneged on the terms of his one-year lease, Jackson agreed to lease the theatre for the 1793 season to Mrs Esten, a popular actress, and one of the patentees, the duke of Hamilton, allowed her the patent. Denied lease and patent on the Theatre Royal, Edinburgh, Kemble opened a rival theatre in the quickly refitted Circus on 12 January 1793. His success, $180 on the first night, was quashed when Mrs Esten enforced her patent and had the new theatre temporarily closed on 6 February, and allowed only 'amusements of various kinds', including concerts and 'imitations'. Reconciliation must have occurred during the spring, because by June 1793 Mrs Esten was performing for Kemble at Newcastle, and he advertised his sole management of the Theatre Royal, Edinburgh, in 1794. 
Even while the debate over Edinburgh raged, Kemble had run a full touring season out of Newcastle and seen off a printed complaint from John Edwin about his poor salary, benefits, and excessive travelling expenses. He continued to expand, opening theatres at Berwick upon Tweed in 1794, Aberdeen in 1795, and Alnwick in 1796. In 1799 he leased the Durham circuit, with Scarborough, North and South Shields, and Sunderland. This final acquisition may have been to offset the decline at Edinburgh, where as Timothy Plain (otherwise Moncrieff Thriepland) complained to the 'Scots Chronicle' (later published as 'Letters on the Theatre in Edinburgh'), Kemble was passing off 'the 'dross' of all theatres, merely because the Manager now and then treats us with a peep of his sister, the Siddons, and his brother John' (Plain, 8). Kemble himself took on more and more roles, although he was primarily suited to 'plain sentimental characters' (ibid., 22), and his modest abilities were not aided by his enormous size: by the 1790s he weighed 18 stone. The critic also accused him of letting the theatre fall into disrepair. Matters were so bad at Edinburgh that his farewell speech as manager in July 1800 was hissed off the stage. Kemble continued his management of the Newcastle and Durham circuits, but here too he was beset by criticism of the company and the condition of the theatres' fabric. In 1804 the proprietors of Newcastle were so exasperated that they advertised the theatre to let. Even the once loyal 'Newcastle Chronicle' only advertised shows with London performers. In November 1806 Kemble yielded the management of Newcastle to William Macready. 
Kemble continued to act and returned to Drury Lane in 1802 in the character of Falstaff. He composed a poem to mark his arrival: '
... all good honest flesh, and blood, and bone, 

And weighing, more or less, some thirty stone! 

Upon the northern coast by chance we caught him, 

And hither in a broad-wheeled waggon brought him; 

... Blest with unwieldiness (at least), his size 

Will favour find in every critic's eyes; 
(Kemble, 'Odes', 26)' Although the 'Monthly Mirror' felt he was 'merely reciting the text, in the habit of Falstaff, instead of entering into the true jovial spirit of the character' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'), the role became a speciality and he performed it at Manchester in 1804 and at Covent Garden in 1806. His performance record is patchy after this. In 1809 he brought out 'Odes, Lyrical Ballads, and Poems', a collection of his songs, addresses, and miscellaneous poems, including an intriguing pair: the pro-trade 'On the Slave Trade' (1784) and the counter-poem of 1808, 'Being fully convinced of my former errors'. Many of the addresses are topical, and the tone of the collection is overwhelmingly patriotic, revealing his keen ear for audience-rousing oratory. 
Kemble returned to management briefly at Whitehaven in 1814, and as stage manager at Drury Lane in 1818, when he took the opportunity to cast his son, Henry Stephen Kemble, in many unsuitable leading roles and to produce 'Flodden Field', a romantic drama, written by father and son. The following season Kemble returned to acting, but stepped down with the arrival of the acting phenomenon Edmund Kean in the company. His final performance was as the Miller in 'The King and the Miller of Mansfield', by Robert Dodsley, on 26 April 1820. Kemble died on 5 June 1822 at The Grove, near Durham, and was buried on 11 June in the chapel of nine altars in Durham Cathedral. His wife survived him by nineteen years, and both his children, Frances Crawford Kemble (1787-1849) and Henry Stephen Kemble (1789-1836), became performers. 


@@@@@


doc= 15327


Kemp, George Meikle (1795-1844), architect, was born on 26 May 1795, at Hillriggs Farm, near Biggar, Lanarkshire, the son of James Kemp, a shepherd, and his wife, Jean Mulberry or Mowbray (died 'c'.1827), a family frequently on poor relief. Showing an early fondness for drawing, carving, and woodwork (he made furniture throughout his life), he was apprenticed as a carpenter to Andrew Noble of Redscaurhead (where his 1932 memorial was erected) before joining a millwright's shop in Galashiels in 1813 (part of his journey being a lift on Sir Walter Scott's coach). In 1815 he joined John Cousin, builder and joiner of Leith, as a journeyman carpenter, and he may periodically have returned to Cousin's firm whenever work was short elsewhere. In 1817 he moved to Lancashire, where he worked as a carpenter while studying Gothic architecture; he also practised as a carpenter in 1820 in Glasgow while attending evening classes. He moved to London in 1824, failed to find a permanent position, and travelled into France. Kemp considered emigrating to Canada, but returned to Scotland upon his mother's death. In 1827 he became a freemason of St Andrew's Lodge, Edinburgh. Probably through his brother Thomas, clerk of works to the duke of Buccleuch 1821-40, he was employed by William Burn on drawings for Bowhill, Selkirk, perhaps as clerk of works; he also worked extensively with John Smith of Darnick. In 1831 he constructed a large wooden model of proposals for Dalkeith by William Burn. In 1832 he married Elizabeth (Betsy) Bonnar, daughter of an Edinburgh house painter and decorator. 
After his views of Melrose were exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1830, Kemp was invited by a Mr Johnstone to prepare drawings for a proposed publication on 'Scottish cathedrals and antiquities'. He was still working on this in 1838, but the project foundered thereafter. By 1836 there was confusion about Kemp's profession. The antiquarian Revd John Sime called him an 'architectural artist', whereas, when completing the West Church in Maybole that year, Kemp referred to himself as an architect. Wholly absorbed in the rediscovery and recreation of the glories of medieval Scotland, Kemp may be compared to an architectural Thomas Chatterton. He drew a proposed restoration of Melrose Abbey, and (unless this was the work of his son Thomas) of Roslin Chapel, Midlothian, and a relocation of Trinity College Church, Edinburgh. His largest project at the time was the restoration of Glasgow Cathedral for Archibald MacLellan; but his drawings were published and forwarded to the Treasury in 1836 without any credit. Kemp presented a set to James Skene of Rubislaw, each drawing annotated 'John Morvo Archt' to underline his authorship. (Morvo was his pseudonym for his greatest work, the Scott monument commission.) Perhaps thinking that Kemp, however good an illustrator, had inadequate credibility as architect, MacLellan commissioned Gillespie Graham for new proposals. Mortified, Kemp exhibited drawings for the cathedral, with sketches for three original windows, and a model, with costs obtained from John Cousin in Edinburgh in 1838. In vain. 
In 1836 Kemp was persuaded to enter the competition for a memorial in Edinburgh to Sir Walter Scott. For one of three premiated designs, he was awarded 50 guineas. The competition was rerun in 1838, and Kemp's design won for its 'strict conformity with the purity and style of Melrose Abbey' (Bonnar, 85). There was probably nobody in Scotland as familiar with Melrose Abbey as Kemp, and he won with a vertical and slender design which John Britton praised as a 'florid cenotaph' (Bonnar, 93). 'The whole building being composed of a substantial collection of buttresses and piers... a feature in which it is well known that the principal beauties as well as strength of gothic architecture resides', wrote Kemp, there were no walls at all (Bonnar, 97). The monument -- perhaps the most striking commemoration of an individual in any British city -- dominates Princes Street and contrasts with the classicism of the nearby art galleries. There was fierce controversy. William Burn admired 'the purity of Gothic composition and more particularly the constructive style', but then attempted to persuade Kemp to accept $100 and give the commission to him (Bonnar, 98). 
Kemp's family moved in 1837 from Stockbridge to 'the land of Canaan', Bloomberry Cottage, Canaan Lane, Morningside. Contemplating entering partnership with John Cousin's son David, he demurred once he had decided to undertake the additional role of supervisor of the building works of the monument at 2 guineas a week. He passed on to David Cousin the proposed 'cheap church' that a Mr Blackie had offered him, and eventually sent his son Thomas to train with him. The foundation-stone of the Scott monument was laid on 15 August 1840. On 5 April 1843 Kemp was elected affiliate member, operative lodge journeyman, Edinburgh; but on 6 March 1844 he tumbled into the Union Canal at Fountainbridge, on his way home, and drowned. He was buried in St Cuthbert's churchyard, Edinburgh. At his death, it was thought he had achieved 'a prosperous position in business', but he died intestate, leaving assets of $202 and the model of Glasgow Cathedral 'which has proved unsaleable'. His wife survived him. 
Kemp was excellent company, a prolific poet, devoted to his family, and had good rapport with his workmen, who regarded him as a role model. He never appears to have made the full transition from joiner to architect that, say, had been achieved only recently by Archibald Elliot. He is reputed to have had a hand in the design of the spiky churches of Millburn Free, Renton (1843), and St John's Free, George Street, Glasgow, designed by J. T. Rochead. But, besides the Scott monument and West Church, Maybole, the only buildings reliably attributed to him are the south wing at Woodhouselee, Midlothian, for James Tytler, and perhaps Gothic Bank, Morningside, fees for both of which were still owing at his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 15328


Kemp, John (1380/81-1454), administrator, cardinal, and archbishop of York and of Canterbury, was born at Olantigh by Wye, near Ashford, Kent, perhaps the second son of Thomas Kemp (died 1428), sometime escheator of the county, and Beatrice, daughter of Sir Thomas Lewknor, a Sussex landowner. His brother, Sir Thomas, had at least two sons, Sir William, the archbishop's named heir, and Thomas Kemp, whom the bishop patronized extensively, to the extent of securing the see of London for him in the face of the duke of Suffolk's candidate. 
Kemp was a fellow of Merton College, Oxford, from 1395 to 1407, serving as senior bursar in 1403-4. He was ordained subdeacon on 14 April 1403 and finally priested on 21 May 1407, at the time he was preferred to the rectories of St Michael, Crooked Lane, London (often connected with personnel of the court of arches), and Southwick, Sussex. He was BCL by 1407 and DCL by 1413. 
Kemp's early career was evidently in one of the courts of the archbishop of Canterbury, to which Archbishop Thomas Arundel attracted notable talent. On 13 September 1409 he accompanied the archbishop as one of his clerks on a visitation of Glastonbury Abbey. He was appointed as examiner-general in the court of Canterbury on 30 January 1413 and was on the tribunal for the second session of the famous trial of the Lollard Sir John Oldcastle on 25 September. He became dean of the court of arches by 21 February 1414, which explains why he was no longer the examiner-general by June. He was said to be still dean in 1428, but this is impossible. His preferment was modest for his position: the rectory of Hawkhurst and a prebend in Wingham collegiate church (both in Kent) only replaced his previous benefices. Even when he was collated to the archdeaconry of Durham, on 13 October 1417, he was obliged on papal instruction to give up the rectory. 
Between 26 April 1414 and 13 July 1416 Kemp was appointed several times to hear appeals from the court of admiralty, and four more times before 1425, even though his career had moved on. On 25 July 1415 he was appointed to an embassy to treat with Aragon, and was engaged thus from 8 September 1415 to 13 June 1416. He was a receiver of the Canterbury convocation's first subsidy in support of its delegation to the Council of Constance, and by 1416, but probably much earlier, was on the council of Christ Church, Canterbury. 
Henry V's campaigns in France stretched his administrative resources and brought several Canterbury officials into major royal service. On 20 July 1417 Kemp was appointed to exercise the jurisdiction of the archbishop of Canterbury overseas, which meant chiefly in those parts of France that the king was slowly acquiring by conquest. It was a key step in his career. On 7 July he had been granted letters of protection as a member of the king's retinue, and on 1 October was included for the first time in a delegation to treat with the French crown. On 6 November 1417 he was appointed -- perhaps worthy of note, perhaps a mere formality -- to hear confessions in the king's army. With hindsight, perhaps it is not a matter for surprise that by the end of 1417 he was Henry's chancellor of Lancastrian Normandy, a position he retained until September 1422, but in the immediate context the recognition of his ability and his swift rise to such prominence are as impressive as they are undocumented. In 1418, besides the general creation and ordering of the chancery, Kemp helped array troops in Normandy, treated with Burgundy (appointed 28 April), and travelled extensively on the king's business in the duchy. 
On 3 October 1418 Kemp was appointed keeper of the privy seal, a rise to chief office that meant his return to England to replace Henry Ware, a close colleague in still recent days in the archbishop's administration, who had just become a bishop and now crossed to France to join the king's immediate circle of government. Kemp was now fully engaged in the government of England in the king's absence, but still much involved in the prosecution of the war. On 24 September 1418 he had been appointed to treat with the house of Anjou, a commission that perhaps lapsed; on 21 January 1419 he was appointed in a top-rank delegation to treat with the French crown, and another on the 22nd with the dauphin, the other leading members of the embassy all being in France, but with Kemp presumably included to co-ordinate with the administration at home. With the treaty of Troyes in the making, Kemp received a rapid series of appointments to treat for peace on 23 February, 28 March, and 22 April. It seems almost certain that he was expected to be in France when he was appointed to a highest-level delegation on 28 May, to receive the oaths of Charles VI, Queen Isabella, and Philip of Burgundy that they would keep the treaty. 
So high and fast had Kemp climbed in the king's estimation that in this spring of 1419 he was on the shortlist of those whom Henry V discussed seriously with Henry Beaufort as the latter's successor to Winchester, the richest see in the realm. In the event, Kemp received much less. On 21 June 1419 he was provided to the meagre see of Rochester (of which the archbishop of Canterbury was patron), receiving custody of the temporalities on 27 July and being consecrated at Rouen on 3 December. From July 1419 to May 1420 he was still in France, engaged in the negotiations surrounding the definitive treaty. He then returned to England, but had letters on 30 October and 6 November 1420 to go to the king in France once more. Kemp resigned as keeper of the privy seal on 25 October 1421, and just three days later was translated to Chichester; he received the temporalities formally only on 21 August, but had had a grant of $650 p.a. out of them since 25 December previously. However, he was already intent on climbing higher, and is known to have intrigued in the papal curia for the see of London, to which he was translated on 17 November 1421 against the king's nominee and elect of the chapter, Thomas Polton of Hereford. On 22 May 1422 Kemp was given the spiritualities, signalling that he had won the contest, and the temporalities followed on 20 June. Polton had to settle humblingly for succeeding to Chichester. On 26 October, Kemp would enjoy the novel experience of being enthroned in one of his sees. 
Meantime Kemp had been back in France. He surrendered the great seal of Normandy to the new regent in France, the duke of Bedford, after Henry V's death on 31 August 1422, but remained on the council in France until mid-October, when he returned to England to join the regency council there. On 22 February 1423 the bishop was present at this body to receive orders to resume his service to the council in France. On 14 May he received the customary commission to array troops, and left for France in the next two or three days. By 26 November 1423 he had returned to England and was appointed on 28 January to a weighty delegation to discuss the liberation of James I with the Scots at Durham. He remained fully engaged in council business, but found time to take on a commission to repair the condition of St Mary's Hospital, Ospringe, in Kent, on 16 February 1424, a reminder of the enduring interest in his native county that perhaps had made his frequent commuting between England and France less wearying to him than it was to others. Shortly after 2 July 1425 Kemp went over to France once more. There he undertook the unpalatable task of representing Humphrey of Gloucester in Paris, in the question of Humphrey's proposed duel with the duke of Burgundy. Fortunately, this failed to happen, and Kemp himself, who had perhaps helped ensure that it did not, certainly gained the good opinion of the duke of Bedford, for whom the quarrel between his brother and brother-in-law was a grave crisis in his regency. 
Kemp's ambition to advance himself beyond London is witnessed by the correspondence between himself and his proctor in the papal curia, William Swan (preserved in the latter's letter-book, BL, Cotton MS Cleopatra C.iv). He watched the health of elderly bishops with interest. The archbishopric of York, where Henry Bowet was bedridden, did not feature on his list, perhaps because Kemp believed the council had already earmarked the succession, but it was thither that he was translated on 20 July 1425, a third choice at best, and perhaps engineered with Bedford's support after deadlock between the pope's nominee, Richard Flemming of Lincoln, and that of the council in England, Philip Morgan of Worcester. If his promotion was not immediately accepted in England, this was probably because the hostility between Beaufort and Gloucester was making any government decision impossible. It was only on 22 April 1426 that the temporalities were restored to him, immediately after Bedford had returned to England to resolve the political crisis. 
As part of Bedford's general settlement of affairs, Kemp was appointed chancellor of the realm on 18 March 1426, not the last time that he would be called upon to take up the reins in a crisis not of his making. Bedford returned to France very quickly, and left Kemp to make what he could of a still simmering and factionalized regime. The archbishop endured it for nearly six years. On 13 July 1428, 25 October 1429, and 21 February 1431 he personally pressed the Canterbury convocation for urgently needed funds. Throughout, he is to be found at the centre of conciliar activity, seeking to respond to the deteriorating fortunes of the war in France, and to the continuing animosity between Gloucester and the majority of the council. Kemp had no faction of his own. In January 1431 he was unable to open parliament because of illness, although he attended later. By the end of that year he was finding Gloucester's attitude intolerable, especially as the duke's influence waxed against the background of defeats abroad. He connived urgently with Swan for a papal mandate ordering him to Rome, although when this was finally issued in June 1432 he had already had to resort to another pretext, that of ill health, to resign the great seal by 26 February; perhaps, in terms of stress, it is even unfair to call it pretext. 
Kemp retired to his York diocese, which hitherto had seen him for only a few weeks each August and September, although he had taken care to make a primary visitation of his cathedral, and then a close one of the powerful archdeaconry of Richmond in 1428. After just seven months, however, Kemp was back in his Westminster inn and able to make regular trips to Olantigh by Wye, now that he was free to pursue his plan to create a school and collegiate church in his birthplace. The convenient call to Rome went unheeded. With Swan's assistance Kemp had always enjoyed the regard of the papacy as a strong supporter of its authority against proponents of conciliar reform, and he was now courted for his influence in England. Indeed, he was appointed as a royal envoy to the Council of Basel on 28 November 1432, and as late as 17 March 1433 payments were arranged for his journey, but he never went, and returned the instalment, being diverted by decision of the government to talks with France. According to his York register he was at Calais in May. 
The archbishop had never formally left the council, even while generally absenting himself while Gloucester briefly held sway. He was negotiating with French envoys in England in July 1433. On 9 November 1434 Bedford named him as an executor. Kemp was now the closest colleague of Cardinal Beaufort in the direction of English policy, and headed the crown's delegation from 25 July 1435 until the latter's arrival at the congress of Arras on 31 August. Ordered to take a hard line by the government, Kemp assumed a stance towards a peace settlement that was twice rebuked formally by the papal legates who were trying to mediate. Beaufort did not soften the position and withdrew the English delegation on 6 September. Kemp's diocese forfeited his annual visit. On the other hand, in 1436 he was unusually active in the north, helping to relieve the siege of Roxburgh. 
In April 1437 the two prelates went to negotiate with the Lancastrian chancellor in France. On 9 April 1438 they and the earls of Warwick and Suffolk headed as weighty a delegation as England could produce to treat with the enemy, indeed empowered on the twentieth to treat for a marriage settlement. From 20 November 1438 to 26 February 1439 they were at Calais, engaged in long but ultimately fruitless negotiations with the duchess of Burgundy, Kemp crossing to and fro in December and February to liaise with the king and council at home. About 23 May 1439 Kemp was appointed to lead the delegation to yet another peace conference with Charles VII's envoys at Calais. Thomas Beckington, the king's secretary, has left a detailed record of this mission. Kemp left London four days after his appointment but did not cross to Calais until 26 June. Talks began on 6 July and were uneasy and mutually distrustful throughout. He returned to Westminster to report the lack of progress on 8 September, before going back for one final effort which failed inside a week. On 29 September he did at least achieve a commercial treaty with Flanders (the duke of Burgundy's county). Kemp was more ready than Beaufort to consider a surrender of the Lancastrian claim to the French throne if the territorial concessions were good enough, but the time was far from ripe to sell such a humiliation to English political opinion. Both were, besides, of a generation that conducted talks with Frenchmen in tones of deep and open distrust. He returned to London on 7 October. 
Although the government's fortunes were failing, Kemp's status was enhanced by his creation on 18 December 1439 as cardinal-priest of St Balbina. He was licensed by the king to accept the red hat on 14 February 1440, despite furious protests from the aged Archbishop Chichele of Canterbury about the superior legatine authority Kemp might thereby seek to exercise in the southern province. Twenty years earlier Chichele had nearly ruined Beaufort over the latter's similar promotion, and at least delayed it for seven years. This time, his protests were treated with contempt. Crown and papacy were in agreement over Kemp's merits and position; he thus became the first cardinal-archbishop in England. 
However, the failure of English policy in France led to Kemp's implication in Gloucester's furious attack in January and February 1441 on Beaufort's record and even loyalty. Although Beaufort was fully protected by the crown, and Kemp was never indicted directly, rising figures around the king, notably the earl of Suffolk, seem to have felt that the two cardinals had had their day. Although there is no specific evidence at the time, it might be thought likely that this shadow was a contributory factor to Kemp's being passed over in favour of John Stafford, bishop of Bath and Wells and chancellor, for the succession to Canterbury in 1442-3. Kemp loved Kent and would not have seen age as an issue, nor his dreadful absenteeism from his diocese (which Stafford at least equalled) as an indictment. It seems more than coincidence that, for the first time ever, Kemp's customary August visit to his diocese in 1443 extended into a stay of sixteen months, save only for limited periods of attendance at Westminster in January-February and June-July 1444, no doubt in connection with the French expedition funded by Cardinal Beaufort under the leadership of the latter's nephew, the duke of Somerset. Kemp had by now a solid group of very long-standing officials (some of them even student friends) entrenched in the York chapter and provincial administration, and his secular officers became involved in such serious friction with the earl of Northumberland's men around Knaresborough as to engage the direct attention of the crown in 1442 and 1443. Perhaps this too was an incentive to Kemp to spend time fighting his own corner rather than serve an ungrateful government. 
Kemp was clearly not now a part of the narrowing circle around the king that actually ran the government and, as in the time of his chancellorship, there was only limited use of formal council meetings where men such as he might give their opinion. However, he was urgently required in Westminster in 1445 when relations with France entered a crucial phase, and he was needed to provide status, experience, and overt commitment to the great delegation that received a French embassy in the wake of the marriage of Henry VI and Margaret of Anjou. The business done, he was free to return to York from August 1446. On 20 January 1447 he was named as a principal executor of Cardinal Beaufort's will, and spent some time in April and May in Winchester on that business. In that same year, and curiously late in life, he became a member of the confraternity of Christ Church, Canterbury, and was in Kent for much of the autumn, probably to enjoy opening his school in Wye. 
If it is clear that Kemp and his close friend and political colleague, Ralph, Lord Cromwell, were by no means close to the duke of Suffolk's ruling circle, yet they came to lend their attendance and reputation to the king's faltering government so far as they were allowed. During 1449 the archbishop managed only one brief trip to his diocese, in July, as the crisis of war and finance came to a head. However, it may have been a more personal matter that had principally kept Kemp at Westminster of late. It is generally held that Suffolk made a serious political mistake in pressing for the promotion to the see of London of Marmaduke Lumley, bishop of Carlisle and treasurer of the realm, refusing to give government approval to the appointment of the cardinal's nephew, Thomas Kemp, who had received the formal support of the king for his candidacy and consequently papal provision to the see on 21 August 1448. The cardinal had actually lived in the bishop of London's palace in Fulham for much of the previous six months, even though his own was perfectly inhabitable, while old Bishop Robert Gilbert's life was maddeningly prolonged by intensive nursing at Much Hadham, Hertfordshire. The fact that Thomas Kemp was a meritless candidate, as he was to prove comprehensively over the next forty years, while Lumley was making impressive steps in recovering the crown's financial stability, does not remove the question mark over Suffolk's belated obstruction. However, if it helped distance Kemp publicly and probably in fact from Suffolk just when the duke needed him, the cardinal rallied none the less to the government's aid, and thus also to the duke's, when crisis came. 
When Suffolk was impeached early in 1450, all the chief officers of state perforce resigned or were dismissed. The king and government were in disarray as the Commons in parliament closed in on those they hated. It was in such circumstances, on 31 January 1450, that Kemp was recalled as chancellor. As had happened twenty-four years earlier, he was being asked to remedy a crisis caused by others, and as he had then he responded with loyalty to the crown, ability, and no little courage. Naturally, within a week his nephew had firm possession of the see of London. There is no doubt that the cardinal was a prime maker as well as mouthpiece of the bold strategy that saved Suffolk from judicial condemnation. Then, on 6 July 1450 Kemp helped negotiate the withdrawal from London of Jack Cade and his followers from the south-eastern counties. However, between August and September he led unsympathetic inquiries in person in Kent into the causes and nature of the revolt. Towards the end of the year, when the duke of York's attempts to involve himself in government caused grave concern in the court, the Commons in parliament demanded (and obtained) some purging of the household and resumption of royal revenues, and the duke of Somerset and others faced threats of lynching, Kemp maintained some semblance of authority and competence for the government. He himself faced no criticism from any quarter, and by May 1451 the crown had shrugged off its various critics. Although the duke of Somerset is seen, especially in retrospect when civil wars broke out, as emerging rapidly as the strongman of the regime, there does seem to have been broader-based policy making at this time, with finances stabilized and some sound preparation for the relief of Gascony. Kemp played his part in this restoration of respect for the crown. In February 1452 he acted as a mediator between York and the king, when the duke backed down from his attempt at an armed coup to bring Somerset to trial. 
Kemp was even able to secure Canterbury at last. After the death of John Stafford on 25 June 1452, Kemp was elected just three days later, and his translation by the pope followed as soon as 21 July, with the enhanced title of cardinal-bishop of St Rufina. The first cardinal-archbishop of Canterbury received his temporalities on 6 September and the pallium from his nephew on the twenty-fourth. He was enthroned at Canterbury on 11 December. His health was not good by now, but it is inconceivable that anyone else could have been promoted at that time. Indeed, whether inspired specifically by achieving his home diocese and primacy of all England, he found novel enthusiasm for ecclesiastical duties. Ill health prevented his attending convocation in February 1453, so he brought the assembly to himself at Lambeth and invited open discussion on possible reforms of the church in the province, an initiative all too soon overtaken by the usual agenda of taxation. As early as September 1452 he had prepared a fascinatingly detailed itinerary for a primary visitation of his diocese, promising personal inspection of each parish and setting out his mealtimes and places each day; ill health and government business inevitably aborted the plan. 
The collapse of the king's mental health in early August 1453 brought Kemp to his last and greatest crisis. It seems that, for as long as the king was alive, the majority of the Lords proposed simply to group around him and exercise collective authority in the king's name, allowing no one even the name of protector, still less regent. When Henry VI's only child, Edward, was born on 13 October, Kemp stood as godparent, despite his advanced age and frail health, alongside the dukes of Somerset and Buckingham, a firm public statement of the boy's heritage. That same month the lords in council, who had been hanging fire over the vacation but had now to come to at least implicit terms with the king's incapacity, called for York to join them and subsequently concurred in the imprisonment of Somerset until he should answer charges laid against him. In December, leading lords led by Kemp explicitly admitted to the king's illness and undertook to rule. It was said that the queen requested she be made regent, but no formal response has been found. 
It was resolved that parliament must be recalled on 14 February 1454, having been twice prorogued since the king's collapse. Amid open tension and rumours that armed factions were being called up by various magnates, the duke of Norfolk was warned by a servant that he should hide his own such preparations from Kemp and other lords of the council, if he was to avoid sanctions. The cardinal himself prepared an armed bodyguard. When the assembly opened, Kemp was fully active in attendance, and called publicly for prayers for the king's health on 2 March 1454. There is no convincing sign of any move to establish a protectorate, only speculation through hindsight by some historians. Then, with no warning, Kemp died at Lambeth Palace on 22 March. The Lords moved at once to send a forlorn but necessary delegation to Windsor to seek guidance from the king as to a new chancellor and new archbishop. In its nervously detailed report on its failure, this delegation never mentioned the idea of a protectorate, but this was what the Lords now moved to establish. Those who had been named as councillors before Kemp's death demanded to reconsider their position now that their service was to be under York's leadership, and there was widespread (if sometimes nominal) reluctance. This seems to confirm that the arrangement had not been planned at all before the cardinal died, and that he was irreplaceable in moral as well as official authority in the turbulent body politic of the time. There were significantly contradictory rumours after his demise. One allegation was that Norfolk had wanted him dismissed as chancellor, presumably as an obstacle to York's advance, or as a deeply cautious obstacle to Somerset's being brought to trial; a contrary scandal claimed that Somerset had had him poisoned. The first has a note of credibility; the latter testifies more to Somerset's deep unpopularity. Together they indicate Kemp's position above faction. Had he survived until the king recovered his health, the civil wars might not have happened; with his death, they were certain. 
There is no will extant. Kemp was buried on the south side of the presbytery in Canterbury Cathedral, where his handsome tomb survives. On the completion of his school and college project at Wye, his birthplace, in 1447, Kemp had recommended that, if possible, a fellow of his own alma mater, Merton College, should always be appointed as provost. The archbishop was given to such long-standing affections, in both his personal and public lives. His letters to Swan have made him appear notably avaricious, but it is only their survival that is unusual. His record of absenteeism from his diocese has been held against him and cannot be gainsaid, but it was never lazy. His ascent to eminence was based on pure ability and a willingness to shoulder burdens that had broken others; no political favours or sinecures came his way, and indeed at times he was rewarded ungenerously. He affected no asceticism or high-profile piety, but likewise acquired no image of corruption, flamboyance, or avarice. He was not so much a politician as the ablest administrator of his time, always loyal to the crown and rallying a consensus around it when factionalism had overtaken. He had few if any friends among those born to the purple, and they did little to win his respect. His officials were his old friends, and his family came above all else. He earned squarely the status and honours that came his way. He died peerless as cardinal-archbishop of Canterbury; he would have liked that. He was buried in Kent; he would have liked that even more. 


@@@@@


doc= 15329


Kemp, John (1665-1717), antiquary, details of whose origins and upbringing are unknown, was possessed of private means, and resided in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. He owned a fine museum of antiquities, chiefly formed by the French educational writer Jean Gailhard, who was governor to George, first Baron Carteret (1667-1695). Gailhard sold it to Lord Carteret for an annuity of $200, and Kemp subsequently purchased it after Carteret's death in 1695. Kemp was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 20 March 1712 and died, unmarried, on 19 September 1717. By his will he directed that the museum (with books) should be offered to Robert Harley, earl of Oxford, or his son for $2000. However, the proposal was declined. The lexicographer Robert Ainsworth drew up an elaborate account of Kemp's antiquities, 'Monumenta vetustatis Kempiana, ex vetustis scriptoribus illustrata, eosque vicissim illustrantia' (2 pts, 1719-20). John Ward, professor of rhetoric at Gresham College, provided Ainsworth with descriptions of the statues and lares, with the discourse 'De vasis et lucernis, de amuletis, de annulis et fibulis', and with the 'Commentarius de Asse et partibus ejus', printed in 1719. 
Kemp's collection was eventually sold by auction at The Phoenix tavern in Pall Mall, Westminster, on 23-5 and 27 March 1721, in 293 lots, for $1090 8's'. 6died Six ancient inscriptions, bought by the antiquary Richard Rawlinson, form part of his collection at the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and appear in Richard Chandler's 'Marmora Oxoniensia' (1763). 


@@@@@


doc= 15330


Kemp, John (1763-1812), mathematician, was born at Auchlossen, Aberdeenshire, on 10 April 1763, the son of John Kemp. In 1779 he matriculated at Marischal College, Aberdeen, where he won a Gray mathematical bursary in 1782 and graduated MA in 1783. In the latter year he emigrated to America, where he taught at the academy at Dumfries, Virginia, for two years before moving to New York, where in 1785 he was appointed teacher, and in 1786 professor, of mathematics in Columbia College. In 1795 he was transferred to the chair of geography, history, and chronology. He received the degree of LLD from King's College, Aberdeen, in 1787 and was elected to a foreign fellowship by the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1792. One of his pupils, and a personal friend, De Witt Clinton, mayor of New York, frequently consulted him on municipal business. In 1810 Kemp visited Lake Erie, and in advance of the surveys pronounced the projected canal to be entirely practicable. Kemp, who married twice, died in New York on 15 November 1812. A daughter from his first marriage survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15331


Kemp, Joseph (1778-1824), organist and composer, was born in Exeter. He was the brother of James Kemp, the author of the poem 'Northernhay' (1808). Kemp was a chorister at Exeter Cathedral and a pupil of William Jackson during and after his time in the choir. In 1802 he was appointed organist of Bristol Cathedral, a post he retained until 1807, when he resigned and settled in London. He had married the daughter of Henry John of Cornwall in 1805. In London he sold music at a warehouse at 43 Old Bond Street between 1807 and 1809 and edited the monthly 'Musical Magazine, Review and Register' from 1809 to 1810. He took his MusB degree at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in 1808, submitting a war anthem, 'A Sound of Battle is in the Land' (composed 1803), as his exercise. He became MusD in 1809 with an anthem entitled 'The Crucifixion'. 
Kemp produced a couple of pieces for the theatre in London in 1809 and 1810, and in 1810 began a series of public lectures on musical education, in which he advocated, perhaps for the first time in England, the teaching of music in classes and the playing of exercises by pupils in concert. These were given at the Russell Institution, Great Coram Street, Russell Square, and formed the basis of 'The new system of musical education, being a self instructor and serviceable companion to music masters' ('c'.1821) and 'Upwards of 100 cards, containing more than 500 points in music, connected with the new system of musical education' ('c'.1821). Kemp's non-pedagogical works include songs, glees, chants, anthems, 'Sonatas or Lessons for the Pianoforte' ('c'.1814), and 'Musical Illustrations of the Beauties of Shakespeare' ('c'.1820). 
Kemp is reported to have lived at 20 Kenton Street, Russell Square, in 1811. In 1814, on account of failing health, he returned with his wife and family to Exeter, where he founded a music college and resided until 1824, although he spent the period 1818-21 in France. A journey to London in April 1824 proved too much for Kemp, then in a weak state of health, and he had a relapse 'of his former complaint, and after acute suffering in his head for upwards of three weeks' (Kassler, 1.626) died in his lodgings on 22 May. He left a widow, two sons, and a daughter. 


