@@@@@


doc= 15332


Kemp, Thomas Read (1782-1844), property speculator, was born on 23 December 1782, at 169 High Street, Lewes, Sussex, the younger surviving child and only son of Thomas Kemp ('bap'. 1745, died 1811), wool merchant and MP, and his wife, Anne (1748/9-1807), daughter of Henry Read, grazier, of Brookland, Kent. He attended Westminster School and was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1800, where he graduated BA in 1805, and to the Middle Temple in 1804. On 12 July 1806 he married Frances (1783-1825), fourth daughter of Sir Francis Baring bt, with whom he had four sons and six daughters. In the following year he purchased Herstmonceux Place, Sussex, where they lived until he sold it in 1819, and they moved to The Temple, Montpelier Road, Brighton. A drawing by Sir Thomas Lawrence in 1808 shows a handsome, fashionable gentleman. 
Having stood unsuccessfully for a county seat in 1807, Kemp was returned unopposed as MP for Lewes in the by-election following his father's death in 1811. In 1816 he resigned his seat. He served as vice-president of the Church Missionary Society from 1812 to 1816. Under the influence of his wife's sister Harriet Wall, he joined with her brother George Baring to found an evangelical sect, set up chapels in Lewes and Brighton, and preached regularly. In 1823 he returned to the Church of England, to fashionable society and an extravagant style of living, and to politics, by being elected MP for Arundel. In the general election of 1826 he regained a seat at Lewes, serving in five successive parliaments until 1837. A whig, he was a champion of parliamentary reform and also supported several radical measures, particularly free trade. He seldom took part in debates, except on local issues. In Brighton and Lewes he was a prominent figure, for example acting as a town commissioner in Brighton, receiving the king and queen on their visit to Lewes in 1830, supporting many charities, and riding with the Brighton Union hunt. 
Kemp's wealth was founded on lands which his father had inherited from an uncle in 1774. The most valuable part was the freehold of nearly half the parish of Brighton outside the old town, onto which housing for the burgeoning resort had been spreading, piecemeal, since the 1770s. In 1823 he initiated the development of Kemp Town, on 40 acres a mile east of the old town. His intention was to profit from providing what Brighton lacked, houses of the size and distinction as, for example, were being built in terraces around Regent's Park in Marylebone. To plans by Charles Augustin Busby and Amon Henry Wilds, the sites for 106 houses were laid out. A square opened from the centre of a crescent which was terminated by terraces parallel with the cliff, and communal gardens and esplanades gave access to the beach. Kemp financed the external construction of ninety-two houses, which had been erected by the end of 1828; they were let on ninety-nine-year building leases with the option to purchase at a fixed price. He also fitted out and occupied one, 22 Sussex Square, where he entertained in grand style. He gave the site of the Sussex County Hospital and $1000 towards the hospital. But with the collapse of the 1824-8 building boom tenants were slow in completing their houses, and it was only, for Kemp too late, in the 1840s that the development was counted a success. The flow of income was far below what was needed to support the expenditure incurred. 
Kemp's wife died in 1825. On 26 November 1832 he married Frances Margaretta, daughter of Charles Watkin John Shakerley, of Somerford Park, Cheshire, and widow of Vigors Harvey, of Killiane Castle, Wexford. They had one son, Frederick ('b'. 1833). 
In April 1837 Kemp resigned his seat in the Commons, let his houses in Kemp Town and in London (at 24 Belgrave Square, Chelsea), and left Britain to live on the continent for the rest of his life except for a visit in 1840-41. The principal reason was financial: his extravagance and the failure so far of Kemp Town had overwhelmed him. Mortgages secured on his first marriage settlement and on Kemp Town amounted to at least $84,000. His finances continued to deteriorate. Land in Brighton was auctioned in 1842, as was his London house early in 1844. 
Kemp died on 20 December 1844 at 64 rue du Faubourg St Honore, Paris, and was buried in the cemetery of Pere Lachaise. His wife returned to spend most of her remaining years in Kemp Town, before dying in Tunbridge Wells in 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 15333


Kemp, William (c.1560-1601), writer on education, was the son of Walter Kempe of Devon or Cornwall. He is not to be confused with another William Kempe, master of Colchester grammar school between 1598 and 1637. Kemp the writer was very probably educated at Plymouth grammar school under William Minterne. In June 1578 he matriculated as a pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge, but migrated to Trinity Hall, where he graduated BA in 1580/81 and MA in 1584. From 1581 to 1601 Kemp acted as master of Plymouth grammar school, where he was paid a salary of $20. 
Kemp is remembered chiefly as the author of pioneering works on the theory and practice of education. He was an apostle of the systems of Ramus, fashionable at Cambridge in the 1560s and 1570s, and his work also bears the influence of Plutarch. It has been very plausibly supposed that William Minterne, himself a graduate of Christ's, had brought Ramism from the college to Plymouth and that it was he who introduced Kemp to the doctrine even before the boy went up to his former college. Kemp's most notable book was 'The Education of Children in Learning' (1588), dedicated to the mayor and corporation of Plymouth. He was concerned for the education of boys (not girls) from yeoman and merchant, as well as landed backgrounds. Kemp was extremely keen that schooling should be both accessible and challenging, and hoped his book 'may teach the unlearned with some delight and not be tedious to those that are learned' (Kempe, 'Education', sig. A3). But he also believed, as in the book of 'Proverbs', that 'Foolishness is tied in the heart of the child, but the rod of discipline shall drive it away' (ibid., title-page). 
There are several indications of Kemp's preference for broadening the traditional curriculum, though classical studies remained central. 'What is music in sounds, in harmony, and in their spaces, concords and divers sorts, but only arithmetic in hearing?', he asked, though music found no more place in his school curriculum than anywhere else (Watson, 212). He recommended that for three years from the age of twelve boys should study logic and rhetoric. The bulk of their time, however, should be spent not on learning theoretical systems but in reading such authors as Cicero, Virgil, and Horace. Kemp was unusual in recommending the intensive study of arithmetic and geometry for six months, at the age of fifteen. He produced the only contemporary translation of Ramus's arithmetical texts into English, enthusiastically describing the author as 'that worthy ornament of arts and all good learning in our time' (Kempe, 'Art of Arithmetic', A3'r'). 
In addition to his works on education Kemp produced 'A Dutiful Invective Against the Moste Haynous Treasons of Ballard and Babington' (1587), which contains a preface addressed to George Barne, lord mayor of London, inveighing against 'the treacherous dealing of that ungodlie disposed woman, the Scottish queen, with the sentence pronounced against her at Fotheringhay and confirmed by her majesty'. His patriotism was of a deeply Calvinist colour, full of confidence that (as he wrote in his will) God 'hath beautified me with the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so made me an heir of thy blessed life to come'. Kemp acquired several properties in Plymouth and furnished his executors with an inventory of his estate, which, after payment of his debts, he estimated to be worth $540. Dividing it into seven parts, he left two parts to his wife and five to be held in trust for his children, to be allocated when they reached adulthood, with no distinction of age or gender. In the meantime, careful provision was made for 'the good education of my children in the fear of God'. Kemp died between 24 July 1601, when he signed his will, and the grant of probate on 18 November; his wife, whose name was Joan, and five of their children survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15334


Kemp, William (d. in or after 1610?), actor, was the most important stage clown working in the late Elizabethan period. He was the original performer of some of Shakespeare's most famous comic roles, but contemporaries knew him best as a maker of jigs and merriments, of which the most celebrated was his feat, performed in 1600, of dancing a morris from London to Norwich. His comic persona was that of a plain man who surmounted his social disadvantages through his surprising wit and physical dexterity. 
Kemp's parentage is unknown, though it has been conjectured that, despite his plebeian performance persona, he was linked in some way to the Kempes of Ollantighe, near Ashford in Kent, who were a wealthy Catholic dynasty. Sir Thomas Kempe (1517-1591) did indeed have a son named William; however, the claim that this William Kempe was the actor cannot be correct, since he was buried at Wye church on 27 March 1597 (Honneyman, 125-9; Bannerman, 3; private information, A. Findlay). Nonetheless, this putative connection might help explain the otherwise surprising story -- dramatized in the play 'The Travailes of the Three English Brothers' (1607) by Day, Rowley, and Wilkins -- that when William Kemp the actor was in Italy in 1601 he had an encounter with the celebrated traveller Sir Anthony Shirley: for Sir Anthony and his two equally famous brothers were related to the Ollantighe Kempes through their mother, who was Sir Thomas Kempe's daughter. Possibly, then, the actor had some tie of kinship to Ollantighe, at an outlying point on the family tree; or perhaps in recommending himself to Shirley he was just opportunistically taking advantage of the name he shared with Shirley's mother. 
Kemp's earliest notices link him to the Earl of Leicester's Players in the 1580s. He was not, as sometimes stated, the 'Mr Kempe' to whom the corporation of Ipswich sent a letter in 1580 at about the date that Leicester's Men were performing there (Eccles, 293). He did, though, perform with the earl's company at Leicester House in London in May 1585, and was one of fifteen players who travelled to the Netherlands in November, when Leicester took up his post as general of English forces in the Netherlands. Kemp seems to have contributed to the general air of ostentation that marked Leicester's disconcertingly regal entourage. He would have performed in shows such as 'The Forces [=Labours?] of Hercules' at Utrecht in April 1586, but he also provided special feats of impromptu clowning and athleticism. One record has him leaping into a ditch while the earl was out walking with Prince Maurice: presumably this was some kind of tumbling trick. Leicester had already singled Kemp out for an individual reward of 10's'. in May 1585, and he received further special payments in the Netherlands. The earl's nephew Sir Philip Sidney called him 'William, my Lord of Leicester['s] jesting player', and used him in January 1586 to carry correspondence home to Lady Sidney ('The Complete Works of Sir Philip Sidney', ed. A. Feuillerat, 4 vols., 1912-26, 3.167). Unfortunately Kemp embarrassed Sidney by delivering his letters to Lady Leicester, who was the subject in them of some undiplomatic remarks. 
Returning to London in May 1586, Kemp immediately embarked on a second continental journey by joining five other English 'instrumentalists and tumblers' in the entourage of the Danish ambassador, Henrik Ramel (Sjogren, 121). This group, which included two future members of Shakespeare's company, George Bryan and Thomas Pope, accompanied Ramel home to the Danish court at Elsinore and worked for three months in the employ of Frederick II. There they probably provided music and pastimes for banquets and other social occasions. When Kemp next becomes locatable, in 1592, he was again in company with Bryan and Pope, performing in England with Lord Strange's Men. However, in the interim he had pursued his own way, for he did not follow the others to Dresden but left Elsinore in August, a month before the rest, and with a month's wages as a gift. Travelling independently with his 'boy', Daniel Jones, Kemp may still have been operating essentially as a solo entertainer. 
By 1590 Kemp had begun to amass a considerable reputation as a comic performer. Richard Tarlton, the revered clown of the Queen's Men, died in 1588, and Kemp rapidly replaced him in public esteem as the most admired comedian of the next decade. The earliest testimony to his popularity comes in Thomas Nashe's 'An Almond for a Parrat' (1590). This satirical tract opens with a mock dedication from 'Cuthbert Curry-knave' to 'that most comical and conceited cavalier, Monsieur du Kemp, jestmonger and vice-gerent general to the ghost of Dick Tarlton', asking Kemp to receive his pamphlet and 'with the credit of thy clownery protect thy Cuthbert from carpers'. Cuthbert claims that during a visit to Bergamo he had met 'that famous francatrip Harlicken [i.e. Harlequin]', who asked 'if I knew any such parabolano here in London as Signior Ciarlatano Kempino', adding that 'for the report he had heard of his pleasance, he could not but be in love with his perfections'. This was an elaborate spoof designed to preface the ensuing pamphlet with a disclaimer of serious intent, but it signalled how famous in London Kemp's 'pleasances' had become. Two years later, another of Nashe's pamphlets twitted Gabriel Harvey by suggesting that his actions would 'fall to [Kemp's] lot for a merriment' ('Works of Thomas Nashe', 1.287, 3.342-3). 
Kemp's merriments were of two kinds. The anonymous play 'A Knack to Know a Knave', printed in 1594 with 'Kemp's applauded merriments of the men of Gotham' (title page), indicates that in some plays he provided independent comic episodes, self-contained farcical skits with minimal integration into the surrounding action. In the play the 'madmen' of Gotham, a cobbler, a miller, and a smith, squabble over who is to present a petition at King Edgar's visit. With much malapropism and absurd logic they compete over who will do it most wisely, but when the petition is read, it is a ridiculous request that travellers arriving in their town be compelled to purchase ale. It is easy to see how, through improvisation and by-play, this inconsequential scene could be elaborated beyond its intrinsic interest into a clowning routine that temporarily hijacked the action. It has been plausibly suggested that the semi-detached scene in Shakespeare's 'Titus Andronicus' involving a common man who mistakes words, and who is sent on a fool's errand resulting in his execution, was an episode written in for Kemp (Wiles, 34). A reference in Ben Jonson's 'Every Man out of his Humour' (1599) to Kemp throwing his shoe at another player perhaps preserves a memory of one more merriment. In the anonymous play 'The Return from Parnassus', part 2 (performed at St John's College, Cambridge, at Christmas 1601-2), in which Kemp is brought on stage as a character, his comic turn is a speech parodying a foolish justice of the peace. 
Kemp's other speciality was the jig or comic afterpiece, a song-and-dance routine that was customarily performed at the end of a play by up to five actors led by the clown: as Nashe explained, 'the quaint comedians of our time... when their play is done do fall to rhyme' ('Works of Thomas Nashe', 1.244). Danced to ballad tunes and rooted in folk culture and popular story-telling, jigs were a distinctly low form of comedy. Their rambunctious and frequently bawdy humour often contrasted radically with the plays to which they were attached, and they acquired a reputation for coarseness and scandal. When, in 'Hamlet' (II.ii), Polonius interrupts the first player's tragical 'Pyrrhus' speech, the prince's put-down -- 'he's for a jig or a tale of bawdry' -- is meant to be cutting. None the less, jigs had a loyal audience following, and some spectators would arrive at a play's close simply for the sake of the ensuing afterpiece. 
At least six of Kemp's jigs had reached print by 1595, and he must have been responsible for more of which we have no record. Four survive, two of which are in German (the jig being a European, and not a narrowly English, form). In the jig 'Rowland', extant only in German, the clown has been cheated of his mistress by a sexton, but wins her back by lying in one of the sexton's graves and surprising the couple with his resurrection. In a German companion piece, 'Von den Mannern', the clown's wife catches him out by playing the same trick on him, pretending she has died and punishing him for the infidelities on which he at once embarks. In 'Rowland's Godson', the servant John has seduced his master's wife, and by a cunning plot he simultaneously dispels his master's suspicions and arranges for him to be beaten. And in 'Singing Simpkin', Simpkin uses a contrivance involving concealment in a chest to enable him to cuckold an old man and outwit a blustering soldier who is trying to seduce the same woman. It will be seen that Kemp's jigs were neatly ironical domestic farces featuring sexual competition and comical violence. Their hero was an ordinary but resourceful man who generally managed to win through despite the odds stacked against him. In the 1590s these beautifully focused and ingenious skits earned Kemp the adulation of the playhouses, though not the approval of more sedate spectators. As one satirist complained in 1598: '
whores, beadles, bawds and sergeants filthily 

Chant Kemp's jig. 
(Baskerville, 110)' 

The 1590s saw Kemp's career at its height. In 1592-4, and probably earlier, he worked with Strange's Men, at this time England's most successful playing company. Led by Edward Alleyn, Strange's performed (when in London) at the Rose in Southwark, and here Kemp would have acted in Kyd's 'Spanish Tragedy', Marlowe's 'Jew of Malta', and, perhaps, 'Titus Andronicus'. Then in 1594 the London companies were completely reorganized. In the new groupings, Kemp emerged with the Lord Chamberlain's Men (Burbage and Shakespeare's company), playing at the Theatre and the Curtain in Shoreditch, with whom he created his remarkable sequence of Shakespearian clowns. He must have become a considerable force in the company. In March 1596, he (together with Shakespeare and Richard Burbage) was the payee for the company's court performances during Christmas 1595-6, and in February 1599 he was one of five players invited by Richard and Cuthbert Burbage to help finance the building of the Globe, in return for a share of the profits. In 'The Return from Parnassus' (1601-2), Kemp is brought on stage as one of London's two most famous stars: 'He's not counted a gentleman that knows not Dick Burbage and Will Kemp' (Leishman, 339). 
Kemp's parts for the Chamberlain's Men are a litany of famous roles: Costard in 'Love's Labour's Lost' (1594), Peter, the Nurse's servant, in 'Romeo and Juliet' ('c'.1595) -- the 1599 quarto includes the direction 'Enter Will Kemp' -- Bottom in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1595-6), Lancelot in 'The Merchant of Venice' (1597), Dogberry in 'Much Ado about Nothing' (1598), and Cob in Ben Jonson's 'Every Man in his Humour' (1598). Some scholars think he also created Falstaff, and Lance in 'The Two Gentlemen of Verona'. 'The Two Gentlemen' is an early play, and Lance could easily have been written in later, though Kemp is not otherwise known for a double act with a dog. Falstaff is a difficult case. He has self-evident clown features, such as direct audience address and farcical misadventures, but his role is much more developed than Kemp's usual parts, and his age, size, and gentility do not match Kemp's athleticism and plainness. It is significant that John Lowin, the Falstaff of the next generation, was not a clown but a tragedian. All of Kemp's other attested roles are unpretentious men who plough a fine line between vulgar ignorance and demotic cunning. Often intellectually at sea in the complex affairs into which they stray, they none the less possess a shrewd common sense that allows them more insight into their world than that possessed by their betters -- the classic instances being Bottom and Dogberry, who are their plays' real, if unofficial, heroes. All have Kemp's trade marks to a greater or lesser degree: verbal mistaking (such as Dogberry's malapropisms), upside-down epiphany (as in Bottom's 'dream'), direct audience address, puzzled soliloquy, and scope for improvisation. Without Kemp in his company, Shakespeare's output in the 1590s -- though not unimaginable -- would clearly have been significantly different. 
Yet despite these glorious roles, Kemp left the company some time in 1599 to resume a career of solo clowning. He sold his share soon after its purchase, and was a conspicuous absentee from the cast of Jonson's 'Every Man out of his Humour' (late 1599). Possibly he stayed in Shoreditch when the Chamberlain's Men moved to the Globe, for in September the German traveller Thomas Platter saw a clown performing at the Curtain with an unnamed company. His next certain appearance was the famous morris dance from London to Norwich, a 130-mile journey begun on 11 February 1600 and completed a month later. This small-scale but fantastic adventure seems to have combined financial speculation with canny self-advertisement. Travelling with an overseer whose job was to certify he really did dance all the way, Kemp laid money with backers, who promised to return three times the sum should he complete the feat, and gave further small gifts as financial pledges to sympathetic spectators 'en route'. In the pamphlet he wrote to publicize his achievement, 'Kemp's Nine Daies Wonder' (1600), he described in picaresque detail his encounters along the road, the amusement, companionship, and occasional competition he provoked. He also complained that many who wagered against his reaching Norwich failed to pay up when he returned, and threatened to publish their names in a supplement. None the less, the preface suggests that the journey was sufficiently successful to encourage him to attempt another solo continental tour. 
During the ensuing year Kemp made his way into Germany and Italy, eventually arriving at Rome, where he met the English traveller Sir Anthony Shirley, an encounter dramatized in Day, Rowley, and Wilkins's 'The Travailes of the Three English Brothers', where the meeting is placed in Venice (Chambers, 2.326). He may also have been the 'Johann Kemp' who in November 1601 was leading an English troupe that had reached Munster by way of Amsterdam and Cologne. But these sparsely documented ventures do not seem to have helped him financially. He was at home in September 1601, complaining of having fallen prey to misfortunes, and in March 1602 he borrowed money from Philip Henslowe, the impresario of Worcester's Men. By this time he had accepted a position with Worcester's Men and was one of their most senior players: he and the dramatist Thomas Heywood were payees for the company's court performance in January 1602. Still, he was probably earning far less from this company than the income he would have received had he remained a sharer at the Globe. Although he had garnered incomparable fame and popular acclaim, the dazzling financial rewards that some contemporary actors acquired largely eluded him. 
Why did Kemp leave the Chamberlain's Men? It has frequently been supposed that in 1599 he was the victim of a company coup, for about the time of his departure Chamberlain's recruited a new comedian in Robert Armin. Armin's line was quite different from Kemp's robust athleticism. More witty, musical, and philosophical, he played fools rather than clowns and was less given to improvisation. Not only did Shakespeare reflect Armin's specialisms in the changed character of his subsequent comic parts, but new departures seem to be signalled in 'Hamlet' (1600). The prince's advice to the players includes severe censure of clowns who 'speak more than is set down for them', intrude laughter into serious passages, and endlessly recycle their 'one suit of jests' (III.i). If, as this suggests, Chamberlain's were trying to move upmarket, Kemp may indeed have felt unwelcome at the new Globe. 
Yet the surviving evidence is not clear-cut. Had the Burbages wanted to force Kemp out, they would hardly have offered him a share, as this made him one of the company's most powerful members. For his part, Kemp may not have seen the break as final. At Norwich in 1600 he was still travelling under the title of 'the Lord Chamberlain his servant' (D. Galloway, ed., 'Norwich, 1540-1642', 1984, 115), and his pairing with Burbage in the Cambridge 'Return from Parnassus' perhaps indicates that at some point after returning from Italy he briefly rejoined the Globe company. Still, the tide was against him and the jigs that were his forte. In the next reign a separation started to emerge between the old-style open-air amphitheatres and the much smaller and more exclusive indoor playhouses that were gradually being built. In this new landscape, jigs were increasingly associated with playhouses like the Fortune and the Red Bull, where audiences were overwhelmingly plebeian and the repertoire had failed to move on. In Richard Brome's 'The Antipodes' (1638), a character directing a play within the play rebukes his clown for disrupting the performance with impromptu jokes. That, he says, was the way: '
of Tarlton and Kemp, 

Before the stage was purged from barbarism 

And brought to the perfection it now shines with. 
(Wiles, 35)' In the more fashionable and socially segregated theatres of Stuart London, nostalgia for jigs connoted a taste for outmoded and inferior dramatic forms. 
Kemp's most important roles with Worcester's Men would have been in Dekker and Webster's 'Sir Thomas Wyatt' (1602) and Heywood's 'A Woman Killed with Kindness' (1603). His last certain mention comes in a costume payment in Henslowe's accounts for September 1602. He may or may not have been 'Kemp, a man' who was buried at St Saviour's, Southwark, on 2 November 1603. Latterly, though, a reference has surfaced to a gratuity paid to 'William Kempe, my Lady Hunsdon's man', in November 1610 (Duncan-Jones). Lady Hunsdon was the wealthy widow of George Carey, who as Elizabeth's lord chamberlain had been patron to the company in which Kemp and Shakespeare performed in the 1590s. If this payment was to Kemp the actor, it suggests he had returned to his old patronage network, perhaps retiring from the stage and spending his final years as a member of Lady Hunsdon's household. 
The possibility that Kemp lived on to about 1610 is strengthened by various early Jacobean allusions to him. The most striking comes in a poem by Sir John Strangways prefacing Thomas Coryat's 'Crudities' (1611, sig. D1v), which says '
Kemp yet doth live, and only lives for this 

Much famous, that he did dance the morris 

From London unto Norwich. 

' However, 'yet doth live' could mean that he was in fact dead, and remained metaphorically alive in the memory that people still had of his morris. He is also mentioned in Thomas Heywood's 'Apology for Actors' (1612), though Heywood's wording does not explicitly say that he was alive, and places him in company with other actors whom Heywood positively states were dead. He had certainly died by 1615, for in a lawsuit over shares in the Globe he is described as 'defunctus' (Wallace). Whether in this putative retirement Kemp made any guest appearance on the public stage, or even acted as himself in 'The Travailes of the Three English Brothers', inevitably remains a matter of conjecture. 


@@@@@


doc= 15335


Kemp, William (1554/5-1628), landowner and sufferer from melancholia, was the eldest son of Robert Kemp of Spain's Hall, Finchingfield, Essex, and his wife, Elizabeth Heigham. He had at least two younger brothers and two sisters. Under a contract dated 10 October 1588 he married Philippa Gunter of London and Aldbury, Hertfordshire. They had one daughter, Jane, who married John Burgoyne of Sutton, Bedfordshire. In December 1604 Kemp was among the Essex gentry who pleaded poverty as an excuse for not contributing to a loan to James I. Although in 1615 his brother Robert bequeathed him money and hawks, which suggests that he was then taking part in country sports, at some point William suffered the psychological trauma which precipitated his sole claim to fame: a retreat into silence which lasted for seven years, 'so swallowed up with a melancholy phrensie, that he neither went to Church nor spake to any person for several years, but always signified his mind by Writing' (Firmin, 2). Seventeenth-century sources, the earliest of them Kemp's own monument in the family chapel in Finchingfield church, offer no reason for his affliction, but family legend attributed his silence to remorse after he had drunkenly insulted his wife, and added that he occupied the years which followed by making fishponds, each one bigger than the last. Local myth-makers elaborated the story with tales of additional misfortunes, including the drowning in the fishponds of three of his servants. 
If Kemp's lengthy abstinence from speech was indeed caused by an altercation with his wife, it none the less continued after her death, since Philippa's burial is recorded in Finchingfield church as 21 August 1623. His depression may well have been religious in origin, since it was spiritual counselling that released him from it, at least two years after Philippa died. In September 1625 the vicarage of Finchingfield, worth $200 per annum, fell vacant by the death of Thomas Pickering. Kemp was the patron, and though he received several applications he showed his puritan sympathies by insisting -- always in writing -- on presenting Stephen Marshall, a leading figure among the godly of Essex, to the living. Marshall was instituted on 25 October 1625, and soon persuaded Kemp to re-enter society by engaging in conversation and by going to church. Thereafter Kemp took part in local government and ecclesiastical business, the latter in co-operation with Marshall. He administered funds for the repair of the church and relief of the poor, and at the time of his death was acting as a surveyor of the highway. His monumental inscription records his burial on 10 June 1628 at the age of seventy-three. He left no will, and since his daughter declined to act the administration of his goods was entrusted to his nephew Robert Kemp, who also inherited Spain's Hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 15336


Kempe, Alfred John (bap. 1784, d. 1846), antiquary, was born in London, where he was baptized at St Mary, Newington, on 16 July 1784, the only son of John Kempe (1749/50-1823), descended from an old Cornish family, who had succeeded his father as 'porteur d'or', or gentleman porter, at the Royal Mint. His mother, Ann (died 1835), was the youngest daughter of James Arrow of Westminster, a descendant of a Berkshire family, which still retained a small estate there. Kempe was educated by two French refugees, from whom he and his sister Anna Eliza ['see 'Bray, Anna Eliza] received a good grounding in literature and the arts, and he was able to benefit from the family's wide circle of artistic acquaintances. He seems to have had no settled employment, although for a short time he too held an appointment at the mint. For some years he was a staff writer for the 'Gentleman's Magazine', for which he produced over two hundred articles on numerous subjects, mainly antiquarian and archaeological; from about 1840 to 1845 he was employed at the state paper office in transcribing and calendaring. 
On 3 October 1808 Kempe married Mary, the daughter of J. Prior, a captain in the merchant navy, at Leyton, Essex; they had eleven children. Around 1809 he made the acquaintance of Charles Alfred Stothard (1786-1821), who married his sister Anna Eliza, and he was drawn into sharing Stothard's enthusiasm for antiquities. With him Kempe explored the district of Keston, in Kent, to which he moved in 1813. These investigations were continued with Thomas Crofton Croker (1798-1854), and led to an article by Kempe, 'An investigation of the antiquities of Holwood Hill, in the parish of Keston', which appeared in the 'Military Register' for 1814, and was also appended to John Dunkin's 'Outlines of the History and Antiquities of Bromley in Kent' of 1815. Kempe returned to the subject again in an article entitled 'An account of some recent discoveries at Holwood Hill, in Kent', printed in the 'Archaeologia' of the Society of Antiquaries of 1829, to which he had contributed since 1816. He became a fellow of the society in 1828, and from among its members, with Crofton Croker, formed the select Society of Noviomagus, which took its name from the Roman city supposed to have been sited at Holwood Hill. 
Kempe helped his sister in the posthumous production of C. A. Stothard's 'Monumental Effigies of Great Britain' by writing the introduction and descriptions for this beautifully illustrated work, which came out in parts between 1823 and 1832. Apart from this, and a translation in 1820 of a two-volume work by Baron von Odeleben which had appeared in French in 1817 (although originally written in German), published as 'Circumstantial Narrative of the Campaign in Saxony in the Year 1813', his published work consists of short miscellaneous papers, some of them reprints of his articles for the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. Kempe died at Stamford Villas, Fulham Road, London, on 21 August 1846 and was buried in Fulham churchyard on 27 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 15337


Kempe, Margery (b. c.1373, d. in or after 1438), visionary, was the author of the earliest surviving autobiography in English. She was born at Bishop's Lynn, Norfolk, the daughter of John Brunham (died 1413), merchant, who was five times mayor and six times MP for Lynn between 1364 and 1391. The identity of Kempe's mother is unknown. At about twenty she married John Kempe, the younger son of a Lynn skinner, also called John (died 'c'.1393). John Kempe the younger was admitted to the freedom in 1393, and was a chamberlain of Lynn in 1394. He is recorded as a brewer in 1403-5. Margery Kempe became pregnant soon after their marriage, and when the child was born she experienced a severe post-partum depression, lasting for eight and a half months. She was finally cured when Jesus appeared and sat at the end of her bed, speaking words of comfort. This marked the beginning of her conversion, though Kempe continued for several years in her old way of life: she ran a brewing business which collapsed, and then a short-lived horse-mill. These failures convinced her that she was being punished for her sinfulness, and she embarked on a life of penance. 
Almost everything known about Margery Kempe derives from her 'Book'. Kempe could not write, but determined in the early 1430s to record her spiritual autobiography. She employed as amanuensis an Englishman who had lived in Germany, but he died before the work was finished, and his writing was anyway illegible. Kempe persuaded a local priest to begin rewriting on 23 July 1436, and on 28 April 1438 he started work on an additional section covering the years 1431-4. Only one manuscript survives, now in the British Library (Add. MS 61823), and previously in the possession of the Butler-Bowdon family of Lancashire. It was copied about 1450 by an East Anglian scribe named Salthows, and later in the century was owned by the Yorkshire Carthusian priory of Mount Grace. Until the manuscript was identified by Hope Emily Allen in 1934, Kempe's 'Book' was known only from excerpts printed by Wynkyn de Worde 'c'.1501, and by Henry Pepwell in 1521 (where the author is described as 'a devoute ancres'). The 'Book' was first published complete in 1936, in a version in modern English by William Butler-Bowdon. A critical edition for the Early English Text Society by Sanford Brown Meech and Hope Emily Allen followed four years later. Other versions have followed since, including one in the 'Penguin Classics' series in 1985. 
The chronology of Kempe's life is unclear from her 'Book', and few events, including her encounters with authority, can be documented from other sources. She had another thirteen children before she finally persuaded her husband, in the summer of 1413, to agree that they should live chastely. Kempe then sought permission from Philip Repyndon, bishop of Lincoln, to become a vowess and wear the characteristic mantle and ring, to which she proposed adding white clothes symbolizing her spiritual purity. Repyndon sent her to Thomas Arundel, archbishop of Canterbury, who received her kindly, but it is not certain that she took a formal vow. Possibly that year, Kempe visited Julian of Norwich to seek reassurance about the authenticity of her visions. Later in 1413 she left Yarmouth on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, via Constance and Venice, living on alms. After reaching Jerusalem, she visited Calvary and the holy sepulchre, where she first manifested the uncontrollable crying which for many years was to be the hallmark of her devotion. She travelled in the Holy Land before re-embarking for Venice, and then went to Assisi and Rome, where she wore white clothing, and where her roaring in church caused much hostility. Throughout this period Kempe had frequent visions, which included a mystical marriage to the Godhead in Rome. While there she met a former servant of the visionary St Bridget of Sweden. She returned to England after Easter 1415. 
Back in Lynn, Kempe was a source of scandal, with her white clothing and noisy weeping. In 1417 she set off again on pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. While waiting for a ship in Bristol she was welcomed into the household of Thomas Peverel, bishop of Worcester, who had known her father and treated her as a holy woman. On her return from Spain she visited the shrine of the holy blood at Hailes, in Gloucestershire, and then went on to Leicester. The political climate, in the aftermath of Oldcastle's revolt of 1414, was not favourable to unusual styles of religion. Earlier, in Canterbury, Kempe had been called a Lollard and threatened with burning by people in the street; here she was brought before the mayor, charged with Lollardy, and imprisoned. After being harassed, verbally and sexually, by the steward of Leicester, she was examined on the eucharist in the mayor's presence by the abbot of the town's Augustinian house, and by the dean of Leicester. She was pronounced orthodox, and made her way to York. Here her white clothing, her sobbing during communion, and her following in the city once more made her suspect. She was examined by minster clergy and then brought before the archbishop of York, Henry Bowet, at Cawood, where she was again accused of heresy and again found to be orthodox. Bowet had her escorted out of the area, but she was rearrested by royal authorities and taken to Beverley. Bowet released her again and gave her a letter certifying her orthodoxy. Once across the Humber she was arrested yet again and released, before going to London to secure a letter from Henry Chichele, archbishop of Canterbury, allowing her frequent access to confession and communion. She returned to Lynn some time in 1418. 
Several years of painful illnesses followed, which made Kempe less mobile than before. The intense spiritual life recorded in her 'Book' includes extended visions, conversations with Jesus, and bouts of noisy crying. A priest read works of contemplation to her over a period of years, including the 'Bible' and commentaries, the 'Revelations' of St Bridget, Walter Hilton's translation of the 'Stimulus amoris', and the 'Incendium amoris' of Richard Rolle. She also knew of Marie d'Oignies (died 1213) and Elizabeth of Hungary (died 1231). Although much criticized, she always had supporters among the clergy, including the Dominican anchorite of Lynn, himself a visionary, her parish priest, Robert Springolde, who succeeded the anchorite as her principal confessor, Thomas Hevingham, prior of the Benedictine monastery in Lynn, Richard Caister, vicar of St Stephen's, Norwich, and William Southfield, Carmelite of Norwich, also a visionary. 
In the 1420s Kempe lived apart from her husband. When he was accidentally injured, and later became senile, she nursed him until his death about 1431, in penance for her pleasure in his body when young. Their son, who lived in Germany, returned to Lynn with his wife and died, shortly before his father. In April 1433 Kempe left Ipswich, without her confessor's permission, to accompany her daughter-in-law back to Danzig. Their ship was blown off course to Norway, but eventually reached Danzig, from where Kempe travelled with difficulty to Wilsnack in Brandenburg to see the miraculous Holy Blood. Then she went to Aachen and its holy relics, and returned via Calais to London. She visited the Bridgettine abbey at Syon, probably in August 1434, where she received the Lammastide indulgence for pilgrims, and then returned to Lynn to be reconciled with her confessor. In 1438, when the 'Book' was completed, a Margeria Kempe, who may be its author, was admitted to the prestigious Trinity Guild of Lynn. The date of Kempe's death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 15338


Kempenfelt, Richard (1718-1782), naval officer, was born at Westminster, the son of Magnus Kempenfelt ('b'. 1664/5, died 'c'.1727), a native of Sweden, and Anne Hunt ('b'. 1678/9). His father is said to have been in the service of James II and followed him to France, later returning to England where he entered the army, and gained the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In 1725-6 Magnus was lieutenant-governor of Jersey; he died about 1727, and was survived by two daughters and two sons, including Richard. 
Richard Kempenfelt entered the navy, served in the West Indies at the celebrated taking of Portobello, and on 14 January 1741 was promoted lieutenant of the 'Strafford', then carrying his flag, by Edward Vernon. After the failure at Cartagena, Kempenfelt was moved into the 'Superbe', and again into the frigate 'Seahorse'. He returned to England towards the end of 1746. In September 1748 he was appointed to the 'Anson', first with Captain Nutt, and afterwards with Captain Charles Holmes. In January 1755 he joined the 'Lichfield' under the command of Captain Charles Steevens whom in April he followed to the 'Orford' as first lieutenant. On 5 May 1756 he was promoted to command the fireship 'Lightning', and on 17 January 1757 he became captain of the 'Elizabeth', bearing the broad pennant of Captain Steevens, and went out to the East Indies as commodore and second in command. 
In the 'Elizabeth', Kempenfelt played a role in the distinguished actions of 29 April and 3 August 1758. He was then appointed to the frigate 'Queenborough' in which he convoyed troops of Colonel William Draper's regiment to Madras where their prompt landing, when the French under Count Lully were on the point of assault, prevented its falling to the enemy. A few months later he rejoined Steevens, now a rear-admiral, on the 'Grafton', which he commanded in the action of 10 September 1759. On Steevens's becoming commander-in-chief, Kempenfelt accompanied him to the 'Norfolk', and took part in the capture of Pondicherry; Kempenfelt's account of the action was reprinted in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for 1846. When Steevens died Rear-Admiral Samuel Cornish hoisted his flag in the 'Norfolk'; he retained Kempenfelt as his flag captain, and put him in charge of landing troops at Manila; after its capture he was detached to take possession of the Spanish naval station at Cavite, and was specially requested by Sir William Draper to act as its governor. Kempenfelt was then sent home with dispatches. After his return to the East Indies he resumed command of the 'Norfolk', and brought her to England in 1764. He is said to have spent a considerable part of the following years travelling in France and elsewhere on the continent, where he made a special study of French shipbuilding techniques. 
It remains unclear when Kempenfelt developed his evangelical Christian convictions, but one of his short poems was written at sea near the island of Sicily, on 20 May 1769, when he was on half pay, and his collected 'Original Hymns and Poems' were published in 1777. Apart from his personal spirituality he shared a conviction, growing among officers in the fleet, that restoration of religious observances could support the structure of naval discipline. In 1779 he wrote to Admiral Charles Middleton (later Lord Barham): 'Don't let anyone imagine that this discipline [of daily prayers] will disgust the men and give them a dislike to the service, for the very reverse will be the consequence' ('Letters and Papers', 1.308). Two years later he had the first consignment of bibles supplied by the Bible Society placed on board his flagship, the 'Royal George'. 
During the dispute with Spain over the Falkland Islands in 1770 Kempenfelt commanded the 'Buckingham', which was paid off in the following year. In October 1778 he was appointed to the 'Alexander', and in April 1779 he sat as a member of the court martial on Sir Hugh Palliser. Afterwards, on the recommendation of George III as 'a great friend of Lord Clarendon, [and] much respected by all parties and one well qualified to heal all little breaches' ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, no. 2209, 9 March 1779), Kempenfelt was appointed captain of the fleet first to Sir Charles Hardy the younger, and, in 1780, to Sir Francis Geary and Vice-Admiral George Darby. As a loyal subordinate to a succession of elderly commanders-in-chief, Kempenfelt worked to overcome the tactical limitations of the fleet which had been brought to his attention during Palliser's trial. During the crisis of 1779, when a large but inefficient Franco-Spanish fleet was in the channel and threatening invasion, Kempenfelt expressed a belief that a smaller but tactically more efficient British fleet should be able, if not to dominate the situation, at least to make invasion impossible. However, his efforts to drill the fleet met with little success, his difficulties having been increased initially by Admiral Hardy's obstinacy. Despite his extensive experiments with new signal books and his practical skill as a tactician, his ability as a theoretician who needed to overcome service conservatism to effect reform proved to be somewhat limited. 
On 26 September 1780 Kempenfelt was advanced to rear-admiral of the blue; he continued with Darby until towards the end of 1781 when, with his flag in the 'Victory', he was directed to put to sea in command of twelve ships of the line and some frigates, and intercept a French squadron and convoy, reported bound for the West Indies. He was instructed that the escort would consist of not more than seven ships; but when he sighted it, on 12 December, some 50 leagues to the south-west of Ushant, he found it consisting of nineteen. Every available ship had been sent, under the command of De Guichen, who was reputedly one of the most skilful tacticians in the French navy. Kempenfelt at once saw that it was impossible for him to attack such a superior force. He formed line abreast and followed the French until he noticed that their van and centre had drawn too far ahead to be any longer able to support the convoy. Turning into line ahead, he engaged the French rear and, brushing it aside, closed with the convoy, twenty of which he captured; he sank the four frigates of the close escort. Forming two divisions, one of which took the prizes in tow and the other of which covered their rear, he ran into Plymouth under a press of sail and hotly engaged by two of De Guichen's ships and a few of the transports. 
On Lord Howe's taking command of the fleet in April 1782, Kempenfelt hoisted his flag in the 'Royal George' as one of the junior admirals, and continued with the fleet during the summer cruise. On 15 August the fleet anchored at Spithead, and was ordered to refit with all possible haste and proceed to the relief of Gibraltar. As part of this process it was necessary to give the 'Royal George' a slight heel to get at a leak a few inches below the water-line. This was done on 29 August by running her guns over to the other side. While she was so heeled supply boats came alongside to transfer casks through the depressed lower gun ports; the additional weight allowed an inrush of water which immediately capsized and sank her. Besides the crew, a very large number of tradesmen, women, and children were on board; it was estimated that more than 800 lost their lives. Kempenfelt was at the time in his cabin, and died in the accident. The master, gunner, and boatswain were all ashore in violation of orders, and the carpenter had been unable to find the officer of the watch to warn him. At the court martial, however, the crew were absolved of all blame. 
After the conservatism of previous commanders the appointment of Earl Howe had brought a sympathetic commander with whom Kempenfelt had been able to work. Because Kempenfelt died so soon afterwards it was left to Howe to provide the fleet with a numerically based flag system capable of transmitting a rapid succession of complex tactical instructions; and it fell upon Sir Home Popham to equip it with a 'marine telegraph' capable of two-way communication of intelligence. 


@@@@@


doc= 15339


Kempt, Sir James (1763/4-1854), army officer and governor-in-chief of British North America, was born between December 1763 and December 1764 in Edinburgh, the son of Gavin Kempt and his wife, the daughter of Alexander Walker of Edinburgh. Although nothing is known about his early life, he was gazetted ensign in the 101st foot in March 1783 and lieutenant the following year. After the regiment's disbandment in 1785, Kempt remained on half pay until 1794, when he was commissioned captain and then major in the 113th foot. When that regiment was broken up, he served briefly as inspecting field officer of recruiting at Glasgow, and in 1796 was again placed on half pay. In 1799 he became aide-de-camp to Sir Ralph Abercromby, commander of troops in north Britain, whom he accompanied with expeditionary forces to Holland and the Mediterranean. On Abercromby's death in 1801, Kempt joined the staff of John Hely-Hutchinson for the rest of the Egyptian campaign. In 1803 he was appointed aide-de-camp to David Dundas, commanding the southern district in England; later that year he obtained the lieutenant-colonelcy of the 81st foot, and served in 1805-6 in Naples and Sicily under Sir James Henry Craig. From 1807 to 1811 Kempt was quartermaster-general in British North America and in 1809 advanced to colonel. Between 1811 and 1814 he served on the staff of Wellington's army in Spain and France, with the rank of major-general. In June 1814 he commanded one of the brigades dispatched from Bordeaux to reinforce British troops in the Canadas during war with the United States. Kempt returned to Europe on Napoleon's escape from Elba and commanded the 8th brigade at the battle of Waterloo. In acknowledgement of his wartime services he received a string of British and foreign decorations, the KCB and GCB in 1815, and the GCH in 1816. He held the lieutenant-governorship of the garrison at Fort William from 1813 and at Portsmouth from 1819. He was colonel successively of the 60th foot (1813), the 3rd West India regiment (1818), the 81st foot (1819), and the 40th foot (1829). He was promoted lieutenant-general in 1825 and general in 1841. 
Like other Wellingtonian officers, Kempt was drawn into the post-war colonial service. He was appointed in 1819 lieutenant-governor of Nova Scotia on the promotion of his friend Lord Dalhousie to governor-in-chief of British North America. Although Dalhousie forewarned him of conflict with provincial politicians, particularly over financial matters, Kempt's conciliatory manner enabled him to preserve harmonious relations with the legislature. He managed to postpone serious consideration of the British government's disruptive proposal in 1825 that the assembly should be invited to vote a civil list, covering the salaries of leading officials, in exchange for control over crown revenues. Religious disputes, especially over higher education, proved more troublesome. The Anglican exclusiveness of King's College, Windsor, had been challenged by Dalhousie's inauguration in 1818 of a non-sectarian college in Halifax, modelled on the University of Edinburgh. Although a building was begun in 1820, the debt-ridden institution remained moribund. In vain Kempt urged the colonial secretary, Lord Bathurst, a fervent Anglican, to sanction a special grant from crown revenues. Kempt also failed to secure funds from a legislature facing similar demands from King's College and Presbyterian Pictou Academy. His constructive initiative to amalgamate King's and Dalhousie won local endorsement in 1824 but was vetoed by the archbishop of Canterbury, with Bathurst's acquiescence. 
In 1828 Kempt was dispatched by the British authorities on a military mission to inspect the building of the Rideau Canal in Upper Canada, where the expenditures contracted by the chief engineer, Lieutenant-Colonel John By, had spiralled alarmingly out of control. On his return to Halifax that summer, Kempt received word of his appointment as governor-in-chief, following the hasty removal of Dalhousie amid a political storm in Lower Canada and at Westminster, where a Commons select committee was investigating his conduct. Kempt viewed with mixed feelings the promotion he had long expected and the task of dealing with a formidable crisis arising chiefly from a protracted, bitter dispute over the appropriation of revenues. He temporarily eased the deadlock by practising calm forbearance and by making tactical concessions to the legislature in the hope that parliament would soon provide a permanent settlement. The recipient of vague, contradictory instructions and much criticism from the Colonial Office, he was relieved to surrender his responsibilities to Lord Aylmer in October 1830. Kempt's success as governor in cultivating a degree of harmony stemmed in part from qualities of character and personality and from a deliberately non-partisan approach to colonial politics. An affable and highly sociable individual, his tact and common sense won widespread respect and co-operation. Kempt was also favoured by circumstances, administrating both colonies during interludes between political strife. 
On arrival in England, Kempt became master-general of the Board of Ordnance, with a seat on the privy council, but determined to stay out of parliament and party politics. In addition to departmental duties, he served on royal commissions in 1833-4 to investigate military punishments and the civil administration of the army, objecting in the latter instance to any change in the powers of the Ordnance. He retired from public life in December 1834, though his name was mentioned in 1835 and again in 1837 for a Canadian appointment. He died, unmarried, in South Audley Street, London, on 20 December 1854, leaving in his will gifts totalling $59,800 and $675 in annuities to various relatives and friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 15340


Kempthorne, Sir John (c.1620-1679), naval officer, was the second son of John Kempthorne, attorney, of Ugborough, Devon, and his wife, Agnes Simon. John senior served as a royalist cavalry officer in the civil wars, by which time his son seems already to have been at sea for several years, beginning as apprentice to the master of a Topsham vessel and eventually commanding Levant Company ships in the Mediterranean trade. About 1649 Kempthorne married Joanna (died 1691), a servant to Lady Bendish, the wife of the ambassador to Constantinople from 1647 to 1661. In 1657 his ship, probably the 'Eastland Merchant', was captured after a hard fight by the Spanish privateer Papachino, who showed great kindness to his prisoner -- a generosity of spirit which Kempthorne reciprocated when Papachino was imprisoned in the Tower of London in 1658, eventually procuring the Spaniard's release. On 17 November 1660 John Kempthorne 'of Poplar' was elected a brother of Trinity House, and in 1662-3 he was commanding the merchantman 'Maidenhead', still in the Mediterranean trade, when she was requisitioned by the Turks to transport troops to Candia (Crete). The ambassador at Constantinople, the earl of Winchilsea, noted at the time that 'the captain has always been a man of loyal principles' ('Finch MSS', 1.180). 
The mobilization for the Second Anglo-Dutch War in 1664 brought Kempthorne his first naval command, probably through the auspices of his father's old commanding officer, Prince Rupert of the Rhine. He was captain of the 'Kent' from June to October 1664, transferring from her to the 'Dunkirk' and then, on 26 November, to the first-rate 'Royal James', which he commanded in the battle of Lowestoft on 3 June 1665 as flag captain to Rupert. On 19 July he transferred to the 'Old James', whose captain, the earl of Marlborough -- a distant relative of the Kempthorne family -- had been killed in the action. Kempthorne moved from her to the 'Royal Charles' in February 1666, commanding her as flag captain to the duke of Albemarle in the Four Days' Fight of 1-4 June before moving to the 'Defiance' on 10 June, becoming rear-admiral of the Blue squadron in her in September. He stayed in the same ship until the end of 1667 and during this period commanded one of the 'flying squadrons' sent out by the bankrupt government instead of a main fleet. His ships convoyed the Mediterranean trade between February and May 1667, then remained in south-western waters, based at Plymouth, during the Dutch attacks on the English and Scottish coastlines in the summer. At the end of June the squadron sailed for Ireland, where it remained until the end of September, usually cruising off the north-west coast between Blackrock and Rockall. After leaving the 'Defiance' in December 1667, he commanded the 'Warspite' during the summer of 1668. 
Early in 1669 Kempthorne took command of the 'Mary Rose', the ship intended to carry Lord Howard as ambassador to Morocco. After landing him at Tangier, Kempthorne collected under his escort a multinational convoy of six merchantmen, only to be attacked north of Cadiz on 18 December by seven Algerine corsairs. The 'Mary Rose' engaged without hesitation. The fighting lasted that day and much of the next, with six of the Algerine force attacking Kempthorne's single warship. Despite severe damage to her masts and rigging, the 'Mary Rose' managed to disable the enemy admiral's vessel, at which point the whole Algerine force withdrew. Kempthorne's squadron arrived safely in Cadiz Bay on the 20th. The event was immortalized by the engraver Wenceslaus Hollar, a passenger on the 'Mary Rose', and it earned a knighthood for Kempthorne on 24 April 1670. When the Third Anglo-Dutch War began in 1672 he became rear-admiral of the blue once more, flying his flag in the 'St Andrew', in which he fought at the battle of Solebay on 28 May 1672. The blue bore the brunt of the fighting and Kempthorne's unsuccessful efforts to relieve his doomed admiral, the earl of Sandwich, brought him high praise: 'he... fought till eight with as much conduct and bravery as ever man in the world did, continually engaged on both sides almost the whole day' (Thomas Lucas to Nathaniel Herne, TNA: PRO, SP 29/310/35). Kempthorne's own account tells of his day-long running battle with the Dutch admiral De Ruyter, who was to regard this action as the hardest he ever fought. Kempthorne subsequently became rear-admiral of the red, and remained in the 'St Andrew' for the 1673 campaign, serving under Sir Edward Spragge as vice-admiral of the blue. As such, he took part in the two indecisive battles of the Schooneveld on 28 May and 4 June, as well as in the battle of the Texel/Kijkduin on 11 August 1673. Spragge's deliberate decision to detach his squadron from the main fleet to pursue his private vendetta with the Dutch admiral Tromp led to bitter recriminations: Kempthorne criticized the conduct of his rear-admiral, Thomas Butler, earl of Ossory, but subsequently retracted the charges. His own part in the action, primarily against Tromp's vice-admiral, Sweers, and Tromp himself, centred on the relief of the severely damaged 'Royal Prince'. 
After leaving the 'St Andrew' in October 1673 Kempthorne drew a flag officer's pension of $200 per annum, and served both as master of Trinity House in 1674-5 and as the first steward of the club for naval captains set up in 1674. Early in 1675 he was appointed resident commissioner of the navy at Portsmouth, forming a close relationship with the governor there, Colonel George Legge, later Lord Dartmouth, a fellow naval veteran of the Dutch wars. During the naval mobilization which occurred in 1678 (when there was a threat of war with France), Kempthorne held his last seagoing command, in the post of vice-admiral of the narrow seas and flying his flag in the 'Royal Charles'. In February 1679, through Legge's good offices, he was returned as one of the MPs for Portsmouth in the elections for a new parliament, despite the government's attempts to secure the seat for the chancellor of the exchequer. Kempthorne's parliamentary career was short-lived as he died at Portsmouth on 19 October 1679. He was buried in St Thomas's Church there, where a memorial was erected to him. 
All three of Kempthorne's sons had naval careers. His eldest surviving son, John, was born in 1651, followed by Morgan, born at Leghorn in 1655, and Rupert. An unnamed daughter married a protege of Prince Rupert, Sir William Reeves, who died of wounds received at the battle of the Texel on 11 August 1673 when in command of the 'Sovereign'. Kempthorne's son John joined the East India Company's service in 1682 and died in 1692. Morgan was killed in command of the 'Kingfisher' in 1681 in an engagement with seven Algerine pirates, an action reminiscent of his father's fight in the 'Mary Rose'. Rupert commanded a fireship in 1690 but was killed in a tavern brawl in 1691, a fate which took an evidently unruly son from his 'tender but grossly abused mother' (BL, Egerton MS 928, fol. 268). In his will Kempthorne left land in Bigbury, Devon, and shares in five merchantmen: he had remained a prominent owner of merchant ships throughout his naval career, hiring the 'Turkey Merchant' to the navy in 1666, in the Third Anglo-Dutch War, and in 1678, as well as being a part owner of the privateer 'Jamaica Merchant' in the third war. Throughout his naval career he had remained popular with the mariners of his native Devon, who often flocked to serve with him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15341


Keymis, Lawrence (1564/5-1618), mariner and explorer, was born in Wiltshire and entered Balliol College, Oxford, in 1581 at the age of sixteen. He graduated BA in 1584 and held a junior bursarship in 1585-6, when his admission of liability for unpaid bills and uncollected battels amounting to over $34 was noted. Part of this was still unpaid when the authorities initiated legal proceedings against him in 1591-2, by which time he had evaded them by taking service with Walter Ralegh and Thomas Harriot, his Oxford contemporaries. Keymis became one of Ralegh's most loyal supporters. He accompanied Ralegh on his first visit to Guiana in 1595, which from local information seemed to offer the prospect of reaching the fabled lake Parima and its source of much gold. Ralegh did discover a source of gold among quartz rocks, but realized that this was too difficult to work, and that he needed to find alluvial gold or some softer deposit. 
Ralegh's second expedition to the New World consisted of two ships that sailed under Keymis in January 1596 with orders to explore the rivers north of the Amazon delta. Keymis sailed along the coast of Guiana, noted the sizes of the river mouths and the tribes and languages he encountered, and was attracted by reports of a vast lake at the head of the Essequibo. He then entered the Orinoco and proceeded upstream to the Caroni River, where he found a small Spanish settlement, San Tome, and an ambush defending the passage upriver where on his previous expedition Ralegh had located gold-bearing quartz. Having no armed force, Keymis was obliged to retreat. The only prospect of success, which he conveyed optimistically to Ralegh on his return, was the story of alluvial gold to be found at the foot of Iconuri, a mountain some 15 miles distant. 
A long period then elapsed, during which Ralegh was imprisoned in the Tower. In the search for evidence against him Keymis was also detained for some eighteen weeks, first in the Tower, then in the Fleet. Ralegh urged his own release so that he and Keymis might return to Guiana to locate the sources of gold, but he obtained his liberty only in 1616, and was instructed to behave peaceably to the Spanish settlers. His fleet sailed in 1617, and, while Ralegh remained at the mouth of the Orinoco with most of his ships, Keymis set off upriver in December with 250 soldiers and 150 sailors in five vessels. Three reached San Tome, which consisted of some thirty houses surrounded by a rampart and moat. On the night of 2-3 January 1618 a party under Ralegh's son Walter marched towards the rampart. Firing broke out, Walter led a charge into the settlement, and was killed in the ensuing conflict. This assault was a violation of Ralegh's instructions, but it is unclear whether Keymis had decided that San Tome must be destroyed before he could search for the mines, or, perhaps more likely, whether the defending Spaniards suspected treachery and fired first. 
Keymis then lost his resolve: he alone knew where the mines were said to be, but more than twenty years had passed since his earlier visit. Afraid to let his men witness his failure, while George Ralegh led a party several hundred miles up the Orinoco, Keymis searched for the supposed mines with a few friends, and one night brought back some ore. This, when tested by a refiner, proved worthless. His excursions upriver were resisted by the Spaniards, and he made no effort to reach the alluvial gold at the foot of Iconuri. Eventually he gave up; the plunder from San Tome was loaded onto the ship and the settlement fired. The ships hastily made their way downriver, fearful lest a larger Spanish force should pursue them, and reached Ralegh's base on 2 March. Keymis had already sent word to Ralegh informing him of the attack on San Tome and the death of his son; he now had to admit his failure to locate the sources of gold. Ralegh, fully aware of the implications of these events, confronted him with the bitter statement that Keymis had ruined him by his actions, and refused to support the latter in his report to the English backers. Keymis left Ralegh's cabin, saying that he knew what action to take, and went back to his ship. Ralegh then heard a pistol shot, and sent his servant to enquire what was happening, to which Keymis, lying on his bed, replied that he was just discharging a previously loaded pistol. Half an hour later Keymis's boy entered the cabin and found him dead. The ball had only grazed a rib, and after Ralegh's servant had left he stabbed himself to the heart with a long knife. Keymis was unmarried and left his estate to his younger brother Nathaniel. 


@@@@@


doc= 15342


Ken, Thomas (1637-1711), bishop of Bath and Wells and nonjuror, was born at Little Berkhamsted in July 1637, the son of Thomas Ken (died 1651), attorney of Furnival's Inn and clerk of assize in Glamorgan, Radnorshire, and Brecon, and his second wife, Martha (died 1641), daughter of the poet John Chalkhill ('fl'. 1600). After his father's death in 1651 he lived with his half-sister, Ann ('b'. 1610), whose husband, Isaak Walton (1593-1683), a literary figure of pronounced Laudian views, doubtless had great influence on the young Ken's spiritual and literary development. 
Ken was educated at Winchester College, where he was elected scholar on 26 September 1651 and admitted the following January. In autumn 1656 he was elected to New College, Oxford, and he entered there in 1657 after a brief spell at Hart Hall. At Winchester and New College he developed a lifelong friendship with Francis Turner, another future nonjuror. At Oxford he also probably began his association with George Hooper, whose life was to interweave with his and to whom in 1704 he gladly ceded his bishopric of Bath and Wells. New College was deeply permeated with puritanism during the interregnum. It is for this reason that Ken may have joined a group which, led by John Fell, met for Anglican worship at the house of Thomas Willis. Music was a favourite recreation all Ken's life and at Oxford, as a skilful lutenist, he took part in a musical society. He also reportedly gave alms to the poor. He graduated BA on 3 May 1661 and proceeded MA in January 1664. In 1661 and 1662 he was lector in logic, and possibly mathematics, at New College. 
After ordination in 1661 or 1662 Ken was instituted on 17 August 1663 into the rectory of Little Easton, Essex, where he was spiritual counsellor to the devout Margaret, Lady Maynard (died 1682); she seems to have had a lasting spiritual influence on him. Her husband had attended Charles II on his entry into London and served at the coronation, and was to become comptroller of the royal household and a privy councillor in 1672. It was perhaps Ken's intimacy with the Maynards, coupled with Isaak Walton's friendship with Bishop George Morley of Winchester, that brought Ken early promotion. Early in 1665 he resigned his living and moved to Winchester as Morley's chaplain. Living in the close he took unpaid charge of the parish of St John in the Soke, where he frequently preached, and reportedly converted many Anabaptists. In December 1666 he was elected fellow of Winchester, resigning his fellowship at New College, where he gave $103 10's'. towards new buildings. On 6 July 1667 Morley instituted him to the rectory of Brighstone, on the Isle of Wight. Here he remained until spring 1669, when he was clearly intended for the rectory of Bishop's Waltham -- on 11 April that year Ken subscribed for that living, but was never instituted. Instead, on 28 May he became rector of East Woodhay. In parallel, on 12 April 1669 he became prebendary of Winchester, moving from one prebend to another in May. In autumn 1672 he resigned his living to make way for George Hooper, his fellow chaplain, who moved from Havant, where the damp was affecting his health. Ken now lived in Winchester, fulfilling his duties as cathedral prebendary, college fellow, and bishop's chaplain, and in St John's parish. Music was still an important part of his life; he had an organ of his own, and frequently accompanied himself for morning and evening prayers on the lute. In 1674 he published his 'Manual for Winchester Scholars', but without his three hymns added later. In 1675 he went on a tour of Europe with his nephew, Isaac Walton the younger. In Rome, where it was jubilee year, papal grandeur was at its zenith. This was enough to alert him to the imperfections of Rome and to confirm him in his adherence to Anglicanism as the purest form of the church catholic, albeit that on his return some said he was 'tinged with popery' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.546). On 6 July 1678 Ken was created BD and on 30 June 1679 DD. 
Late in 1679 Henry Compton, bishop of London, appointed Ken to succeed George Hooper as chaplain to Mary, wife of the future William III. From now onwards Ken was increasingly involved in the turbulent events of the 1680s that engulfed the royal family and the realm. The task at The Hague was not easy, as Hooper had unpleasantly discovered; the chaplain's role was to protect Mary's Anglicanism from William's dour and boorishly combative Calvinism. Ken himself was 'horribly unsatisfied with the Prince', thought he was 'not kind to his wife', and decided to speak to him 'though he kicks him out of doors' ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.19-20). William's threats prompted Ken to offer his resignation, but Ken's firmness impressed William enough to persuade him to stay. When Compton asked Ken to enquire into the possibility of Anglican union with Dutch protestants, Ken advised against proceeding further, because of the questionable validity of Dutch ordination. Nevertheless, he scored a notable coup in securing the conversion from Catholicism of Colonel Edward Fitzpatrick, a scion of a noble Irish family and nephew of the duke of Ormond. In September 1680 Ken was able to report that Fitzpatrick had received 'the Holy Eucharist in our chapel' (Plumptre, 1.152-3). This conversion at the time of the Popish Plot was doubly significant, for some had suspected Ken himself of harbouring popish sympathies. 
On his return to England in 1680 Ken was appointed one of the king's chaplains, but continued to live in Winchester. Three years later, in summer 1683, Charles made one of his frequent visits with the royal court to Winchester to oversee the construction of his magnificent new palace. Ken stubbornly refused requests to accommodate the king's mistress, Nell Gwyn, in his prebendal house. Instead she had to stay in the deanery. Charles, typically accepting this rebuff, respected Ken for his views and his boldness; later he reportedly declared 'I must go and hear little Ken tell me of my faults' (Plumptre, 1.159). 
Ken's next assignment was to Tangier, granted as a Portuguese marriage dowry to Charles II in 1661. Originally attractive, its possession proved a costly burden, and the government decided to send a taskforce to withdraw the garrison and destroy the fortifications. In August 1683 at short notice Lord Dartmouth, the fleet commander, on Samuel Pepys's advice appointed Ken, a man of 'piety, authority and learning', as senior chaplain of the fleet ('Life, Journals', 2.149-50). His task included oversight of other chaplains, who were said to be little better than the current decadent state of the navy. Rough weather made the voyage in their ship, the 'Grafton', long and arduous; it took five weeks, during which Ken was in frequent discussion with Pepys and Dartmouth. In Tangier all three were appalled by its depravity. Pepys himself noted 'nothing but vice in the whole place of all sorts, for swearing, cursing, drinking and whoring' ('Tangier Papers', 89). Ken courageously preached in the Anglican church 'particularly in reproof of the vices of this town' ('Life, Journals', 1.374), sometimes in the presence of officials including the governor, Colonel Percival Kirke, a capable, if brutal, soldier once described as a 'foul-mouthed, drunken, bullying sensualist' (Rice, 59). Dining quietly in Pepys's cabin Ken and Pepys one evening discussed the 'viciousness of this place and its being time for God Almighty to destroy it' ('Tangier Papers', 49). On another occasion they had an angry confrontation with Kirke about the 'excessive liberty of swearing and blaspheming we observe here' (ibid., 50). With Kirke as an uncongenial companion they embarked, after long delays, on the return journey on 8 March. This proved extremely hazardous in one of the worst gales for decades. Arriving at Portsmouth in April, six months later than originally intended, they brought with them the Tangier church silver, later given to Portsmouth for use in the parish church, now the cathedral. This prolonged naval episode, unsought and unwelcome as it was, amply demonstrated Ken's devotion to duty and his moral and physical courage in confronting both Tangier's depravity and the terrors of the sea. 
Ken clearly had so impressed the king and his brother, James, by his work at The Hague and in Tangier that, when in November 1684 the see of Bath and Wells fell vacant, Charles was eager to appoint him. Allegedly Charles declared 'Odd's fish! Who shall have Bath and Wells but the little fellow who would not give poor Nelly a lodging' (Bowles, 2.66). The king pressed to have the processes completed rapidly. Elected by the Wells chapter on 16 December, Ken was consecrated by Sancroft, with Turner as a co-consecrator, at Lambeth on 25 January 1685. When the king fell ill only a few days later, significantly Ken was one of four bishops summoned to his deathbed. Ken was present for three days and nights. Though the junior bishop there, he 'was the most in favour with (the king) of all the bishops' ('Burnet's History', 392), and took the lead. Speaking with 'an elevation of thought and expression like a man who was inspired' (ibid., 218), he tried to awaken the king's conscience. Although he had received communion from Ken himself as recently as Christmas, the king now stubbornly refused the sacrament. Despite receiving a mere nod regarding penitence, Ken absolved the clearly adamant king. Courageous as ever, he demanded the removal of the king's mistress, the duchess of Portsmouth, from the bedchamber and the admission of the queen. Eventually it was Father John Huddleston who, with the king's active consent, administered the last rites. Charles died on 6 February, a Catholic, despite all Ken's efforts. Apparently none of the bishops attended the royal funeral in Henry VII's chapel on 14 February. 
Enthroned by proxy on 6 February 1685, Ken instituted his first incumbent to a benefice six days later, but it was the national scene that soon came to dominate his brief tenure of the see. On 23 April he fulfilled the historic role of the bishop of Bath and Wells at the coronation as one of the king's supporters, while Turner, now bishop of Ely, preached. A mere six weeks later Monmouth landed at Lyme Regis to set his rebellion in motion. On 13 June local Monmouth sympathizers rioted near Wells Cathedral; by 30 June horses were stabled there and on 1 July the mob broke in and ransacked the building. In almost daily attendance at the Lords, and loyal to the king, Ken was in London during these tumultuous events and was still away when Monmouth was defeated at Sedgemoor (6 July) and subsequently captured. On 13 and 14 July Ken and Turner, chosen specifically by James, were in the Tower of London with Monmouth. They told him of his impending execution, obtained from him a declaration of his illegitimacy, and prepared him for death. On 15 July, after passing the night with the duke, they, with Hooper and Tenison, accompanied him to the scaffold. 
Ken then journeyed to Somerset and, appealing to James, tried to halt the appalling carnage being perpetrated under the military commanders Feversham and Kirke. Accordingly several hundred prisoners were saved from death. After unsuccessfully interceding with Judge Jeffreys, Ken spent his time day and night visiting prisoners at Wells, Taunton, and Bridgwater, supplying their wants where possible. At the Bloody Assize that followed at Wells, 97 of 500 prisoners were condemned to death and 385 to transportation. 
The king and Ken held each other in considerable esteem. James seemed to respect the bishop's boldness, his deep faith, his ascetic way of life, his preaching skills as 'the best preacher among the Protestants' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.548), and the work he had done in The Hague and in Tangier, while Ken also admired James. This went beyond his natural respect for an anointed monarch. He was also a friend who not only appreciated James's genuine affection for his children, but had pastoral concern for his soul. Nevertheless James's maladroit and politically insensitive Romanist policies thrust Ken into opposition. 
The tide of Romanism was now gathering pace. In November 1685 the papal nuncio arrived. In March 1686 James issued a declaration of indulgence for Scotland, and in July set up the commission for ecclesiastical causes. Though by nature no controversialist, as part of the growing campaign of anti-Catholic preaching Ken felt increasingly fired to protest with a series of sermons, and he had the temerity to do so. In March 1687, for instance, at Whitehall in Princess Anne's presence he preached on 'the blasphemies, perfidy, wresting of scriptures, preference of traditions before it, spirit of persecution, legends and fables of the scribes and pharisees' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 4.541) as an obvious allusion to the current situation with the Romanists. He followed this with another on the following Sunday at St Martin-in-the-Fields. There was sensation in London. Anne was even keen enough to request a special invitation to listen to Ken in Turner's London chapel. Soon afterwards James issued his first declaration of indulgence in England. In May Ken again preached fervently before the queen at Bath, where she was taking the waters. An Irish Jesuit's pamphleteering reply met with no response from Ken. Later the same month the king, discourteously without Ken's knowledge, touched for the king's evil in Bath Abbey, using a specially revived Romish rite. It was not a good year; by December Compton had been suspended and Sancroft was banned from court. 
In 1688 Ken resumed his passionate preaching. On 1 April in Anne's presence he preached 'with his accustomed action, zeal and energy' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 4.578) and again people flocked to hear him. This sermon in the royal court was audacious, drawing a parallel between the English church and ancient Judah and Israel in captivity, as they patiently awaited the arrival of a saviour. In the face of Romish dangers Ken called for collaboration with dissenters, though not for comprehension. James, not present at the time, was nettled enough to request a discussion afterwards. In April the king issued his second declaration of indulgence in England. Whereas this in itself posed no real problem for the bishops, the subsequent order in council, enforcing it to be read publicly in late May or early June, certainly did, for this active element implied approval of the king's dispensing power. 
On 18 May under Sancroft's leadership Ken and other bishops drew up and signed a moderate, but firm, petition opposing the dispensing power. This they delivered personally by barge to Whitehall that evening, but almost immediately, to the bishops' shocked surprise, it was leaked to the popular coffee houses. When the king consequently demanded the bishops' appearance at the privy council on 8 June they, as peers, refused to enter into recognizances and were committed to the Tower. After a trial in the king's bench they were acquitted on 30 June amid great rejoicing. 
Ken stayed on in London briefly as adviser to the ailing Sancroft. When news of William's preparations for invasion reached England, Ken and other prelates met James several times at his request. On 3 October Ken and Sancroft again visited the king with further suggestions to alleviate political tension, but it was fruitless. This was Ken's final meeting with James, and he left for Wells soon afterwards. Little is known of Ken's part in the discussions which soon led to James's abject capitulations to the Anglican episcopate in what has been dubbed 'the Anglican revolution' (Goldie, 108). On 23 September Ken had declared his constant readiness to serve the king 'as far as can be consistent with my superior duty to God' (Plumptre, 2.11-12). William landed at Brixham on 5 November. By 24 November the Dutch were seizing houses in the Wells neighbourhood. Because Ken knew William and Mary personally, he decided to retire to the countryside, probably to Poulshot. On 18 December James left the kingdom. 
After Christmas in Wells, which included his Advent ordination two days beforehand, Ken reached London on 10 January 1689 and had discussions with other bishops about issues arising from William's arrival. In the Convention, meeting first on 22 January, Ken consistently voted for a regency, against declaring William and Mary king and queen, and against taking new oaths to the new monarchs. On 12 February Ken left the Lords, never to return, and went back to Wells. 
Ken now had to make the hard decision about personally swearing the oaths, but, unlike some, he hesitated. Despite his personal vow to James II and his denial of parliament's claim to deprive clergy of preferments, he realized that many of James's policies had been misconceived. He refused to trim to William for office like some but, shrinking from the prospect of permanent schism, he distanced himself from the bitterness and scurrilous libels that future nonjurors indulged in. To hard-liners he was a waverer. To Henry Dodwell he was 'fluctuating' (Plumptre, 2.41); to Francis Turner, his friend, he was 'warping from us... towards a compliance with the new government' (ibid., 40). Indeed, George Hooper at Lambeth, with whom he stayed before Ascensiontide 1689, 'so superfined' upon him that he all but persuaded him to take the oaths (Marshall, 52). In July Ken announced his decision to refuse them, and was officially suspended on 1 August. He was not finally deprived, however, until mid-April 1691. Before leaving he protested formally from his throne in the cathedral, asserting his canonical rights and his continuing readiness to perform his pastoral duty. He then left the cathedral for the last time. 
Though his tenure had been so short and his attention inevitably so distracted by the national scene, Ken was much loved in his diocese. Records show that, except during his almost daily parliamentary attendance up to July 1685, he personally instituted to benefices until February 1690 and confirmed regularly until his final deprivation over a year later. He carried out visitations in 1686 and 1689 and starting in May 1686 he ordained regularly, usually at Trinity and Michaelmas, though his last was in Advent, on 23 December 1688. All ordinations took place in Wells, in the palace chapel or the cathedral. 
In his diocese, calling himself 'Thomas, unworthy bishop of Bath and Wells', Ken was essentially a pastor and teacher (Ken, 'Prose Works', ed. Round, 445). Simple in his own lifestyle, his holiness and asceticism impressed all and won the love of the people. At Wells he frequently had twelve poor people to dine with him, and tried unsuccessfully to establish a workhouse for the poor. After his consecration he typically refused to hold an extravagant banquet, but instead gave $100 to the building of St Paul's. Appealing to his clergy in 1686 to support the Huguenots recently expelled from France, he himself contributed substantially from episcopal funds. 
Ministering in his first year to prisoners after Monmouth's rebellion, Ken was appalled by 'a lamentable ignorance and forgetfulness of God' which he found among them (Plumptre, 1.237), and accelerated publication of his 'Practice of Divine Love'. This was soon followed by the simpler 'Directions for Prayer for the Diocese', and plans to found schools in several Somerset towns. He also wrote a manual for those rich and poor taking the waters at Bath. In February 1688 he published instructions on how to keep Lent. 
But Ken's deprivation caused a sea change in his life. When Richard Kidder was consecrated as his successor in August 1691, Ken could only refer to him, with unusual bitterness, as 'my successor, or rather supplanter... He is a person of whom I have no knowledge' (Plumptre, 2.52). Ken himself had lost his role, not only his beloved diocese with its pastoral care and its income, but also his place in national affairs. While James and his ministers had often called upon him for advice, Ken, with the familiar cry of the role-loser, now found he was 'wholly in the dark', knowing nothing (ibid., 2.39). 
Though Lord Weymouth was himself no nonjuror, he had been a friend of Ken's since their Oxford days, and was sympathetic to the group. He now offered Ken a home at Longleat. Ken left Wells with a mere $700 from the sale of his possessions, in exchange for which Lord Weymouth granted him a life annuity of $80. From now onwards he lived mainly at Longleat, also spending time in other places -- Poulshot, where his nephew, Isaac Walton, was rector, Leweston, the Thynne family home, and Naish Court, near Portishead, with the Kemeys sisters. His relationship with his nonjuring colleagues, apart from two moderates, Robert Frampton and John Fitzwilliam, was never happy. Nevertheless, when abusive pamphleteering hounded the nonjurors in 1690 soon after the English fleet's defeat off Beachy Head, Ken closed ranks with them in denying any part in conspiracies. Later, however, he characteristically distanced himself from the other more belligerent nonjurors, including Turner, as they developed closer contacts with James II in France. Still tortured in conscience, Ken above all abhorred anything that seemed to perpetuate the schism between the nonjurors and the church, and thus vigorously opposed the clandestine consecration of two nonjurors as bishops in February 1694 ['see also 'Nonjuring bishops]. 
Ken was still prepared to come out of obscurity when necessary. In December 1694 Queen Mary died, but nonjurors had never been happy with her part in superseding her father. Consequently in March 1695 Ken wrote to Archbishop Tenison, condemning his naive attendance at the queen's deathbed and his subsequent adulatory sermon. In April, fully robed, Ken -- on the only occasion he did so after his deprivation -- officiated at All Hallows Barking at the funeral of the nonjuring devotional writer John Kettlewell, a moderate like himself. Soon afterwards, with others, he supported Kettlewell's plan to establish a charity for deprived nonjuring clergy. Kettlewell's death affected Ken profoundly, and from then onwards he sought to minimize and, if possible, end the division they both hated so much. In the confused aftermath of the 1696 plot to assassinate William, Ken was arrested with others, but after being summoned before the council and interrogated he was released. 
Meanwhile the breach with other nonjurors widened. In 1701, after several nonjuring prelates had died, Ken, still in search of an end to the schism, proposed to Lloyd that they, as the two surviving prelates, should renounce the canonical claims to their bishoprics. This created further offence. 
In 1702 the new queen, Anne, offered to restore Ken to Bath and Wells by translating Kidder to Carlisle, but he refused; he felt unable to take the new oath of abjuration, and was also in poor health. Kidder died in the great storm of October 1703. Nonjuring extremists regarded this as an act of providence, but not so Ken. Mixed though his feelings must have been it was to him a 'deplorable calamity'. He was filled with a natural awe and pity. Anne now offered Hooper the bishopric, which out of deference for Ken he initially refused. Ken, however, persuaded him to accept, and agreed to cede his rights to him, as a means of stopping 'a Latitudinarian traditour' (Plumptre, 2.133) from taking the see. Ken now significantly abandoned his episcopal signature 'Tho: Bath and Wells'. Lloyd and other nonjurors condemned Ken for treachery, while Anne granted him a pension of $200. 
With Lloyd's death in January 1710 Ken, now the only surviving nonjuring prelate, told Robert Nelson, a moderate nonjuring layman, philanthropist, and writer, that he thought the schism should end. In line with Ken's wishes, from Lent 1710 onwards moderate nonjurors started attending their parish churches. Soon afterwards Ken announced his intention of receiving the sacrament from Hooper in Wells Cathedral, but it was probably his rapidly declining health that prevented this significant step from happening. After a period at Bristol Hotwells from April to November 1710, he visited Leweston, where he succumbed to paralysis and dropsy. The following March he reached Longleat, but died soon afterwards, on 19 March. Two days later he was buried modestly at sunrise, as he wished, in Frome parish churchyard beneath the east window of St John's Church, his coffin being draped in a plain black cloth instead of a funeral pall. In his will he declared: 'I die in the holy catholic and apostolic faith, professed by the whole church before the disunion of east and west; more particularly I die in the communion of the Church of England, as it stands distinguished from all papal and puritan innovations, and as it adheres to the doctrine of the cross. (will, fol. 289'v')' Among Ken's legacies were a number of small bequests to family members; Viscount Weymouth was left all those books of Ken's of which Weymouth did not already have copies. He left $500 to the deprived English clergy, $40 to deprived officers of the church, and $50 to the deprived Scottish clergy. He also bequeathed a wooden cup with gold lining and Lord Clarendon's 'History of the Rebellion' to his friend Mrs Margaret Mathew of Cardiff, and a chalice to the parish where he was buried, for the use of sick persons desiring the sacrament. 
Ken's important writings were devotional, written in his earlier days. His 'Manual of Prayers for the Use of Winchester Scholars' (1674), intrinsically valuable, is primarily noteworthy for the three 'Hymns for Morning, Evening and Midnight', written about 1670 but first appended to the eighth edition of 1695. They were 'Awake, my soul, and with the sun', 'Glory to thee, my God, this night', and 'Lord, now my sleep does me forsake'. These hymns, memorable to this day, were probably inspired by canticles from the Roman breviary. Ken himself sang them daily to the accompaniment of lute or organ; he hoped Winchester scholars and others would do the same. 
Ken's 'Practice of Divine Love' (1685), a devotional exposition of the catechism, was written for his diocese and republished in the following year with 'Directions for Prayer'. In Rupp's words 'No other contemporary catechism has such a 'devotion of rapture'' which, though redolent of the medieval mystics, 'is an authentically seventeenth-century devotion -- Puritan as well as Caroline' (Rupp, 14). Its affective mystical character is encapsulated in these words from the catechism itself: 'Thou, Lord, art my hope, my trust, my life, my joy, my glory, my God, my all, my love' (T. Ken, 'Practice of Divine Love', 1685, 2). 
Ken's only other contemporary publications were few, but included three of his sermons, 'Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Lady Mainard' (1682), 'Sermon Preached at Whitehall' (1685), and another at Whitehall on Passion Sunday 1688. Rupp has described his preaching style as belonging 'to an older generation, and the beautiful passages, in which he loves to repeat a key word, have a haunting and melodic quality unlike that of the new preaching age' (Rupp, 13). Other prose works include his 'Pastoral Letter' in support of the French protestants (1686) and his 'Letter to (Archbishop Tenison) on his Sermon Preached at the Funeral of her Late Majesty' (1695), but two works, 'Ichabod', otherwise known as 'Expostularia', and 'The Royal Sufferer', are no longer attributed to him. 
After Ken's death William Hawkins, his nephew, found Ken to have been also a prolific, if clandestine, writer of poetry, and published his works in four volumes containing 2058 pages. Apart from the hymns, his poetry, probably written as a private therapy to alleviate the frustrations of his later life, was poor in quality and clearly not intended for publication; even Ken's greatest admirers are uncharacteristically critical. One work, 'Edmund', a long epic, probably written in his last years, was a reflection on his life's vicissitudes, while 'Hymnotheo' was a thinly veiled autobiography. 
Though small, sparely built with dark hair and eyes, Ken had a powerful personality. Endowed with 'a very lively temper, but too hot and sudden' ('Burnet's History', 382), he was a fiery, passionate preacher, drawing large crowds in the 1680s. He could be venomous when, for instance, attacking Dutch Calvinists or latitudinarians, but was always ready to ask for forgiveness for any hurt caused. Not a great intellectual, he was nevertheless scholarly and read French, Spanish, and Italian. Ascetic in his lifestyle and generous with his income, Ken was never wealthy, finding it necessary to borrow even for his consecration expenses. In London, while other bishops used coaches, Ken went on foot. 
The holiness of Ken's life was paramount. To the twenty-first-century observer he initially may seem sanctimonious. The tone of his letters, headed constantly by 'All Glory Be To God', chimes uneasily in a materialistic age, but a study of his life reveals a man of genuine holiness rooted in the practicalities of life. A devotional writer, his spirituality is reminiscent of the French and Spanish mystics, whose books furnished his library. 
With conscience as his guide Ken showed remarkable physical and moral resilience. No seaman, he endured uncomplainingly the rigours of the hazardous journeys to and from Tangier. He displayed moral audacity in speaking his mind whether to William at The Hague, to the people of Tangier, the royal court in London, or to Charles II or James II in person. He was never bitter in confronting wrong, whether political, ecclesiastical, or ethical, except perhaps when Kidder 'supplanted' him, but he could not condone Mary's apparent frivolity when taking over her father's inheritance at Whitehall. Not a typical nonjuror, he was equally firm with his nonjuring colleagues, and had no truck with the rancorous controversy they provoked. A moderate in all his dealings, his opposition to the new oaths was tempered by his paramount desire for the peace, unity, and welfare of the church. Ken suffered the full agony caused by the dichotomy of his stance. Though always ready, when necessary, to fight and preach vigorously for what he felt to be right, he found it more important to welcome Hooper as his successor and thus defend the church's truths than to encourage permanent schism by prolonging the nonjuring protest. An ascetic, courageous, saintly figure, living always true to his love for God and his fellow men, and to his principles, he justly deserves a high place in the annals of church and nation. 


@@@@@


doc= 15343


Kendal, Richard (d. 1431?), grammarian, is recorded in the catalogue of the library of Syon Monastery, Isleworth, Middlesex (now Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 141), as the author of a grammatical work which had apparently been lost from the library by 1526. In his index of British writers the sixteenth-century bibliographer John Bale gives the titles of six grammatical works by Kendal from a book that he says he saw at the Benedictine monastery of Horsham St Faith, Norfolk. Since none is now extant, Bale's attributions cannot be tested. Nor is there confirmation for the date of Kendal's death, given as 1431 by Thomas Tanner. Nothing links Richard Kendal with a certain Kendale, a monk of Sherborne, who is credited as the author of a short verse treatise on music in a collection of such treatises originally belonging to John Wylde, precentor of Waltham Abbey ('fl'. 'c'.1460), and now in the British Library (Lansdowne MS 763, fols. 52-3; an eighteenth-century transcript of this manuscript is BL, Add. MS 4912, fols. 81-2). 


@@@@@


doc= 15344


Kendall, Edward Augustus (1775/6-1842), writer, of whose life very little is known, had a varied literary output, which divides into four categories: his serious ideas and proposals for political and social reforms, for example his letters on the state of Ireland; his weekly 'popular' journalism which, ambitiously, might be described as a forerunner of Harmsworth; his translations from the French; and his children's books. 
In 1809 Kendall published an account of his travels in North America, having previously been 'employed in a civil capacity in Canada' (Watkins and Shoberl). In 1817 he issued proposals for the Patriotic Metropolitan Institution in London for the assistance of new settlers in the colonies and for the encouragement of new branches of colonial trade. He also proposed the establishment of new colonies for the Eurasians of India and metis of the West Indies. And he urged the benefits to be derived from establishing in England free drawing schools and schools of chemistry and mathematics. 
Aiming to provide cheap and good literature for the people, Kendall started in London in 1819 the 'Literary Chronicle and Weekly Review', which lasted until 1828, when he started a new series which was shortly to be incorporated with 'The Athenaeum'. There is also an edition entitled the 'Country Literary Chronicle', beginning in 1820 with a part numbered 59. The 'Literary Chronicle' was succeeded by another popular miscellany projected by Kendall, called 'The Olio, or, Museum of Entertainment' (11 vols., 1823-33). These efforts at periodical literature were described in Kendall's 'Gentleman's Magazine' obituary as having originated 'the present deep and deservedly popular race of weekly issues from the press' ('GM'). Kendall also wrote the more weighty 'Letters to a friend on the state of Ireland, the Roman Catholic question, and the merits of constitutional religious distinctions' (1826), in which he argued that Ireland enjoyed a vigorous and paternal government, whose duty it was to repress Roman Catholicism there, and in Great Britain as well. 
Kendall's most attractive works, however, are his books for children, some of which were still being reprinted fifty years after his death, especially 'Keeper's Travels in Search of his Master' (1799); 'The Crested Wren' (1799); and 'Burford Cottage and its Robin Red Breast' (1835), the last of which is a long novel narrated by a robin, who discourses on natural history and other improving topics. Kendall's educative impulses can also be seen in his earlier 'Parental Education, or, Domestic Lessons: a Miscellany Intended for Youth' (1803). His children's books are generally marked, however, by a sentimental style which has now long been out of fashion, although his lengthy 'The English Boy at the Cape: an Anglo-African Story' (1835) is more mature and less sentimental than his other children's books. 
Kendall was also a member of the Society of Antiquaries, and his more scholarly work included translations from the French such as Saint-Pierre's 'The Indian Cottage' (1791); 'Beauties of Saint-Pierre, Selected from his 'Studies of Nature'' (1799); and 'The Travels of Denon in Egypt' (2 vols., 1802). 
Kendall died at Pimlico, London, on 14 October 1842, aged sixty-six, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 15345


Kendall, George (bap. 1611, d. 1663), clergyman and religious controversialist, was the eldest son of George Kendall of Cofton, Dawlish, Devon, collector of customs for Exeter and Dartmouth, and Katharine Moor. He was baptized in Exeter Cathedral on 16 April 1611. He was educated at Exeter grammar school and Exeter College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 18 February 1627. He proceeded BA in 1630, MA in 1633, BD in 1642, and DD on 31 May 1654. He was a fellow of Exeter College from 1630 to 1647, and was ordained priest in Exeter Cathedral on 4 January 1637. It is said that Charles I wished him to succeed John Prideaux as rector of Exeter College in 1642, but he was not elected. 
On 24 August 1643 Kendall was instituted as rector of St Nicholas, Abingdon, the king being the patron. He never seems to have taken up residence and in 1655 the churchwardens presented him at the Berkshire sessions: 'hath not been amongst us these 10 or 11 years'. Meanwhile two ministers had in turn been intruded into the cure ('Calamy rev.', 304). In any case he was presented in 1643 by the crown to the rectory of Blisland, Cornwall, despite his strong presbyterian sympathies. He became a prebendary of Exeter Cathedral in February 1645, and in 1648 he was appointed to the sequestered living of Bodmin. Since Bodmin is only 5 miles from Blisland and he continued to ascribe his books from the latter, it is probable that he held the two parishes in plurality. 
In 1653 Kendall moved to be rector of St Benet Gracechurch, London, seemingly to be able the more effectively to oppose the anti-Calvinist preaching and writing of John Goodwin at the neighbouring St Stephen, Coleman Street. He was admitted a member of the fourth London classis on 21 November 1653 and immediately elected a delegate to the provincial assembly; he took a leading part in the work of the classis in 1654, presiding, for instance, over nine meetings for an ordination in May. His last appearance at the classis was in 1655 and he may thereafter have returned to Devon as he was one of the moderators at the first meeting of the Devon association of ministers in October 1655. During these years he was engaged in controversy with John Goodwin, whose 'Redemption Redeemed' appeared in 1651, and to a lesser extent with Richard Baxter. Kendall's 'Vindication of the Doctrines Commonly Received in the Reformed Churches' was dated from Blisland 14 September 1652. 'Sancti sanciti', which appeared in 1654, was effectively a continuation of the 'Vindication', since it, too, was a detailed reply to Goodwin's book. Goodwin was espousing the familiar 'Arminian' position that Christ died for all men 'sufficiently', but only 'efficaciously' for those who responded in faith. For Kendall, Christ died only for those who were elect from all eternity: 'we deny... that he intended to purchase eternal salvation for them all' (G. Kendall, 'Vindication', 1652, 2nd pagination, 93). To preach 'universality' is to 'befriend the devil' (ibid., 3rd pagination, 30). In defence of this position Kendall comes near to a 'reductio ad absurdum': 'To provide for the salvation of all men would have been no grace' (ibid., 3rd pagination, 73). To the question does our doctrine raise 'jealousies and, hard thoughts' about God (ibid., 3rd pagination, 52), Kendall has one invariable reply: man can neither understand nor question the dispositions of God; man is 'no competent judge of what makes for God's honour' (ibid., 2nd pagination, 25). Goodwin, in a long digression, had attacked the Calvinist doctrine of the perseverance of the saints as leading to antinomianism, charging that 'our doctrine asserts the saints are in no possibility of falling away finally or totally, continue they never so loose and exhorbitant' (G. Kendall, 'Sancti sanciti', 1654, xxiv). To Kendall 'this doctrine of perseverance lieth very near the fundamental article of the reformed religion' (ibid., 3rd pagination, 132). He believes that it was essential for the saints' assurance of salvation and, far from leading to antinomianism, inspired such love in the believer's heart that he advanced in sanctity. He allows that there are 'stumblings' and 'ebbs and floods', but asserts that the Christian learns from them. If the seeming Christian falls finally from grace this is 'apostasy', and shows he has never been a true believer. Goodwin had attacked the doctrine of personal election and claimed that the scriptural passages on perseverance and election applied to the church at large rather than to individual Christians; this arouses Kendall to especial wrath: 'I have resolved not to be angry; else I should fall foul on you for throwing this dirt so shamelessly in our faces' (ibid., 1st pagination, 60). In each of the books Kendall turns aside to tangle with a more doughty opponent, Richard Baxter, 'a man whom I very much respect... but the truth is he stands so full in my way that I cannot pass on without a friendly scuffle with him' (ibid., xxxx). 
In his 'Aphorismes of Justification' (1649) Baxter had sought to find a middle way between antinomianism, the result of which he had seen in the civil war, and Arminianism, a cause which he hesitated fully to embrace. For Kendall, Baxter's apostasy in the 'Aphorismes' centres in his belief that new 'immanent acts of God' are possible: election is an immanent act decreed by God from eternity, and Baxter's teaching is an attack on divine providence. For Baxter this belief, found in the teaching of William Twisse, led to 'that error and pillar of antinomianism, viz. justification from Eternity' (Baxter, 'Aphorismes', 173). Kendall replies (G. Kendall, 'Vindication', 1652, 1st pagination, 133) that any new immanent act must be in God's will or understanding and in either case God would be shown to be fallible. This analysis he argues against Baxter's position that 'this (new act) doth make no change in God'. God can make 'a moral change in our relation' to himself without that being a new immanent act; 'the proper effect of the immanent act (in eternity) is to lay the foundation from which the (new) relation (of justification) can arise' (Baxter, 'Aphorismes', 175). There can in any case be a delay between an original act and its fulfilment, just as there is between the drawing up of a deed of gift and its implementation. But as to the small print Baxter says 'I dare not be too confident in so dark a point' -- an admission which from his entrenched position Kendall could not make (ibid., 176). Baxter accepted the distinction between sufficient grace for all men and efficient grace for salvation and attempted to hold the two in balance. For instance he maintained that common grace enables men to live in society, but is not sufficient for salvation. To Kendall this is anathema: 'surely the schools of Pelagius owe you a doctorate the next commencement' (G. Kendall, 'Sancti sanciti', 1654, 2nd pagination, 105). Baxter replied to the 'Vindication' in 1654 with 'The Reduction of a Digressor', covering much the same ground as the 'Aphorismes'. The controversy between the two men features frequently in Baxter's 'Correspondence', with his friends writing to commiserate with him. The hatchet was finally buried thanks to Archbishop Ussher's intervention. Kendall was appointed to the vacant vicarage of Kenton in Devon in 1656. From there he produced in the following year his third major book. This was 'Fur pro tribunali', a collection of works, all in Latin. Most important was his defence of the doctrine of predestination, written in the form of a dialogue, against an anonymous work, 'Fur praedestinatus'. There were also an exegesis of the 1595 Lambeth articles, an oration against neo-pelagianism, and finally a life of his hero and mentor, William Twisse. 
In October 1662 Kendall was ejected both from his vicarage at Kenton and his prebend in Exeter Cathedral. He retired to Cofton and died there on 19 August 1663, being buried in a chapel adjoining his house. His wife, Mary (died 1676), daughter of Periam Pole of Tallaton, Devon, licensed the house as a meeting-place in 1672. One of Baxter's correspondents, Henry Bartlett, advised Baxter that to answer Kendall in full would be 'too voluminous and too tedious' and recommended only a brief reply without 'particular repeating and answering' ('Correspondence of Richard Baxter' 1.141, letter 184); he had clearly recognized the obsessive streak in Kendall's character. Baxter himself, who believed that Kendall 'thought to get an advantage for his reputation by a triumph over John Goodwin and me', was somewhat more generous: 'he was a little quick-spirited man, of great ostentation and a considerable orator and scholar' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.110). 


@@@@@


doc= 15346


Kendall, (Thomas) Henry (1839-1882), poet, was born in Kirmington, near Milton, in the Ulladulla district of New South Wales, Australia, on 18 April 1839, one of the twin sons of Basil Kendall (died 1852) and his wife, Melinda, 'nee' M'Nally. His father, who had been an officer in the Chilean navy, a flour factor, a farmer, and a shepherd, was the son of Thomas Kendall, a missionary to Australia under Samuel Marsden. After Basil Kendall died, while running a school at Grafton, New South Wales, his widow and children moved to her father's home at Wollongong, south of Sydney. 
Henry Kendall received little formal education. He went to sea on the whaling vessel 'Waterwitch' in September 1855, and upon his return to Australia in March 1857 set up a house for his mother, twin brother, and sisters at Newtown, in Sydney. In 1859 he began to contribute poetry to 'The Month', whose editor consequently introduced him to literary men such as James Lionel Michael, a lawyer who in 1860 employed Kendall as a clerk and allowed him to use his extensive library. 
In 1862 Kendall sent a parcel of manuscript verses to 'The Athenaeum' in London, whose editor sufficiently appreciated their promise to publish three poems dealing with the scenery of the Australian bush, noting that although Kendall had 'much to learn', his poems possessed a 'wild, dark... power of landscape-painting' ('The Athenaeum', 27 Sept 1862, 394). Encouraged by this recognition Kendall had a volume, 'Poems and Songs', printed in Sydney in 1862; but he suppressed it in 1865 on grounds of its immaturity and issued, without date, another volume, 'At Long Bay: Euroclydon: Poems'. At the same time Henry Parkes encouraged him to contribute verse to 'The Empire', his newspaper. 
Kendall entered the public service of New South Wales in 1863 as clerk in the lands department, with a salary of $150, and in 1866 was transferred to the colonial secretary's office, where he earned a salary of $200 a year. In March 1868 he married Charlotte, the eighteen-year-old daughter of John Yates Rutter, a medical officer of Woolloomooloo, Sydney. About this time he added 'Clarence' to his name, after the Clarence River, but continued to sign letters and publish poetry as Henry Kendall. His domestic circumstances were strained, however, as he was often in debt to friends and moneylenders, largely because of his sisters' extravagance and his brother's fiscal dishonesty. His second volume of poetry, 'Leaves from an Australian Forest' (1869), was well received but was not a financial success. The combined pressure of this commercial failure, the debts incurred by his mother and siblings, and the death of his one-year-old daughter Araluen in 1870 worsened an existing problem with alcohol. Fearing bankruptcy and dismissal, on 31 March 1869 he resigned from the civil service, and attempted to make a living in Melbourne as a journalist. Things became worse, however, and in December 1870 he was charged with forging and uttering a cheque, a charge of which he was found not guilty by reason of insanity. His wife returned to her mother and Kendall became a derelict, finally being committed to the Gladesville Hospital for the Insane in Sydney from April to July 1873. 
Later in 1873, however, Kendall was befriended by William and Joseph Fagan, who allowed him to live with their family at Gosford, New South Wales, as he recovered his health, and in 1875 gave him a job in their timber business. In May 1876 his wife and children rejoined him, and he began to rebuild his family life, slowly supplementing his income with occasional publications. They moved to Camden Haven, and in 1879 he wrote the words for a cantata and hymn of praise sung at the Sydney International Exhibition, and he also won the 'Sydney Morning Herald''s prize of 100 guineas for a poem on the exhibition. 
Kendall's third volume of poetry, 'Songs from the Mountains', was published in December 1880 to critical acclaim and popular success. In 1881 the post of inspector of forests was offered to him by Sir Henry Parkes, a former patron whom he had previously offended on several occasions, even as late as 1879, with his satiric poem 'The Gagging Bill'. He was grateful for the job, but his health made him unable to cope with its requisite long rides in all kinds of weather, and he collapsed in June 1882 at Wagga Wagga. He was taken to William Fagan's house in Bourke Street, Surry Hills, Sydney, and died there of phthisis on 1 August 1882. His wife survived him, as did three sons, Frederick ('b'. 1870), a second son ('b'. 1873), and AEthelstan ('b'. 1877), and two daughters, Evelyn Persia ('b'. 1878) and Roma ('b'. 1879). He was buried in the Waverley cemetery near Sydney, and in 1886 a monument was erected to his memory. After his death $1200 was raised by public subscription for the support of his wife and family. 
The twentieth-century critic T. Inglis Moore has noted that 'as a poet, Kendall was over-praised in his own day, then suffered an undue depreciation'. Although he lacked discipline and economy and tended at times towards an excess of sentiment, he had a 'gift of song' and 'a rich variety of verse forms, subjects and moods' and was an 'accomplished painter' of Australian scenes (Moore, ix-x). He was one of the first Australian-born writers to gain a significant reputation outside his own country. 


@@@@@


doc= 15347


John Kendall (fl. 1476-1486) was a vicar-choral at Southwell Minster, admitted on 16 March 1476. His parentage is not known. His career was inglorious (something he shared with several of his colleagues) and included fighting and taking women of bad character to his chantry. He resigned on 16 August 1486. Nothing further is known of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15348


Kendall, John (d. 1485), administrator, may have been the son of John Kendall of Gloucester (died July 1447) and Elizabeth, his wife; and if so he was the eldest son and was of age in 1447. The younger John Kendall received legal training, possibly studying at Barnard's Inn, and is described as an attorney in 1479. He made his career as secretary to Richard, duke of Gloucester, being first recorded in that capacity in a document dated 22 December 1474. As secretary he gradually increased his power and influence, becoming in 1482 clerk of returns of the writs in the castle and county of York, and in 1483 keeper of the writs and rolls of the common bench. 
Kendall's influence increased after his master became king as Richard III. As secretary he received his livery of 6 yards of scarlet at the coronation in 1483, and he accompanied the post-coronation progress. His many grants included his appointment in 1483 as controller, changer, and assayer of the mints in the Tower of London and at Calais for life, and keeper of the prince's wardrobe in the city of London. After the rebellions of that year he was given lands worth $80 per annum from forfeitures in Berkshire and Oxfordshire. In December 1484 he was on the commission of the peace for Middlesex as secretary (together with a namesake 'of Westminster'), and possibly on the commissions in December 1483 and April 1485. He may also have been on the commissions of the peace in the East Riding of Yorkshire in June and December 1483 and September 1484. By February 1485, in a grant of the office of master forester in the king's park of Havering atte Bower, Essex, he was being described as king's councillor and secretary, and he also became steward of the abbey of Waltham Holy Cross. In July 1485 he accompanied Richard III to Nottingham, and on 1 August was one of the witnesses in the chapel of the castle when the great seal was handed over to Richard by Thomas Barowe, keeper of the rolls. Kendall undoubtedly fought with the king on 22 August 1485 at Bosworth, and was probably killed there. He was attainted afterwards and his lands confiscated. He was certainly married, but it is not known to whom, and he probably had a son. 
Another 


@@@@@


doc= 15349


Kendall, John (d. 1501), administrator and prior of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in England, probably born into a Norfolk or Yorkshire family, entered the order of the knights of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem at an early age. He began his career in the convent on Rhodes where he was retained by the master until May 1465. In 1466-7 he acted as proctor of the English tongue (the English brethren in the convent) at the order's chapter general at Rome. After the chapter he returned to Rhodes where he ran into unknown difficulties, but on 21 August 1474 he was in Westminster, when Brother Robert Multon, who was afterwards replaced, was presented to Edward IV as the new prior of England. Kendall returned again to Rhodes where on 28 April 1477 he was elected turcopolier, that is conventual bailiff, and commander of the lighter mercenary troops. On 7 November 1478, during a general chapter on Rhodes, he also became proctor-general at the Roman curia, and on 20 January 1479 he was named proctor and lieutenant of the master, Pierre d'Aubusson, of the convent and treasury for Italy, Burgundy, the Netherlands, England, and Ireland. Probably from mid-1479 onwards he took up residence at Rome. When Rhodes was besieged by the Ottomans in 1480, he had to gather men and money from the West, which suggests that he was not on the island during the siege. Again in Westminster on 29 and 30 April 1480, Kendall gained royal protection for the order and two letters of recommendation (one for a visit to Ireland). In England he also sold indulgences, including one for Dame Joan Plumpton. He was in Rome on 6 May 1484 when he was granted by Sixtus IV the first year's fruits of the order's benefices in England for the rearmament of the English part of the city walls and for the rebuilding of the house of the English tongue in Rhodes (on which Kendall's arms were probably still to be found in 1826), and in 1485 he was a member of the order's legation to the new pope, Innocent VIII. 
On 22 June 1489 Kendall was elected prior of England and resigned the office of turcopolier. In August 1490 he was allowed to leave Rome for England, and on 1 March 1491 -- as a sign of their deep personal relationship -- the pope made him a member of his own family, the Cibo of Genoa, and took him under papal protection. On 5 January 1492 Kendall was pardoned by Henry VII for having acted as prior of England without royal permission, and afterwards became involved in English politics. In June 1492 he took part in peace negotiations with France, in February 1496 he was one of the envoys to Archduke Philip, the son of Maximilian I, and in June 1500 he accompanied Henry VII to a meeting with Philip in Calais. In September 1492 and in June 1496 he is mentioned as justice of the peace for Essex (and Middlesex), in June 1497 he was one of the commissioners to inquire concerning insurrections in Cornwall and elsewhere, and in November 1499 he participated in a grand jury that found Edward, earl of Warwick, one of the heirs presumptive of Richard III, guilty of high treason. It seems that Kendall remained in the king's favour throughout (obtaining a general pardon on 18 June 1496), though in March 1496 he had been accused of having sided with another of the Yorkist pretenders, Perkin Warbeck. Kendall remained prior of England until his death which occurred between 20 January and 6 April 1501. The lease-book from his administration of the hospitaller houses in England survives (BL, MS Lansdowne 200). Although he was probably not on Rhodes during the siege, he was honoured by a contemporary Italian medal (now in the British Museum). It bears a bust on one side and his arms on the other with the inscriptions 'Io. Kendal Rhodi Tvrcvpellerivs' and, on the obverse, 'Tempore Obsidionis Tvrchorvm MCCCCLXXX' ('at the time of the siege [of Rhodes] by the Turks, 1480'). 


@@@@@


doc= 15350


Kendall, John (1726-1815), Quaker minister and writer, was born on 6 March 1726 at Colchester, one of six sons of John Kendall (died 1752?), printer and bookseller, and his wife, Elizabeth Yarritt ('c'.1704-1773). John and Elizabeth Kendall belonged to the Society of Friends in a town with a large congregation and two meeting-houses. Kendall himself became a minister in the society at the age of twenty-one. He travelled extensively in the ministry for some years, his first tour of religious visits taking him, in 1750, to the north of England and Scotland as companion to Daniel Stanton. Two years later, in July 1752, he set out for the Netherlands, which he revisited on four further occasions. A group of Friends, by then dwindling in numbers and including the parents of the Quaker historian William Sewel, was at that time established in Amsterdam and in the neighbouring town of Twisk. Kendall, who had some knowledge of Dutch, was always welcomed at both places. 
After the death of his father, Kendall took responsibility for his mother, his five brothers, and the business which he inherited. He prospered, and on 17 July 1764 he married Ann Havens (1734?-1805), daughter of Philip and Ann Havens of Colchester; they had no children. His time and money were thenceforth spent in religious visits to various towns, sometimes as part of extensive tours, in philanthropic pursuits, and in study. He attended the yearly meeting of Friends in London over a long period. With his wife he founded, in 1791, Kendall's almshouses at Colchester, for eight poor widows. The rules and original minutes are in his own handwriting, and the former were subsequently printed. He was also involved with the short-lived Friends' school at Ipswich, which was in existence from 1790 to 1800. His bequest of $2000 set up Kendall's Trust, which provided for the distribution of a certain number of religious books every year, and Kendall's Foundation, a school at Colchester, to which his cousin Francis Freshfield also bequeathed money. Six poor boys, preferably the sons of Quakers, were to receive a free education, and a valuable library of 1030 volumes was left for the use of the master and assistants. Since this consisted chiefly of Greek, Latin, and Dutch books, it proved unserviceable and was by consent of the charity commissioners sold, with its furniture, by Sothebys in 1865, the net benefit of $270 going to the school. From 1746 Kendall also undertook clerical work for the Quakers in Colchester, and he appears to have been clerk of Colchester monthly meeting between 1757 and 1791. 
Kendall's kindly disposition and personal influence caused him to be received with courtesy wherever he went. It is said that he attended the theatre in Colchester one Saturday night, at the start of the performance, and persuaded both actors and audience quietly to disperse. He called at public houses in Colchester to admonish people against the evils of intemperance, and visited other places of public entertainment for similar purposes. He published his views on the wasting of time in a pamphlet, addressed to all Christians, entitled 'Remarks on the prevailing custom of attending stage entertainments: also on the present taste of reading romances and novels' (1794). 
Kendall was a prolific author and editor of Quaker literature. His most printed work was 'Some principles and precepts of the Christian religion explained, by way of question and answer, for the use of children' (1783), of which five editions were printed in his lifetime and further reprints went on into the mid-nineteenth century. Rearranging the entries chronologically he edited the Quaker devotional standard collection of obituaries, 'Piety Promoted' (1789). Sharing the quietist enthusiasm for continental devotional writing, he also edited 'Extracts from the writings of Francis Fenelon, Archbishop of Cambray, with some memoirs of his life' (1797). Outside the Quaker tradition he published an abstract of 'The Imitation of Christ' (1805). A work much used in Quaker families early in the nineteenth century was his abstract, in two volumes, 'The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament' (1800). Other devotional publications included anthologies of poems on religious subjects (in three parts, 1775-1807) and two volumes of Quaker letters (1802-5). 
Kendall more than once visited George III and Queen Charlotte, and, when with his regiment in Colchester, the prince of Wales called on Kendall at the king's request. Kendall died at Colchester on 27 January 1815 and was buried there, in the Quaker burial-ground, on 3 February. The posthumous 'Memoirs of the Life and Religious Experience of John Kendall', containing a short autobiographical sketch and a number of letters, was published in 1815. 


@@@@@


doc= 15351


Kendall, John (1768/9-1829), architect and stonemason, was the youngest of four children of Edward Kendall (died 1796) of Exeter, monumental sculptor and mason, and his wife, Mary ('bap'. 1738, died 1831), daughter of James and Elizabeth Rennel of Kingsteignton. He probably attended Exeter grammar school with his elder brother William (1767-1832), later praised as a poet, amateur architect, and local philanthropist. Kendall's interest in medieval architecture and his practical skills as a craftsman owed much to his father, who had been employed as stonemason to Exeter Cathedral since 1766. The family's separate statuary business provided Kendall's first commissions: he designed and carved funeral monuments for the cathedral from 1791, and continued until his last years. On Edward Kendall's death in November 1796 John was appointed stonemason to Exeter Cathedral. 
On 30 July 1798 Kendall married Grace Luxmore ('bap'. 1770) of Okehampton. Seven daughters and one son, John Henry (later vicar of Treneglos, Cornwall), were born between 1799 and 1809. Kendall's large young family and the chapter's annual settlement of accounts probably contributed to his bankruptcy in 1811. Soon at work again, he embarked on a major expansion of the cathedral restoration programme that had begun with repairs to the west front in 1805. Fifteen years of hectic activity followed on the cathedral surveyor's 1812 report describing Exeter's crumbling structure. From then until 1827 Kendall prepared plans and estimates and personally carried out all the main stonework repairs. Decayed pinnacles, parapets, windows, and buttresses were restored or replaced, many of the west front image screen figures repaired or reinstated. The restored chapter house became the cathedral library's new home and the lady chapel, freed of books, was returned to its proper use. It was, however, Kendall's new Gothic reredos, erected in 1818 (removed by Sir George Gilbert Scott) that was commended by contemporary visitors as his finest achievement. His similar screen (1821) at Haccombe church, Devon, survives. Kendall followed in the tradition of the medieval master masons, combining the skills of designer and builder. Some of his detailed drawings of the cathedral interior (1805-6) he later used as illustrations for his treatise 'An Elucidation of the Principles of English Architecture, Usually Denominated Gothic' (1818). Of his designs prepared for the dean and chapter, only his 1818 design for the new reredos has survived. 
After a protracted illness Kendall died on 24 September 1829, aged sixty, at Longbrook Street, Exeter, where he lived; he was buried on 29 September in St David's churchyard, Exeter. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15352


Kendall, Timothy (fl. 1572-1577), translator and poet, son of William and Alice Kendall, was raised in North Aston, Oxfordshire. Very few personal details about his life are known. He was educated at Eton College and went on to Oxford where he was a member of Magdalen Hall in or before 1572. He left the university without a degree and became a student at Staple Inn where he compiled the verse work 'Flowers of epigrammes, out of sundrie the moste singular authours selected, as well auncient as late writers' (1577). Kendall lists the authors he translates on the reverse of the title-page and dedicates his work to Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. The translated epigrams are followed by Kendall's compositions entitled 'Trifles by Timothe Kendall devised and written (for the most part) at sundrie tymes in his yong and tender age. Tamen est laudanda voluntas' and include 'Verses Written to his Father when he was Scholler at AEton', 'Preceptes written in his friend Richard Woodwards praier booke, sometime his companion in Oxford', 'Verses written at the request of his cosen, Mary Palmer, in her praier booke called The Pomander of Praier', and some epitaphs on his father and mother. Many of the pieces are taken verbatim from Martial, some, without acknowledgement, are from George Turberville's collections. Despite the substantial dependence of 'Flowers of Epigrammes' on Martial's work, Francis Meres describes Kendall as one of the English epigrammatists, along with John Heywood, Thomas Drant, Thomas Bastard, and Sir John Davies ('Palladis tamia', 1598). 'Flowers of Epigrammes' was reprinted by the Spenser Society in 1874. The manner, place, and date of Kendall's death are unknown and there is no evidence of a will having been proved. 


@@@@@


doc= 15353


Kendrick, Emma Eleonora (1788-1871), miniature painter, was baptized on 22 February 1789 at St Mary Street, St Marylebone Road, Middlesex, the daughter of Joseph Kendrick ('b'. 1755), sculptor, and his wife, Jane. Her elder brother, Josephus Kendrick (1791-1832), was also a sculptor; in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' his identity was confused with that of his father. Josephus Kendrick entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1808, where in 1813 he obtained a gold medal. He exhibited frequently at the Royal Academy and designed two monumental tablets in St Paul's Cathedral. He was described by Gunnis as 'a competent minor sculptor' (Gunnis, 226). 
Emma Kendrick became very successful as a miniature painter in watercolour on ivory and obtained a large practice. She later noted that 'Mr. West, the late president of the Royal Academy, said to me when a beginner 'Go on and prosper; you are in the right road'' (Kendrick, 111). In 1810-11 she was awarded by the Society of Artists a silver palette for a drawing after Giorgione; in 1812 a silver medal for a miniature copy, after Guercino; and in 1814 the Gold Isis medal for an original figurative miniature, 'Religion'. This medal she was again awarded in 1816 for an original miniature of Dido, and in 1817 for an original historical miniature. She exhibited at the Royal Academy, from 1811 to 1840, a total of eighty-three miniatures, including 'ad vivum' portraits and copies after works by Sir Joshua Reynolds and Van Dyck, and a similar number at the Society of British Artists in Suffolk Street. From 1815 to 1820 she also exhibited with the Society of Painters in Water Colours. Her portraits in miniature include a three-quarter-length portrait of Lady Caroline Lamb in a white dress and cashmere shawl, holding an open book (exh. RA, 1817; V&A), which is signed on the reverse and also there inscribed by the artist with her address, '6 Upper Marylebone Street / Fitzroy Square'. In keeping with the sitter's pensive expression this miniature is more softly and delicately painted than her hard-edged miniature of Mrs Vanhardt in masquerade dress, signed and dated 1828, also in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Basil Long noted that she 'varied her style a good deal' (Long, 249). 
Following the debacle of her affair of the previous year with the poet Lord Byron, in January 1814 Lady Caroline Lamb stole a miniature of Byron (priv. coll.), painted by George Sanders ('c'.1812), from the house of the publisher John Murray. Through the intervention of her aunt Lady Melbourne the miniature was eventually returned to Byron, but not before Lady Caroline succeeded in obtaining a secret copy of it, taken by Miss Kendrick, which Lady Caroline enclosed in a large gold locket inscribed with the words 'Ne Crede Byron'. This locket, which still contains the miniature of Byron painted by Miss Kendrick, is now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. Her miniature of General Matvey Ivanovich Platov, one of the commanding officers of the Russian allies against Napoleon, was sold at Christies (18 December 1974, lot 70). Miss Kendrick painted miniatures of several British officers, including William Carr Beresford, Viscount Beresford, and Sir George Walker. Her portrait of Thomas Erskine, first Baron Erskine of Restormel, was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1816. In her rectangular miniature of an unknown man (priv. coll., France), inscribed 'Emma Eleonora Kendrick / Pinxit 1825. / 4 Duchess Street / 'Portland Place'', Long saw 'the influence of Sir Thomas Lawrence'; 'the features were softly but accurately modelled'; this miniature he considered 'distinctly good' (Long, 250). Many of her miniatures were engraved, including those of Lady Forester, Lady Kirkwall, and Lady Grantham. Miss Kendrick described herself in 1818 as miniature painter to Princess Elizabeth, Landgravine of Hesse-Homburg; in 1831 she was appointed miniature painter to William IV. 
Miss Kendrick published in 1830 'Conversations on the Art of Miniature Painting', in which she describes, in five conversations, her materials and technique. In her advice to Miss Forester, daughter of the duchess of Rutland, to whom she dedicated this work, she upholds the precepts of Sir Joshua Reynolds put forward in his 'Discourses'. In particular his endorsement of the generally held belief that artists should study but not slavishly copy the old masters and that 'Nature is still a nobler resource' are two precepts on which Miss Kendrick's advice to her pupil are founded (Kendrick, 37). Hogarth's belief that 'a gentle, waving serpentine line is the line of beauty' also finds expression in her conversations (ibid., 11). In addition to this evidence of Miss Kendrick's theoretical knowledge of her art, however, her belief that 'art [is] poor when compared with the sublime grandeur of Nature' (ibid., 37) and that 'a soul or spirit should breathe through the whole, and it should be rather the expression than the mere lines of a face which you should try to represent' (ibid., 41) places her work (like that of some of her more notable subjects) securely within the context of nineteenth-century Romanticism rather than under the theoretical (or social) constraints imposed on, or by, eighteenth-century portraiture. Among the works that she exhibited at the Royal Academy in the 1820s and 1830s were several with titles indicating that they were based on the works of Byron or Scott. In 1839 the miniature painter James Holmes (who knew both Byron, of whom he painted several portraits, and Lady Caroline Lamb) exhibited at the Royal Academy a portrait of Miss Kendrick. 
Miss Kendrick died at her home, 88 Albany Street, Regent's Park, London, where she had lived with her sister, Josephia Jane Mary Kendrick, on 6 April 1871, aged eighty-three. 


@@@@@


doc= 15354


Kendrick, James (1771-1847), botanist, was born on 14 January 1771 at Warrington, Lancashire, the town where both his father and grandfather were born. He was educated at Burtonwood grammar school and at Warrington's free grammar school. On leaving school he was apprenticed to a Mr Hankinson, a local 'practitioner in surgery of some note in his day' ('GM'). He began practising medicine -- as a surgeon -- about 1793, and together with his friend Thomas Glazebrook Rylands was instrumental in establishing the Warrington Dispensary. 
Although a career, medicine was not Kendrick's passion. In his leisure he studied botany and zoology, and was admitted a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1802. In 1811 he and a group of friends started the first literary and scientific institution in Warrington; Kendrick was made vice-president. He was also part of the 'small circle of nature lovers' who founded the Warrington Natural History Society on 23 November 1838. At the time of his death Kendrick was president of the society, which subsequently provided material to form the nucleus of the Warrington Museum and Library. Kendrick was one of the chief founding benefactors of the museum -- others included William Beamont, William Robson, and John Fitchett Marsh. 
Kendrick was president of the Botanical Society of Warrington, and contributed observations and notes to George Crosfield's 'A Calendar of Flora, Composed during the Year 1809, at Warrington, Latitude 53 degree 30'' (1810). Kendrick was well acquainted with the philanthropist John Howard and gave much assistance to James Baldwin Brown in his 'Memoirs of the Public and Private Life of John Howard' (1818) -- in which Kendrick was described as 'the successor of Dr [John] Aikin'. The botanist Thomas Nuttall (1786-1859) named the 'Rhododendron kendrickii' (imported into England in 1852 from Bhutan) after him. Kendrick's wish 'to die quietly at the close of a day's work' ('GM') was fulfilled when he died on 30 November 1847, at Stanley Street, Warrington. He was buried on 6 December at St Elphin's Church, Warrington (with the simple inscription 'Kendrick' to mark his grave). He was married and is known to have been survived by two sons and several daughters. 
Kendrick's eldest son, 
Kendrick began his medical career with his father and served an apprenticeship at the Warrington Dispensary in Buttermarket Street. About 1828 he moved to Edinburgh where he graduated MD on 1 August 1833 with a thesis entitled 'On the Dependence of Diabetes Mellitus on Disease of the Stomach and Intestines'. Soon after Kendrick returned to Warrington where he began to practise medicine from 1833; about 1850 he acted as physician to Mr Lyon's family, at Appleton Hall. On 21 July 1837 Kendrick married Isabella Anne (died 23 July 1863), the only child of Robert Berry, a merchant formerly of Port Louis, Mauritius (afterwards consul for Sweden and Norway in China, where he resided at Macau), and his wife, Ann Mary; this marriage resulted in nine children, five of whom survived their father. The year after his first wife's death, on 19 October 1864, he married Martha (died 'c'.1873), third daughter of Thomas Green of Warrington and sister-in-law to Benjamin Pierpoint, of the same town; this marriage was childless. In 1874 he married his third wife, Catherine, daughter of William Burgess of Frodsham, and sister of Alderman John Burgess; their marriage was also childless. 
Kendrick had a fondness for antiquities and frequently lectured on local topography and history. He issued a series of 'Contributions to the early history of Warrington' in the 'Manchester Courier' (1839-40; 1851) and wrote many papers which appeared in the publications of the Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire, Chester Archaeological Society, the 'Reliquary', and the 'Warrington Guardian'. In 1853 he became a member of the British Archaeological Association. 
Kendrick wrote a number of other publications including: 'An Account of Warrington Siege, anno 1643' (1852; 1856); 'A Description of Two Ancient Chessmen, Discovered in the Mote Hill, Warrington' (1852); 'Profiles of Warrington Worthies' (1853; 1854); 'An Account of Excavations Made at the Mote Hill, Warrington' (1853); 'Account of the Loyal Warrington Volunteers of 1798' (1854; 1856); 'A Morning's Ramble in Old Warrington' (1855); and 'The Warrington Blue Coat School Exposure, and its Beneficial Results' (1868). 
In 1869 Kendrick wrote 'On the Roman Station at Wilderspool, Near Warrington' (1870). He spent much time and money on the excavation of this site and on 15 August 1870 it was reported that Kendrick had presented an extensive collection of Roman artefacts found there to the Warrington Museum. In 1871 he released 'On Recent Discoveries at the Roman Site at Wilderspool', and a year later compiled 'A Guide Book to the Roman Remains from Wilderspool', which was presented to the museum. He was also co-author, with William Robson, of 'Memorials of the Late Dr. Robson, of Warrington: his Life and Writings' (1876). 
In 1859 Kendrick took charge of the antiquities in the Warrington Museum; he subsequently contributed many items to the collections, including an important series of impressions from German imperial seals. In 1878, he donated some 1000 books and pamphlets to the Warrington Free Library. Kendrick died on 6 April 1882 at his home, 27 Bold Street, Warrington. His remains were interred beside other members of his family in Padgate churchyard on 11 April 1882; present at his funeral were his third wife, two daughters, and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 15355


James Kendrick (1809-1882), local historian and topographer, was born on 7 November 1809, at the corner of Orford and Buttermarket streets, Warrington. He was educated at Mr Davenport's School (then located in Golborne Street), Warrington, and he also attended a school in Mersey Street, which was run by the Revd Topping, curate at the parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 15356


Kenealy, Edward Vaughan Hyde (1819-1880), barrister and writer, was born on 2 July 1819 at Nile Street, Cork, the first of four children of William Kenealy, shopkeeper, and his wife, Catherine. His parents were Roman Catholics, but at university he abandoned the Catholic faith. After attending several private schools at Cork, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 6 July 1835. In 1840 he graduated BA, in 1846 LLB, and in 1850 LLD. He was called to the Irish bar in 1840, and joined the Munster circuit. He offered to contest the parliamentary representation of Trinity College, Dublin, on repeal principles in June 1847, of Kinsale in February 1848, and of Cork in late 1849, but received too little support to persevere. Meanwhile he became a student of Gray's Inn on 13 January 1838, and paid several visits to London before he was called to the English bar on 1 May 1847. In that year he settled in London, becoming a queen's counsel and a bencher of his inn in April 1868. He joined the Oxford circuit, and attended sessions at Shrewsbury and at the central criminal court. In 1848 he defended Francis Looney and William Dowling on charges of treason-felony, and was subsequently junior counsel for the defence of William Palmer, the Rugeley poisoner. In 1850 he was prosecuted by the guardians of the West London Union for punishing with undue severity Edward Hyde, his six-year-old illegitimate son. He was sentenced to a month's imprisonment. On 29 November 1851 he married Elizabeth (1834/5-1922), daughter of William Nicklin, a builder, of Tipton, Staffordshire; they had eleven children, including the writer and physician Arabella Madonna Kenealy. 
In December 1867 Kenealy defended the Fenians Burke and Casey, but after the Clerkenwell explosion he retired from the case; and in 1869 he led the prosecution of Overend, Gurney, and others for conspiracy to publish a fraudulent banking prospectus. In 1868 he unsuccessfully contested Wednesbury as an independent candidate. In April 1873 he succeeded William Campbell Sleigh as leading counsel for the Tichborne claimant, whose case he conducted with violent partisanship, which has been sometimes attributed to ill health (he suffered from diabetes). He made groundless imputations against witnesses and various Roman Catholic institutions, treated the bench with contempt, and protracted the case into the longest trial at 'nisi prius' on record. The jury appended to their verdict a censure of the language he had employed. He then started a scurrilous paper called 'The Englishman', which attained a large circulation, to plead the cause of the claimant. 
Kenealy's conduct during and after the trial was brought before the professional tribunals, and he was expelled from the mess of the Oxford circuit on 2 April 1874, dispatented by the lord chancellor, and disbenched and disbarred by Gray's Inn on 17 August 1874. Intent on publicizing his own and his client's grievances, he founded the Magna Charta Association and toured the country, delivering lectures on the Tichborne trial. After receiving numerous invitations to contest Stoke, Kenealy was actually elected MP for that borough on 16 February 1875, by a majority of nearly 2000 votes. On 18 February he took his seat; contrary to custom, no members introduced him to the house, the ceremony being dispensed with on the motion of Disraeli. On 23 April Kenealy moved for a royal commission of inquiry into the conduct of the Tichborne case, but beyond his own and his co-teller's, he obtained only 1 vote; there were 433 against him. Kenealy cut no figure in parliament; he contested Stoke again at the general election of 1880, and came bottom of the poll. Meanwhile, however, under Kenealy's leadership, the Magna Charta Association became a leading popular radical organization demanding triennial parliaments, votes for women, the abolition of income tax, and duties on tea, coffee, and sugar. Kenealy inspired, among others, the socialist Henry Hyndman. 
Kenealy was a great reader and a voluminous writer, of varied and considerable learning. His poems contain translations from Latin, Greek, German, Italian, Portuguese, Russian, Irish, Persian, Arabic, Hindustani, and Bengali, but he was probably not an accomplished scholar in all these tongues. His poems were published both in book form and in leading periodicals such as 'Fraser's Magazine'. He carried the extravagance and unconventionality which had wrecked his legal career into his spiritual life, fabricating from ancient texts an extraordinary mystic religion of his own: he believed he was the twelfth messenger of God, part of a line that included Adam, Jesus Christ, and Ghengis Khan. Kenealy wrote a series of theological works starting with 'The Book of God: the Apocalypse of Adam-Oannes' in 1866 in which he set out his religious views. A more conventional publication was his biography of 'Edward Wortley Montagu' (1869); he was also the editor of a nine-volume edition of the Tichborne trial account. 
Kenealy died on 16 April 1880 of heart failure and diabetes at his home, Stoke House, 6 Tavistock Square, London, and was buried on 22 April in the church at Hangleton, Portslade, Sussex. He was survived by his wife. The Magna Charta Association, led by Kenealy's son, Maurice, lasted for another six years. Although Kenealy enjoyed only limited success as a lawyer and litterateur, he became for a brief period one of the most dynamic political demagogues between the end of Chartism and the rise of socialism. 


@@@@@


doc= 15357


Keninghale, John (d. 1451), theologian, prior of Norwich, and diplomat, was born near Norwich and joined the Carmelite order there. He was ordained acolyte on 8 March 1407, and later studied at Oxford University, where he graduated DTh some time before 1425. As a young theologian, he was a confidant of Thomas Netter (died 1430), on whose behalf he visited Rome several times, being described as 'nuncio to the Apostolic See'. In 1421 he conveyed to the prior-general the response of Netter to certain criticisms that had been made against him, and towards the end of 1425 he was in Rome again, presenting a copy of Netter's 'Doctrinale fidei ecclesiae' to Pope Martin V, while in the following year he presented the second volume. 
After Netter's death Keninghale was elected provincial in 1430 at Hitchin, and he held office until he resigned in 1444 because of his involvement in affairs of state. Present at the Council of Basel during 1432-4, Keninghale was a conspicuous opponent of the Wycliffite views of Peter Payne (died 1455/1456?), and a sermon he preached to the council has survived (Mansi, 1237). In 1438-9 Keninghale and three other Carmelites were the only English representatives at the Council of Florence and it was while he was there that Keninghale (not Nicholas Kenton, who died in 1468, as in some accounts) visited the tomb of Sant'Andrea Corsini and was 'miraculously cured of a great pain in the head' (BL, Harley MS 3838, fol. 37'v'). In 1443 Keninghale and the French provincial were appointed commissaries by the prior-general to resolve dissensions in the Lower German province. 
Keninghale, who was at one time confessor to Richard, duke of York (died 1460), and his wife, Cecily (died 1495), ended his days as prior of Norwich, where he built a library and room for himself. He died on 28 April 1451 and was buried at the priory. His writings included a collection of twelve sermons which were formerly in the Carmelite library at Oxford. In his 'Scriptores', John Bale adds works by Keninghale 'on his travels and legations' and on Aristotle, but these lack incipits. Keninghale is credited by late twentieth-century scholars with being the provincial who played a leading part in bringing together the 'Fasciculi zizaniorum', a Carmelite collection of anti-Wycliffite documents which is a major source of information for this period. 


@@@@@


doc= 15358


Keninghale, Peter (d. 1494), prior of Oxford and theologian, was born in France of a noble English family. He joined the Carmelites in Oxford, where he incepted as a DTh in 1479-80. He is recorded as being prior there in 1461 and again in 1481, and probably he remained in office until his death. In 1494 he received a bequest of 20's'. from Master Robert Geffray, a former master of Beam Hall, Oxford, who died as archdeacon of Shropshire. Keninghale passed all his life lecturing in the Carmelite studium in Oxford and when he died, on 10 November 1494, he was buried in the chapel there. Bale ascribes to him a collection of fifty-seven sermons, with incipit, one of which he preached as part of his doctoral examination in 1479, and Leland adds a volume of 'disputationes'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15359


Kennaway, Sir John, first baronet (1758-1836), army officer in the East India Company and diplomatist, was born on 6 March 1758 in Exeter, the third of six children of William Kennaway (1717-1793), woollen merchant, and his wife, Frances (1722-1788), the daughter of Aaron Tozer. In 1772, after leaving Exeter grammar school, Kennaway obtained the patronage of a near relation of his mother, Robert Palk, former governor of Madras. Having entered the service of the East India Company as a military cadet, Kennaway sailed for India before his fourteenth birthday. On the approach to Calcutta he was shipwrecked and lost all his possessions. His early years in India were marred by ill health and slow career advancement. Only at the insistence of a family friend at Madras did Kennaway stay in India. Of scholarly inclinations, he learned Persian and wrote commentaries on late Roman poetry. A devout Anglican, he also compiled prayers, a habit he followed through the better part of his life. In a letter to his eldest brother, William, on 17 March 1780 Kennaway wrote: 'I am ambitious of acting upon a large scale' and expressed a 'hope to spend the summer of my life in affluence with my friends' (Devon RO, M961 Add. S/F39). 
In 1781 opportunity to 'act upon a large scale' presented itself when Kennaway's brigade marched 1700 kilometres from Bengal to the Carnatic to serve in the Second Anglo-Mysore War. He saw action at Cuddalore and made captain's rank in 1783, and his linguistic skills were recognized when he became the brigade's Persian translator. With peace restored in 1784, he briefly returned to Bengal before being sent in 1785 to the Oudh residency as translator. His knowledge of Persian and Indian courtly etiquette was further acknowledged a year later when he was appointed to attend Haidar Beg Khan, Oudh's chief minister, on an embassy from Lucknow to Calcutta to meet the governor-general, Cornwallis, who, impressed with Kennaway, made him his aide-de-camp. 
Cornwallis continued to promote Kennaway. In April 1788 he was appointed temporary resident to the court of the nizam of Hyderabad, a lucrative but delicate post charged with obtaining the peaceful cession of the Guntur Circar. The nizam had, in 1768, promised to cede the area -- a strategic coastal region between Bengal and Madras -- to the company upon the death of his brother in return for military assistance and annual cash payments. When the nizam's brother died in 1782 and neither party enforced the lapsed treaty, in 1786 the London authorities ordered Cornwallis to acquire Guntur Circar in return for annual rent. Kennaway fulfilled his task, and in September 1788 British forces occupied the area. In 1789 Kennaway's recall from Hyderabad was pre-empted when Tipu Sultan of Mysore attacked Travancore, a company ally, and Kennaway was instructed to negotiate the nizam's participation in a coalition. 
By the treaty of Pangal, Kennaway obtained the nizam's co-operation and was awarded a baronetcy on 25 February 1791. In 1792, with the allies encamped before the walls of Mysore's capital, Cornwallis bid him to negotiate peace. By the treaty of Seringapatam, Mysore ceded half its territory to the allies, more than 3 crores of rupees (approximately $3 million) and Tipu Sultan gave two of his sons as hostages against Mysore's default. Kennaway, who enjoyed conducting affairs in Persian, ascribed his success as a diplomat, in a letter to Colonel Harper of 3 May 1787, to an ability to maintain 'an appearance of indifference and total unconcern' (Devon RO, M961 F/2, fol. 114). After negotiating before Seringapatam, Kennaway fell ill and took a leave of absence from his duties as resident. Balding, grey, and commonly thought to be a decade older than he was, Kennaway knew his career was taking a physical toll. None the less his lingering idea of returning to England became a conviction only after learning of his father's death, and in 1794 he left India. 
A thrifty man who regularly remitted funds to England, Kennaway fulfilled his youthful hope and lived out his life in congenial affluence. He purchased Escot House, at Ottery St Mary, near Exeter, for $26,000 and became a respected member of the Devon gentry. In 1797 he married Charlotte (1768-1845), daughter of Charles Amyatt, nabob and MP. The couple had seven sons and five daughters, of whom nine survived childhood. Besides being colonel of the local militia for twenty-five years, Kennaway was an avid hunter. He also supported parochial charities, including the Devon and Exeter Society for promoting Christianity amongst the Jews. By 1826 his eyesight was going. Despite his affliction the blind old baronet kept his morning habit of donning a military greatcoat and riding about his estate. On 26 December 1835 he suffered a paralysing stroke. He died early on new year's day 1836, and was succeeded in his baronetcy by his eldest son, John. 


@@@@@


doc= 15360


Kennedy, Margaret (d. 1793), singer and actress, had an Irish background but, according to Anthony Pasquin, she was born in London and studied music under Gaetano Quilici before becoming a pupil of Thomas Augustine Arne. In his 'Musical Memoirs' W. T. Parke claimed that some Covent Garden performers heard her singing when she was waiting on the parlour guests at a public house near St Giles-in-the-Fields and took Arne to hear her. She married Thomas Farrell on 7 August 1774 and in 1775 sang at the Haymarket Theatre in three concerts put on by Arne to display his pupils. Each evening included catches, glees, and Arne's 'The Sot', in which Mrs Farrell played the male role of Fairlove, with the hunting song 'The dusky night rides down the sky'. After another pupils' concert early in 1776 she sang that March in two performances of Arne's 'Comus' at Covent Garden. 
Mrs Farrell joined the Covent Garden company in December 1776, when she was a principal singer in Arne's music for 'Caractacus'. The 'Morning Post' praised the duet between Leoni and Mrs Farrell, 'who sung with great taste, and fine execution' ('Morning Post', 7 Dec 1776). Her Ariel in 'The Tempest' later that month was successful vocally, but she was taller and more heavily built than her Prospero. Suited by her appearance and contralto voice for male roles, she sang the title role in Arne's 'Artaxerxes' in January and Macheath in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' early the next season. The 'Morning Post' of 18 October 1777 admired her voice and praised the judgement and spirit of her interpretation, but Macheath's singing of Arne's hunting song was attacked by the 'Public Advertiser' as being 'in Defiance of Propriety and Common-Sense' ('Public Advertiser', 18 Oct 1777). In the summers of 1777 and 1778 she appeared at Ranelagh, performing songs by Arne and James Hook, and in those years, besides her theatre appearances, she also sang in festivals in Manchester, Oxford, and Winchester and in the Lent oratorio seasons in London. On 24 January 1779 the widowed Margaret Farrell married an Irish doctor, Morgan Hugh Kennedy (died 1809), and as Mrs Kennedy she remained a leading singer at Covent Garden until 1789. 
Mrs Kennedy performed at Vauxhall Gardens every summer from 1781 to 1785, and numerous songs by Hook, Michael Arne, and others were published as sung by her there. She was heard in the oratorio seasons at Drury Lane (1779, 1784) and the Haymarket (1785). In 1791, two years after Mrs Kennedy's retirement from the stage, Mrs Papendiek was moved in a Handel concert at Westminster Abbey by her 'contralto voice melodiously sweet' ('Court and Private Life', 2.254). At Covent Garden her salary rose from $5 a week to $12 in her last two seasons. She sang much incidental music, and her roles in stock pieces included Don Carlos in Sheridan's comic opera 'The Duenna' and later Lucy in 'The Beggar's Opera'. She created a large number of roles designed for her, including Cicely in Hook's 'Lady of the Manor' (23 November 1778), Orra in Charles Dibdin's 'The Islanders' (25 November 1780), Margaret and later Allen-a-Dale in William Shield's 'Robin Hood' (17 April 1784; 12 October 1784), and William in his 'Rosina' (31 December 1782), the role she played in her final stage appearance on 2 April 1789. The playwright John O'Keeffe gave her the Irish roles of Patrick in 'The Poor Soldier' (4 November 1783) and Mrs Casey in 'Fontainbleau' (16 November 1784), both with music by Shield, as well as one of her most frequently performed parts, Don Alfonso in Arnold's 'The Castle of Andalusia' (2 November 1782). In 1786 the celebrated Mrs Kennedy appeared in her favourite roles in the Edinburgh summer season. 

'The Secret History of the Green Rooms' claimed that Mrs Kennedy left the stage because of a disagreement with the manager, Thomas Harris, and 'The Bystander' deplored her departure, praising her 'easy, sweet, natural, and unaffected' singing ('The Bystander', 1790, 140). It is likely that her health was declining; Parke stated that she was prescribed brandy and water for a medical condition and by 1791 was drinking too much. She died on 23 January 1793 at Bayswater Hall, Bayswater (her husband was physician at the lying-in hospital there), and was buried at St Anne's, Soho, on 3 February. Even in 1821 a writer in the Boston 'Euterpeiad' remembered her thrilling voice, a 'sweet counter tenor; a quality so rare in a female, that it charmed by its novelty no less than by its richness of tone' ('Euterpeiad', 13 Oct 1821, 114). 


@@@@@


doc= 15361


Kennedy, Alexander (1695-c.1785), violin maker, was the first of an eminent family, famous for its prolific output of string instruments. He was born in Scotland and moved to London early in the eighteenth century, and set up business from about 1730 in Oxford market, north of Oxford Street. He made only violins, which he built on the high-arched Stainer model, and varnished with a brownish yellow spirit varnish. He is regarded as 'one of the better London makers' of the mid-eighteenth century, and his instruments are generally well made and with 'well-figured wood' (Harvey, 359). He died about 1785. His nephew 


@@@@@


doc= 15362


Kennedy, Sir Arthur Edward (1810-1883), army officer and colonial governor, was born at Cultra, co. Down, Ireland, on 9 April 1810, the fourth son of Hugh Kennedy and his wife, Grace Dora, the daughter of John Hughes. He was taught at home and then attended Trinity College, Dublin. In 1827 he joined the army as ensign in the 11th regiment. He served in Corfu, bought a commission, and in 1840 became captain of the 68th regiment; he then served in Canada for three years. On 18 May 1839 he married Georgina Matilda, the daughter of Joseph Macartney of St Helen's, co. Dublin. They had two daughters, one named Georgina Grace Maria, and one son, Arthur Herbert William, who later entered the army. 
In 1846 Kennedy was appointed poor law inspector for Ireland; during the famine of 1847 he served on Sir John Burgoyne's relief committee. He retired from the army altogether in 1848. 
In 1851 Kennedy received his first appointment in the colonial service as governor of the Gambia. The following year he transferred to the governorship of Sierra Leone, and in 1854 he became consul-general of Sherbro county. He was governor of Western Australia from 1855 to 1862, when he was made CB. He was moved to Vancouver Island in 1863 and to the west African settlements in 1867, was knighted in 1868, made KCMG in 1871, and in 1872 became governor and commander-in-chief of Hong Kong. Kennedy's wife died on 3 October 1874, and in 1877 he left Hong Kong to take up the post of governor of Queensland. He was made GCMG in 1881 and left Australia for England, aboard the steamship 'Orient', in 1883. He died during this voyage, off the coast of Aden, on 3 June 1883 and was buried at sea in the Gulf of Aden. 


@@@@@


doc= 15363


Kennedy, Benjamin Hall (1804-1889), headmaster and classical scholar, was born at Summer Hill, near Birmingham, on 6 November 1804, the eldest son of Rann Kennedy (1772-1851) and his wife, Julia ('nee' Hall). Charles Rann Kennedy was his brother. From 1814 to 1818 he was educated in his father's house and at King Edward's School, Birmingham, and throughout his youth owed much to the encouragement of his father's friends John Johnstone and Samuel Parr. The example of his father early imbued him with a love of learning and passionate admiration for poetry, and he read widely in his father's large library. When a child he thoroughly mastered an edition of 'The British Theatre' in thirty volumes, and a love of dramatic literature never left him. In spite, however, of his discursive reading, he worked hard at classics, and when, in January 1819, he went to Shrewsbury School, the composition which he wrote, consisting, as the fashion then was, entirely of original Latin composition in verse and prose, exhibits astonishing command of Latin and power of invention. 
Samuel Butler was the headmaster of Shrewsbury, and under him young Kennedy developed rapidly. In a year he became second boy, and in a year and a half, when he was not sixteen, head boy, a position which he held until he left in 1823. Among his schoolfellows were Charles and Erasmus Darwin. While still at school he sent in a copy of iambics for the Porson prize and a Latin ode for Sir W. Browne's medal at Cambridge; in both cases the examiners selected his composition for the prize, and, although he was not eligible for the Browne medal, he received the Porson, and the regulations were in consequence altered, so that he is the only schoolboy who ever won it. 
In 1823 Kennedy went to St John's College, Cambridge. Professor J. E. B. Mayor says that the list of what he had then read 'sounds like the record of a Scaliger' ('Classical Review', 227). In January 1824, when only in his second term, he won the Pitt university scholarship. During the examination Dean Law set 'Isaiah' 14: 6-17 for Greek iambics, and Kennedy's translation was so good that the Greek professor, Dobree, had it printed and circulated. His other university distinctions were the Porson prize for the second time in 1824, and for the third in 1826; the prizes for the Greek ode in 1824, for the Latin ode in 1824, and for the epigrams in 1825, and the members' prize in 1828. He graduated BA in 1827, being a senior optime in the mathematical tripos, and senior classic and first chancellor's medallist. Throughout his undergraduate career he was as notable for his wit and his social qualities as for his scholarship. The first Lord Lytton, who for fifty years remained his close friend, recorded the impression produced by 'an ardent, enthusiastic youth from Shrewsbury, a young giant in learning, who carried away the prize from Praed' (Lytton, 1.232). He took frequent part in the union debates and became president in 1825. In 1824 he was also elected a member of the Cambridge Conversazione Society, better known as the Apostles, where he formed a close friendship with F. D. Maurice and John Sterling, and in the same year became an original member of the Athenaeum, at the invitation of Richard Heber. Among his other undergraduate friends and acquaintances were W. M. Praed, Alexander Cockburn, Charles Wordsworth, Charles Buller, and William Selwyn. 
In 1827 Kennedy went to Shrewsbury as an assistant master, but, on being elected fellow of St John's in 1828, returned to Cambridge to take pupils. Among them were Richard Shilleto, Charles Merivale (afterwards dean of Ely), Henry Philpott (afterwards bishop of Worcester), and William Cavendish (afterwards seventh duke of Devonshire). He was ordained deacon in 1829 and priest in 1830, and in the latter year accepted a mastership under C. T. Longley at Harrow, where he had the Grove House. In March 1831 he married Janet (died 1874), daughter of Thomas Caird, of Paignton, Devon. They were the parents of a son and four daughters Charlotte Amy May Burbury ['see under 'Kennedy, Marion Grace], Marion Grace Kennedy, Julia Elizabeth Kennedy ['see under 'Kennedy, Marion Grace], and Edith Janet. At Harrow discipline was at the time extremely lax, and the general standard of teaching very low, and Kennedy's position as assistant master gave him no effective influence. But early in 1836 Samuel Butler was made bishop of Lichfield, and Kennedy, his former pupil, was nominated his successor in the headmastership of Shrewsbury, greatly to Butler's satisfaction. Although the headmastership of Harrow had fallen vacant at the same time, Kennedy made no concealment of his preference for Shrewsbury. He was also made DD by royal mandate at this time. 
Kennedy remained at Shrewsbury until 1866, a period of thirty years, and throughout that time the school maintained an unparalleled reputation for classical training. It was poorly endowed, and could not secure brilliant boys by offers of rich scholarships. Although the headmaster was fairly well paid, there were no means of paying under-masters a good salary, and the whole burden of teaching the upper boys fell upon the headmaster. The buildings of the school, dating from the sixteenth century, were meagre and the accommodation for boarders very defective. Until Kennedy went there was no cricket ground, and the very scanty school grounds possessed a solitary fives court as the sole provision for healthy amusement. The numbers of the school were consequently never large; having inherited a pupil body of nearly 230, at one time Kennedy found their numbers down to about eighty. None the less he regularly sent up to the universities a succession of pupils, who carried all before them. A list of the very numerous distinctions obtained by Shrewsbury men at Oxford and Cambridge between 1840 and 1860 establishes Kennedy's claim to be the greatest classical teacher of the nineteenth century. His success was due to his energetic nature; his enthusiasm, like all genuine enthusiasm, was contagious, and his pupils left him possessed of the true key of knowledge -- a genuine and vigorous love of knowledge for its own sake. Yet there is abundant evidence that his teaching methods were erratic and idiosyncratic to a quite remarkable degree. 
The veneration in which Kennedy was held by his pupils was shown by the large sum which was raised for a testimonial to him on his retirement in 1866. The money was devoted partly to the building of the chancel of the chapel at Shrewsbury School, and partly to the founding of a professorship of Latin in the University of Cambridge. Kennedy added $500 to the fund, on the condition that the professorship should not be named after him (though since 1911 it has indeed been called the Kennedy professorship). The first occupant of the new chair was one of his former pupils, H. A. J. Munro, and the second was another, J. E. B. Mayor. It was to Kennedy that Munro dedicated his great edition of Lucretius and Mayor his famous edition of Juvenal. 
While at Shrewsbury Kennedy was, in 1843, appointed prebendary of Lichfield, and in 1861 select preacher in the University of Cambridge. In 1862 a royal commission sat to inquire into the condition of the nine chief public schools, including Shrewsbury (which would have been inconceivable had it not been for the headmasterships of Samuel Butler and of Kennedy himself). Kennedy's published evidence clearly defined the value of classical study, though he had instituted a 'non-collegiate' class at the school. Among the changes recommended was the use of the same Latin and Greek grammars in public schools, and the headmasters of the nine chief schools unanimously selected as the basis of the new Latin grammar Kennedy's 'Elementary Latin Grammar', originally published in 1847. Accordingly, a small subcommittee (which included Kennedy himself) constructed, on the basis of Kennedy's 'Grammar', 'The Public School Latin Primer', which was published in 1866, but was greeted with widespread hostile comment. Subsequently, however, Kennedy published 'The Public School Latin Grammar' (1871), a more thorough and complete work than any which had preceded it in England, and not without value more than a century later. The Latin primer had met with much criticism, but it stood the test of time; however, the revision of 1888, and the 'Shorter Latin Primer' of the same year, owed much not only to Kennedy's ex-pupils G. H. Hallam and T. E. Page, but also to his unmarried daughters Marion Grace and Julia, and it is unlikely that Kennedy had any hand in these works. 
Before Kennedy left Shrewsbury in 1866 he had accepted the living of West Felton, near Oswestry, vacant by the death of his son-in-law, William Burbury, patron of the living. In 1867 he was appointed regius professor of Greek at Cambridge and canon of Ely, which offices he held until his death. He represented the Ely chapter as proctor in convocation for some years. At Ely he was held in great affection, and helped to break down the barriers which had long separated the cathedral body from the rest of the town. At Cambridge he took a vigorous part in the business of the university, and was elected a member of the council in 1870. With his daughters he took a keen interest in the movement for the education of women, and in an impressive speech in February 1881 he strongly supported the opening of the Cambridge University honour examinations to the women students of Girton and Newnham colleges. He was from 1870 to 1880 a member of the committee for the revision of the 'New Testament', and took an active part in the work. In 1880 he was elected an honorary fellow of his old college, St John's, and in 1885 an ordinary fellow of it for the second time after an interval of fifty-eight years. In the same year he received from the University of Dublin the honorary degree of LLD. Kennedy died of bronchitis at Shipway House, Torquay, on 6 April 1889. 
Kennedy's passionate love of poetry, and not merely their classical perfection, gives his compositions in Greek and Latin their singular charm, seen to best advantage in his 'Between Whiles' (1877). In politics he was a Liberal, and in religious matters a staunch supporter of the established church, although intolerant of narrow sectarian prejudices. His general reading was exceptionally wide, and his memory unusually retentive. Of English history his knowledge was profound and minute; his familiarity with naval and military annals was remarkable. He was a brilliant speaker, with a voice and gesture capable of every modulation. His character was notably impulsive. In society he was an excellent conversationalist, overflowing in anecdote and genial humour. He is said to have been a knowledgeable connoisseur of wine. 


@@@@@


doc= 15364


Kennedy, Charles Rann (1808-1867), lawyer and classical scholar, was the son of Rann Kennedy (1772-1851), a poet, and his wife, Julia, daughter of the historical engraver John Hall. He was the younger brother of Benjamin Hall Kennedy. He was educated at Shrewsbury School and at King Edward VI School, Birmingham, before matriculating as an exhibitioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1827. He was a talented student and won several prizes and scholarships. In 1831 he graduated BA as a senior classicist, and was elected a fellow of Trinity; he proceeded MA in 1834. On 5 February 1835 Kennedy was admitted at Lincoln's Inn. He was called to the bar on 19 November 1836. At first he practised in London and took part in the significant libel actions brought by John Stockdale against Hansard between 1836 and 1840. In connection with this case he published 'The Privileges of the House of Commons' (second edition, 1841). In the autumn of 1849 he was elected professor of law in Queen's College, Birmingham, and he asked to join the midland circuit. Unusually, this request was refused, leading Kennedy to publish in 1850 an open letter to the lord chancellor, complaining of the conduct of the circuit leagues. In May 1856 Kennedy became the professional adviser of Mrs Swinfen, the plaintiff in the case of 'Swinfen v. Swinfen', and carried the litigation to a successful conclusion. A dispute, however, arose as to his payment, and on 26 March 1862 he brought an action against Mrs Swinfen for $20,000. Kennedy won in the first instance but this result was overruled in the court of common pleas, the judges holding that a barrister could not sue for his fees. A deed which Kennedy had obtained from Mrs Swinfen, giving him a reversion to the Swinfen Hall estates in Staffordshire, was ordered to be delivered up by a judgment of the master of the rolls on 31 July 1863. Kennedy died at his home, Stapylton House, Harborne, Staffordshire, on 17 December 1867. He was married and left a family. 
Kennedy was an accomplished classical scholar and translator. He published translations of the various works of Demosthenes and completed an English translation begun by his father of the last eight books of Virgil's 'Aeneid'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15365


Kennedy, David (1825-1886), singer, was born in Perth on 15 April 1825, the only son of a weaver, David Kennedy, who was also precentor of a United Secession church, and his wife, Catherine Taylor. At the age of sixteen he was apprenticed to a painter, but he was trained in music by his father and in 1845 became precentor of the South Kirk, Perth. During 1848 he worked at his trade in Edinburgh and London, and returned to Perth to set up in business. There, on 22 December 1848, he married Helen, daughter of Robert Henderson, a brewer, and following her death five years later, on 5 June 1855, Elizabeth, daughter of Charles Fraser, a farm servant. Marjory Kennedy-Fraser, the folk-song collector, was their second and his fifth child. 
Kennedy later obtained a precentorship in Edinburgh, and in 1859 began a series of weekly concerts. Short concert tours in Scotland followed in 1860 and 1861, and in 1862 he made his first appearance in London, at the Hanover Square Rooms. Between December 1862 and May 1863 he gave a hundred concerts in the Egyptian Hall; and in 1864 and 1865 he was again in London, singing, and reading parts of Walter Scott's 'Waverley'. In 1866-8 he toured Canada and the eastern United States, with his eldest daughter, Helen, as his accompanist. In 1869 he went to San Francisco via Panama. While he was in San Francisco the first railway across the continent was opened, and he sang 'The Star-Spangled Banner' at the inaugural ceremony. 
After spending three years in Scotland, Kennedy and his family made a tour around the world (1872-6), visiting Australia and New Zealand, the United States, Canada, and Newfoundland. From 1876 to 1879 he toured in the British Isles, and performed two seasons in London; in 1879 he visited South Africa, and in 1879-80, India. On his way home he spent several months in Italy, where several of his children were studying; in 1881 one of his sons and two of his daughters died when the Theatre des Italiens, Nice, burnt down. In 1881-2 Kennedy was again in Canada and the United States, in 1883-4 in Australia and New Zealand. In March 1886 he appeared in London for the last time and then left for Canada, where he died at Stratford, Ontario, on 12 or 13 October 1886. He was buried in the Grange cemetery, Edinburgh. 
Kennedy possessed a rich tenor voice and good dramatic powers, along with a fund of humour, sometimes 'pawky', sometimes broad. He followed the example of John Templeton in concentrating on Scottish songs, and his many tours were prompted largely by a desire to bring his native music to the many expatriate Scots throughout the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 15366


Kennedy, Edmund Besley Court (1818-1848), surveyor and explorer, was born on 5 September 1818 at St Peter Port, Guernsey, Channel Islands, the sixth of the eight children of Colonel Thomas Kennedy and Mary Ann, daughter of Thomas Smith, sometime lord mayor of London. After attending Elizabeth College, Guernsey, Kennedy trained as a surveyor and then sailed for Australia, arriving in 1840 and being appointed assistant surveyor in the surveyor-general's department in New South Wales. His first task of surveying, in Victoria, ended with his being recalled after a dispute with a local magistrate and an indiscreet liaison with an Irish immigrant, Margaret Murphy, with whom he had a child. 
After spending two years with little surveying work in Sydney, Kennedy was suddenly in 1845 appointed second in command of the last exploring expedition conducted by Sir Thomas Livingstone Mitchell in 1846 in search of a route from Sydney to the Gulf of Carpentaria. After maintaining a base camp for some months, in March 1847 Kennedy volunteered to trace the 'Victoria' River, which was the furthest point touched by Mitchell in 1846. Starting from Sydney with eight mounted men with led horses, and eight months' provisions, he reached Mitchell's furthest point during an exceptionally dry season, descended the Thomson River, and followed the 'Victoria' south-west, showing that it did not flow north-west into the gulf as Mitchell had supposed. After tracing the Warego River and naming the Thomson, Kennedy turned back and reached Sydney in February 1848. Another stream having been named the Victoria, Kennedy renamed Mitchell's 'Victoria' by its Aboriginal name, the Barcoo. The narrative of this journey was published in the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society' (1852). 
In January 1848 Kennedy started on his last expedition for the exploration of Cape York peninsula. The party, consisting of nine men, with horses, and an Aborigine called Jackey Jackey, set out from Rockingham Bay, and found itself beset with misfortune. Mangrove swamps and mountains made progress slow, as did sickness and a growing shortage of supplies. Kennedy had to leave eight of his men sick at Weymouth Bay while the others tried under his leadership to reach the supply ship. On the subsequent journey one man shot himself accidentally, and the two others had to be left to tend him. Kennedy continued his journey with Jackey Jackey, hoping to reach the vessel at the tip of Cape York. Trapped by crocodile-infested mangrove swamp and hostile Aborigines, Kennedy was attacked and speared, dying on 13 December 1848 in the arms of the faithful Jackey Jackey, who thirteen days afterwards brought the tidings to the steamer 'Ariel' in Albany Bay. Of the other members of the expedition, only two survived to return to Sydney. 
An excellent leader, patient and persevering, Kennedy's important geographical discoveries have too often been overshadowed by the tragedy of his last expedition. 


@@@@@


doc= 15367


Kennedy, Gilbert, second earl of Cassillis (c.1492-1527), magnate, was the eldest son of David Kennedy, first earl of Cassillis (d. 1513) ['see under 'Kennedy family (per. c.1350-1513)], and his wife, Agnes Borthwick ('b'. 'c'.1460, died in or before 1509), daughter of William, third Lord Borthwick. He was the chief of a kindred which had been prominent in southern Ayrshire since the mid-fourteenth century. When his father was killed at Flodden in 1513, Gilbert, who was almost certainly already of age and married to Isobella Campbell ('b'. 'c'.1495, died in or after 1533), daughter of the second earl of Argyll, succeeded as second earl of Cassillis and fourth Lord Kennedy. He and Isobella had seven sons, including Gilbert Kennedy, third earl of Cassillis, and Quintin Kennedy, abbot of Crossraguel, and at least three daughters. Gilbert supported the duke of Albany, governor of Scotland during the earlier years of James V's minority, and in 1515 was among the forces besieging the queen dowager in Stirling Castle. He was one of the ambassadors sent to England in February 1516 and on 14 November that year the town of Maybole was created a free burgh in barony for him. In March 1523 he was paid $150 by parliament for remaining for three months with the young king during Albany's second absence in France. 
When Albany finally quit Scotland in May 1524, Cassillis joined the earl of Arran's party, and during the winters of 1524 and 1525 he was again in England negotiating peace. He was acquitted of the murder of Martin Kennedy of Lochland and Gilbert Makilwraith by an assize presided over by his brother-in-law the third earl of Argyll on 13 June 1525 and on 18 June 1526 he was granted a respite, along with many of his kindred and dependants, for the murder of Cornelius Machtema, a Dutch merchant killed during the sitting of parliament, and other offences. In August, as the Douglases tightened their hold on government, Cassillis withdrew from council. He backed the earl of Lennox's efforts to wrest James V from the control of the sixth earl of Angus and on 4 September was with the army that unsuccessfully opposed Angus and Arran at Linlithgow. His estates were subsequently forfeited and nominally awarded to Arran, but on 25 November he was discharged of treason -- a letter from James V enlisting his support was produced in his defence. 
A dispute over the ownership of Turnberry and other lands in Carrick caused relations between Cassillis and his territorial rival Sir Hugh Campbell of Loudoun, sheriff of Ayr, to deteriorate. On 11 July 1527 the case was submitted before the lords of council, but on 23 July Cassillis complained that Loudoun, a follower of Angus, had privately persuaded members of council to subscribe a decreet in his favour. Before due process could be exhausted the earl was murdered, at Loudoun's instigation, on the sands beside Prestwick some time between 24 and 31 August 1527. Loudoun was outlawed for the crime on 5 October, but escaped punishment through crown patronage. By tradition the Kennedys swore beneath the dule tree of Cassillis to revenge his death, and in actuality retaliated by killing Robert Campbell of Lochfergus. The second earl was buried in Maybole collegiate church. 


@@@@@


doc= 15368


Kennedy, Gilbert, third earl of Cassillis (c.1517-1558), magnate, was the eldest son of Gilbert Kennedy, second earl of Cassillis (c.1492-1527), and his wife, Isobella Campbell ('b'. 'c'.1495, died in or after 1533). Quintin Kennedy, who became abbot of Crossraguel, was his brother. The second earl was murdered in late August 1527, and the younger Gilbert's upbringing was entrusted to his uncle William Kennedy, abbot of Crossraguel. According to John Knox, Cassillis was obliged when only twelve or thirteen to subscribe the death warrant of Patrick Hamilton, Scotland's first protestant martyr, who was burnt at the stake at St Andrews on 29 February 1528. This has been interpreted as evidence for the earl's having matriculated at St Andrews University, but he does not appear in its records, and in any case Cassillis was probably only eleven in 1528. On 8 April 1530 he was licensed to go on pilgrimage to France with another uncle, Thomas Kennedy of Coiff. He remained there for about five years, much longer than many Scots spent on the continent, and it was probably then that he received his education. His personal tutor was no less a figure than George Buchanan, who in 1533 dedicated to Kennedy his translation of Linacre's 'Latin Grammar', published that year in Paris. By 1536 the two men had returned to Scotland; shortly afterwards Buchanan wrote his 'Somnium' at Cassillis's family seat in Ayrshire. 
Following his return Cassillis emerged as a power to be reckoned with in the west of Scotland, and principally in Ayrshire, where he began a lawsuit against Hugh Campbell of Loudoun, the killer of his father, probably over lands at Turnberry. He was made a member of James V's privy council, attended parliament regularly, and accompanied the king to the Western Isles in 1540. On 3 July 1538, shortly before he came of age, his marriage was granted to Margaret Kennedy of Bargany ('c'.1520-1596), the widow of William Wallace of Craigy, who then married him; they had three sons and two daughters. In November 1538 he received sasine of his earldom, confirmed to him by a charter of entail on 6 February 1541; its revenues have been estimated at about $715 Scots per annum. Cassillis also set about recreating the Kennedy affinity. Many of his kin, surname, and adherents were with him on 25 November 1542, when Sir Thomas Wharton captured him at Solway Moss. 
Cassillis was taken to London as an important prisoner of war and initially lodged in the Tower of London. But when news came of James V's death on 14 December, and thus of the accession to the throne of his newly born daughter, Mary, the earl was brought to court and released into the custody of Archbishop Thomas Cranmer. Influenced by both Buchanan and Cranmer, he emerged in 1543 as a firmly committed protestant, ready to sign articles promising to advance by all the means in his power the marriage of Prince Edward to Queen Mary and to help Henry VIII gain the most important Scottish castles. An English pension of 300 marks must have made it easier for him to swallow treason, but he also had to provide hostages for his good behaviour. They were two of his brothers, David and Archibald, and also his uncle Thomas, and they languished in England for a long time, not returning home before February 1545 or later. 
Back in Scotland in March 1543 as one of the Assured Lords, Cassillis was active in the protestant cause, ever promoting 'thys godly mariage and union' of Edward and Mary (Merriman, 112). In April 1544 he was apprehended by the governor, the second earl of Arran, at a time when he was collaborating with the earls of Lennox and Glencairn and with Lord Maxwell to undermine Arran's rejection of the English marriage, but was soon released. At the forefront of plots to assassinate Cardinal David Beaton, at the end of May Cassillis approached the English ambassador Sir Ralph Sadler with such a proposal, though he demanded a reward and a written warrant. Henry was reported as 'reputing the fact not meet to be set forward by him, and yet not misliking the offer' ('LP Henry VIII', 20/1, no. 834), and his councillors tried to forward the scheme, but Cassillis was discouraged and abandoned the idea. When the deed was eventually done by others, on 29 May 1546, so shocking did it appear that on 11 June Cassillis (along with others of the Assured Lords) swore before his peers at Stirling that he had renounced all his contracts with Henry VIII. 
Cassillis was not being wholly dishonest. Although he continued to communicate with the English and to receive letters from them (for example, he was sent ten copies of the printed proclamation of September 1547 and the February 1548 'Epistle'), he did little for his former allies. Nevertheless, he remained a committed protestant. Acts of iconoclasm erupted in many of the churches on or near his estates, and he was an early admirer of George Wishart, who in 1545 was invited to preach against the pope and the mass in Ayrshire. Cassillis may have flirted with treason in order to ensure that the government paid well for his support; if so, his tactics paid off, for by 1549 the French had appointed him lieutenant-general of the Scottish army and were paying him a pension to provide 800 light horse. An ally of Mary of Guise, the queen dowager, against Arran in 1544, Cassillis accompanied her to France in 1550 for her meeting with Henri II, and in October 1552 agreed with the earl of Angus and others to support her against Arran (now duc de Chatelherault). After she had become regent on 12 April 1554, Cassillis was rewarded on the 20th with the office of lord treasurer. 
Although he was firmly against a war with England in the French interest in 1557, Cassillis was one of the eight Scottish commissioners appointed at the end of that year to negotiate in Paris for the marriage of Mary, queen of Scots, to the dauphin, Francois. The nuptials were duly celebrated on 24 April 1558 but ultimately proved fatal for several of the Scots who had negotiated them. A dispute as to whether the dauphin should have the Scottish crown matrimonial soured their mission, and as they were returning home four of the commissioners died. Almost inevitably there were suspicions of poison. Cassillis made his will on 8 November and died at Dieppe on the 28th. His body was taken back to Scotland for burial at Maybole, Ayrshire. His eldest son, Gilbert Kennedy, succeeded to the earldom. 


@@@@@


doc= 15369


Kennedy, Gilbert, fourth earl of Cassillis (c.1541-1576), nobleman, was the eldest of five children of Gilbert Kennedy, third earl of Cassillis (c.1517-1558), and his wife, Margaret ('c'.1520-1596), daughter of Alexander Kennedy of Bargany. He was under age in November 1558 when his father -- in whose absence he first sat in parliament as master of Cassillis -- died in France, and he was not served heir until 16 October 1562. On 10 February 1559 he succeeded his father as a gentleman of the bedchamber to Henri II of France. The English ambassador reported him, in August 1561, 'that Sunday at the preaching and the Monday at the Mass: it is said that since he has repented it and this is but Tuesday' ('CSP Scot.', '1547-63', p. 547). Despite such inconsistency, Cassillis initially resisted reform, guided by his uncle Quintin Kennedy, abbot of Crossraguel. His eventual conversion to the protestant faith, in August 1566, is attributed to Margaret ('c'.1545-1626), only daughter of John Lyon, seventh Lord Glamis, whom he married on 30 September. They had two sons, John Kennedy, fifth earl of Cassillis, and Hew, master of Cassillis. 
Cassillis's relative youth precluded any significant participation in politics until the later years of Mary Stuart's reign. He sat on the assize which in April 1567 acquitted the earl of Bothwell of Lord Darnley's murder, signed the so-called Ainslie bond shortly afterwards in favour of Bothwell's marriage to Mary, but joined the confederacy opposing the royal couple at Carberry Hill on 15 June. Following Mary's escape from Lochleven Castle on 2 May 1568, he signed the Hamilton bond, and on 13 May fought for her at Langside, where his brother Sir Thomas Kennedy of Culzean was taken prisoner. After the queen's flight to England he remained loyal to her, though he entertained a genuine respect for the regent Moray, and acted as pallbearer at his funeral. 
Cassillis achieved notoriety when he attempted to resolve a long-running dispute over the ownership of the lands of Crossraguel Abbey by roasting their commendator (lay proprietor) in the black vault of Dunure Castle. The abbey had been in Kennedy hands since 1524, but following the death of Abbot Quintin in August 1564 the crown intervened to appoint Allan Stewart as commendator. Cassillis held a five-year lease of the abbacy set to expire at Whitsun 1569 and when he attended the 1566 celebration of Candlemas in Holyrood chapel, his display of devotion was rewarded with a further nineteen-year lease, in terms which appeared to contradict the earlier grant to Stewart. However, the new commendator, intent on diverting lands to his brother Sir James Stewart of Cardonald, proved unreceptive to Cassillis's attempts to buy him out. Allan Stewart was lured to Dunure Castle on 29 August 1570. When he refused to dispone the lands in Cassillis's favour, so Stewart alleged, he was carried to the black vault, where he was stripped below the waist and his feet set between an iron chimney and a fire until he complied with the earl's demands. His refusal to ratify the relevant charters a week later saw him put back over the fire. He was finally rescued in November 1570 by men of the sheriffdom led by Cassillis's uncle Sir Thomas Kennedy of Bargany. The leader of King James's party in Carrick, Bargany had himself detained the commendator in the previous year, in pursuit of a share of the Crossraguel lands. 
Cassillis's attempts to reassert his authority in Ayrshire were arrested when the regent Lennox descended on Carrick, and he was forced to enter himself in ward at Stirling on 15 April 1571, thus effectively ending his support for the queen. He rejoined the privy council under the regent Mar on 7 September. Cassillis subsequently acquired the Crossraguel estates by purchase. His violence was condemned by opponents of the Marian cause, but his actions consolidated his family's grip on southern Ayrshire, where he was popularly known as the King of Carrick. He had earlier secured the lands of Glenluce Abbey at the expense of Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar. In 1576 his horse fell with him as it crossed a bridge near Glasgow. He was carried to Edinburgh, where he died on 12 December. He was buried in Maybole collegiate church. 


@@@@@


doc= 15370


Kennedy, Gilbert (1678-1745), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster, son of Gilbert Kennedy (died 1689), who was successively minister of Girvan, Ayrshire, and Dundonald, co. Down, was born at Dundonald. In 1697 he entered the University of Glasgow. He was probably in Ireland by late 1701 and was licensed by the presbytery of Armagh on 17 November 1701. On 23 March 1704 he was ordained by the presbytery of Armagh as minister of the united charges of Donaghcloney and Tullylish, and, during the first subscription controversy, soon became one of the most prominent men on the orthodox side in the synod of Ulster. In 1720 he was elected its moderator. He was probably the author of 'New Light Set in a Clear Light' (1721), published anonymously in Belfast, which was intended as a reply to the 'Religious Obedience Founded on Personal Persuasion' of John Abernethy, and James Kirkpatrick's 'Vindication of the Presbyterian Ministers in the North of Ireland'. In 1724 was published 'A Defence of the Principles and Conduct of the General Synod of Ulster'. It was a reply to Samuel Haliday's 'Reasons Against the Imposition of Subscription to the Westminster Confession of Faith', and appears to have been the work of several hands, but Kennedy's name alone appears on the title-page. In 1727 he issued 'A Daily Directory Enlarged' which expanded on the devotional work of the same title published in 1680 by Sir William Waller, the parliamentarian general. It was several times republished. 'The Narrative of the Non-Subscribers Examined' (1731) has also been attributed to Kennedy, but on insufficient evidence. A long correspondence between him and John Abernethy is among Wodrow's papers in the National Library of Scotland, Edinburgh. Kennedy married Elizabeth, daughter of the Revd George Lang of Newry; they had four sons and three daughters. He died on 8 July 1745, probably at Tullylish, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 15371


Kennedy, Grace (1782-1825), novelist, was born at Pinmore, Ayrshire, the fourth daughter of Robert Kennedy (died 1790) and Robina, daughter of John Vans Agnew of Barnbarroch, Galloway. Vans Kennedy was her brother. Heavy financial losses forced the family to move to Edinburgh while Grace was still a child. Here she was brought up under the instruction of her mother, a devout evangelical protestant. Being of a very retiring disposition, she took no share in the ordinary amusements of society. But her cheerful temper and intellectual attainments made her a delightful companion among intimate friends. She showed an active interest for many years in the education of children, and was led to writing fiction as a means to serve God. 
Grace Kennedy's novels (at least eight) were all published anonymously and rapidly in the early 1820s, and met with considerable success, being reissued late into the nineteenth century, often in religious reprint libraries. The first, addressed to adolescent readers and entitled 'The Decision, or, Religion must be All, or is Nothing' (1821), sets a standard. A mixture of conduct-book instruction and dramatically executed scenes, it tells of a young girl's entrance into London society and her rejection of it in favour of religious duty. 'Anna Ross: a Story for Children' (1823) replaces the rational Lockean narratives of a previous generation of writers for children, such as Anna Letitia Barbauld and Maria Edgeworth, with an unremitting focus on individual salvation. 
1823 also saw the publication of 'Father Clement: a Roman Catholic Story', the book by which she is best known. A controversial novel, it set the fashion for tales of suffering Jesuits that continued throughout the nineteenth century. Though written from the protestant viewpoint, it distinguishes between the system (to be condemned) and the individual, the sympathetic Father Clement, whose faith is at issue in a tearful deathbed conclusion. It reached a twelfth edition in 1858, and was translated into several European languages. The anonymous 'Father Oswald: a Genuine Catholic Story' (1842) declares itself an 'antidote' to Kennedy's novel, while 'Father Clement''s reputation was still current in 1857 when Miss Pratt, a character in George Eliot's novella 'Janet's Repentance', refers to it. 
In 1824 appeared 'Andrew Campbell's Visit to his Irish Cousins' and 'Dunallan', Kennedy's longest tale, written before any of the others. After enjoying uninterrupted good health until 1824, Grace Kennedy died unmarried in Edinburgh on 28 February 1825. 'Philip Colville, a Covenanter's Story', left unfinished at her death, was published posthumously. It attempts to correct the fanatical picture of the Scottish covenanters painted by Sir Walter Scott in 'Old Mortality' (1816). A collected edition of Kennedy's works was issued at Edinburgh in 1827 in six volumes, and was reprinted at Brussels in 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 15372


Kennedy, James (c.1408-1465), bishop of St Andrews, was the third son of a much married mother, Mary Stewart (died after 1458), daughter of Robert III, and her second husband, Sir James Kennedy of Dunure (killed 8 November 1408) ['see under 'Kennedy family (per. c.1350-1513)]. Mary Stewart's various marriages -- first to George Douglas, earl of Angus (died 1403), and, after Kennedy, to Sir William Graham of Montrose, and finally to Sir William Edmonstone of Duntreath -- meant that, from birth, her sons might expect influential support and rapid advancement. In spite of occasional political reverses, James Kennedy emerged to become an important figure, as ecclesiastical statesman, diplomat, and royal adviser, in the reign of James II and the minority of his son. Being the third son, Kennedy seems to have opted for an ecclesiastical career at an early stage. He entered the University of St Andrews about 1426, supported financially by Bishop John Cameron of Glasgow and by his uncle James I. He duly took his master's degree in 1429 and was holding academic office at St Andrews the following year. 
A temporary setback then occurred. In the summer of 1431 the king suddenly arrested Archibald, fifth earl of Douglas, and Sir John Kennedy, James's eldest brother. This royal intervention may have been a drastic solution to a Kennedy family feud in Carrick; and it has recently been suggested that James and his other brother, Gilbert Kennedy ['see under 'Kennedy family (per. c.1350-1513)], with no desire to share Sir John's fate -- incarceration in Stirling Castle followed by escape into exile -- may have assisted the king in undermining John's position. Alternatively, a combination of prudence and fear may have led James to go abroad at this point to the new University of Louvain, where he matriculated in the faculty of law and graduated as bachelor of canon law some time before the end of January 1433. Returning to Scotland, he found himself again in favour, being provided anew to the subdeanery of Glasgow in the spring of 1433. Late in January 1437, when he was aged about twenty-nine, his career appeared at last to have 'taken off': against the wishes of Pope Eugenius IV, the cathedral chapter at Dunkeld, and Walter Stewart, earl of Atholl (died 1437), James I provided his nephew James Kennedy to the bishopric of Dunkeld. 
Almost at once (21 February 1437) James I was assassinated at the instigation of his uncle Atholl, and Kennedy was faced with the problems of gaining acceptance from an initially hostile pope and coping with the political perils associated with a royal minority -- for James II, in the care of the widowed queen Joan Beaufort, was only six in 1437. Astutely, the new bishop of Dunkeld threw his support behind Pope Eugenius in his struggle with the Basel conciliarists, a crucial move. By 1439 Kennedy had transformed himself into the leader of the papalist party in Scotland, receiving from a grateful pontiff first the commend of the abbey of Scone (23 September 1439) and then the richest prize of all, the bishopric of St Andrews, following the death of Bishop Henry Wardlaw in 1440. The translation was made on 1 June. Significantly, Kennedy's standing with the pope was such that he was allowed to remit only half the 3300 gold florins in common services payable on entry to St Andrews. 
Close association with the queen mother and the rump of James I's administration brought dangers for Kennedy at home, and the bishop found himself on the wrong side in the civil war of 1444-5 which culminated in the collapse of the late king's party, the death of Joan Beaufort, and the dominance of the Douglas-Livingston faction at court. The victors seem to have considered depriving Kennedy of his bishopric; his lands were harried by the earl of Crawford (an incident which led to Kennedy's cursing of Crawford, who died in the 'battle of Arbroath' a year later) and he played no further part in government for four and a half years. 
Kennedy re-emerged in the parliament of January 1450, supporting the adult James II in condemning his former keepers, the Livingstons, and lending the king money. Thereafter he went on pilgrimage to Rome to attend the jubilee celebrations, and cannot certainly be found in Scotland between 28 August 1450 and 18 April 1452. Thus he was absent when James II launched the first of his assaults on the Black Douglases, and probably returned to Scotland only after the killing of the eighth earl of Douglas, by James II himself, on 22 February 1452. Kennedy's role as royal counsellor was not therefore a dominant one -- Bishop William Turnbull of Glasgow was much more active on the royal side during the 1452 crisis -- but he performed the signal service of making St Andrews Castle available to Queen Mary of Gueldres during her third pregnancy, which ended successfully in the birth of a male heir, the future James III (May 1452). For the remaining eight years of James II's life Kennedy was a frequent witness to royal charters, an occasional parliamentarian (1452 and 1454), and an auditor of exchequer in 1452, 1455, and 1456. Yet he appears to have played no part in the king's final defeat of the Black Douglases in 1455, and he was never given a major office of state. On embassy to Bourges to take part in Scoto-Danish negotiations in the summer of 1460 he fell ill at Bruges; at about the same time (3 August 1460) James II was killed at the siege of Roxburgh, aged only twenty-nine. 
Kennedy's role in government during the early years of James III's minority was limited; he seems not to have returned to Scotland until after the first parliament of the new reign (February 1461), in which Mary of Gueldres effectively took charge of government. A running battle between the queen mother and the bishop ensued, with the latter attempting to honour his earlier promise to Charles VII of France to pursue a Franco-Lancastrian foreign policy, while Mary of Gueldres, perhaps more realistically, followed a more pragmatic line, balancing Lancaster against York in the English civil wars, and recognizing that the Yorkists were the clear victors by the early 1460s. The death of Mary of Gueldres on 1 December 1463, however, left Kennedy, for the last eighteen months of his life, in charge of the young James III. He took the king on an extended northern progress in the summer of 1464; and before he died, at St Andrews on 24 May 1465, the bishop entrusted the custody of the king to Gilbert Kennedy. 
Sixteenth-century writers, starting with John Mair (1521), would exaggerate Kennedy's role as James II's principal adviser in his struggle with the Douglases, largely because the theme of the over-mighty subject, not to mention the wilful queen mother, was one which struck a resonant chord in the troubled minority of James V. Later historians, above all A. I. Dunlop in a biographical work of massive scholarship published in 1950, would echo and develop these claims. Yet it is arguable that the true legacy of Bishop Kennedy did not lie in politics. On 27 August 1450 he founded the college of St Salvator at St Andrews, with the particular intention that it should promote the study of theology in the university. The college was liberally endowed -- its provost and twelve scholars were to be supported from the teinds (tithes) of four neighbouring parishes -- and was soon attracting members of noble Scottish families, studying at their own expense. Mair, followed by Leslie, Pitscottie, and Buchanan later in the sixteenth century, would remember this as one of Kennedy's three remarkable achievements, along with the erection in 1458 of a magnificent tomb in the chapel of his college and the possession of a huge ship, the 'Salvator', of 500 tons, greatly admired by the water bailiff of Sluys as she rode at anchor in the harbour in 1457. 


@@@@@


doc= 15373


Kennedy, James (c.1793-1827), writer, about whose early life nothing is known, published 'Glenochel', a two-volume poem, in 1810, and, having planned to be a barrister, graduated MD from Edinburgh in 1813. He became an army hospital assistant in 1814, and assistant staff surgeon in 1815. 
For most of his life, Kennedy was posted in the Mediterranean, where he was also involved in missionary and educational work. It was in Cephalonia in 1823 that he met Byron. He had received a religious education, but was not a strict Christian until university. Now he undertook to explain his faith to some sceptical friends. Byron was at the first meeting; the two became friends, and Byron subsequently had frequent conversations with Kennedy on the subject. He entrusted a little Turkish girl he intended to adopt to Kennedy and his wife, Hannah Sarah. When the poet died, Kennedy summarized their discussions in 'Conversations on Religion with Lord Byron', published with some success posthumously in 1830. 
Kennedy returned to England in 1826, spent time in Ireland, and in December was ordered to the West Indies. He died at Up Park Camp, near Kingston, Jamaica, of yellow fever, on 18 September 1827. 


@@@@@


doc= 15374


Kennedy, James (1784/5-1851), medical bibliographer, was the son of Captain John Kennedy. He was born in Scotland and spent his childhood at Tillyrie, near Kinross. He became librarian to the Glasgow Public Library (a subscription library) and was presumably responsible for the catalogue printed in 1810, which displays his lifelong tendency to over-elaboration. He celebrated his native region in 'Glenochel, a Descriptive Poem' (2 vols., 1810), including lengthy scholarly notes, and was editor of a short-lived magazine, 'The Druid' (1812). He began to attend medical classes at Glasgow University in 1810 and graduated MD in 1813 with a thesis, 'De lingua humana'. He practised as a physician at Dunning, Perthshire, until 1821, then at Glasgow, becoming an ardent phrenologist and friend of George Combe (letters in National Library of Scotland MSS 7215-7269, 7383-7388). His practice at Dunning furnished material for a series of articles in the 'London Medical Repository' between 1820 and 1826, and in 1825 he published 'Instructions... on the Management of Children'; his 'Instructions... on the management of the female constitution' was described as 'ready for the press' but was never published. 
In 1826 Kennedy moved to Tamworth, and in 1827 or 1828 he was invited to Ashby-de-la-Zouch by Edward Mammatt, agent to the marquess of Hastings, who was promoting the town as a spa. Kennedy contributed 'Remarks on the water' to T. Wayte's 'Descriptive... Guide' (1831) and in the same year published anonymously 'An Exposure of the Unphilosophical and Unchristian Expedients Adopted by Antiphrenologists', an overblown response to 'Anti-Phrenology' (1829), by Dr John Wayte of King's Lynn. He continued to contribute to professional journals and to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', but his only other publication in book form was 'A Lecture on... Cholera' (1832). His first wife was Miss Thompson, sister of Lord Hastings's secretary; subsequently he married Charlotte Hawkes of Norton Canes, Staffordshire, on 20 November 1838. There were no children. 
In 1842 Kennedy retired to Woodhouse, near Loughborough, retaining some charitable practice and serving as physician to the Loughborough Dispensary, but concentrating on his 'Athenae medicae Britannicae', a long-standing project for an author-bibliography of British medicine to 1800 (including foreign authors published in Britain). The work was accepted for publication by the Sydenham Society and in 1851 Kennedy moved up to London to supervise printing and to work at the British Museum, but he was taken ill in April after delivery of the first thirty-two pages of proofs. He died aged sixty-six on 9 May 1851, at 24 Great Russell Street, from inflammation of the bowels, and was buried at Woodhouse on 15 May. The manuscript of his bibliography, of which only the letter A was in a finished state, was presented to the British Museum by his widow on 5 August 1859 (now British Library Add. MSS 23168-23194). His library was sold at Sothebys on 11-13 December 1851, and realized $330. 4's'. 0died 


@@@@@


doc= 15375


Bailie, James Kennedy- (1793-1864), classical scholar, son of Nicholas Kennedy, a schoolmaster, was born in Ireland, and entered Trinity College, Dublin, as a pensioner in 1807, aged fourteen. He obtained a scholarship in 1810, graduated BA in 1812, was elected a junior fellow in 1817, and proceeded MA in 1819, BD in 1823, and DD in 1828. In 1823 Kennedy was appointed Donnelan lecturer in his university, and in Trinity College chapel delivered 'Ten Lectures on the Philosophy of the Mosaic Record of Creation', which he published in two volumes in 1827. He produced various classical works, including an edition of Homer's 'Iliad' (1822) and a blank verse version of the 'Agamemnon' (1823). He resigned his fellowship in 1830 on being presented to the college living of Ardtrea, co. Tyrone. In 1835 he assumed the additional surname of Bailie. In manner he was vain and pompous, and he is said to have claimed relationship with the marquess of Ailsa, which the latter declined to admit, although Kennedy offered to make him his heir on condition that the relationship was acknowledged. He died unmarried at Ardtrea on 18 January 1864, leaving his property to a nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 15376


Kennedy, Sir James Shaw (1788-1865), army officer, was born on 13 October 1788 at The Largs, Straiton, Ayrshire, second of the six children of John Shaw (died 1831), a former captain in the 76th highlanders who had served in the American War of Independence, from Dalton, Kirkcudbrightshire, and his wife, Wilhelmina Hannah Macadam, sister of John Loudon Macadam, the road engineer. James's paternal grandfather, John Shaw, sold the family estate, Dalton in Kirkcudbrightshire, before his son could inherit, and the younger John's family moved from Straiton into an old castle near Maybole, Ayrshire. James Shaw was educated at Maybole parish school and Ayr Academy. 
On 18 April 1805 Shaw became an ensign in the 43rd foot (light infantry), which he joined at Hythe, Kent, and which was training under Sir John Moore. William Napier was then a captain in the regiment. Shaw became lieutenant on 23 January 1806 and served with the regiment during the 1807 expedition to Denmark in the battle of Kioge and siege of Copenhagen. In 1808 the 43rd sailed for northern Spain under Sir David Baird, advancing to support British troops at Sahagun, shortly before Sir John Moore began his long retreat to Corunna, pursued hotly by the French. Shaw fought with the rearguard, which covered the evacuation. Back in England he suffered from a severe fever whose effects never thereafter fully left him. None the less, he returned to the Peninsula in 1809, marching with the light division from Lisbon to Talavera, where he assumed responsibility as adjutant in the 43rd. During 1809 and 1810 Shaw was aide-de-camp to Brigadier-General Robert Craufurd and took part in several actions between the Coa and Agueda rivers, being severely wounded in the elbow at Almeida on 24 July 1810. Shaw's account of this phase of the Peninsular War, preserved in a journal, has been judged 'most ample and reliable' (Craufurd, 89). During the storming of Ciudad Rodrigo (19 January 1812) he was standing beside Craufurd on the crest of the glacis, when the general fell mortally wounded. He carried Craufurd from the field, and, subsequently, conveyed Wellington's summons to surrender to the French governor. On his return to regimental duty he served with the 43rd at the siege and storming of Badajoz (5-6 April 1812) where he distinguished himself in assaulting a lesser breach, at the battle of Salamanca, and in the advance to Madrid. During Wellington's withdrawal from Madrid to winter quarters at Ciudad Rodrigo, Shaw acted as aide-de-camp to Major-General Charles von Alten, and was involved in various minor actions 'en route'. In July 1812 he was promoted captain. At the close of 1812 Shaw was declared medically unfit, returned home, and suffered another bout of debilitating fever. 
On 2 April 1813 Shaw joined the senior department of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, but in August ill health compelled him to leave. During the 1815 crisis he returned to active service as assistant quartermaster-general with the 3rd division of Lieutenant-General Sir Charles von Alten, at Quatre-Bras and Waterloo. As the only quartermaster-general's staff officer still in action with the division, on 17 June he reconnoitred its detached line of march, separate from the main force, during northwards withdrawal from Quatre-Bras across the Dyle River at Weys, 'a movement of great delicacy... in open day in presence of Napoleon's advance' (Levinge, 320). The following day (when retrospectively he would acquire a brevet majority) at Waterloo, where Alten's division had its left flank resting on the Charleroi-Brussels road above La Haye-Sainte, Shaw 'was allowed, in the presence of the duke of Wellington, to form the division in an order of battle new and unusual, that of oblongs in exchequer, to meet the formidable masses of cavalry seen forming in its front' (Levinge, 320). The oblongs, mostly formed on the two centre companies of battalions, had their faces and flanks four ranks deep; but to preserve the closest affinity to line formation each flank had only the width of a subdivision. Thus drawn up, the division withstood furious enemy cavalry assaults in late afternoon. Struck in the side and disabled for some time, Shaw had one horse killed and another wounded under him during the battle. 
For three years (1815-18), Shaw was commandant and military agent as assistant quartermaster-general at Calais with the army of occupation. He had many difficulties with the French garrison, and received the thanks of the tsar, with a diamond ring, for his services in embarking 8000 Russians during October 1818. Having been placed on half pay in the regiment on 25 March 1817, he obtained a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy (21 January 1819) following Wellington's recommendation. In 1820, at Ayr, Shaw married Sir John Whiteford's granddaughter, Mary Primrose Kennedy (died 1877) of Kirkmichael, an estate close to Maybole. When he succeeded to the estate through his wife, in 1834, Shaw added Kennedy to his surname. 
In 1826, after nine years on half pay, Shaw had become assistant adjutant-general in Belfast; later that year he transferred to Manchester, where he remained for nine years during outbreaks of civil disorder, mainly caused by dissatisfaction with working conditions. On leaving the city he was presented with a valuable service of plate by some of the inhabitants, and Sir Charles Napier dubbed his report on general principles for preserving order during periods of labour unrest 'a masterly affair' ('DNB'). Having declined Sir Robert Peel's offer of the position of first commissioner of the new Metropolitan Police in 1829, Shaw Kennedy accepted the post of inspector-general of the Irish constabulary in 1836. During his two-year tenure he raised and organized a force of 8000 men, devising his own successful system of drill and field exercise. He became a major on the unattached list on 16 July 1830, colonel (10 January 1837), major-general (9 November 1846), and lieutenant-general (20 June 1854). He was appointed colonel, 47th foot, on 27 August 1854, and promoted general on 19 August 1862. Shaw Kennedy became CB on 19 July 1838, and KCB in 1863. He also held the military general service medal (often called the Peninsular silver medal) with three clasps, and the Waterloo medal. 
Summoned from St Leonards, on 10 April 1848 Shaw Kennedy was ordered to take charge of troops, under the control of the civil authorities, in Liverpool, where Chartist demonstrations were feared. Later that year he was appointed extra general officer on the Irish staff under Sir Edward Blakeney. Indifferent health caused him to decline that post and the governorship of Mauritius proposed the following year. In 1852 Shaw Kennedy did accept command of the forces of north Britain, but persistent poor health led him quickly to resign and move to Bath. That year Sir William Napier -- his close friend whom he considered the greatest genius he had ever personally known -- referred to Shaw Kennedy's 'great intelligence, great zeal, and undaunted courage on very many occasions... He is, perhaps, with the exception of Lord Seaton, the very ablest officer in the service' (Craufurd, 8). But his weak constitution prevented any serious suggestion that he succeed Wellington as commander-in-chief or lead the Crimean expeditionary force. 
Despite his medical problems Shaw Kennedy remained tall, spare, and erect throughout his life, abstemious in habit, at once reserved and distant in manner but also gentle, kind, and modest. Unlike Napier he eschewed politics and reputedly never voted in an election. With another aide-de-camp to Craufurd, William Campbell, he edited 'Standing Orders for the Light Division', while his Peninsular journal appeared in Lord Frederick Fitzclarence's 'Manual of Outpost Duties' (1851); in 1859 he wrote 'Notes on the Defence of Great Britain and Ireland', in 1863 'Notes on Waterloo', in 1860 a brief autobiography, and in 1862 'Plan for the Defence of Canada'; all were published in 1865. 
Shaw Kennedy died of a long-standing liver complaint at 8 Royal Circus, Bath, on 30 May 1865, and was interred in a vault at Kirkmichael parish church, where his widow was also buried in 1877. Two daughters, Henrietta Shaw Kennedy and Wilhelmina Shaw, predeceased their father, but John Shaw Kennedy survived him to succeed as laird of Kirkmichael. 


@@@@@


doc= 15377


Kennedy, John, fifth earl of Cassillis (1574/5-1615), nobleman, was born in Ayrshire between October 1574 and April 1575, the son of Gilbert Kennedy, fourth earl of Cassillis (c.1541-1576), and his wife, Margaret ('c'.1545-1626), daughter of John Lyon, seventh Lord Glamis (b. c.1521, d. in or before 1559). His father dying while he was still a small child, he was placed under the tutorship first of his uncle, John Lyon, eighth Lord Glamis ('c'.1544-1579), and then of his paternal uncle, Sir Thomas Kennedy of Culzean. In 1597 he married (by contract dated 4 November 1597) Lady Jean Fleming (1553/4-1609), daughter and heir of James Fleming, fourth Lord Fleming, and widow of John Maitland of Thirlestane, former chancellor. Almost immediately, probably because of her influence at court, he became involved in national politics, being recorded on a sederunt of the privy council in January 1598 and attending conventions of the estates in June and December. In April 1599 he was appointed, through his wife's influence, lord high treasurer to James VI. He was reluctant to accept this office, the privy council charging him on 11 April to come to Edinburgh to take up his duties. Six days later, Kennedy of Culzean appeared before the council in his stead to accept the office formally on the demission of its former holder. Within a few weeks he resigned, already 40,000 merks ($26,666 Scots) out of pocket. 
Cassillis was party to the murder in Ayrshire in December 1601 of Gilbert Kennedy of Bargany, in revenge for Bargany's attempt on Cassillis's life in an ambush. In the following May, Kennedy of Culzean was murdered by Bargany's brother and, in 1603, while the earl was in England with James VI, his wife and brother were seized by Bargany's kinsmen because his killer was in their company. Although Cassillis returned on hearing of this outrage, he had little affection for his wife. On 1 November 1604, he was charged to enter Blackness Castle 'for preissing, in presens of the Counsall, to have violentlie tane his wife furth of the counsalhous' during a meeting of the privy council ('Reg. PCS', 7.16). They were in dispute over the laird of Clerkington's lease of the 'place of Lethington' (now Lennoxlove), Haddingtonshire, which belonged to the countess and which Cassillis was accused of 'violentlie takking and deteaning'. A few weeks later, the king having commended the countess to the care of the privy council, Cassillis had to enter surety of $5000 Scots and was ordered to remain west of Linlithgow ('Reg. PCS', 7.580). On 23 June 1609 the countess died, aged fifty-five, the marriage having produced no children. 
Cassillis remained active, attending conventions of the estates in 1608 and 1609 and regularly appearing on the privy council. In November 1610 he was made a justice of the peace in Wigtownshire and Kirkcudbright, and in Ayrshire. He was also involved in ecclesiastical affairs, attending the general assembly at Linlithgow in December 1606 and being appointed to the court of high commission under the archbishop of Glasgow in March 1610. His last recorded attendance on the privy council was in March 1615 and he died in October 1615. His nephew John Kennedy (1595-1668) succeeded as sixth earl of Cassillis. 


@@@@@


doc= 15378


Kennedy, John (fl. 1626-1629), poet, a Scot, published two small volumes at Edinburgh in the early part of the seventeenth century. His first work, printed in 1626, was a love tale interspersed with songs and relations in different metres and entitled 'The history of Calanthrop and Lucilla, conspicuously demonstrating the various mutabilities of fortune in their loves, with every several circumstance of joyes and crosses, fortunate exploites and hazardous adventures, which either of them sustained before they could attaine the prosperous event of their wished aimes'. The dedication to Sir Donald Mackay, from June 1628 Lord Reay of Stranever, reveals that this was the author's first production: 'the first perspicuous invention of my stirile braine'. Kennedy confesses to being 'meanly acquainted' with Mackay and seeks to mitigate his audacity with allusions to his addressee's learning, virtue, and generosity, and to the poet's own 'dutie-bound obligation'. Commendatory verses in Latin were provided by Walter Bellenden and Robert Fairley, and in English by Patrick Mackenzie. '
But view this pamphlet, and thy wilt shall finde 

Wise precepts and instructions for thy minde. 

Sweet peace of thought, the secret joy of heart, 

Chaste modest love, void of all vitious airt. 

' It was reprinted at London in 1631 as 'The Ladies' Delight'. Both editions are very rare, and references to copies can be found in the Huth library catalogue of 1880 and in the catalogue of Heber's collection of early English poetry. 
Kennedy also wrote 'A theological epitome or divine compend, apparently manifesting Gods great love and mercie towards man' (1629). This short verse exploration of 'Old Testament' narratives dwells on aspects of divine justice and mercy. Kennedy's closing appeal is for unity of purpose: '
What obligation then have we, 

Towards our gracious Lord? 

Who hath from hell thus set us free, 

O then in one accord! 

In faith, and love with hearts contreit, 

Let us our spirits raise, 

And yeeld to Father, Sonne, and Spreit, 

Thanks, Honour, Glorie, praise. 

' A copy, believed to be unique, is in the British Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 15379


Kennedy, John, sixth earl of Cassillis (1601x7-1668), politician, was the son of Hew Kennedy (died 1607), younger son of Gilbert Kennedy, fourth earl of Cassillis, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Uchtred Macdowall of Garthland. He succeeded his uncle John Kennedy, fifth earl of Cassillis (1574/5-1615), in October 1615. On 24 January 1619 he received a royal licence to travel in France, Germany, and the Low Countries 'for his instruction in languages and doing his other lawful affairs' ('Historical Account', 45). He was served as heir to his uncle on 13 December 1621. He was still under age when he was contracted on 21 December 1621 (at Edinburgh) and on 7 January 1622 (at Whitehall) to marry Lady Jean Hamilton (1607-1642), third daughter of Thomas Hamilton, first earl of Haddington (1563-1637), and his second wife, Margaret Foulis. They had a son, James, who predeceased his father, dying in 1663. The countess has been identified as the heroine of 'The Gypsy Laddie', but she was dead before some of the events depicted in the song. 
Cassillis was known as 'the grave and solemn earl' (GEC, 'Peerage') as befitted, perhaps, a zealous presbyterianism. Indeed, Gilbert Burnet, whose first wife was one of Cassillis's daughters, talked of his father-in-law's 'obstinate stiffness' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 1.96). He opposed the religious policies of Charles I in Scotland, but he maintained that this was out of zeal rather than a challenge to royal authority. This was the theme of the instrument of protest unveiled by Cassillis and Archibald Johnston of Wariston at the market cross in Edinburgh on 22 February 1638. However, there is some evidence that even at this early date he was in contact with others of a similar outlook in England with the aim of bringing both kingdoms under one reformed religion. 
Although a committed signatory of the national covenant Cassillis had to be convinced by Robert Baillie of the necessity of forcible resistance to the king. Characteristically, once convinced he entered wholeheartedly in covenanting resistance and he was present in the covenanters' camp upon Duns Law in 1639. He was named to the committee of estates appointed on 8 June 1640 to sit in the interval before parliament was due to reconvene in November 1640. When parliament eventually sat Cassillis was named to several important committees and on 17 September 1641 he was nominated by the king to the new privy council of Scotland. Following the end of the parliamentary session he was named to the most important financial interval committees, and also those concerned from January 1642 in supplying troops for the Irish campaign which were to be paid by the English parliament. When the convention of estates met from June to August 1643 Cassillis served on four of its most important committees. He duly signed the solemn league and covenant on 2 November 1643, the first occasion that a privy councillor could do so. 
Early in January 1644 the Scottish army crossed into England, where, on 20 February 1644 at 'the Scots league at Heighton', Cassillis, whose first wife had died about 15 December 1642, signed a contract to marry Lady Margaret Hay (died 1695), daughter of William Hay, earl of Erroll, and the widow of Henry Ker, Lord Ker (died 1643), eldest son of Robert Ker, first earl of Roxburghe. They had one son and four daughters. Meanwhile Cassillis was very active in the committees of the convention of estates in the first part of 1644 and on the committees of the parliament which met under the terms of the 'Triennial Act' in June 1644. In July 1644 he was named to the army section of the committee of estates, but still attended nearly half of the meetings of the Edinburgh section and most of the privy council meetings. 
Cassillis continued to be active in both parliament and the various committees set up in the intervals between sessions. When the president of the parliament, the earl of Crawford-Lindsay, was absent Cassillis was chosen vice-president of the parliament on 26 December 1645. In January 1646 he supported the 'Act of Classes' which set out the punishments for malignants and delinquents. With Crawford-Lindsay again absent Cassillis was elected president of the parliament on 6 February 1647. He was an active attender of the committee of estates between March 1647 and February 1648, although the balance of power had swung towards the duke of Hamilton and the engagement. He was not elected president of the first session of the second triennial parliament in March 1648, but attended and sometimes spoke in support of the marquess of Argyll and Johnston of Wariston. Like Argyll, Cassillis did not vote for the legislation of 11 April which paved the way for the invasion of England. With the changed circumstances following the defeat of the engagers at Preston in August 1648 Cassillis was one of the leaders of the whiggamore raid to Edinburgh which secured control of the committee of estates. Cassillis was a leading figure on the revamped committee which met on 14 September 1648. When parliament reassembled in February 1649 Cassillis supported the renewal of the solemn league and covenant and the 'Act of Classes' debarring the engagers from parliament. 
Following parliament's proclamation of Charles II in February 1649 Cassillis set sail on 17 March as the only peer among the seven commissioners sent to Charles at The Hague. He reported back to parliament on 11 June on the unsuccessful negotiations with the king. On 29 June 1649 he was admitted lord justice-general and on 3 July 1649 an extraordinary lord of session. Although Cassillis opposed the appointment of commissioners to treat with Charles at Breda in February 1650 he was duly nominated a commissioner, and in fact was elected president of the commission which met Charles II in March. On 29 April 1650 Cassillis signed the invitation to Charles to come to Scotland, but he urged the kirk to prevent the ratification of any agreement with the king because he had not taken the covenants. According to John Lamont, Cassillis attended the coronation of Charles II at Scone on 1 January 1651, but not in his robes. He attended all the meetings of the committee of estates between the coronation and the meeting of parliament in March 1651. The defeat of the Scottish army at Worcester on 3 September 1651 and the incorporation of Scotland into the English Commonwealth in October saw his retirement from political affairs. Oliver Cromwell nominated Cassillis to his other house in 1656-8, but he never took his seat. However, he was placed second behind General George Monck in the commission of assessment for Ayrshire in June 1657, and again in January 1660. 
At the Restoration Charles II restored Cassillis to his places as justice-general in August 1660 and as a lord of session. However, when parliament assembled on 1 January 1661 Cassillis declined to take the oath of allegiance unless he could add his own interpretation to it, and particularly objected to the crown's supremacy in ecclesiastical issues. He left the parliament saying 'I resolve to leave his counsels and dominions which is as ill as anything Oliver ever threatened me with' (Young, 321). By an act of 10 April 1661 he was deprived of his office as an extraordinary lord of session and barred from holding any public office. A subsequent trip to London in spring 1661 failed to retrieve his political position, or to prevent the imposition of episcopacy in Scotland, although in August he argued against the establishment of bishops. He returned to Scotland about November 1661, possibly with a royal promise that he and his family would remain unmolested by the government. Certainly in January 1664 the Scottish authorities received orders that Cassillis and his family should not be harassed for a refusal to comply with the law in ecclesiastical matters. Cassillis reciprocated this gesture in 1665 by spurning Dutch approaches to support a rebellion. Cassillis died 'at his own house in the west country', presumably Maybole in Ayrshire, in April 1668, and was succeeded as seventh earl by John Kennedy (c.1646-1701), his son from his second marriage. His wife died in London and was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields on 22 April 1695. 


@@@@@


doc= 15380


Kennedy, John, seventh earl of Cassillis (c.1646-1701), nobleman, son of John Kennedy, sixth earl of Cassillis (1601x7-1668), was born soon after his father's marriage to Lady Margaret (died 1695), daughter of William Hay, earl of Erroll, and widow of Henry Ker, Lord Ker, eldest son of the first earl of Roxburghe. He succeeded his father in 1668, 'being heir', claimed his brother-in-law Bishop Gilbert Burnet, 'to his stiffness, but not to his virtues' ('Bishop Burnet's History of his Own Time', ed. G. Burnet and T. Burnet,, 2 vols., 1724-34, 1.292). He was noted for his opposition to the religious policies of Charles II and to Lauderdale's government, and in 1670 was the sole commissioner in the Scottish parliament to vote against the act forbidding field conventicles. Cassillis refused to subscribe the bond stipulating that neither his family nor tenants would attend conventicles and, in 1678, 1500 of the 'highland host' were quartered on his estates. The earl himself was outlawed for declining to give sureties against nonconformity, and gained nothing by two journeys to London with the duke of Hamilton. Owing to financial pressures and debt, he was obliged in 1674 to sell his estates in Wigtownshire to John Hamilton, Lord Bargany, acting for Sir John Dalrymple of Stair. 
Cassillis supported William of Orange at the revolution of 1688 and thereafter took a more active part in public affairs, as a member of the privy council and a lord of the Treasury. By a marriage contract dated December 1668 he had married Lady Susan, daughter of James Hamilton, first duke of Hamilton. After her death he married, in February 1698, Mary, daughter of John Fox of Lincoln's Inn Fields. She outlived him, dying on 12 September 1746. Cassillis himself died on 23 July 1701, and was succeeded by his grandson John, eighth earl (son of Cassillis's eldest son from his first marriage). 


@@@@@


doc= 15381


Kennedy, Patrick (d. 1760), numismatist, was of Scottish birth and may have come from Aberdeen, where he had an uncle. By profession a physician, he was generally known as Dr Kennedy, and he has been referred to as John, not Patrick, apparently erroneously. According to John Nichols he resided for some time at Smyrna but by 1736 he was in London, collecting ancient coins and corresponding with others at home and abroad on numismatics. His collection, augmented by a purchase from Richard Mead, was strong in the coinage of the Hellenistic kingdoms but it was with Roman imperials that Kennedy particularly concerned himself. A special interest in the issues of the third-century British usurper emperors Carausius and Allectus, about which he corresponded with William Stukeley, George North, and others, led him into a rather ridiculous controversy. Kennedy maintained that the female figure named Oriuna on a billon coin of Carausius in Paris was the usurper's patron goddess; Stukeley held her to be his wife. Neither had actually seen the coin in question, relying instead on an engraving; in fact it was a poorly preserved specimen, reading not Oriuna but Fortuna and showing the anodyne image of the goddess Fortune. The debate did however draw attention to the unusually rich imagery of the Carausian coinage, and Kennedy's two principal contributions -- 'A Dissertation upon Oriuna' (1751) and 'Further Observations upon Carausius' (1756) -- are still of interest. He also produced a sixpenny 'Letter to Dr Stukeley' and an engraved plate of some of his coins of the two usurpers. 
Kennedy died 'at an advanced age' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 5.451) on 26 February 1760 in the Strand, London, leaving as heirs a sister, her daughters, and two cousins. His will, a highly eccentric document, is chiefly concerned with the disposition of his coins, suggesting that the first pick of his Carausian pieces be given to English buyers, though they would be 'greatly valued abroad by all the powers who collect, as France, Spain, a curious pontiff &c'. The collection was sold by Prestage on 8 and 9 May 1760; the 256 coins of Carausius and 89 of Allectus were purchased by P. C. Webb for $86 10's'. and afterwards passed into the collection of William Hunter. Kennedy's books and a collection of about 200 pictures, including two portraits of himself by Keysing, had been sold on 30 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 15382


Kennedy, John (1698-1782), Church of England clergyman and chronologist, on 10 November 1732 succeeded William Hawford as rector of All Saints', Bradley, near Ashbourne, Derbyshire, a position he retained until his death. He was the author of several controversial works on the chronology of the 'Bible', the first of which was 'A New Method of Stating and Explaining the Scriptural Chronology', published in 1751. In 1753 he drew attention to what he considered to be the errors and defects of the Revd John Jackson's chronological calculations in a work entitled 'Examination of the Reverend Mr. Jackson's 'Chronological Antiquities''. Kennedy's best-known publication was 'A Complete System of Astronomical Chronology, Unfolding the Scriptures' (1762), which contains a dedication to George III written by Samuel Johnson (Boswell refers to Kennedy as the Revd Dr Kennedy in his 'Life of Johnson'). In this Kennedy attempted to date some of the most important events of the 'Bible'. However, his calculations and conclusions were challenged by the astronomer James Ferguson and, perhaps more eloquently, by the Revd Thomas Bowen of Bristol in a series of letters in the 'Christian Magazine'. Kennedy defended his findings in a publication of 1774 entitled 'An Explanation and Proof of 'A Complete System of Astronomical Chronology'', which took the form of a series of letters to James Ferguson, but he was never able to convince a sceptical public of the reliability and accuracy of his dating. 
Kennedy died at Bradley on 4 February 1782 and was buried in the churchyard there. The inscription on his gravestone credits him with the degree of MA but his name does not appear on the lists of graduates from the English or Scottish universities. 


@@@@@


doc= 15383


John Kennedy (1729/30-1816) was apprenticed to him. Remaining in London, John subsequently established himself in Cooper's Gardens, near Shoreditch church; in Houghton Street, then Clement's Lane, Clare Market; and in Long Alley, Sun Street, Moorfields. At the height of his success he employed several assistants making violins and violas of the high German model. His instruments were mainly cheap violins (roughly made and unpurfled) with a light reddish varnish, made principally for the music shops. He died in poor circumstances at Long Alley, Moorfields, in 1816, aged eighty-six, and was buried in Shoreditch churchyard. He was married three times; the eldest son from the third marriage was 


@@@@@


doc= 15384


Kennedy, John (1789-1833), poet, was born in Kilmarnock on 3 October 1789, the son of a prosperous hand-loom weaver. After a sound elementary education under a teacher named Thomson he began work with his father. While at his loom, however, during the day he had his book conveniently placed for study, and his evenings also were occupied with literature. From 1807 to 1815 he was in the Royal Ayrshire militia, serving in both Great Britain and Ireland. Having settled again in Kilmarnock he was in frequent collision with the authorities through the vehemence of his political criticisms. In early 1820 he suffered two short periods of imprisonment as a result of his association with radicals who were plotting to muster in arms against the government. Fortunately he managed to prove his innocence. 
Eventually Kennedy qualified as a teacher. After a short engagement in Kilmarnock he was appointed schoolmaster at Chapel Green, near Kilsyth, Stirlingshire, where he settled in July 1820 with his young wife, Janet Houston, whom he had married on 14 July. He speedily made a favourable impression as a teacher while, socially, his frankness of utterance both provoked keen opposition and secured him much esteem. 
By 1820 Kennedy had published two volumes of verse and poems in several provincial periodicals. In 1826 he published 'Fancy's Tour with the Genius of Cruelty, and other Poems'. In the leading piece he studies 'what man has made of man', drawing upon sacred and profane history from the time of Cain to that of Claverhouse. Several other poems are noteworthy: that on Horace for its reminiscences and its critical opinions, while that entitled 'Andra the Bard' is practically a defence of lowland Scots as a literary instrument. All display satirical force rather than poetical grace. 
Kennedy died suddenly at Kilsyth on 4 October 1833, leaving a widow and three daughters, from a family of six, unprovided for. 'Geordie Chalmers, or, The Law in Glenbuckie', a satirical novel, was published immediately after his death. Manifestly based on personal experience, this book is valuable as a vivid, if somewhat caustic, delineation of nineteenth-century Scottish rural life. 


@@@@@


doc= 15385


Kennedy, John (1769-1855), textile manufacturer, was born on 4 July 1769 at Knocknalling, Kirkcudbrightshire, a small farm 6 miles from New Galloway which had belonged to the family for over three centuries. John's father inherited the estate from his own father; his mother came from Stirling. Both parents had some education, his father having attended college in Edinburgh. There were seven children, five sons of whom John was third eldest and two daughters. The father died when the children were young. Distance from the local school meant that the children received only occasional teaching from tutors training to be schoolmasters. Through contact with one such occasional teacher, Kennedy recognized his enthusiasm for mechanics, and this was encouraged by his mother who believed that such skills were the key to an independent life. The eldest son took over the running of the farm, and the others had to seek employment elsewhere. In February 1784 John Kennedy moved to Chowbent, near Leigh in Lancashire, to be apprenticed to William Cannan, who came originally from the parish of Kells, and was the son of a neighbour of the Kennedys. Kennedy's training covered the manufacture of textile machinery including carding engines, jennies, and water frames. On completing his apprenticeship in February 1791, he moved to Manchester and formed a partnership with Benjamin and William Sandford, fustian warehousemen, and James M'Connel, a nephew and former apprentice of Cannan, to manufacture textile machinery and undertake cotton spinning. This partnership lasted for four years, the active management of the business being undertaken by M'Connel and Kennedy, the latter taking charge of the machine department. For some years the firm was virtually the only business using Crompton's mule. Kennedy was a skilled and inventive engineer, and has been credited with devising a crucial improvement to fine spinning machinery, called double speed, which enabled much finer thread to be manufactured. This made possible the mechanization of fine spinning, marked an important advance in the quality of production, and formed the basis for the success of the business. 
In March 1795 M'Connel and Kennedy formed a new partnership with their share of the profit from the previous partnership, and a little additional capital of their own, in sum $1770, and moved to a new factory in the same Canal Street, where they remained for six or seven years. Then they built the first of their three mills in Union Street. This new partnership formed the basis for the rest of Kennedy's working life, which spanned the next three decades. Initially the firm continued to make cotton-spinning machinery for sale, but this part of the business ended around the turn of the century, although it still manufactured for its own requirements. Thereafter the spinning side of the business became the sole activity, concentrating on the production of the highest quality cotton yarn. In 1815 a survey of firms in Manchester showed that only nine companies employed over 400 workers, the largest being Adam and George Murray with 1215 workers followed by M'Connel and Kennedy with 1020. In 1798 the firm's inventory showed that it had almost 7500 spindles at work valued at $1107. By the time Kennedy retired in 1826 the number of spindles had increased to almost 125,000 and the valuation to $28,540. In 1804 John Kennedy married Mary, daughter of John Stuart of Manchester; they had one son and several daughters. The family lived in Ancoats Lane until 1806, and in Medlock until 1822, when they moved to Ardwick Hall. 
M'Connel and Kennedy was thus one of the major pioneering firms in the early phase of the Lancashire cotton industry. The firm was also distinctive in concentrating on the fine-quality market, selling their product mainly in Scotland and Ireland, and later supplying the Nottingham lace trade. Its rise demonstrates one route through the potential minefield of business growth in a volatile market situation propped up by a network of interconnected credits and debits, which brought many businesses to a speedy and inglorious end. The key to the success of this firm appears to have been risk aversion. Manufacturing their own machinery, and initially renting premises, enabled the partners to limit debt by offering discounts for cash or short credit. Vulnerability to market fluctuations was thus minimized. Ironically, such caution allowed the partners to enjoy the massive windfall gains from highly speculative ventures during the Napoleonic wars, when blockades confined trade with Europe to smuggling. This promised substantial gains if successful, but total loss if the cargo was discovered and confiscated. The capital so carefully accumulated allowed M'Connel and Kennedy to venture into this trade, and to profit substantially from it. This mixture of technical expertise, financial prudence, and commercial opportunism brought success and considerable prosperity, and allowed Kennedy to retire from the business while still in his fifties. His only son did not follow him into the firm, which was carried on by M'Connel and his sons, and the Kennedy name disappeared from the business in the 1830s. 
Kennedy devoted much of his time subsequently to following his technical and mechanical interests. He was consulted about the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, on the issue of the relative merits of stationary or moving engines, and was an umpire at the Rainhill engine trials in 1830. He was an active member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, and had four papers published in the transactions of the society on the state of the cotton trade (1815), the poor law (1819), and the influence of machinery on the working classes (1826), and a memoir of Samuel Crompton (1830). Although Kennedy was highly successful in business, Fairbairn's memoir depicts him as a rather retiring individual of a nervous disposition, prone, like his father, to depression, and whose greatest enthusiasm lay in the search for mechanical improvement. He died on 30 October 1855 at home at Ardwick Hall, Manchester, and was buried at Rusholme Road cemetery, Ardwick, Manchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 15386


Kennedy, John (1819-1884), Free Church of Scotland minister, was born on 15 August 1819 at the manse at Killearnan, Ross-shire, the son of John Kennedy, Church of Scotland minister of Killearnan and a close friend of John Macdonald of Ferintosh (the Apostle of the North), and his wife, Jessie, the daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie of Assynt, Sutherland. Their fourth son, he was educated at the parish school at Killearnan and at Aberdeen University, where he excelled in mental and moral science and chemistry, and graduated MA in 1840. He proceeded to the Theological Hall of the Church of Scotland in Aberdeen, and while there served as tutor in the family of Dr Henderson of Caskieben, Aberdeenshire. Licensed by the Church of Scotland Presbytery of Chanonry in September 1843 he, like his brother Donald, who succeeded his father at Killearnan, entered the ministry of the Free Church following the Disruption of that year. 
In February 1844 Kennedy was inducted to his only pastorate, at Dingwall, Ross-shire. On 28 April 1848 he married Mary (1819-1896), daughter of Major Forbes Mackenzie, at Fodderty. Of their four children, a girl and a boy died in infancy and twin daughters survived. Kennedy was in great demand as a preacher in both Gaelic and English -- hundreds of people attended when he participated in communion seasons -- and he was loved by young and old alike. P. Carnegie Simpson recalled that, 'As a preacher, he was a king to whom his pulpit was a throne.... His sermons were massive structures... but they literally glowed with Celtic fervour, and, as he poured them forth, he strained and soared heavenward, till at times he broke out at last into impassioned adoration' (P. C. Simpson, 'The Life of Principal Rainy', 1909, 1.442). He declined calls from Dunoon (1853), Australia (1854), Greenock (1857 and again in 1872), Tain (1857), and Renfield church, Glasgow (1863). In 1873 he became a DD (Aberdeen). Kennedy served as clerk to the presbytery of Dingwall and to the synod of Ross. During the winter of 1869-70 his health broke down, and he was off duty for periods in 1872, 1873 (when he visited Canada and America, and was impressed by the prayers of Charles Hodge and disquieted by a sermon by Henry Ward Beecher which, he thought, emphasized the fatherhood of God at the expense of sin and the need of atonement), and 1881. On 17 May 1870 the Baptist Charles Spurgeon, whom Kennedy had met while recuperating in London, preached at the opening of the new Free Church building in Dingwall. 
Kennedy's words, 'To be behind an age that is drifting away from truth and godliness is the only safe, the only dutiful position' (J. Kennedy, 'The Present Cast and Tendency of Religious Thought and Feeling in Scotland', 1902, 18), aptly indicate his stance. As his first book, 'The Days of the Fathers in Ross-Shire' (1861), makes clear, he was for 'the old paths', and, though not unaware of their weaknesses, his admiration for earlier ministers and Men (a spiritual elite in the highlands comprising elders, schoolmasters, catechists, and others of deep spiritual experience), who combined faith, experience, and practice, was deep and nostalgic; he lamented 'The fathers, where are they?' ('The Days of the Fathers in Ross-Shire', 84). 
Though a reluctant controversialist, many of Kennedy's writings were polemical. He sided with James Begg, and during 1863-73 led the highland opponents of the proposed union of the Free Church with the United Presbyterian church, both because of his commitment to the establishment over against the voluntary principle and because he suspected that the United Presbyterians were unsound on the doctrine of the atonement. He rebuked those who argued for the disestablishment of the Church of Scotland. He opposed the use in worship of 'uninspired hymns' (hymns other than metrical renderings of biblical passages) and instrumental accompaniments to singing; the organized temperance movement; Sunday schools; age- and sex-specific church organizations; soirees; Plymouthism -- 'the slimiest of all isms'; the critical views of W. Robertson Smith; and the opening of the Highland Railway on Sundays. His theological position is summed up in 'Man's Relations to God Traced in the Light of 'the Present Trends'' (1869), and his homiletic method is exemplified in his posthumous 'Expository Lectures' (1911). No arch-Calvinist who would offer the gospel to 'sensible sinners' only, Kennedy was no rampant evangelist either, being stoutly opposed to the methods of such revivalists as Dwight L. Moody: he relied on God's enabling grace to draw sinners to the Christ freely offered in the gospel. 
On his way home from a visit to Italy, Kennedy died at Bridge of Allan, Stirlingshire, on 28 April 1884, and was buried in the grounds of the Free Church in Dingwall on 1 May, more than sixty ministers and thousands of people being in attendance. 


@@@@@


doc= 15387


Kennedy, John Pitt (1796-1879), army officer and engineer, fourth son of John Pitt Kennedy, rector of Carn Donagh, co. Donegal, and afterwards of Balteagh, co. Londonderry, and Mary, only daughter of Thomas Cary of Loughash, co. Tyrone, was born at Donagh on 8 May 1796. Tristram Edward Kennedy was his brother. He was educated at Foyle College, Londonderry, under the Revd James Knox. He entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, on 6 November 1811, passed out fourth of his year in 1813, and was commissioned second lieutenant, Royal Engineers, on 1 September 1815. 
Kennedy was employed on the Ordnance Survey in Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire for a short time, and served at Plymouth, Chatham, and Portsmouth until 1819, when he was sent to Malta, and thence to Corfu in the Ionian Islands, a British protectorate from 1815 to 1863. On 6 April 1820 he was made director of public works at Santa Maura. He constructed a small harbour on the eastern side of the island, with a canal from it to the natural harbour on the west, and lengthened the mole. He was promoted lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 19 June 1821, but went on half pay on 28 May 1822 when the corps was reduced in size. 
On the appointment of Major Charles Napier as military resident of Cephalonia in 1822 Kennedy became island secretary and director of public works. He there built the Guardianno and Point Theodore lighthouses, a marine parade, a quay, and a market, and he intersected the island with roads. Napier formed a high opinion of Kennedy's abilities, and wrote of his 'genius' and that he was 'an excellent architect' (W. Napier, 1.389, 318). Kennedy became Napier's best friend -- their friendship was to be lifelong -- and helped him through difficult times with his tempestuous Cephalonian mistress, Anastasia. Napier continued to attempt to advance Kennedy's career. 
Kennedy was brought back to the Royal Engineers from half pay on 23 March 1825, returned to England in 1826, and was sent to Woolwich. To retain his Cephalonia appointment he was, at Napier's request, transferred from the Royal Engineers on 20 April 1826 to the 50th foot, as lieutenant. He ceased duty at Woolwich on 14 May, and on 10 June 1826 purchased an unattached company and returned to Cephalonia. On 3 January 1828 he was appointed sub-inspector of militia in the Ionian Islands, a position he held until 1 March 1831, when he returned home and settled in Ireland. He bought land in Donegal which he believed would be a profitable investment. 
Kennedy attempted to remedy the deplorable state of the Irish peasants, and to show by small-scale practical example what might be done for the country. He devoted himself to teaching the farmers the principles of agriculture, and to setting the unemployed to cultivate wastelands. He managed the property of his nephew (also John Pitt Kennedy; 1824-1897) at Lough Ash in co. Tyrone, and the Clogher, co. Tyrone, estate of Sir Thomas Charles Style, baronet, who is not to be confused with Sir Charles's first cousin once removed, Charles Style (1777-1853) of the nearby estate of Glenmore, Stranorlar, co. Donegal, whose daughter Kennedy married in 1838. Both at Lough Ash and Clogher, Kennedy established a national school, and arranged practical agricultural lessons on a model farm of a few acres. He also divided the wastelands into reclaiming farms, and had great success. In 1833 he visited agricultural schools in Belgium, Germany, and Switzerland. On 19 June 1835 he was brought in from half pay to the 28th foot, and on 26 June he sold out to devote the money from his commission to the furtherance of his schools. Kennedy married Anna (Annie) Maria Style ('c'.1819-1902) in Dublin on 2 October 1838, and they had three sons and one daughter. 
In November 1837 Kennedy was appointed inspector-general in the Irish national education department, on the understanding that practical instruction in agriculture was to become prominent in education. Inspectors were appointed under him for each county by public competition, and he chose 60 acres at Glasnevin, north of Dublin, with a large house and garden, for a central model farm and training establishment for teachers from the district schools, who also were trained in teaching at Dublin. His plan was to have a second-class agricultural school, subordinate to the central school, in each of the four provinces, a third-class school in each county, a fourth-class school in each barony, and a fifth-class school connected with each elementary school. However, his proposals were persistently thwarted by some members of the board, and the board itself, largely officials fully occupied with their particular duties, did so little to advance agricultural and other education that on 18 March 1839 Kennedy wrote a spirited protest, resigned, and returned to Lough Ash. 
Napier (now Sir Charles) wrote a pamphlet, 'Essay Addressed to Irish Absentees on the State of Ireland', on the value of Kennedy and of his plan. In January 1838 Kennedy had declined an Australian governorship in order to continue to promote his views on agricultural education in an appointment which he described as neither lucrative nor brilliant. He was self-confident and optimistic and believed in the possibility of progress; 'his promises were alluring, and his views so forcibly stated that they always commanded attention' (Sandes, 106). Napier and his brother, William, continued to believe his potential wasted and that, given the chance, he could have achieved great change in Ireland. In 1844 William Napier wrote to Charles, 'If the government had decided to give Kennedy a free hand in his education and farming schemes in Ireland people would have been well off by now, and O'Connell would have had no following beyond his immediate ones' (P. Napier, 'Raven Castle', 29). 
Sir Robert Peel, as part of his Irish 'conciliation' policy, in November 1843 appointed a small royal commission, of Irish landowners chaired by the earl of Devon, on the law and practice of land occupation in Ireland. Kennedy was appointed -- ''without any solicitation' from myself or any friend' (Kennedy to Napier, 13 Dec 1843, Napier papers, d. 243/1) -- secretary to the Devon commission, which reported in February 1845. It heard many witnesses and received many written submissions, and the work was arduous, resulting in five printed folio volumes, with a mass of data and criticism of the social and economic system and of bad landlords, but only limited proposals for legislation, including compensation for tenants' improvements. In November 1845 Peel, responding to the Irish potato blight, appointed the temporary relief commission, comprising some of the most influential and able members of the Irish administration, to supervise the local relief committees and their distribution of the grain the government had purchased overseas. Possibly because Sir Charles Napier wrote to Peel on behalf of Kennedy, 'a man without a match' (P. Napier, 'Raven Castle', 104), the latter was appointed secretary of the commission. 
In 1846 Kennedy was appointed superintendent of the relief works in the western division of co. Limerick under the board of works, an appointment he relinquished in September on becoming agent for Lord Devon's extensive estates in co. Limerick. He was also a director of the Waterford and Limerick Railway. In spring 1848, when excitement was great and a revolution was expected in Dublin, Kennedy volunteered to organize security measures. The city authorities gave him control over the volunteer arrangements. He divided the city into defence districts; maps were distributed showing the key points in each district, the defence of which would secure the whole. At this crisis the Dublin Orangemen offered their services to the lord lieutenant. Lord Clarendon declined, as they had passed resolutions accusing the government of encouraging popery, and demanding that Roman Catholics be suppressed. Kennedy, thinking more of the safety of Dublin than of politics, enrolled them among his volunteers, and gave them $600 to purchase arms. This was to form one of the grounds of an attack on the government in the House of Lords on 18 February 1850, in response to which Lord Clarendon defended the government, and declared that Kennedy had generously provided the money for these arms out of his own pocket without the knowledge of the government, and with the laudable intention of keeping the Orangemen loyal. 
When in 1849 Sir Charles Napier was appointed commander-in-chief in India, he offered Kennedy the post of military secretary, and obtained permission for him to re-enter the army. Kennedy was reinstated in the army on 23 March 1849 as ensign in the 25th foot, and on 4 May he was appointed to a cornetcy in the 14th light dragoons, with the local rank of major in the East Indies. He went to India with Napier, and accompanied the expedition to Peshawar to open the pass and relieve the fortress of Kohat in 1850. 
Besides his duties as military secretary, Kennedy devoted his spare time to the construction of a great military road from the plains through Simla towards Tibet, and a company of sappers was placed at his disposal. The road bore his name. In November 1850 he was appointed consulting engineer to the government of India for railways, and went to Calcutta to take charge of the railway department. He strongly opposed any break of gauge, and planned a system of railways throughout India. 
In September 1852, in a memorandum to the directors, Kennedy made proposals for a general system of railways which, he claimed, would enable reduction in the army and so financial saving, and he criticized the achievement of railway engineers in England. However, his plans were based on incorrect assumptions, one of which was that railways should run almost on a dead level and along coastlines and rivers. His proposals were condemned by the government's railway consulting engineers, who alleged his data were erroneous, he exaggerated the saving on military expenditure, and that the railways could not be built in the way he proposed. According to E. W. C. Sandes, Kennedy's proposals were 'typical of the grandiose schemes which have so often been propounded by imaginative engineers in any new field of endeavour without the collection of sufficient data' (Sandes, 107). However, Kennedy's health failed, and he resigned and returned to Britain in 1852. A minute of the governor-general, Lord Dalhousie, stated that his departure was a public loss to the government. He was promoted lieutenant on 15 March 1853, exchanged into the 42nd foot on 24 June, gazetted lieutenant-colonel in the East Indies, and placed on half pay on 11 November 1853. 
On his arrival in England Kennedy became one of the founders and the managing director and chief engineer of the Bombay, Baroda, and Central Indian Railway, and in September 1853 he returned to India, and surveyed the line. An ingenious engineer, he experimented successfully on the Surat-Ahmadabad line with special piers for railway bridges on alluvial soils, and speeded construction by standardizing his iron bridge spans. From 1854 his home was in England, and he continued active on the board of directors for the remainder of his life. In 1859 he induced the court of directors to permit him to extend the railway south to Bombay, building under difficult conditions a succession of bridges, using metal screw piles filled with concrete. An enthusiastic optimist, he underestimated the cost of building the railway. However, largely owing to his energy Bombay gained an additional outlet for trade, and better communications with the hinterlands of Broach and Surat, which produced excellent cotton. Kennedy again visited India for the company in 1863-4. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers on 3 March 1868, and in 1872 he promoted a company for building with concrete. 
Kennedy's publications included many pamphlets on Irish and Indian issues: agriculture, railways, and others. Among them were 'Instruct; employ; don't hang them, or, Ireland tranquilized without soldiers and enriched without English capital' (1835); 'Analysis of projects proposed for the relief of the poor of Ireland' (1837); 'Road-making in the hills. Principles and rules having special reference to the new road from Kalka via Simla to Kunawur and Thibet' (1850); 'Finances, military occupation, government, and industrial development of India' (1858); 'On the financial and executive administration of the British Indian empire' (1859); 'National defensive measures, their necessity, description, organization, and cost' (1860); and 'Railway gauge, considered in relation to the bulk and weight of goods to be conveyed, more especially in India' (1872). Kennedy died on 28 June 1879 at his residence, 66 St George's Square, Pimlico, London. His wife, one son, Charles Napier Kennedy, and his daughter, Mrs Florence Martin, survived him. Kennedy was a man of great ability and simplicity, unworldly and disinterested. However, living in an era of impressive technological progress, he was sometimes unrealistic and over-optimistic in his schemes. 


@@@@@


doc= 15388


Kennedy, Patrick (1800-1873), antiquarian, was born at Kilmyshall, near Bunclody, co. Wexford, the son of Patrick Kennedy. In 1807 the family moved to Castleboro, with the result that -- thanks to the patronage of the Carew family -- the boy acquired a sound education in a traditional-style school. The area at this time was rich in folklore and communal harmony, a factor which imbued all his subsequent work with a humane warmth. In 1821 he moved to Dublin to further his education, and two years later became an assistant master with the Kildare Place Society, a pioneering project devoted to interdenominational popular education. Perhaps because of the hostility which the society provoked in certain sectors of Catholic Ireland, Kennedy (a self-effacing man) finally abandoned teaching in 1843, and opened a bookshop-cum-library in Dublin's Anglesea Street. His clients included notable figures such as Sir Charles Dilke. 
Amid the modest literary revival stimulated by Isaac Butt, Samuel Ferguson, and others, Kennedy gained a reputation as a repository of folktales and local history. He collected his work using the pseudonym Harry Whitney. His principal publications in this vein are 'Legends of Mount Leinster' (1855), 'Banks of the Boro: a Chronicle of the County of Wexford' (1867), and 'Evenings in the Duffrey' (1869). Kennedy's work with less local material, for example in 'Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts' (1866) and 'The Bardic Stories of Ireland' (1871), prefigures the interest of W. B. Yeats, Augusta Gregory, and other writers of the Irish literary renaissance, while lacking their modernist appreciation of myth and the archaic world. His inclusion with Thomas Hood in 'The Book of Modern Anecdotes' (1873) encapsulates his mid-Victorian middlebrow conception of the writer as entertainer. Nevertheless, Kennedy was one of the first people in the Anglophone world to recognize the importance of the 'Kalevala' for the understanding of western folklore and tradition. 
Kennedy's friendship and business relationship with Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu contributed to his material comfort during the 1860s. His many contributions to the 'Dublin University Magazine' during Le Fanu's editorship (July 1861 to June 1869) are reflected in 'The Wellesley Index to Victorian Periodicals' (1987, 4.657-9) though the list given there includes some items attributed on slender, and often circular, evidential argument. It is certainly striking that the earliest article he claimed, writing to the Royal Literary Fund in April 1871, had appeared in the issue for September 1861, while the latest attributed to him by the Wellesley researchers appeared in May 1873, two months after Kennedy's death and four months after Le Fanu's. Both men were book lovers, with antiquarian interests. Though Kennedy has been cast as a specialist on Irish topics, his range in the 'Dublin University Magazine' included French, Breton, and even Russian literature. His influence on Le Fanu's short fiction is evident in the stories the latter published in 'All the Year Round' in 1870. Despite his modest background, his learning was both extensive and innovative, at least in the context of Victorian Dublin. 
Patrick Kennedy died of bronchitis at his home, 9 Anglesea Street, Dublin, on 28 March 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 15389


Kennedy, Quintin (c.1520-1564), abbot of Crossraguel and religious controversialist, was the fourth of the seven sons of Gilbert Kennedy, second earl of Cassillis (c.1492-1527), and his wife, Isobella Campbell, daughter of Archibald Campbell, second earl of Argyll. Possibly he was taught by George Buchanan, tutor to his eldest brother. He then matriculated at St Salvator's College, St Andrews, in 1540, and is recorded at Paris University in 1542-3. Vicar of Girvan by October 1545, he was also parish clerk of Colmonell and succeeded his brother Thomas, slain at Pinkie in November 1547, as vicar of Penpont (Nithsdale). When his uncle William Kennedy, abbot of Cluniac Crossraguel and commendator of Premonstratensian Holywood, died at some point after 23 May 1547, Quintin succeeded him at Crossraguel. The Cassillis family clearly dominated the church in the Carrick division of Ayrshire: Cassillis and Dunure (seats of the family), Colmonell, and Crossraguel were all in Carrick, and the earl was bailie of Crossraguel. 
Quintin Kennedy's election (technically postulation, as he was not a monk though presumably a priest) was confirmed on 1 January 1548 by the father abbot of the Cluniac order in Scotland. On 1 February Kennedy was installed as abbot and acknowledged receipt of all monastic property, as it had been in the keeping of his brother Gilbert Kennedy, the third earl, since Abbot William's death. On 23 April he received crown admittance to the temporalities. He also resigned his benefices at Girvan, Colmonell, and Penpont, the latter two to his brother Hugh. The evidence for his monastic status, however, is conflicting. The Crossraguel abbacy did not require Roman consistorial provision. Election and confirmation denote a regular abbot, and resigning benefices is a similar indication, but in July 1554 Julius III, at Queen Mary's petition, appointed Kennedy to be commendator of Crossraguel. The inference must be that he had never become a monk and regular abbot. 
During the next ten years Kennedy took little part in public life, though he attended the Scottish church council of 1549. He sat in parliament in April 1554, and in May he was recorded as setting out for France to have dealings with the bishop of Ross, who was already there as the queen's envoy. In the years between 1558 and 1563, however, he played an active part in Reformation disputes. In 1558 he published 'Ane Compendius Tractive', dedicated to his nephew, the master of Cassillis, in which he severely criticized abuses in the church, particularly the appointment of unsuitable men and even children to pastoral positions, but insisted that interpretation of scripture and all matters of faith and worship were to be decided by church authority only. The tract was influential and he also circulated a summary. 
The protestant John Willock preached at Ayr in the winter of 1558-9 and accepted Kennedy's challenge to a disputation on the mass in early May 1559. It did not take place. Willock claimed his opponent was unpunctual, while Kennedy asserted that Willock arrived with several hundred supporters instead of the agreed twelve on each side, whereupon Kennedy refused to debate and repeated the challenge. He was absent from the church council held at that precise time but soon after was discussing with Archbishop James Beaton means of combating the protestant reformers. 
Kennedy did not attend the Reformation Parliament of August 1560 and plainly did not accept its enactments. He was mentioned specifically in the general assembly's complaint in December 1560 about mass still being said in Ayrshire. At this time he composed 'Ane Litil Breif Tracteit' aimed at proving Christ's presence in the consecrated elements. This and two other works have survived in manuscripts dated 1561: 'Ane Oratioune' to the protestant lords of congregation, warning them against being deceived by the reformed ministers; and 'Ane Compendious Ressonyng', with the theme that the mass was instituted by Christ. 
Kennedy was declared an outlaw for non-payment of the tax of a third of the revenues of benefices which was levied in 1561 and 1562 to finance a reformed ministry, and indeed had 'deforced' (resisted) an official sent to uplift the tax. In June or July 1562 he was present at a secret meeting of Roman Catholics in Paisley, planning, it was said, a Catholic rising. In September came the incident for which he is best known: his three-day disputation at Maybole (Carrick) with John Knox on the eucharist. What is known about this comes from Knox's account but neither disputant was able afterwards to claim a clear victory. After a promising start, with Kennedy attempting to prove that the mass is a sacrifice because Christ is a priest according to the order of Melchizedek, the disputation declined into a somewhat sterile debate on the nature of Melchizedek's offering. 
At Easter 1563 there was a public celebration of Roman Catholic sacraments in Ayrshire and other western districts, in which Kennedy and Crossraguel monks were involved. Carrick remained a Roman Catholic stronghold, and Crossraguel monks all stayed Catholic. By now Kennedy's health had deteriorated badly; he had been ill the previous year and was not expected to live. He survived for a year, however, and died in July 1564, probably at Crossraguel. 
The only accusation to be made against Kennedy's character was John Knox's stricture that he had failed to instruct his flock. In fact Kennedy features little in contemporary sources and he published only one short tract, though three others survived in manuscript. Nineteenth-century publication of sources made him better known, and two tracts, recently rediscovered and printed, have revealed his eucharistic theology. In this area he made a real contribution. Though not an original thinker, he produced a simplification of late medieval theology, citing the fathers not at first hand but from recent works. His approach was less polemical than systematic, aimed at showing that the mass was identical with the last supper and was not a repetition of Calvary, but was rather the means whereby the fruits of Calvary were distributed. He used the concept of bloody and unbloody sacrifice a year before its appearance in the Council of Trent's decree. Kennedy's tracts add significantly to knowledge both of the Scottish Reformation and of literary sixteenth-century Scots. He attempted to bridge the gap between technical theology and its popular expression, and in doing so he used both traditional pulpit oratory and Renaissance rhetoric. 


@@@@@


doc= 15390


Kennedy, Rann (1772-1851), schoolmaster and poet, was the son of Benjamin Kennedy (died 1784), surgeon, and his wife, the daughter of Illedge Maddox. He was of Scottish origin, being descended from a branch of the Ayrshire Kennedys, who settled at Shenstone, Staffordshire, early in the eighteenth century. His father went about 1773 to America, to introduce inoculation, and settled at Annapolis in Maryland with his family, where they remained during and after the American War of Independence. On his father's death in 1784, Rann returned with his mother, who was of Welsh descent, to her family's estate at Withington, near Shrewsbury, where he was brought up. 
In 1791 Kennedy went to St John's College, Cambridge, where he formed a lasting friendship with S. T. Coleridge. After obtaining his degree (BA 1795 and MA 1798) he took holy orders, and accepted a mastership at King Edward's School, Birmingham, where he became second master in 1807. From 1797 to 1817 he was also curate of St Paul's, Birmingham, and from 1817 until about 1847 was its incumbent, his congregation having purchased for him the next presentation. 
In 1802 Kennedy had married Julia, daughter of John Hall (1739-1797), historical engraver, and Mary de Gilles, a French Huguenot. Their four sons also had distinguished and successful careers at Cambridge and beyond. All won the Porson prize while at university, and the three elder were senior classics (1827, 1831, and 1834). Benjamin Hall Kennedy (1804-1889) eventually became the regius professor of Greek at Cambridge, and Charles Rann Kennedy (1808-1867) was a lawyer and a classical scholar. A third son, George John (died 1847), was to become master at Rugby, while the fourth son, William James (1814-1891), was to serve as first secretary of the National Society for the Promotion of Education, as HM inspector of schools (1848-78), and as vicar of Barnwood, Gloucestershire. 
Kennedy was earnest and enthusiastic, and a determined enemy of intolerance and bigotry. He was considered to be 'one of the best classical scholars of his time' (Trott, 47), and also published several poetical works, including 'A Church of England Psalmbook' (1821), and its companion piece, 'Thoughts on the Music and Words of Psalmody as at Present in use among the Members of the Church of England' (1821). He had a great many friends in intellectual circles, chief among them being John Johnstone MD and Samuel Parr, but he also associated with Coleridge, Washington Irving, Wordsworth, James Montgomery, Henry Francis Cary, Charles Kemble, and Sarah Siddons. A poem which he published in 1817 on the death of the Princess Charlotte received the highest praise from Washington Irving, who quotes from it in his 'Sketch-book'. Irving described Kennedy as 'a most eccentric character' and 'a man of real genius... one of the queerest mortals living' (Trott, 47). 
Kennedy inherited a small property called the Fox Hollies, near Birmingham, from his cousin John Kennedy, and in March 1835 he retired from his mastership at King Edward's School. Kennedy assisted his son Charles in a translation of Virgil, published in 1849. Several of his poems were published in his sons' volumes, including the much praised lyrical poem 'The Reign of Youth' (1840; reprinted in B. H. Kennedy's 'Between Whiles', 2nd edn 1882). He died at Charles's home, 34 St Paul's Square, Birmingham, on 3 January 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 15391


Kennedy, Thomas (d. 1754), judge, son of Sir Thomas Kennedy of Kirkhill, Ayrshire, provost of Edinburgh in 1685-7, was called to the Scottish bar in 1698, and acquired a considerable practice and a high reputation for forensic eloquence and ingenuity. He held with distinction the office of lord advocate during the temporary disgrace of Sir David Dalrymple, from June to November 1714. On the accession of George I he was raised to a seat on the exchequer bench, which he held thereafter. 
Kennedy was an able judge and a man of refined tastes and wide knowledge, and his house was a centre of reunion for the cultivated society of Edinburgh. His modesty and courtesy were as remarkable as his ability. He married, on 19 August 1714, Grizel Kynynmound, widow of Sir Alexander Murray, a lady much admired for her dignity and charm. Kennedy's health declined in his later years. He died on 19 April 1754, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 15392


Thomas Kennedy (1784-1872), the best-known maker of the family. He was born in Houghton Street, Clare Market, London, on 21 January 1784. After working for some time in his father's shop, he was apprenticed to Thomas Powell (17 June 1795), and at the beginning of the nineteenth century he worked occasionally for the younger William Forster (whose son was subsequently apprenticed to him). In 1811 he set up his own business at 19 Princes Street, Westminster. From there he moved to 364 Oxford Street, nearby, where he worked for thirty-three years. Like his father, he worked a great deal for the music trade, and, being a rapid and neat (if uneven) workman, was one of the most prolific of English makers. He is credited with about 2000 instruments, including at least 300 cellos based mainly on the Amati model. His best work is of a very high quality and achieves high prices at auction (see Harvey, who also includes a plate of one of Kennedy's violins dated 1844). In June 1849 he retired from business and moved to 162 Pentonville Road, London, where he died on 24 January 1872. He was married to Jane ('b'. 1780/81), but had no family. One of his violin-making pupils was James Brown (1759-1834), a former silk weaver, who, like his son and pupil, James Brown the younger (1786- 'c'.1860), produced works of a reasonable but variable quality. 


@@@@@


doc= 15393


Kennedy, Thomas Francis (1788-1879), politician, born at Dalquharran Castle, Ayrshire, on 11 November 1788, was the only son of Thomas Kennedy of Dunure and Dalquharran, and great-nephew of Thomas Kennedy (died 1754), Scottish judge. His mother was Jane, daughter of John Adam of Blair Adam, Kinross-shire, architect. Kennedy was educated first under James Pillans, afterwards professor of humanity at Edinburgh, then at Harrow School, where he was a contemporary of Byron, and subsequently at the University of Edinburgh, where he attended Dugald Stewart's lectures and studied law, but took no degree. He was called to the Scottish bar in 1811, and in 1818 he entered parliament for Ayr burghs, which he continued to represent until his retirement from political life in 1834. A strong whig, he took from the first a prominent position in the House of Commons. In 1819 he introduced, but failed to carry, a measure for the reform of the Scottish poor law, and subsequent attempts met with no better success. He was more successful with a measure for substituting a system of ballot with peremptory challenge on the part of the prisoner for the arbitrary power which the Scottish judges then possessed, and sometimes abused, of nominating juries in criminal cases. His measure was adopted by the government in 1825 and carried into law (6 Geo. IV c. 22). Kennedy also advocated the abolition of the inquisitorial powers vested by the Scottish law in the public prosecutor, and of the Scottish law of entail. He took great interest in the salmon fisheries of Scotland, and was chairman of a committee appointed in 1824 to inquire into the laws relating to them, which initiated the measure passed in 1828 for their preservation (9 Geo. IV c. 39). In 1831 he piloted through the House of Commons the government bill providing for the eventual extinction of the Scottish court of exchequer. 
In general politics Kennedy supported the removal of religious disabilities, the extension of the franchise, and the reduction of the corn duties. He was the close friend of Henry Cockburn, Lord Minto, Jeffrey, and other eminent members of the whig party in Scotland, in concert with whom he prepared in 1830 a scheme for the extension of the franchise in that country, and gave notice of motion on the subject in the House of Commons, but withdrew it on the government's announcing their intention of introducing a comprehensive measure of reform. He forwarded to Lord John Russell for ministers' consideration a memorandum, 'Proposed reform in Scotland', which was adopted as the basis of the government's measure. In recognition of his services to the cause of reform, Grey gave him, in February 1832, the post of clerk of the ordnance, and in the following November promoted him to a junior lordship of the Treasury. 
Financial embarrassment, due in great measure to Kennedy's voluntary assumption of responsibility for his father's debts, compelled his retirement from political life in 1834. In 1837 he was appointed to the newly created office of paymaster of the civil services in Ireland, and sworn of the Irish privy council. He administered this office with great efficiency until 1850, when he exchanged it for a commissionership of woods and forests. High-handed action against several employees in this department led to complaints to the Treasury. Gladstone, as chancellor, recommended his dismissal and in 1854 Aberdeen dismissed him without a pension, an action which led to a substantial row between Russell and Gladstone. Kennedy's correspondence with Russell on the affair was published as 'Letter to... Russell from the Rt. Hon. T. F. Kennedy... with Lord John Russell's reply and remarks and correspondence' (1854). 
For the rest of his life Kennedy resided mainly on his Ayrshire estates, occupying himself with county affairs, stock-breeding, sanitation, and the application of science to agriculture. He did not, however, lose interest in politics; he approved of the reform movement of 1867-8, and of the 'Elementary Education Act' of 1870. Kennedy was chosen as an extraordinary director of the Highland Agricultural Society in 1835, and was a deputy lieutenant and a justice of the peace for Ayrshire. He married in 1820 Sophia, only daughter of Sir Samuel Romilly; they had one son. Congestion of the lungs led to Kennedy's death at his home, Dalquharran Castle, on 1 April 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 15394


Kennedy, Vans (1783-1846), army officer and Sanskrit and Persian scholar, was born at Pinmore in the parish of Ayr, Scotland, the youngest son of Robert Kennedy of Pinmore and his wife, Robina, daughter of John Vans of Barnbarroch, Wigtownshire, who on marrying his cousin assumed the name of Agnew. Kennedy belonged to an old Ayrshire family and was connected with the houses of Cassillis and Eglintoun. His father was ruined by the failure of the Ayr Bank, and had to sell Pinmore and retire to Edinburgh, where he died in 1790. The care of their numerous children, who included the writer of religious tales Grace Kennedy (1782-1825), then fell to his widow, who was a woman of great strength and ability. 
Kennedy was educated in Edinburgh, at Berkhamsted, and finally at Monmouth and was noted in youth for his studious habits. He was particularly fond of language study, rather in its theoretical and grammatical sides than in the spoken. On the completion of his fourteenth year he returned to Edinburgh, and, having obtained a cadetship in the East India Company's Bombay army, he sailed for Bombay in 1800. Shortly after his arrival he was employed with his corps, the 1st battalion of the 2nd grenadiers, against the people of the Malabar district, and received a wound in his neck, from the effects of which he suffered all his life. In 1807 he became Persian interpreter to the peshwa's subsidiary force at Sirur, then commanded by Colonel W. Wallace (died 1809). While at Sirur Kennedy had frequent opportunities of meeting Sir Barry Close and Sir James Mackintosh, both of whom greatly admired him. In 1817 he was appointed judge-advocate-general to the Bombay army, and on 30 September of the same year he contributed a paper on Persian literature to the Literary Society of Bombay, forerunner of the Bombay branch of the Asiatic Society. Mountstuart Elphinstone, who described Kennedy as the most learned man of his acquaintance, gave him the appointment of Marathi and Gujarati translator of the regulations of government, but the post was abolished a few months after Elphinstone's retirement. Kennedy was promoted to major in 1820, and held the office of judge-advocate-general until 1835, when as the result of a dispute or misunderstanding he was removed by Sir John Keane. After that he was appointed oriental translator to the government, and he held this office until his death. 
Kennedy remained a student throughout his life, and he seems to have belonged to the type of the recluse and self-denying scholar. He was described as working sixteen hours a day, and as spending all his money on manuscripts and munshis, as well as in relieving the wants of others if he felt they were the victims of injustice. He contributed several papers to the Bombay branch of the Asiatic Society, of which he served successively as secretary, president, and honorary president, and in 1824 he published at Bombay a Marathi-English dictionary. In 1828 he published in London a quarto volume entitled 'Researches into the Origin and Affinity of the Principal Languages of Asia and Europe', and in 1831 he followed this with another quarto entitled 'Researches into the Nature and Affinity of Ancient and Hindu Mythology'. These were scholarly works for their time and show energetic and independent thinking. Though their findings and hypotheses are now almost entirely superseded, they none the less both deserve attention as documents in the history of western studies in Indology, historical philology, and comparative religion. The first considers both semitic and Indo-European linguistics and makes some corrections to the assertions of other early scholars in these fields. But the erroneous conclusion of the work, based on examination of comparative vocabulary, was that Sanskrit was the parent language of Greek, Latin, and Gothic. In the second work Kennedy similarly tries to derive the Graeco-Roman, Etruscan, and Thracian religious systems from that of India. Kennedy also wrote five letters on the Puranas, and had a controversy with Horace Hayman Wilson and Sir Graves Champney Haughton on the subject of Vedanta philosophy. He published in Bombay in 1832 a work on military law, of which a second edition appeared in 1847. A list of his principal writings is appended to the biographical memoir by James Bird in the journal of the Bombay branch of the Royal Asiatic Society for 1848. Kennedy died in Bombay on 29 December 1846, and the next day was buried with due military honours at the old European cemetery in Sonepur, Bombay. He does not appear to have married. 


@@@@@


doc= 15395


Kennedy, Walter (1455?-1518?), poet, was a younger son of Gilbert Kennedy (d. in or after 1479) ['see under 'Kennedy family], first Lord Kennedy of Dunure in Ayrshire, and Katherine, daughter of Herbert Maxwell, first Lord Maxwell. Descended through his grandmother Mary, countess of Angus, from Robert III, he boasted of his kinship to James IV: 'I am the kingis blude, his trew speciall clerk' (Dunbar and Kennedy, 417). The Kennedy family possessed estates in Carrick and other parts of the south-west of Scotland, where it was very powerful and influential. Walter was the nephew of James Kennedy, bishop of St Andrews (died 1465), and his own nephew David Kennedy ['see under 'Kennedy family] became first earl of Cassillis in 1509. 
The earliest reference to Walter names him as the sixth son of Lord Kennedy in 1455 (NA Scot., Ailsa MS 66). He was educated at the University of Glasgow, where he graduated in 1476, and became MA in 1478. On 3 November 1481 he was nominated as one of the examiners for the faculty of arts (Innes, 222, 227, 236). On 24 February 1492 he acted as deputy to his brother John, second Lord Kennedy, in his hereditary office of bailie of Carrick (Thomson, 212). There is no evidence that Kennedy had a degree in law, but on 29 October 1497 he acted as legal representative for the Cluniac abbey of Crossraguel in Ayrshire (Donaldson); and was described as 'attorney' in an instrument of seisin, dated 29 November 1498 (Ailsa MS 166). It was then common for educated laymen to act on behalf of others in the Scottish courts. On 25 September 1498 he was one of the witnesses to a charter granted by Archibald, earl of Angus, to Janet Kennedy (Thomson and others, 'Registrum', no. 2457). 
Unpublished charters and documents, dated between 1504 and 1510, indicate that Kennedy possessed Glentig and other estates in Carrick and Galloway; by 1505, and probably much earlier, he was married to Christian Hynd, and had heirs, of whom two sons (at least) survived him. On 30 July 1510 he was also styled 'parson' of Douglas (NA Scot., Ailsa MS 220). Two years earlier the register of Pope Julius II (23 July 1508) recorded that the prebend of Douglas, together with a canonry at Glasgow Cathedral, were held unlawfully by 'Walter Kennedi, who claims to be a cleric' ('CEPR letters', no. 38). This evident doubt as to Kennedy's status seems justified; there is no evidence that he was ordained as a priest, and he may have remained in minor orders, which would have permitted him to marry. 
A vivid but scurrilous pen-portrait of Kennedy exists, drawn by a contemporary. In 'The Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedie', a verse quarrel (composed before 1505), William Dunbar depicts Kennedy as poor, leprous, and lice-ridden, a thieving highland 'baird', living with his wife in a remote glen. In reply Kennedy's powers of invective match those of Dunbar; he also proudly refers to his substantial properties, and asserts the claim of Erse, or Gaelic, to be 'the gud langage of this land' (Dunbar and Kennedy, 347). Carrick was then still Gaelic-speaking, but Kennedy's own poems are written in lowland Scots. 

'The Flyting' was one of the first works printed in Scotland ('c'.1508); Kennedy's other poems are preserved in the great literary miscellanies, such as the Asloan manuscript, the Bannatyne manuscript, and the Maitland folio. They include a 'ballat' in praise of the Virgin Mary, and three moral lyrics, highly penitential in tone. None can be definitely dated, although two adopt the persona of an old man. Kennedy's most substantial work, containing over 1700 lines, is 'The Passion of Christ', which is preserved in MS Arundel 285, one of the few collections of religious verse to survive from pre-Reformation Scotland. Owing much to the devotional tradition of the pseudo-Bonaventuran 'Meditations on the Life of Christ', it is a learned and complex poem. The story of the crucifixion is related to the hours of the divine office in the week before Easter; and simple narrative is punctuated by highly rhetorical passages, in which the reader is exhorted to feel compassion and contrition through contemplation of Christ's sufferings. 
Kennedy's literary reputation is inevitably overshadowed by that of Dunbar, with whom he is often coupled. Yet he was much admired by contemporary poets, such as Gavin Douglas, who styled him 'greit Kennedie' ('Palice of Honour'), and Sir David Lindsay, who praised his 'aureate' diction ('Testament of the Papyngo'). Dunbar himself, despite the insulting tone of 'The Flyting', expressed grief that 'gud maister Walter Kennedie / In poynt of dede [death] lyis veralie' (no. 21: 'I that in heill wes and gladnes'). Past scholars wrongly assumed that Kennedy must have died 'c'.1508, when these lines were published. But he seems to have survived until shortly before 18 June 1518; on that date various estates were conveyed to his son, also called Walter Kennedy, who seems, in addition, to have succeeded his father as rector of Douglas and canon of Glasgow Cathedral (NA Scot., Ailsa MS 241). 


@@@@@


doc= 15396


Kennedy, William (1799-1871), diplomatist and writer, was born in Scotland on 26 December 1799, the eldest of five sons and a daughter of an Ayrshire man who became a cotton manufacturer in Dublin and his wife, Ann Davis. Kennedy's parents died before he reached adulthood, and the Revd James Bridge, a Presbyterian minister who lived near Aughnacloy, co. Tyrone, was his guardian until Kennedy could take legal responsibility for his siblings. Kennedy attended Belfast Academical Institution, known as a training place for dissenting clergymen. His father's will stipulated that Kennedy could inherit only on becoming a clergyman and Kennedy accordingly undertook a theological course at Dr Lawson's Seminary, Selkirk. He returned to Aughnacloy and was licensed to preach on 17 December 1822, but left the ministry after a year. 
By February 1824 Kennedy lived in Dublin, tiring of monotonous Aughnacloy. He supposedly set out for Greece to join Lord Byron, but there is no firm evidence of this. By 1826 Kennedy was established in Paisley, where he became a friend of William Motherwell. In this year he published his first work, 'My Early Days', a moralizing fictional piece for children, reprinted in 1828, 1835, and 1843. On 25 March 1826 Kennedy became editor of the 'Paisley Advertiser', a post he held until 17 May 1828. In 1827 he published his first verse collection, 'Fitful Fancies', and during 1828 he and Motherwell produced the 'Paisley Magazine'. Kennedy then moved to London, resolved on becoming an English lawyer. A letter (12 August 1828) reports that 'there are two highly satisfactory things here -- constant employment and good pay' (Marshall, 18). By October he had become a student of the Inner Temple, simultaneously working for the 'Morning Journal' at 5 guineas a week. The short-lived 'Englishman's Magazine' was undertaken with Leitch Ritchie ['see 'Ritchie, (Duncan) Leitch] in 1831. Kennedy also contributed to several annuals, and published a second verse collection, 'The Arrow and the Rose' (1830), and another fictional work, 'An Only Son' (1831). 
Kennedy's historical drama, 'The Siege of Antwerp' (1838), was dedicated to the earl of Durham, a whig, who was appointed governor-in-chief of British North America in March 1838. Durham, who had known Kennedy since 1833, appointed him commissioner for inquiring into the municipal institutions of Lower Canada. At some time between 1831 and 1838 Kennedy worked in Hull, where he met his wife, whose identity is unknown. According to family tradition she was socially unacceptable. There were no children. Kennedy's attachment to his wife is recorded in a poem, 'Alla mia sposa', written on board a New York packet on 25 December 1841: '
And where thou art, the dreariest spot 

Is home, sweet home to me. 
(Marshall, 53)' After Durham's retirement, late in 1838, Kennedy travelled to America, spending some months in Texas, and after his return to England in 1839 he supported the cause of Texas in debates about its independence. In 1841 he published a two-volume work entitled 'The Rise, Progress and Prospects of the Republic of Texas'. He offered his services to Lord Aberdeen at the Foreign Office, and visited Texas again, claiming responsibility for the ratification of the slave trade treaty. Kennedy's popularity in Texas is reflected in his appointment as its consul-general in London, soon after his return in the spring of 1842. He resigned when he was offered the post of British consul to Galveston, Texas, in September 1842. Kennedy returned to England in 1847, suffering bad health. He visited Glasgow, undertaking the editorship of the third edition of Motherwell's poems. In 1849 he retired on a government pension, living first in London, then Paris. He became ill again in Paris, and was a patient in the Maison de Sante at Neuilly. He died there in the spring of 1871. He was buried in Paris, but his sister moved his remains to Caen in Normandy. Kennedy's verse was largely of the 'gift book' genre, though a few pieces reflect a more personal involvement, such as his poem 'I love the land'. He is perhaps more entitled to be remembered as a diplomat than a poet. 


@@@@@


doc= 15397


Kennedy, William Denholm (1813-1865), historical genre and landscape painter, was born at Dumfries on 16 June 1813; he received his early education at Edinburgh. At seventeen he moved to London where he entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1833. His lifelong friendship with the artist William Etty began at this time, the older artist influencing both Kennedy's style and his subject matter. The two artists even collaborated on paintings, for example, 'A Nymph Reposing' and 'A Bather' (ex Christies, 1865). 
In 1833 Kennedy sent his first pictures to the Royal Academy, 'A Musical Party' and 'The Toilet', and he continued to exhibit there almost every year until his death. In 1835 he won the academy's gold medal for a historical painting with his 'Apollo and Idas'. In 1840 he was awarded a travel allowance from the academy and journeyed to Italy, where he spent two years studying in Rome. He returned with many sketches and studies of Italian scenery. Six landscape watercolours in the British Museum relate to his Italian travels: these vibrant, lightly washed paintings are full of light and were deftly painted 'en plein air', for example, 'Castel Gandolfo' and 'Rainy Day at Baiae, Bay of Naples'. However, it does not seem that Kennedy worked up these watercolours into full studies at a later date. 
Kennedy continued to paint Italian genre scenes and literary subjects, including scenes from Byron, Spenser, and Tasso, after he returned from Italy. Pictures such as 'The Bandit Mother' (1845), 'The Italian Goatherd' (1847), and 'The Land of Poetry and Song' (1865) demonstrate the continued impact of his time there. He also made stained glass designs for Thomas Willemont, including those for the windows in St Stephen Walbrook, London, and was a good judge of etchings and engravings. He collected etchings by his contemporaries Sir Edwin Landseer, Sir David Wilkie, and Richard Parkes Bonington, as well as those after the old masters such as Paolo Veronese, Titian, Rubens, and Van Dyck. 
Kennedy died of heart disease and dropsy at his home, 26 Soho Square, London, on 2 June 1865. He was a competent but not popular artist of the nineteenth century and consequently, despite exhibiting throughout his life at the British Institution and the Royal Academy, many of his works remained in his studio and were sold after his death by Christies. The sale also included forty-nine etchings by Rembrandt -- very fine impressions of 'Christ Preaching' (called 'The Little La Tombe') and the 'Agony in the Garden'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15398


Kenneth I (d. 858), king in Scotland, was ruler of the Dalriada in western Scotland from 840, and also ruler of the Picts from 842. In the genealogy of Scottish kings his father, Alpin, occurs as a son of Eochaid, son of Aed Find, a celebrated king of Dalriada ['see under 'Dal Riata, kings of]. The Irish synchronisms (based on king-lists), in the undoubtedly correct Edinburgh text, include Alpin among 'kings in Scotland'; some modern scepticism concerning his kingship, and also concerning Aed Find's own royal descent, is a result of scribal omissions from some texts. 
Kenneth himself is first heard of in the seventeenth-century annals of the four masters. Under 835 they say that a lord of Airgialla (perhaps in the Western Isles, not the Airgialla -- Oriel -- of Ireland) 'went over to Alba [Scotland] to reinforce Dalriada at the bidding of Kenneth, Alpin's son' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.267). This would be more explicable if it were several years after 835. But although some of the four masters' material is in fact predated by as much as five years, there seems to be no textual reason why this entry should not belong, as does the rest of the year-section, to 836. In that year Eoganan, a grandson of Aed Find's brother Fergus, became king of Dalriada. Eoganan's uncle and father had recently been kings of Dalriada and, for a total of more than twenty years, of Picts as well. Eoganan (or Uven) ['see under 'Picts, kings of the] likewise appears in regnal lists for both kingdoms. 
In 839 Eoganan died in a disastrous battle against 'heathen' (probably Danes). In the Pictish kingship he was followed by one Urad who reigned for three years. The Dalriadan kingship seems to have been held by Kenneth's father, Alpin, for only one year, 839-40. It is likely enough that he died at the hands of Picts, as the late chronicle of Huntingdon says, but that is a very poor authority. The year 834 which it gives for the death of Alpin was inferred from a faulty king-list, and has no authority at all. 
The most substantial source for Kenneth is the Scottish chronicle, a reign-by-reign narrative from Kenneth to the late tenth century. He held Dalriada, it says, for two years (840-42) before he 'came to Pictavia'. Having 'destroyed' the Picts, he reigned over Pictavia for sixteen years, from 842 to 858. 
King-lists show that in the year when Kenneth 'came to Pictavia' the Pictish Urad ceased to reign, and that Urad's son Bred, who succeeded him, probably died in the same year. Three further Pictish kings are named by one group of lists, with reigns totalling six years (842-8). The last of them, Drust, was 'killed at Forteviot, or some say at Scone' (Anderson, 'Kings and Kingship', 266). This must refer to the story known in Ireland and Scotland in the twelfth century as 'the treachery of Scone', in which Pictish nobles invited by Scots to a council or feast were treacherously killed. Whatever truth there may have been in the tale, the germ of which is as old as Herodotus, it must be supposed that the death of Drust ended six years of active opposition to Kenneth. To follow tradition by describing Kenneth son of Alpin as the first king to rule over both Picts and Scots would be to simplify greatly a development which extended over more than half a century. His main political achievement should rather be seen as the establishment of a new dynasty which aspired to supremacy over the whole of Scotia, and under which the Scots so dominated Pictland that its native language and institutions rapidly disappeared. 
The Scottish chronicle says that in the seventh year of his reign (848 or 849) Kenneth 'brought relics of Saint Columba to a church that he built' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.288). In 849 relics were taken to Ireland also. Norse raids had by this time made Iona untenable. Kenneth's church was probably at Dunkeld, though later Pictish lists attributed the building of Dunkeld church to the King Constantine (or Causantin) who died in 820. The chronicle lists other events of Kenneth's reign without dates. Six times he invaded Saxonia (Northumbria), and he seized and burnt Dunbar and Melrose. But British (from Strathclyde) burnt Dunblane, while 'Danes' laid Pictavia waste 'as far as Clunie and Dunkeld' (ibid.). 
A notice of Kenneth's death in 858 is the only mention of him in the older Irish annals. The Scottish chronicle says that he died of a 'tumour', in February, at Forteviot; perhaps on Tuesday the 8th, but the reading is in doubt. He and most of his successors down to the eleventh century are said by lists to have been buried in Iona. He left two sons, Constantine I and Aed, who were kings in succession from 862, and at least two daughters: one who married Run, king of the Britons of Strathclyde, and one who married Mael Muire, who died in 913. 
Kenneth was succeeded by his brother 
Donald mac Alpin died on 13 April 862, 'in' 'palacio Cinnbelathoir', the Scottish chronicle says, but the place has not been identified. Later king-lists say that he died in 'Rathinveramon', 'the fort at the mouth of the [Perthshire] River Almond' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.291), as Skene proposed. The two places are possibly the same and only a few miles from Forteviot, which archaeological remains show could well have been a royal residence at that time. It stands above the right bank of the Water of May, a small river that joins the Earn less than a mile to the north. The chronicle does not mention Forteviot again after Donald's reign. 
Forteviot was almost certainly within Fortriu, roughly equatable with the southern half of modern Perthshire. The Irish annalists give the title 'king of Fortriu' to only four Pictish kings: two who died in 693 and 763 respectively, and Kenneth's predecessors Constantine and Oengus in the ninth century. Kenneth I is not called 'king of Fortriu'. He, his brother Donald, and Kenneth's two sons are all called 'king of Picts'. This title had very seldom been used by the annalists when writing of their own times. It may imply a claim to sovereignty over all Pictish provinces; but there is very little evidence to show how far Kenneth's or Donald's sovereignty actually extended. 


@@@@@


doc= 15399


Kenneth II (d. 995), king in Scotland, was the son of Malcolm I (d. 954); King Dubh (d. 966) was his older brother. Kenneth, who may have married a daughter of one of the Ui Dunlainge kings of Leinster, became king after the death of Culen in battle with the Britons of Strathclyde in 971 and reigned for twenty-four years and two months. He immediately plundered Strathclyde, but suffered a serious defeat at 'Moin Vacornar'. He repeatedly invaded England, on one occasion capturing a 'son of the king of the Saxons' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.512). A contemporary account of the submission of Welsh kings to King Edgar of England at Chester in 973 is elaborated in later versions to include Kenneth as one of the kings who rowed a boat with Edgar at the helm. What is more certain is that 'c'.975 King Edgar formally acknowledged Kenneth's rule over Lothian, which may have been annexed to the Scottish kingdom when Edinburgh fell to King Indulf at some time between 954 and 962. It is possible, however, that Lothian was temporarily lost to the earls of Northumbria in the last year of Kenneth's reign, 994-5. 
Kenneth killed Olaf (brother of King Culen) in 977, which apparently brought a lull for two decades in the rivalry between the two branches of the royal dynasty -- the descendants of Constantine I (died 876), to which Kenneth belonged, and the descendants of King Aed (died 878), to which Kenneth's predecessor, Culen, had belonged. Kenneth was a benefactor of the church, and founded the monastery of Brechin, in Angus, perhaps as a Celi De community: there were Celi De there until the early thirteenth century. It may, however, be conjectured that Brechin was founded for strategic reasons as much as religious motives. It is situated in the north of Strathmore, the broad and fertile valley which runs north-east from the Gowrie (north of Perth) to the Mearns (in modern Kincardineshire), and may have lain in disputed territory. Kenneth apparently had trouble in Strathmore which led eventually to his death. He allegedly killed the only son of Finguala (Finella), the daughter of Conchobar, earl of Angus, at Dunsinane in the Gowrie; and, in revenge, Finguala arranged for Kenneth's assassination in 995 at Fettercairn in the Mearns -- not 12 miles from Brechin. He was succeeded by Constantine III ['see under 'Culen]. 
With his Irish wife, Kenneth had at least one son, Malcolm II, king of Scots from 1005 to 1034. Boite mac Cinaeda was probably another son of Kenneth II (rather than a son of Kenneth III), but possibly born to a different mother. Boite had a grandson who was killed by Malcolm II in 1032, and he also had a daughter, Gruoch, successively the wife of Gille Comgain, ruler of Moray (died 1032), and of Macbeth, ruler of Moray and king of Scots (died 1057). 


@@@@@


doc= 15400


Kenneth III (d. 1005), king in Scotland, was the son of King Dubh (d. 966). When he killed Constantine III ['see under 'Culen] in 997 and became king, his victory represented the final demise of the rival branch of the royal dynasty, the descendants of King Aed (died 878). After Kenneth's triumph competition for the kingship narrowed to rival descendants of Malcolm I. In 1005 Kenneth III was killed in battle at Monzievaird (Perthshire) by his cousin Malcolm II (d. 1034), who succeeded him. A late (and debatable) source claims that he was buried on Iona. Boite mac Cinaeda, whose son or grandson was killed by Malcolm II, may have been Kenneth III's son, but was more probably the son of Kenneth II. Kenneth III's supposed son Giric was apparently the product of a copyist's error, but Kenneth probably did have a son or sons whose descendants became the 'clann' Duib (later Macduff). 


@@@@@


doc= 15401


Kennett, Basil (1674-1715), antiquary and translator, was born at Postling, Kent, on 21 October 1674, the son of Basil Kennett (died 1686), vicar of Postling and rector of Dymchurch, and his wife, Mary White. He was educated by his elder brother White Kennett (1660-1728), bishop of Peterborough, at a school at Bicester, Oxfordshire, and in the family of Sir William Glynne, baronet, at Ambrosden, near Bicester. In 1689 he entered St Edmund Hall, Oxford, under the tuition of his brother, who was then vice-principal. In 1690 he was elected a scholar of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, as a native of Kent, and graduated BA in 1693 and MA in 1696. That year he published his first and most successful work, 'Romae antiquae notitia, or, The Antiquities of Rome'. Prefaced by two original essays -- 'The Roman learning' and 'The Roman education' -- it passed through many editions, and as late as 1786 the bookseller William Lowndes purchased a thirty-second share in the rights to the book. Its elegant synthesis of the antiquarian data assembled over the previous 200 years ensured it a leading place among books on the daily life of the Romans until the nineteenth century. 
In 1697 Kennett became fellow and tutor of Corpus, and published 'The Lives and Characters of the Ancient Greek Poets'. This book, like his earlier one, was dedicated to the duke of Gloucester, son of Queen Anne, and indeed there was some talk (reported in 'Biographia Britannica') of Kennett's becoming tutor to the young prince. Between 1703 and 1705 he published translations of several French works, including 'Thoughts upon Religion' (1704, later edns, 1727, 1741) from Pascal's original, and original essays, of which 'A Brief Exposition of the Apostles' Creed' (1705, later edns, 1721, 1726) enjoyed some success. He also presided over a collaborative translation of Puffendorf's 'Law of Nature and Nations' (1703, later edns, 1710, 1717, 1729, 1749). 
In 1705 Kennett's brother White, then a canon at Salisbury Cathedral, presented him to the vicarage of Coombe Bissett, Wiltshire. The following year he agreed, again at the instigation of his brother, a leading figure in the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, to go as the first chaplain to the British trading factory at Leghorn. Nominated by royal licence dated 8 September 1706, he arrived in December. His appointment attracted attention both in England, where he was awarded an Oxford BD by decree of convocation the following February, and in Italy, where the Inquisition interfered with the execution of his duties and even, his brother's letters relate, with his personal safety. Though he had a firm ally in Henry Newton, British envoy at Florence, the political support needed to make his position tenable was long in coming. Kennett's health suffered, a fact variously ascribed to his scholarly lifestyle and, as suggested in a biographical note by White Kennett, a poison administered by the Inquisition. He soon decided to resign his post although, unwilling to abandon it before the still indecisive government sent out his replacement, he remained until February 1712. Before returning home he visited Florence, Rome, and Naples with the merchant Humphrey Chetham, and spent large amounts of money (much of it his brother's) on books, sculpture, and curiosities. He arrived back in July 1713, and in October took up another appointment arranged by his brother, as chaplain to William Wake, bishop of Lincoln. 
During Kennett's absence several smaller works of his had been published, including a translation of selections from Jean-Louis de Balzac's 'Aristippus' (1709). This caused some embarrassment for his brother, who had contributed the preface: soon after its publication a pamphlet entitled 'French Favourites' appeared, containing extracts from it arranged so as to produce a satirical commentary on the relationship between Queen Anne and the duchess of Marlborough; authorship was attributed to White Kennett, compelling him to issue a swift denial. In May 1714 Basil Kennett was elected president of Corpus Christi College, being made DD the following July. His health had not improved. He fell seriously ill in November and died of a fever in the president's lodgings on 3 January 1715. He was buried in the college chapel on 6 January. Though his will included generous bequests to his college and university, it emerged that he had died in debt, and some of his effects had to be sold. His sermons to the merchants at Leghorn were published in 1715. His letters and unpublished works, including commentaries on the 'Bible' and liturgy, 'Lives of the Latin poets', and notes on English poets, survive in his brother's collections, now subsumed in the Lansdowne manuscripts in the British Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 15402


Kennett, White (1660-1728), historian and bishop of Peterborough, was born in the parish of St Mary, Dover, on 10 August 1660, the eldest of the seven children of Basil Kennett (died 1686) and Mary, eldest daughter of Thomas White, a wealthy shipwright. His father was a storekeeper in the dockyards at Dover, but after the Restoration he was ordained and became in 1668 vicar of Postley and in 1676 rector of Dymchurch, both in Kent. 
Kennett attended local schools at Elham and at Wye, after which he was sent to Westminster School in London. On contracting smallpox he returned home and after regaining his health he spent a year tutoring the three sons of a family in Beaksbourne, Kent. He matriculated from St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 25 June 1678. A conscientious student, Kennett was tutored by Andrew Allam and was also taught by Anthony Wood, the celebrated antiquary. At Oxford he developed a lifelong fascination with historical and antiquarian scholarship. 
It was during the Exclusion crisis, while he was an undergraduate, that Kennett produced his first publication. 'A Letter from a Student at Oxford to a Friend in the Country' appeared just before the opening of parliament in 1681. The anonymous pamphlet attacked parliament for its support of exclusion and railed against papists and puritans alike. It aroused parliament's ire to the point that the vice-chancellor was ordered to identify the offending author and punish him. Fortunately for Kennett the king quickly dissolved parliament and the matter was dropped, prompting Kennett to publish a celebratory poem in which he declared 'that our King's a God on earth' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 6). 
After graduating BA on 2 May 1682, Kennett settled on a career in the church and began to study for his master's degree in January 1684. To support himself, and to make his mark as a scholar, he translated several Latin works into English, most notably Erasmus's 'Moriae encomium', which was published as 'Wit Against Wisdom, or, A Panegyric upon Folly'. On 12 October 1684 Kennett became curate and assistant schoolmaster of Bicester, Oxfordshire, where his pupils included his younger brother Basil Kennett. Having received his MA on 22 January 1685, he was ordained priest by Bishop John Fell in Oxford on 15 March. He was befriended by Sir William Glynne, who presented him to the vicarage of Ambrosden on 3 June 1685. Kennett carried out his clerical duties conscientiously, but it was a small parish and the workload was not taxing. Ambrosden's proximity to Oxford facilitated Kennett's continuing scholarly research. His translation of Pliny contained a dedication to Glynne which reiterated Kennett's arch-royalist views. 
Nevertheless, James II's pro-Catholic policies alienated Kennett. Like most of the clergy in the diocese of Oxford he refused in May 1687 to sign an address to the king or to read the second declaration of indulgence in his church. The accession of William and Mary to the throne tested Kennett's loyalty. He eventually decided to take the oaths of allegiance to the new sovereigns, arguing that he could 'abridge' his obedience to James because the king was too far away for Kennett to give him 'just tribute'; motivated also by self-interest, he recognized that his refusal would 'promote my own ruine' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 12). 
The strain imposed on Kennett from these political events was compounded by personal adversity. The barrel of his gun splintered while he was out shooting in January 1689 and a piece of metal fractured his skull. He endured painful surgery and 'a hot and distempered brain' which afflicted him for five weeks (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 11). He had a scar on his forehead and wore a patch over it for the rest of his life. Kennett married Sarah (1674/5-1694), daughter of Robert and Mary Carver of Bicester, on 6 June 1693 at Ambrosden. She died in childbirth on 2 March of the following year. Kennett was devastated and fell seriously ill for several days. He later wrote that he suffered 'so great weakness and decay of spirits that my Physician and my Friends expected nothing but death' (ibid., 256). Fifteen months later, on 6 June 1695, he married as his second wife Sarah Smith (died 1702), the sister of Richard Smith MD, of London and Aylesbury. They had two children: White Kennett (died 1740), who became rector of Burton-le-Coggles, Lincolnshire, and prebendary of Peterborough, and Sarah (died 1756), who married John Newman, of Shottesbrooke, Berkshire. 
In 1691 Kennett was appointed tutor and vice-principal at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, and moved back to Oxford. In the same year he was chosen as public lecturer and pro-proctor, and named as one of the city lecturers at St Martin's, Carfax; his sermon upon the death of Queen Mary was printed in 1695. In June 1694 he was presented by Francis Cherry, a nonjuring squire, to the rectory of Shottesbrooke, Berkshire, in the diocese of Salisbury; he retained the Ambrosden living. Shottesbrooke was then a haven for nonjurors, such as Henry Dodwell and, briefly, George Hickes, and Kennett found the environment strengthened his opposition to the rigid principles of the nonjurors. His political and theological thinking was moving towards a more latitudinarian stance. 
Release from Shottesbrooke came in 1700 when Kennett was appointed curate of St Botolph, Aldgate, by the impropriator of the parish, Samuel Brewster. Kennett secured the cure only after the incumbent, Richard Hollingsworth, was ejected and lost his suit to regain his office. As priest in a large London parish, and still in possession of his two rural livings, Kennett now enjoyed a comfortable income. He sedulously carried out his duties and his sermons were much admired; he preached before the City corporation in 1705, the House of Commons in 1706, and later that year before Queen Anne. 
Kennett's arrival in London coincided with the convocation controversy. Francis Atterbury's 'Letter to a Convocation Man' (1697) and 'The Rights, Powers, and Privileges of an English Convocation' (1700) made the high-church case that the convocation of Canterbury had legislative authority in ecclesiastical affairs; thus it was not in the power of the king -- or of the archbishops -- to call or prorogue it. Atterbury's works touched off a battle of books in convocation between 'high-flying' champions of the lower house and whiggish advocates of the episcopal upper house. The principal critics of Atterbury and his circle were William Wake, Edmund Gibson, and White Kennett. Kennett's several contributions to this debate, most notably his 'History of the Convocation of the Prelates and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury' (1702), exposed the flimsy historical basis of Atterbury's arguments and, in particular, vindicated the archbishop's authority over the lower house. He contended that such authority, rather than diminishing the church's standing in society, actually enhanced it. 
By the time convocation opened on 30 December 1701 Kennett had won the confidence of Archbishop Thomas Tenison and became his primary adviser and advocate in the lower house. He remained so in the convocations of 1702-5, 1708, and 1710-13. His task was to obstruct the high-church majority in the lower house and uphold the power of the bishops. Dabbling in newspaper journalism, Kennett contributed to the whig 'Medley' in 1711, defending the bishops against Jonathan Swift's claim in the 'Examiner' that the low-church clergy were crypto-Presbyterians out to subvert the church. The bitter divisions within convocation guaranteed that the meetings would be fruitless, and convocation was suspended in 1717. 
Kennett's defence of the upper house won him the favour of Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, who collated him to a prebend in the cathedral church of Salisbury in April 1701. And on 16 May Kennett was appointed archdeacon of Huntington, Lincolnshire, an office he held until 1720. 
Following the death of his second wife in August 1702, Kennett married Dorcas Havers (died 1743) in 1703. The daughter of Thomas Fuller, rector of Wellinghale, Essex, and the widow of Clopton Havers, a physician, Kennett's new wife proved to be a forceful character. Thomas Hearne's jaundiced view was that Dorcas 'wears the Breeches, and manages him as his Haughty, insolent Temper deserves' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 257). 
In the ideological conflict between whigs and tories Kennett robustly defended in print and from the pulpit the ministry of Marlborough and Godolphin. On 31 January 1704, the fast day to commemorate the execution of Charles I, Kennett delivered a sermon, 'A Compassionate Enquiry into the Causes of the Civil War', which supplied historical justification for the ministry's war against France: he blamed the 'French Interest and Alliance', personified by Queen Henrietta Maria, for causing the civil war (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 91). The publication of this sermon on 19 February 1704 provoked a torrent of pamphlet attacks from tory loyalists. Kennett's views of the civil war were reformulated at length in the 'Compleat History of England', published in 1706. The author's negative portrayals of the early Stuarts and his enthusiasm for the war against France ignited another round of broadsides against Kennett. On 22 November 1709, soon after the costly battle of Malplaquet, Kennett preached a sermon before Queen Anne in which he praised Marlborough's 'unblemishe'd and uninterrupted Honour' and called to task those who 'could be counted to diminish and detract from his merits' (ibid., 106). 
Eager to advance his career, Kennett cultivated the favour of whig ministers. In April 1707, angling for the deanery of Peterborough, Kennett asked Bishop William Wake to approach Lord Sunderland on his behalf. In June 1707 Kennett was made a royal chaplain at Windsor. He acquired a reputation for sycophancy, exemplified by the flattering eulogy he delivered at the funeral in Derby of William Cavendish, first duke of Devonshire and a whig grandee, whose licentiousness was notorious. This sermon prompted a new round of salvos against Kennett, most notably one by John Sharp, reader at Stepney, to which Kennett responded in 'A Vindication of the Church and Clergy of England'. This anonymously published tract expressed Kennett's opposition to 'Popery and French Power', favoured by 'a Party who have been out of humour ever since the Revolution' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 101). Kennett's loyalty to the whigs paid off when the second duke of Devonshire successfully pressed Queen Anne to nominate Kennett as dean of Peterborough, which she did on 8 January 1708. 
Kennett was drawn into the heated controversy generated by Henry Sacheverell's infamous sermon, 'The Perils of False Brethren, both in Church and State' (1709). The high-church Sacheverell identified Kennett by name as the author of the anonymously published 'Compleat History of England' and cited the work to support his claim that William of Orange was not bent on resistance to James II when he landed at Torbay in 1688. Kennett retorted, in 'A True Answer to Dr Sacheverell's Sermon', that he had made no such statement. He further defended archbishops Tenison and Tillotson and Bishop Burnet against Sacheverell's aspersions. 
The tory electoral victory in 1710 drove Kennett into further activity. His sermons and pamphlets expressed his concern to preserve the Hanoverian succession and the 'Toleration Act', and to combat the nonjuring doctrines of divine right kingship and non-resistance. Assailed by George Hickes in 1711 as an immoral pluralist, political time-server, and promoter of dissent, Kennett responded with a pamphlet, and retorted that 'I have for many years looked upon Hereditary Succession and Passive Obedience in the rigid Notions of Dr Hickes to have no Foundation in the Christian Gospel or in the English Constitution' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 117-18). 
Kennett was preoccupied with the issue of lay baptism throughout most of 1712. The high-church party had claimed in the previous year that baptism was valid only when it was conferred by an episcopally ordained minister. Such a position, Kennett wrote, constituted 'dangerous Pretensions of unchurching the Foreign Churches, and paganizing Fellow-Christians, and excluding Protestant Heirs to the Crown' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 122). He undertook historical research to uphold the validity of lay baptism, on behalf of Archbishop Tenison, who met his bishops at Lambeth Palace, where they decided against the high-church position. 
On 1 November 1713 Kennett preached a sermon at Windsor 'against Popery and Profaneness' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 125). He warned about the danger to the protestant succession before a congregation that included -- besides the queen -- the earl of Oxford, Viscount Bolingbrooke, and Jonathan Swift. Kennett observed later that Swift 'drew the eyes of many upon him, when I happen'd to mention among other corruptions of the Age, the prevailing foolishness of Wit and Humour so called' (ibid., 125). Kennett's whiggish sermons did not win him any friends at court, but he never compromised his views. A pamphlet in 1713 made the case that a monarch could not name his or her own successor in defiance of parliament. It read like a cautionary warning to Queen Anne. 
Kennett's outspokenness made him anathema to the tory high-flyers. In 1714 one of their number, Dr Richard Welton, rector of Whitechapel in London, had an altarpiece placed in his church that depicted the last supper. The painting showed Judas with a mark on his forehead and the face was clearly recognizable as that of White Kennett. People turned out in droves to admire the wicked caricature. Verses appeared lampooning the 'new false Brother' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 127) and a new round of pamphlets was published, some of which contained images from the painting. Kennett was humiliated. The whig press came to his defence. The 'Flying-Post' attacked Dr Welton and the 'Daily Courant' offered a reward for information that could lead to the prosecution of those responsible for the altarpiece. The chancellor of the diocese viewed the painting and ordered that it be taken down. 
Kennett had great expectations that the accession of George I in 1714 would rapidly advance his career, and he was disappointed when no new offices or rewards came his way. He seems to have been held back by his reputation as a controversialist -- even though on behalf of the whigs -- and by his ineptness as a courtier. The death of Bishop Burnet and the resignation of the second duke of Devonshire deprived Kennett of his influential patrons. When the see of Lincoln went to Edward Gibson in 1716, instead of to Kennett, the dean's spirits sank and he described himself as 'a forgotten man' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 135). 
Nevertheless Kennett remained a vigorous publicist for a latitudinarian church and whiggish politics. In published sermons he denounced the Jacobite rising of 1715. He continued his attacks on papists and the nonjurors in controversies with Jeremy Collier and Mathias Earbury. He was also drawn into the Bangorian controversy in 1717, when he was accused, plausibly, of having toned down before publication the sermon by Benjamin Hoadly, bishop of Bangor, entitled 'The Nature of the Kingdom or Church of Christ'. Kennett vigorously denied the charges in an open letter in the newspapers. He staunchly defended Hoadly against his high-church critics in convocation. 
Kennett's opportunity for preferment finally came in 1718 when the bishop of Peterborough, Richard Cumberland, died. William Wake, the archbishop of Canterbury, commended him to the earl of Sunderland and Kennett was nominated to the see of Peterborough on 12 October 1718. Henceforth Kennett faithfully attended the House of Lords, where he became part of Sunderland's circle in that body. Kennett spoke in the Lords in support of the ministry's bill to repeal the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts'. He aspired to be influential at court and hoped that Peterborough would be a stepping-stone to a more prestigious bishopric. But Sunderland's political decline and his death in 1722 meant that Kennett had no entree to higher office. Although Kennett continued to speak out in favour of whig policies, he now spent more time on historical scholarship and on running his diocese. 
White Kennett made a significant contribution to British historical scholarship. By the early 1690s he had joined a circle of historians at Queen's College, Oxford -- led by William Nicholson, and including William Wake, Edmund Gibson, and Thomas Tanner -- which conducted pioneering research in medieval and antiquarian studies. While at Oxford Kennett wrote 'Parochial antiquities attempted in the history of Ambrosden, Burchester, and other adjacent parts in the counties of Oxford and Bucks' (1695). Tracing the land tenures in north Oxfordshire before and after the Norman conquest, Kennett showed that a new structure of landholding was imposed by William I. The book bolstered the argument of Henry Spelman, Robert Brady, and others that the Norman conquest had produced novel legal and military institutions, namely feudalism. It also discussed lay impropriations, deaneries, and papal policies. It was the first substantial parish history and was well received, but Kennett's proposal that he and his colleagues should write a general history of medieval England fell on deaf ears. 
The convocation disputes, based on appeals to history, further propelled Kennett's research. 'The Case of Impropriations' (1704) examined the history of lay impropriations. In 1706 Kennett's massive 'Compleat History of England' (3 vols.) was published anonymously. The 'Compleat History' answered William Temple's call in 1695 for a general history of England from ancient times to the present. It was among the most ambitious and expensive publishing ventures up to that time. Thirteen booksellers collaborated on its publication and requests for subscriptions were sent throughout the provinces. Kennett was paid $150 for the work, which was edited, probably, by John Hughes. The first two volumes consisted of old chronicles; the third offered a narrative of the period from the reign of Charles I to that of William III. 
Kennett wrote his 'History' in part to refute the tory view of the English revolution and Restoration. The work chronicled the perils of 'popery', especially the arbitrary power that, Kennett argued, always attended it. Kennett made extensive use of Clarendon's recently published 'History of the Rebellion' and wanted to show that 'the noble historian' could not be appropriated by the tories (Okie, 28). Although Kennett upbraided Charles I for his laxity towards Catholics and Catholic powers, it is only with the Restoration that the work took on a consistently whiggish tone. Kennett painted a very unflattering picture of Charles II, wrote favourably of the 'Exclusion Bill', and authenticated the Popish Plot. He argued that the revolution of 1688 was based on 'Church of England principles' in the face of the popish threat posed by James II (ibid., 29). 
Kennett's narrative was embedded in copious documentation. Most of the work consists of state documents, memoirs, histories, newsletters, trials, and so forth, threaded together with the author's level-headed narrative. It broke no new ground and displayed a rather static concept of history, but was notable for its scholarship and its relatively impartial tone, notwithstanding Kennett's whiggish interpretation. 
Kennett's 'Compleat History' was generally well received, going through four reprints, and a new edition in 1719. Inevitably it provoked hostile reactions from tory writers. As late as 1740 a 700-page critique, 'The Examen', by Roger North, was published to discredit Kennett's 'pretended Complete history' (Okie, 31). 
Kennett's final work, 'A Register and Chronicle Ecclesiastical and Civil' (1726), was a massive collection of English historical documents which covered the years 1660 to 1662. Kennett intended it as an example of the kind of documentary record which could be continued by future scholars with government support. 
Despite the many hours Kennett devoted to historical and political writing, he did not neglect his considerable pastoral duties. As chaplain at St Botolph, Aldgate, he preached twice every Sunday, visited the sick, and officiated at numerous marriages, baptisms, and funerals. When a less burdensome living at the combined rectory of St Mary Aldermary and St Thomas the Apostle in the City presented itself in 1708, Kennett accepted it. 
Kennett was a latitudinarian churchman who encouraged greater toleration of dissenting protestants. Although devout, he was more interested in winning souls and in church administration than he was in theology. He was also one of those churchmen who feared that irreligion, immorality, and lawlessness were on the rise. Hence he became a leader of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) and the Society for the Reformation of Manners. He joined the SPCK in 1700 and for several years thereafter attended meetings every week. He was most active during the latter years of Queen Anne's reign in nourishing relations between the SPCK and similar organizations on the continent. He did much to promote charitable giving for the Palatinate refugees in 1709 and to defend their cause. The SPCK's project that elicited Kennett's most ardent support was the charity school movement. He promoted the growth of charity schools in Aldgate and wrote a pamphlet for the students there, 'The Christian Scholar' (1708), that was adopted by the society for schools elsewhere; it reached its twentieth edition in 1811. Kennett's anti-Catholic views can be seen here as well: 'Every Charity-School is as it were a Fortress and a Frontier Garrison against Popery' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 190). 
Kennett was in 1701 among the first members of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts and of its governing standing committee. His book 'An Account of the Society for Propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts' (1706) related the early history of the society and argued that the American colonies should have a suffragan bishop. He attended meetings of the society regularly even after becoming a bishop, occasionally serving as its vice-president. 
As archdeacon of Huntington, Lincolnshire, from 1701 to 1720, and dean of Peterborough from 1708 to 1718, Kennett was a highly conscientious and meticulous administrator. He took it as his mandate to further the 'Apostolical Cause of having All Things done decently and in order' (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 196). He upbraided clergy for their slovenly appearance, closely monitored the financial accounts of his archdeaconry and cathedral, hectored churchwardens to keep their churches in good repair, laid down a code of conduct for all employees of the cathedral church, and imposed fines on those who breached regulations. 
Kennett brought his passion for order and discipline to the see of Peterborough, which had been neglected by his predecessor. He complained in 1723 that the clergy of the cathedral church were 'most idle' and that the buildings were in disrepair (Bennett, 'White Kennett', 235). He took it upon himself to see that the cathedral prebends performed their duties faithfully. He had to deal with insubordination by the new dean, Richard Reynolds, and misconduct by the registrar, Thomas Cumberland, whom he dismissed. He undertook three episcopal visitations and several additional tours to confirm lay people. He presided over forty-four ordinations -- a higher rate than most bishops -- and made every effort to select qualified priests. 
Kennett's indefatigable devotion to the church testifies to his boundless energy and to his strong sense of moral purpose. He had firm convictions and harboured few doubts about his personal worth. He was outspoken, combative, and tactless -- traits that hindered his career. But he was also empathetic, generous, and not without charm; he had close, lasting friendships, and good working relationships with colleagues and associates. 
Personal troubles clouded Kennett's last years. He felt pained and humiliated when he found out that his daughter, Sarah, had formed a relationship with his coachman, John Newman. She became pregnant, and in December 1721 clandestinely married Newman. The marriage lasted, and father and daughter were eventually reconciled. Kennett's will designated that she receive half of his money. 
Having been unwell for months, White Kennett died on 19 December 1728 of an undisclosed illness at his St James Street town house in Westminster. He was survived by his wife, who died on 9 July 1743. He was buried behind the high altar at the cathedral in Peterborough, where a marble monument was erected in his honour. He bequeathed over 1500 books printed before 1641 to the Peterborough Cathedral Library; they are now on deposit at Cambridge University Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 15403


Kenney, Arthur Henry (1776/7-1855), Church of Ireland dean of Achonry and religious writer, was the youngest son of Edward Kenney (died 23 April 1818), vicar-choral and prebendary of Cork, and Frances, daughter of Thomas Herbert MP, of Muckross, co. Kerry. In 1790 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he was elected a foundation scholar in 1793, and graduated BA in 1795. In 1800 he proceeded to an MA, and was a junior fellow, a post which he left in 1809 to take up the college living of Kilmacrenan, Donegal. He became BD in 1806, and DD in 1812. 
On 27 June 1812 Kenney was made dean of Achonry, a post which enabled him to publish 'An enquiry concerning some of the doctrines maintained by the Church of Rome: in answer to the charge of intolerance brought by members of that church against members of the Church of England' (1818), and 'Principles and Practices of Pretended Reformers in Church and State' (1819). He resigned as dean in May 1821 in order to take up a new appointment as rector of St Olave, Southwark. Here he was popular with his parishioners and, under the initials A. H. K., edited a fifth edition of Archbishop Magee's 'Discourses on the Scriptural Doctrines of Atonement and Sacrifice' (1832) as well as a memoir of Magee, which served as an introduction to the archbishop's 'Works' in eight volumes (1842). Under his own name he also published 'Documents illustrative of the history of the period immediately preceding the accession of William III' (1827), 'The dangerous nature of popish power in these countries, especially as illustrated from awful records of the time of James the Second' (1839), and 'A comment, explanatory and practical, on the epistles and gospels for the Sundays of the year, and on those for holy days immediately relating to our Blessed Saviour' (1842). St Olave's eventually got into financial trouble and the post was abolished. He then went to live abroad for the last ten years of his life, dying in Boulogne on 27 January 1855. He was twice married, and had a son and daughter with his first wife; the son was the Revd Arthur Robert Kenney, rector of Bourton-on-Dunsmore, Warwickshire. He also had several sons and one daughter with his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 15404


Kenney, Charles Lamb (1821-1881), author and playwright, was born at Bellevue, France, on 29 April 1821, the last son of the Irish-born playwright James Kenney (1780-1849) and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Mercier ('c'.1780-1853), the widow of the playwright and novelist Thomas Holcroft. He was named after his godfather, the well-known author Charles Lamb, and, according to his acerbic rival in the theatre Sir Francis Burnand, the name 'did a great deal for him' in a public and literary life in which he moved in the most lofty of circles. 
Kenney was educated at London's Merchant Taylors' School and in his early working days went through a variety of jobs: as a clerk in the Post Office, as a playreader for Covent Garden Theatre, as an all-purpose reporter and critic for 'The Times', as publicity man for the Great Exhibition (1851), as secretary, first to Sir Joseph Paxton during the Crimean War (1855) and then to Ferdinand de Lesseps in the early days of the Suez Canal project (1856), and latterly as a journalist again, this time on 'The Standard'. 
Throughout this time Kenney also wrote -- or, more accurately, for the most part translated and/or adapted -- a number of works, both for the printed page ('Fairy Tales and Romances', 1849; 'Travels in Southern Russia', 1853) and for the theatre. While still in his early twenties he had a hand in some of the extravaganzas written by Albert Smith and Tom Taylor for the Keeleys at the Lyceum. He also further adapted Nathaniel Thomas Haynes Bayly's adaptation of a French play as 'The Spitalfields Weaver', in which the comic actor Johnnie Toole made his stage debut under the Keeleys at the Haymarket in 1852, and which remained a perennial in Toole's repertory for many years. In 1859 Kenney married Rosa Stewart in Paris, and in the same year, with Sutherland Edwards, he provided the St James's Theatre with a burlesque of the Brothers Grimm's Swan Lake tale, 'The Swan and Edgar'. 
It was another adaptation from the French, however, which gave the multilingual Kenney his most significant success. The English Opera at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden, had been struggling since the retirement of its famous managers Louisa Pyne and William Harrison, and in October 1864 a limited company fronted by the former concert promoter John Russell took over its management. Russell commissioned adaptations of Charles Gounod's 'Le medecin malgre lui' and Jacques Meyerbeer's latest hit 'L'Africaine' from Kenney before the limited company went under, at which stage Russell took over the theatre with an ambitious project of his own: the first faithfully adapted English version of a full-sized 'opera bouffe' by Offenbach to be produced in Britain. He entrusted the adaptation of 'La grande-duchesse' to Kenney. Russell's production proved a landmark, 'opera bouffe' became the rage of the English and American stage for a decade, and productions of Kenney's highly praised version of 'La grande-duchesse' were seen throughout the English-singing world for many years. 
Kenney subsequently adapted Offenbach's 'Barbe-Bleue' for Russell, 'La princesse de Trebizonde' and 'La belle Helene' for John Hollingshead at the Gaiety, Emil Jonas's zany 'Le canard a trois becs' for E. P. Hingston at the Opera Comique, and Offenbach's 'La jolie parfumeuse' for Russell's erstwhile prima donna, Emily Soldene. At the same time he continued to turn out English versions of French and Italian operas, adding to his list between 1871 and 1875 'Don Pasquale', 'La fille du regiment', 'Lucia di Lammermoor', 'Le nozze di Figaro', 'Un ballo in maschera', 'La muette de Portici', 'La favorita', 'Semiramide', 'Le domino noir', 'Ali Baba', and 'L'elisir d'amore'. He also translated the text to Verdi's 'Requiem' into English. Among his other stage works were an English edition of Leo Delibes' little 'operette' 'Six demoiselles a marier' for Drury Lane, where it was produced with Lydia Thompson in the principal role in March 1867. He revised and modernized one of the old Keeley extravaganzas as a pantomime, 'Valentine and Orson, or, Harlequin the Big Bear and the Little Fairy' (music by George Richardson), for Sefton Parry at the Holborn Theatre at Christmas 1867. Kenney's short farcical sketch 'with musical finale' entitled 'Our Autumn Manoeuvres' played as a curtain-raiser to Andrew Halliday's long-running adaptation of 'Les miserables' at the Adelphi in 1871, with Henry Ashley and Mrs Alfred Mellon featured, and his comedietta 'Maids of Honour' was produced by Horace Wigan at the Mirror Theatre in April 1875 with Fred Irish as the attraction. 
Kenney was never an enthusiastic worker -- Burnand described him as 'epigrammatically brilliant and invariably, because constitutionally, lazy' (Burnand, 2.245) -- and the onset of what would be his final illness meant that he produced little in the last five years of his life. By June 1877 he was in such straits that Lord Dunraven, Tom Taylor, and Lord Londesborough organized a benefit matinee on his behalf: Henry Kemble, Henry Neville, Charles Santley, Johnston Forbes Robertson, Henry Irving, Ellen Terry (in her London debut), Sims Reeves, Mrs Alfred Mellon, and Mrs Henry Leigh featured in 'A School for Scandal' to a packed house at the Gaiety. 
Latterly Kenney contributed spasmodically to magazines such as 'The Musical World' and published a translation, 'The Correspondence of H. de Balzac' (1878), but he spent his final years as an invalid. He died at his home in Eldon Road, Kensington, on 25 August 1881, and was buried in the family grave at Brompton cemetery on 30 August. His two children, Charles Horace Kenney (1857?-1909) and Rosa A. Kenney (1860?-1905), both had careers on the stage. 


@@@@@


doc= 15405


Kenney, James (1780-1849), playwright, was born in Ireland, the son of James Kenney ('fl'. 1760-1800), well known in English sporting circles. Nothing is known of his childhood or education, but his father was for many years manager of the Savour Vivre Club in St James's Street, London, and it was presumably he who placed Kenney in the London banking house of Herries, Farquhar & Co. Despite a diffidence which, in later life, exhibited itself as a nervous inability to make up his mind on even the most trivial issues, Kenney declared his literary ambitions in 1803 by publishing 'Society, a Poem in Two Parts, with other Poems', which made little impact. 
Kenney persisted, however, and the production at Covent Garden on 5 November 1803 of his first play, 'Raising the Wind', made his reputation. It remains his strongest claim to a place in dramatic history, above all for its creation of the charming confidence trickster Jeremy Diddler. Before submitting the play to Covent Garden, Kenney had played Jeremy Diddler in an amateur performance, but it was the ageing William 'Gentleman' Lewis who made the part, and the play, famous. 'Raising the Wind' ran for thirty-eight nights in its first season, and its success enabled Kenney to abandon the safety of the bank for the danger of a playwright's career. He was already well enough acquainted with the London theatres to have shaped his first play according to the strengths of the Covent Garden company. Not only did Jeremy Diddler slot in to Lewis's line in lounge lizards, but there was also a shrewdly comic Yorkshire servant for the popular tyke John Emery and a female grotesque for Mrs Davenport. 
It was by providing such custom-built plays for actors, singers, and theatre managers that Kenney sought to sustain his forty-year career in London. His name is linked to more than fifty pieces, and he had a hand in many others. 'Raising the Wind' was followed by three musical pieces, comic operas in the style of the day, with music by Matthew Peter King. The third of these, a comic opera in three acts called 'False Alarms', opened at Drury Lane on 12 January 1807 and ran for twenty-one nights. Its popularity was enhanced by the contribution of the singer-composer John Braham, and in particular by Braham's setting of Kenney's sentimental ballad, 'Said a Smile to a Tear'. When the taste for melodrama declared itself, Kenney supplied Drury Lane with 'Ella Rosenberg', an early example of domestic Gothic, which opened on 19 November 1807 with Mrs Siddons in the title role. On 31 March 1808 the same theatre staged his first comedy, 'The World', which ran for twenty-three nights. 'Ah! where is Kenney's wit?', asked Byron a year later in 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers', complaining that 'The World' 'tires the sad gallery, lulls the listless Pit'. Byron was not alone in perceiving in the play's popularity evidence of the destitution of contemporary comedy, but Kenney made no attempt to answer his critics. He was much liked for his good humour, and for his unwillingness to join in malicious gossip. J. R. Planche, who could not remember Kenney's 'saying a severe thing of or to anyone', recalled an occasion when his nervous friend, startled by a sudden noise, exclaimed, 'Is -- 'Heaven' broke loose?' (Planche, 1.125-6). 
Accepted into literary circles after the success of 'The World', Kenney was a regular guest of Samuel Rogers, and numbered Charles Lamb among his close friends. By 1812 he had become prosperous enough to marry, but not, perhaps, to marry as he did. Louisa Mercier ('c'.1780-1853) had become the fourth wife of the playwright-novelist Thomas Holcroft in April 1799. When Holcroft died in March 1809, Louisa was left in sole charge of their twin daughters and of two daughters from Holcroft's third marriage. She and Kenney were married on 5 March 1812, and had four further children, of whom Charles Lamb Kenney (1821-1881) is the best-known. The struggle to maintain his extended family was a given circumstance for the rest of Kenney's working life. He continued to write in a variety of dramatic genres, ranging from tragedy ('The Pledge' of 1831 was a version of Hugo's 'Hernani' and 'The Sicilian Vespers' of 1840 an adaptation of a play by Casimir Delavigne) to burlesque ('Aladdin' at the Lyceum in 1844), but his greatest successes, in association with the actor John Liston, were in farce. 'Love, Law and Physic', which opened at Covent Garden on 20 November 1812, provided Liston with the first, and most enduring, of a string of lower middle-class cockney roles, Lubin Log. It was followed, in 1814, by 'Debtor and Creditor', with Liston as Gosling. The partnership was renewed at the Haymarket on 7 July 1823, when Liston created the lovelorn cockney waiter Billy Lackaday in Kenney's 'Sweethearts and Wives', and continued at Drury Lane, where Liston played Knipper Clipper in 'Thirteen to the Dozen' (1826) and the shipwrecked cockney Bowbell in Kenney's unfairly neglected 'The Illustrious Stranger', which opened on 4 October 1827. 
At about this time, Kenney was briefly associated with Elliston in the management of Drury Lane, but his nervous disposition was unequal to the strain of theatrical in-fighting. His appearance was so affected by his anxiety that 'he was more than once taken for an escaped lunatic' ('DNB'). After his marriage to Louisa, Kenney lived for several years in St Valery-sur-Somme, where Louisa may have plumped the family income by instructing private pupils. Kenney died of heart disease at his home, 22 South Terrace, Alexander Square, Brompton, London, on 25 July 1849. That the family was suffering financial hardship is suggested by the staging of a benefit performance at Drury Lane on the day of his death. On 13 October 1849 his widow was awarded a civil-list pension of $40 a year which passed to her dependent daughters on her death on 17 July 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 15406


Kenney, Peter James (1779-1841), Jesuit, was born in Dublin, probably at 28 Drogheda Street, on 7 July 1779, the son of Peter Kenney ('fl'. 'c'.1740-1810) and his wife, Ellen, 'nee' Molloy, who ran a small business together. Kenney's known siblings were Anne Mary, who joined the convent of the Sisters of St Clare, and an elder brother, or half-brother, Michael, who set up an apothecary shop in Waterford. Peter was apprenticed for a while to a coach-maker, and was educated in the schools run for poor children and apprentices by the former Jesuit priest Dr Thomas Betagh, in cellars and back lanes in Dublin. He was impressed by Betagh and another former Jesuit, Richard Callaghan, and this influenced his choice of career. The Jesuits had been suppressed in 1773, except in Belorussia; their continuation there was formally recognized by the papacy in 1801, which gave hope of a general restoration of the order. As a result Father Callaghan sent Kenney and some other young men to Carlow College to prepare for the priesthood. From there they were sent to Stonyhurst College in Lancashire, which was run by former English Jesuits, where they commenced their noviciate. Kenney made an impression almost immediately with his ability, sound piety, and eloquence, despite suffering from asthma. Following the recognition of the society in Sicily, Kenney was sent there in 1808 to complete his studies and for the sake of his health. 
The island of Sicily was in danger of invasion by Napoleon, and depended on the British navy and British military garrison for its defence. For this reason, Kenney's ordination and that of his colleagues was brought forward: he was ordained on 4 December 1808, but remained in Sicily until 1811. It was a period of cultural and spiritual development, and his ability and general maturity so impressed the Jesuit superior that he termed him 'L'incomparable P. Kenney' (Morrissey, 64). During his time in Sicily he was chosen to act as interpreter in a British naval expedition to rescue the pope from imprisonment by Napoleon. However, the pope refused to leave Rome. Kenney and an English Jesuit friend, Thomas Glover, also acted as chaplains to Catholic soldiers and sailors in the British force on the island, many of whom were Irish. Their efforts were terminated by the intolerance of 'Scotch generals' (ibid., 58-9). Kenney's and Glover's reports about the matter gave rise to questions in the House of Commons. 
Kenney returned to Ireland on 31 August 1811 and found himself much in demand. Dr Daniel Murray, bishop of Dublin, sought his assistance at Maynooth College, the national seminary, where there were problems with morale and discipline. Under Murray as president and Kenney as vice-president, the college was transformed within a year. Kenney's sermons and spiritual meditations were written down by students and passed from hand to hand for years. In 1814 he founded Clongowes Wood College, co. Kildare, which became the leading boarding college for the middle-class Catholic population. Five years later he opened a house at Rahan, near Tullamore, in the midlands, which subsequently became St Stanislaus College, and then a small church in Dublin, which became in turn the forerunner of the large church of St Francis Xavier at Gardiner Street and of the well-known day school Belvedere College. The Jesuit order was restored universally in 1814, and Kenney was appointed superior of the Irish mission. Despite his achievements, he was considered too demanding and strict by some fellow Jesuits and was replaced after four years. His standing with the Jesuit-general, however, led to his being sent in 1819 to North America to sort out the problems of disunity among the Jesuits of different nationalities working there. 
Kenney's visitation of the Jesuits, mainly in Maryland, proved successful. He brought order into the temporal administration, introduced customs and structures which promoted order and team effort, revitalized Georgetown University, and prepared for the future by approving the sending of six young men to Rome to further their studies. On his return to Ireland, he was appointed superior once more, and soon achieved further distinction as a preacher and spiritual guide. He played a prominent part in assisting many religious congregations, and was particularly close to the founders of the new religious bodies -- the Irish Sisters of Charity, the Irish Christian Brothers, and the Sisters of Loreto. From 1830 to 1833 he went once more to the United States of America on behalf of the Jesuit-general, this time as superior of the entire mission, which by now had spread southward into the vast area then termed Missouri. They were years of endeavour, long journeys, periods of ill health, and eventual achievement. He helped to consolidate the universities at Georgetown and St Louis, promoted harmony and good order across the vast territory, established better management in the estates which had supported much of the early work, improved the living conditions of the slaves who worked the estates, and raised the question of managing without their forced labour. He also laid the ground for the renewal of the society's mission to the North American Indians. As he left Maryland was raised to the status of a province of the society, and Missouri was acknowledged an independent mission. On the day of his departure, 11 July 1833, the diary for Georgetown University contains the entry: 'Never has a man lived among us whom all without exception so loved and reverenced' (Morrissey, 338). His standing with the diocesan clergy and bishops is indicated by his name's having been put forward at different times for the bishoprics of New York, Philadelphia, and Cincinnati. 
When Kenney returned to Ireland, a very tired man, he was appointed once more the overall superior. This post he tried to combine with pastoral work at the Gardiner Street Church. It was too much. Owing to the constant demands from people, clergy, religious, and bishops, for confession, sermons, and spiritual direction, he neglected his reports to Rome and was unable to act adequately as provincial. He was removed from the position, much to his relief, in May 1836. His pastoral endeavours led to his being termed 'the modern apostle of Dublin' and 'to an incalculable extent, of Ireland at large' (Meagher, 93). In 1841 he was chosen by his fellow Jesuits to represent them at a general congregation of the procurators of the society at Rome in October. He set out despite very severe asthma and a strained heart. After a journey marked by rain, floods, and other hardships, he arrived at Rome exhausted, and after some days suffered a stroke. He died on 19 November, and was buried under the high altar at the Jesuit church of the Gesu in Rome. When the news reached Dublin on 3 December, large crowds mourned his passing. Kenney was one of the most eminent preachers, theologians, and spiritual directors in Ireland in the first half of the nineteenth century, and he also had very considerable influence as an educationist and through his foundations. His greatest contribution to the development of the Catholic church, however, was probably in the United States of America. Manuscript copies of his 'Meditations' have been preserved, as have parts of his American diaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 15407


Kennicott, Benjamin (1718-1783), biblical scholar, was born at Totnes, Devon, on 4 April 1718 and baptized there on 20 April, the son of Benjamin Kennicott ('bap'. 1688, died 1770), barber and parish clerk of Totnes, and his wife, Elizabeth Sage (died 1749/50). He was educated at the town's grammar school for seven years, as a foundation boy. Apart from his books Kennicott as a youth was passionate about bellringing; he drew up regulations for the practice of the Totnes ringers in 1742 and gave a brass eight-light candlestick for the use of the ringers in the belfry. His first appointment was that of master of the blue coat, or charity, school of Totnes, where he attracted notice by some short poems, particularly 'On the Recovery of the Hon. Mrs. Eliz. Courtenay from her Late Dangerous Illness', printed in 1743 and 1747. 
Subscriptions were opened to finance Kennicott's studies at Oxford, and mainly through the Courtenays of Powderham, Ralph Allen of Bath, and the Revd William Daddo, master of Blundells's School at Tiverton, he matriculated as a servitor from Wadham College, Oxford, on 6 March 1744. His undergraduate notes display a precocious familiarity with a comparative approach to scripture. He was Pigott exhibitioner in 1744 and 1745, Hody (Hebrew) exhibitioner from 1745 to 1747, and 'Bible' clerk from 3 May 1746. In order to be eligible for a fellowship at Exeter College, as he had not resided long enough to qualify in the usual way, he was made (in accordance with the recommendation of the earl of Arran, chancellor of the university) BA, by decree, without examination, on 20 June 1747 and was duly elected to a fellowship, which he held until 1771. His subsequent degrees were MA (4 May 1750), BD (6 December 1761), and DD (10 December 1761); he was elected FRS in 1764. In politics he was loyal to the Pelhamite whigs and benefited from their patronage. 
Having taken holy orders Kennicott was Whitehall preacher in 1753, vicar of Culham, Oxfordshire, from 21 September 1753 to 1783, chaplain to Bishop Robert Lowth of Oxford, in 1766, and Radcliffe librarian at Oxford from 27 November 1767 until his death. He initially discharged his librarian's duties conscientiously and helped to remedy the library's state of disrepair; he persuaded the trustees to acquire an illuminated Iberian 'Bible' of 1476, subsequently known as 'Kennicott's 'Bible'' and one of the Bodleian Library's greatest treasures. In July 1770 he was appointed to a canonry at Westminster Abbey but soon resigned it for the fourth stall at Christ Church, Oxford (installed 1 November 1770). On 3 January 1771 Kennicott married Ann (died 1831), sister of Edward Chamberlayne (died 1781), later secretary of the Treasury, and sister-in-law of William Hayward Roberts, provost of Eton College. From 1771 to 1781 Kennicott held the vicarage of Menheniot, Cornwall, which was given to him as a fellow of Exeter College by the dean and chapter of Exeter on the recommendation of Bishop Lowth. He conscientiously resigned this preferment in 1781 because of his inability to reside in the parish. He was also a member of the Royal Society of Science at Gottingen, the Theodore-Palatine academy at Mannheim, and the Royal Academy of Inscriptions at Paris. 
Kennicott was instructed in Hebrew by Professor Thomas Hunt, and the greater part of his life was spent in the collation of Hebrew manuscripts with the object of producing a definitive original text of the 'Old Testament'. Robert Lowth, always his major patron, first inspired him with a desire to test the accuracy of the Hebrew text of the 'Old Testament'. With his formidable knowledge of Syriac, early Latin, the 'Septuagint', and the Samaritan 'Pentateuch' it was recognized that he was very well qualified for the task. His critical examination of manuscripts, initially in the British Museum and the libraries of Oxford and Cambridge, began in 1751, and when Thomas Secker, then bishop of Oxford (and also a member of Exeter College), urged him in March 1758 to undertake their collation he agreed to the request. In return Secker, when archbishop of Canterbury, gave Kennicott his unstinting support and friendship when for a time he nurtured a project for producing a revised Authorized Version of the 'Bible'. Meanwhile in 1753 Kennicott issued 'The State of the Printed Hebrew Text of the Old Testament Considered: a Dissertation', and in 1759 he brought out a second dissertation on the same subject. He identified his object thus: 'to compare Scripture with itself, to explain a difficult phrase or passage by a clear one, that bears some relation to it, to consider the natural force of the Original Words, the tendency of the Context, and the Design of the Writer; to compare the most ancient editions of the Original, with one another, and with the best copies of the most celebrated versions. (vol. 1, p. 12)' These volumes were translated into Latin by W. A. Teller and published at Leipzig, the first in 1756, the second with additions in 1765. 
Kennicott's scholarly endeavours attracted support in Britain and beyond. In England subscriptions amounted to $9119 7's'. 6died; in France the duc de Nivernois (a former French ambassador to the court of St James) patronized him and helped him to gain access to Parisian manuscript collections in 1767; the king of Denmark offered him the use of six ancient manuscripts; four quarto volumes of variant readings were sent to him on the king of Sardinia's orders; and the stadholder of the Netherlands made an annual donation of 30 guineas. His first report, 'On the Collation of the Hebrew Manuscripts of the Old Testament', was forwarded to the subscribers in December 1760 and a similar statement appeared each year until 1769. This annual summary afforded him an opportunity to defend the accuracy of his own collations, the Hebraic scholarship of the staff assisting him, and to print lists of subscribers. 
Kennicott's labours culminated in the production of his 'Vetus Testamentum Hebraicum cum variis lectionibus', the first volume published at Oxford in 1776, the second in 1780. These were two superb folios complete with parallel Samaritan and Hebrew texts and 'apparatus criticus'. To the second volume was annexed 'Dissertatio generalis', on the manuscripts of the 'Old Testament', which was published separately at Oxford in the same year and reprinted at Brunswick in 1783 by Paul Jacob Bruns, a native of Lubeck, who had been employed by Kennicott in collating manuscripts on the continent. A copy of the entire work was personally presented by Kennicott to George III. Lowth called the 1776 variorum 'Old Testament' 'a work the greatest and most important that has been undertaken and accomplished since the Revolution of Letters' (Hepworth, 145). 
Kennicott's second volume, of 1780, concluded that 'none of the variants was a threat to essential doctrine or increase[d] historical knowledge', but none the less his biblical scholarship provoked appreciable controversy. Though he took pains to deny it, his work seemed like a dire threat to the familiar Authorized Version. The first exchanges followed on from publication in 1753 of 'The State of the Printed Hebrew Text'. Fowler Comings at once replied with 'The printed Hebrew text of the Old Testament vindicated: an answer to Mr Kennicott's dissertation' (1753) and Julius Bate issued 'The integrity of the Hebrew text and many passages of scripture vindicated from the objections and misconstructions of Mr Kennicott' (1754). Bate's involvement as a leading Hutchinsonian was indicative of that grouping's concern that the work undertaken by Kennicott ('the English Ezra', as he called him) was destabilizing a time-honoured text with the unintended consequence of fostering unbelief. Kennicott responded anonymously with the pamphlet 'A word to the Hutchinsonians, or, Remarks on three extraordinary sermons lately preached before the University of Oxford' (1756), which disparaged contemporary Hutchinsonian politics and refused to take their scholarly endeavours seriously. This work in turn prompted a defence and counter-attack by George Horne, then a don at University College. Thomas Rutherforth, regius professor of divinity at Cambridge, was also drawn in, producing a pamphlet on the second 'Dissertation' (1761), in which he backed a recommendation that senate in Cambridge should support Kennicott's work, yet refrained from retracting earlier claims that the project was 'in many instances injudicious and inaccurate'. 
Controversies were also generated on the other side of the channel. In 1771 there appeared 'Lettres de M. l'Abbe de -- ex-professeur en Hebreu... au Sr Kennicott', purporting to have been printed at Rome and sold in Paris, and an English translation was produced by William Stevens in 1772. It treated Kennicott and his project with learned disdain and made a particular charge that he had much underestimated the Jewish role in preserving and transmitting the text. It lambasted the imaginary corrections, describing them as 'follies, ignorant productions, omissions... which only deserve contempt and derision' (p. 147). In reply there appeared (possibly by Kennicott himself) 'A letter to a friend occasioned by a French pamphlet lately published against Doctor Kennicott etc.' (1772), stating that the 'Lettres de M. l'Abbe de -- ' were the composition of Capuchins in the convent of St Honore, Paris. It is more likely to have been written by Ignatius Adophus Dumay, Jewish by birth, who had been for four years chief collator to Kennicott and who also produced a powerful manuscript critique of his former employer's project, particularly the quality of the assistance that he had received. Bruns published at Rome in 1782 a Latin version of 'A letter to a friend' and added some correspondence of his own. In Italy there appeared a censure upon Kennicott's letters in 'Des titres primitifs de la revelation par Gabr. Fabricy, Romae' (2 vols., 1772). Kennicott remained largely aloof from these assaults. Sure of his patrons and his enterprise, he clearly did not feel either would be adversely affected by silence on his part, and he relied on replies by followers and admirers. 
Many of Kennicott's chief opponents were Germans, notably J. D. Michaelis, whose 'Bibliotheca orientalis' (pt 11) contained a severe criticism of his first volume on the grounds that he too easily disregarded vowel points and accents and had an unfortunate predilection for facilitating readings. Kennicott sent out a long Latin epistle to Michaelis (Oxford, 1777; reprinted Leipzig, 1777) inserted into the twelfth part of the 'Bibliotheca orientalis'. After publication of his second volume Kennicott drew up a brief defence in Latin, 'Contra ephemeridum Goettigensium criminationes' (1782). The four volumes of J. B. de Rossi's 'Variae lectiones veteris testamenti', published at Parma in 1784-8, with a supplement of 1798, form a supplement to Kennicott's volumes of 1776 and 1780, and include codices which the latter had missed. 
The scale of textual criticism (he had consulted and collated 615 manuscript versions and 52 printed editions) gave Kennicott a European reputation that transcended national and denominational boundaries, his labours constituting a milestone 'in a more systematic and comprehensive examination of the formation of the biblical text and canon by subsequent scholars' (Ruderman, 23). His pertinacity offset an unpropitious start in life, and through careful organization and working to schedule he completed his great undertaking in his lifetime. But with indomitability went an arrogant streak that repeatedly generated hostility to his scholarship and ambition. He always found it hard to take his detractors and their charges seriously and he relied principally on powerful allies like Secker and Lowth to protect as well as patronize him. 
Many of Kennicott's other published works were in response to critical attacks occasioned by his preaching and, in due time, his academic renown. Early in his career he fell foul of William King, the Oxford Jacobite, and caustically defended Exeter College for its pro-whig line in the notorious Oxfordshire election of 1754 in 'A letter to Dr. King, occasion'd by his late Apology, and in particular by such parts of it as are meant to defame Mr Kennicott' (1755). Kennicott gave ammunition to his detractors with his 'Christian fortitude: a sermon preached before the University at St. Mary's, Oxford, 25 Jan. 1757' (1757), to which there were several fierce replies. He also wrote anonymously 'Remarks on the 42 and 43 Psalms' (n.d., 1765?), which was soon followed by a similar treatise on psalms 48 and 89. These, when translated into Latin with an appendix by Bruns, were published by J. C. F. Schultz at Leipzig in 1772. Another anonymous tract was 'Critica sacra, or, A Short Introduction to Hebrew Criticism' (1774). 'Remarks on Select Passages in the Old Testament. With Eight Sermons' (1787) was published following directions in Kennicott's will. 
Kennicott suffered badly from gout towards the end of his life and was walking on two sticks by 1781. After a lingering illness he died at Oxford on 18 August 1783, and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral, close to the grave of Bishop Berkeley, on 21 August. Ann Kennicott long survived her husband, and died on 25 February 1831. She was very friendly with Richard Owen Cambridge, Mrs Garrick, Hannah More, and Fanny Burney, and after marriage had learned Hebrew, in order to assist her husband in his edition of the 'Bible': 'She was to him hands and feet, and eyes and ears, and intellect' (H. Roberts, 1.291). During her widowhood she had a warm friendship with Bishop Shute Barrington and there was even talk of their marrying after his wife died. She was also on intimate terms with Bishop Beilby Porteus and his wife and she frequently stayed with them at Fulham and in Kent. She moved closer to the evangelical camp in the early nineteenth century and was a strong supporter of the abolition of the slave trade and of the Windsor branch of the Bible Society. In memory of her husband and for the promotion of the study of Hebrew she founded two scholarships at Oxford, and her name is included in the bidding prayer among the benefactors of the university. 


@@@@@


doc= 15408


Charles John Kennion (1789-1853), landscape painter, exhibited twenty-six works at the Royal Academy between 1804 and 1853, and five works at the Suffolk Street Gallery. His watercolour paintings were much in the style of his father. Charles Kennion died in Robert Street, Regent's Park, London, on 10 September 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 15409


Kennion, Edward (1744-1809), landscape painter, was born on 15 January 1744 in Liverpool, the son of James Kennion, a businessman. His grandfather, John Kennion, was a nonconformist minister preaching at the Toxteth Park Chapel, Liverpool. A relative, John Kennion, took charge of Edward's education, placing him at John Holt's school in Liverpool. When Kennion was fifteen he entered Mr Fuller's academy in London, where he learned to draw. Edward Kennion sailed for Jamaica in 1762, and joined the British attack on Spanish Havana under Sir George Pococke and George Keppel, third earl of Albemarle, in which John Kennion was commissary. After the capture of Havana Kennion went briefly to New York to recover his health, and then returned to England in December 1763. In 1765 he again went to Jamaica, where he remained until July 1769, serving as superintendent of John Kennion's estates and aide-de-camp to the commander-in-chief of the island. 
In 1769 Kennion returned to London, where he worked in trade until 1782. About 1771 Kennion made the acquaintance of George Barret RA, a landscape painter, and in the following years accompanied him on sketching tours in the Lake District and around Liverpool. On 13 November 1774 Kennion married Ann Bengough, a Worcester woman of some property. None of the couple's several children survived, and Kennion's wife died in 1786. On 10 October 1787 he married Mary Hill of Upton upon Severn, Worcestershire. In 1782, Kennion had retired from business in London and moved to Rydd-Green, near Malvern in Worcestershire. There he began making drawings for a treatise on landscape painting. In 1784 he published 'Antiquities of the Counties of Hereford and Monmouth' which contained five perspective views of ancient castles on the Welsh border, and three ground plans engraved by R. Godfrey, with full descriptions by Kennion. Kennion spent the winters of 1787 and 1788 in London, where he gave drawing lessons. In 1789 Kennion and his family moved to London permanently, and he adopted the profession of teacher and artist. 
Kennion was admitted as a fellow to the Society of Artists in 1790. Between 1790 and 1791 he exhibited twenty-four works, including drawings, watercolours, and oil sketches, at its annual exhibitions. He also exhibited eight pictures at the Royal Academy between 1795 and 1807. Several of the works shown at the Society of Artists were designated as studies for a proposed work entitled 'Elements of Landscape and Picturesque Beauty', to be published in four volumes. Kennion's uncle, a Liverpool physician, died in 1791, leaving him enough money to proceed with plans for the book. In 1803 Kennion published a full prospectus of the work, and final arrangements were made for the publication of the first volume early in 1809. However, before the volume was published Kennion died in London on 14 April 1809. He was survived by his wife and four children, including his son Charles John Kennion ['see below'], who was born in 1789. 
The only part of Kennion's proposed 'Elements of Landscape and Picturesque Beauty' that was complete at his death was entitled 'An Essay on Trees in Landscape' and was issued in 1815. Many of the plates for this work were engraved or finished in aquatint and soft ground etching by his son Charles. The volume contains fifty etched and aquatinted plates, a preface and biographical notice, and forty-eight pages of instructional text. A copy in the Manchester Free Library was bound up in 1844 with four large unpublished landscapes said to be by Kennion, and six picturesque studies of trees, etched by H. W. Williams. A critic, Arlunydd Penygarn, wrote: 'He seems to have devoted himself to the representation of the specific growth of trees, and gives studies of a great number, sometimes very good, sometimes not so happy, but it was a thing needed in the art of the time' (Dibdin, 88). Characteristic examples of Kennion's work such as 'Landscape with Fishermen' (V&A) show picturesque landscapes populated by figures and animals, and surrounded by soft masses of foliage-laden trees. An engraving by Kennion, after a drawing by Benjamin Ferrey, was included in Ferrey's book 'The Antiquities of the Priory of Christ-Church, Hampshire' (1834). According to the preface of 'An Essay on Trees in Landscape', Kennion seldom painted in oils, and his earlier work was executed in India ink and pencil with tints applied later. However, under the tutelage of George Barret he began to paint in watercolours and also learned print-making techniques. 




@@@@@


doc= 15410


Kennish, William (bap. 1799, d. 1862), naval officer and poet, was baptized at Kirk Maughold, Isle of Man, on 24 February 1799, the son of Thomas Kennish, a small farmer, and his wife, Margaret Radcliffe. He worked as a ploughboy while learning the trade of ship's carpenter. In 1821 he entered the navy as a common seaman, where he first learned English, and rose to be a warrant officer. He was ship's carpenter on the 'Hussar', under Admiral Sir Charles Ogle at the North American station, 1829-30. While stationed at Halifax he devised a plan for concentrating a ship's broadside more effectively, which met with encouragement from Captain Edward Boxer of the 'Hussar', and was tried by Sir Charles Napier on board the 'Galatea' in 1831. He communicated his method, which used a marine theodolite to direct the fire, to the Society of Arts, which in June 1832 awarded him its gold Isis medal. He published his essay 'A Method for Concentrating the Fire of a Broadside of a Ship of War' in 1837. He communicated other inventions to the Society of Arts in this period. He subsequently served upon the men-of-war 'Tribune' and 'Donegal' in the Mediterranean and in the channel, but felt he had not received encouragement from the Admiralty commensurate with the labour and money he had spent on his essay, and he left the navy in 1840. 
Kennish settled at Ballsall on the Isle of Man, whose coast he surveyed for the British government. He wrote verse, published in London as 'Mona's Isle and other Poems' (1844), which evoked his childhood and his love for his wife Mary, as well as bringing Manx customs to the attention of a wider readership. A mine of Manx folklore, the collection had a long subscription list of naval men. In 1845 he became a schoolmaster at the parochial school at Ballsalla, but in 1849 emigrated to the United States. In 1855 he surveyed the isthmus of Panama for the US government, and wrote a pamphlet published in New York on 'The Practicability and Importance of a Ship Canal to Link the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans' (1855), setting out his plan for a canal to link the oceans without the use of locks. He died at New York city on 19 March 1862, leaving his widow, Mary, in Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 15411


Kenny, William Stopford (1787/8-1867), schoolmaster and educational writer, was born in 1787 or 1788. On 1 January 1812 he married, at St Pancras, London, Eliza Adams. For many years he kept a classical school at 5 Fitzroy Street, Fitzroy Square, London, later moving to Richmond, Surrey, where his son, William D. Kenny, ran a boarding-school. In 1856 Kenny stated that he had been a teacher for forty years. An accomplished chess player, his first published works were 'Practical Chess Grammar' (1817), 'Practical Chess Exercises' (1818), and 'Analysis of the Game of Chess' (1819), a translation of Danican Philidor's work. He was later known for his schoolbooks. His most popular work, 'Why and because: being a collection of familiar questions and answers on subjects relating to air, water, light and fire' (4th edn, 1830; 18th edn, 1854), translated from a French original, set out in an appealing way answers to children's questions about nature. His 'Grammatical Omnibus' (8th edn, 1853) identified and corrected 'improprieties frequent in writing and conversation'. Latterly he was described as a teacher of languages, and he published French and Italian phrase books (1854-6). 'Kenny's School Geography' (1856) was a catalogue of facts to be learned by heart, with questions and exercises. He died on 16 November 1867 at 2 York Villas, Richmond. 


@@@@@


doc= 15412


Kenrick, Daniel (b. 1649/50), poet and physician, the son of Samuel Kenrick ('b'. 1602/3), rector of St Mary de Crypt, Gloucester, was born in Gloucestershire, matriculated aged sixteen at Christ Church, Oxford, on 30 May 1666, took his BA in 1670, became MA in 1674, and was later vicar of Kempsey in Worcestershire. His brother Christian was educated at New Hall, Oxford (BA 1679), and later took up the position of vicar of Eckington, Worcestershire, in 1681. It appears that Daniel Kenrick also practised as a physician in Worcester for some time. Kenrick's reputation rests on the poems collected in 'The Grove' (1721), which also includes some biographical information: 'Dr Kenrick took his degrees both in Divinity and Physick, and being a Person of Vivacity and wit, entertain'd his Leisure Hours in Poetical Compositions. His Talents seem equal in Panegyrick, satire, and Lyric: There is a Fire and Sprightliness of Thinking which runs thro' all his Copies, and to this, perhaps, he ow'd that haste in his Writing, which made him sometimes negligent of Harmony both in Rhimes and Numbers.' Kenrick had a wide circle of friends including Aphra Behn and Henry Purcell. Some of his work is closely associated with Henry Hall, and it is likely that Kenrick was a high-churchman, and perhaps, Jacobite sympathizer. This would account for the sermon of 1688 (though a difficult attribution to prove beyond all doubt), the argument of which was developed from 'Romans' 31.1, 'Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers'. It is divided into the following arguments: '
I. 'Of the Necessity of our Subjection to the Higher Powers: And then more particularly.' 

II. 'Of the strick Obedience we owe to the higher Powers, or the Kings of this Realm.' 

III. 'Of the Reasonableness of our Obedience to the King in the present juncture of Affairs.' 

' According to Kenrick, religion was for some: 'the specious Cry, when alas all his Religion is either Pride, Interest, Revenge for lost Honour, or a wild humour for innovation. For 'tis utterly impossible that any Man can have a serious awe of his Maker... and disturb the Peace of the Kingdom in which he lives. (Kenrick, 'Sermon')' It is a skilfully argued sermon which follows a basically tory stance, yet seeks a religious and political tolerance for Catholics. Kenrick's sermon should be read in the context of the fears concerning the potential for Catholic monarchy and attendant political resurgency in England, which occupied Kenrick's years as a priest, following James II's 'His Majesty's Gracious Declaration to All his Loving Subjects for Liberty of Conscience', issued on 4 April 1687. This allowed Catholics to reassume public office, and permitted them the freedom of religious assembly. Many Anglicans were repulsed by James's use of the royal prerogative to appoint Catholics to positions in the army and the universities. In conclusion Kenrick asks 'Are we afraid of Popery?': 'The King assures us, 'Tis possible to be happy, without being pernicious... Tho seeming clouds appear, let our Fears and Jealousies be laid aside, and fear no Darkness, since God and the King say, 'Let there be Light'. (ibid.)' Kenrick's reputation as a poet rests on work published in 'The Grove', though other poems can be found in manuscript (Harvard UL, MS Eng. 614). As a whole, 'The Grove' contains work stretching over a considerable period of time. Kenrick's most widely known work is 'A New Session of Poets. Occasion'd by the Death of Mr John Dryden', first published in the year of Dryden's death, 1700. It is a playful piece which names many contemporary poets as successors to Dryden, yet finds fault with all of them when judged against Dryden's towering stature. Apollo, called upon as judge, returns to heaven saying: '
Ye sons of Wit, 'tis by your God decreed, 

Till One arise to match the mighty Dead, 

The Wreath shall stay on the De Facto's Head. 

' There was, however, a sting in the tail since Dryden was criticized for having attempted to consider religion in 'The Hind and the Panther' (1687). Kenrick's other work found in 'The Grove' is mostly devoted to his muse Sylvia, one of which, 'Upon Visiting Sylvia, on her Death-Bed, as her Physician. An Ode' is a rare, perhaps dramatized, reference to his professional life. 


@@@@@


doc= 15413


George Kenrick (1792-1874), Unitarian minister, was born at Exeter on 28 October 1792 and was educated at the boarding-school established in Exeter by Lant Carpenter, who had succeeded Timothy Kenrick as co-pastor at George's Meeting. He matriculated from Glasgow University in 1808, and from 1810 to 1813 studied under Charles Wellbeloved at Manchester College, York, where his elder brother John was classics tutor. He served as Unitarian minister to congregations at Chesterfield (1813-14), Hull (1815-21), Maidstone (1822-6), Hampstead (1829-45), and Battle (1845-7). From 1833 to 1860 he was a trustee of Dr Williams's foundations. He published sermons and contributed to the 'Monthly Repository' and other periodicals. Of his three marriages, his first, on 10 September 1817, was to Mary Ann, the youngest daughter of Richard Hodgson, Unitarian minister at Doncaster; they had a daughter, Marianne, who married Abraham Champion, a Bristol engineer. His second wife, whom he married at St Leonard's, Exeter, on 11 October 1822, was Margaret ('bap'. 1794, died 1824), the daughter of Charles Bowring, a wool merchant, and his wife, Sarah Jane Anne Lane, and the sister of Sir John Bowring (1792-1872). Lastly, in May 1848 he married Sarah (died 1888), the daughter of Thomas Walters. In 1860 he retired in considerable ill health to Tunbridge Wells, where he died on 2 December 1874. 


@@@@@


doc= 15414


Kenrick, John (1788-1877), historian and tutor, was born on 4 February 1788 at Exeter, the eldest son and second of five children of Timothy Kenrick (1759-1804), Unitarian minister, and his first wife, Mary (died 1793), the daughter of John Waymouth of Exeter, merchant. His father married second Elizabeth Belsham (1743-1819), sister of Thomas Belsham (1750-1829), who proved a 'conscientious and affectionate' stepmother (Kenrick, 6). He received his early education from his father, and in 1793 was sent to the grammar school conducted by the Revd Charles Lloyd (1766-1829), where, after an initial distaste for classical grammar, he made good progress in Latin and Greek. In 1799 he entered the nonconformist academy conducted by his father and the Revd Joseph Bretland (1742-1819), even though he was only in his twelfth year and considerably below the age of the other students. He studied Greek and Latin, and later Hebrew. Because of his age, his removal from a school discipline was not a success, and his father had already decided to place him at school again when he died suddenly in 1804. Thomas Foster Barham (1766-1844) taught him German, of great importance later for his classical and biblical studies. With Barham he wrote essays and sermons, the only direct training he received for the ministry. After the Exeter Academy closed in March 1805 Kenrick continued his studies at Birmingham under John Kentish, his father's intimate friend, who for two years directed his reading. In 1807, on the advice of Lant Carpenter, Kenrick entered Glasgow University with a Dr Williams's exhibition, where he studied for three years, graduating MA on 1 May 1810. Although personally obliged to a number of the professors, privately he was to be critical of the quality of instruction, though he did later appreciate the benefits when he began to teach himself. Kenrick's considerable intellectual powers and scholarship were evident while at Glasgow. He was the first prizeman in his class for all three years, won the Gartmore gold medal for an essay on the English constitution in the Tudor period, and a silver medal for an essay on the aberration of light. 'He is spoken in higher terms than were ever bestowed upon a young man' (Charles Wellbeloved, 6 April 1809, Harris Manchester College, Oxford, Wood MS 1, fol. 84'r'). 
In 1809 Kenrick was invited to become classics tutor at Manchester College, York, but he did not take up the appointment until after graduating the following year. Although highly praised by Charles Wellbeloved (1769-1858), the theological tutor, he had little experience of teaching and began to doubt his own abilities. He offered his resignation at Christmas 1810, but was persuaded to withdraw it. In 1817 feelings of personal inadequacy and shyness again led him to offer his resignation with the intention of studying abroad. In 1819 he was given leave of absence to spend a year in Germany. During the winter semester he studied history at Gottingen under A. H. L. Heeren, attending also the lectures of J. G. Eichhorn and J. F. Blumenbach; the following summer semester he devoted to classical study at Berlin under the great philologists, studying Tacitus with F. A. Wolf, Demosthenes with A. Boeckh, and Latin composition and conversation with K. G. Zumpt, and he attended Friedrich Schleiermacher's course of philosophy. After a tour in southern Germany and Switzerland he returned to York in September 1820. This introduction to the main nineteenth-century advances in German historical criticism and philology was of critical importance to his intellectual development. 
In 1818 and again in 1825 Thomas Belsham tried to persuade Kenrick to become his assistant at Essex Street Chapel, London; but Kenrick had decided upon an academic career: though an able exponent of his own theological position, he had none of the gifts of a popular preacher. He had also married Wellbeloved's eldest daughter, Laetitia (died 1879), on 13 August 1821; they had no children. 
Kenrick was the greatest scholar among the Unitarians of his day: he was the equal of Eliezer Cogan (1762-1855) in erudition, and his superior in culture. His reputation as a classical scholar was established by his highly popular translations, 'Latin Grammar' (1823; 5th edn, 1839), from Zumpt's work, and 'Introduction to Greek Prose Composition' (1835; 3rd edn, 1839), from the work by V. C. F. Rost and E. F. Wusteman, and by his own 'Exercises on Latin Syntax' (1825; 4th edn, 1838) and pioneering textbooks for schools. He was chosen by Bishop Blomfield to revise the fifth edition of A. H. Matthiae's greatly enlarged 'Greek Grammar' (1832). 
In 1840, when the college returned to Manchester, Kenrick became professor of history and served also as principal from 1846; he retired from both offices in 1850. He continued to live in York, and travelled to Manchester to deliver his lectures. His later publications were principally historical: 'The Egypt of Herodotus' (1841), 'Ancient Egypt under the Pharaohs' (1850), and 'Phoenicia' (1855). Curator of antiquities for the Yorkshire Museum from 1858 until his death, he also published on Roman York. Kenrick regularly attended the annual meetings of the British Association for the Advancement of Science during the 1830s. Although only marginally concerned with natural science itself, he did help mould Unitarian reactions to the religious controversies over Darwinism and the origins of the earth. His 'Essay on Primeval History' (1846) demonstrated how the principles of criticism could be applied to myths and traditions. His theology, while essentially that of the older Unitarian school, was modified in its conservatism by his acceptance of the new standards of biblical criticism. Both his teaching and his writings were characterized by his immense scholarship and 'comprehensive grasp' of the subject's 'whole outline... nothing fragmentary, nothing discursive, nothing speculative, broke the proportions' or disturbed his overall interpretation (Martineau, 408). An outstanding teacher who breathed life into the classics by placing them in their historical contexts, he was, however, a severe critic of those students who fell short of his exacting standards. Through his pupils, most notably John James Tayler (1797-1869), James Martineau (1805-1900), and George Vance Smith (1816-1902), and his writings he was responsible for helping to introduce to Britain the main nineteenth-century advances in German historical criticism and philology. On his death in York on 7 May 1877 'The Times' described him as 'indisputably the greatest nonconformist scholar of our day' (26 May 1877). He was buried in York cemetery on 12 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 15415


Kenrick, Timothy (1759-1804), Unitarian minister and tutor, was born on 26 January 1759 at Wynn Hall in the parish of Ruabon, Denbighshire, one of the four sons of John Kenrick (died 1803), a landowner, and his wife, Mary, the daughter of Timothy Quarrell of Llanfyllin, Montgomeryshire. The family was Presbyterian, and Timothy was baptized at Chester Street Chapel, Wrexham, on 6 February 1759. His brother Archibald Kenrick (1760-1835) ['see under 'Kenrick family] founded a dynasty of hardware manufacturers in West Bromwich. 
In 1774 Kenrick entered the dissenting academy at Daventry, then conducted by Caleb Ashworth and from 1775 by Thomas Robins. At the end of his course in 1779 he was appointed tutor in mathematics and natural philosophy, and on Robins's resignation in 1781 he continued under Robins's successor, Thomas Belsham. He left the academy in January 1784 to take up the post of assistant minister to James Manning at George's Meeting, Exeter, and was ordained there on 28 July 1785. On 24 February 1786, at St Mary Major, Exeter, Kenrick married Mary (died 1793), the daughter of John Waymouth of the city. They had five surviving children: Lucy, John Kenrick, Samuel, Mary ('b'. 1791), and George ['see below']; the twin of Samuel, George, died in infancy. In 1794, following Mary's death, Kenrick married the sister of his former tutor, Elizabeth (1743-1819), who was the second daughter of James Belsham (died 1770), a dissenting minister, and Anne Woodward (died 1780). 
During his ministry in Exeter, Kenrick encountered both religious and political controversy, especially in the years following the French Revolution. Although he worked well with his senior colleague, Manning, they differed theologically, for Manning was an Arian and Kenrick followed Belsham in holding a Unitarian view of Christ's nature. This division was underlined when Kenrick wrote a preamble to the rules of the Western Unitarian Society, which was formed in 1792 and explicitly excluded Arians. News of the Birmingham riots of 14 July 1791 compelled Kenrick to condemn the rioters, who had attacked dissenting chapels, in a sermon preached on 24 July. A number of his congregation gathered to request him to refrain from discussing 'subjects of a political nature... in the pulpit' ('Kenrick letters', 4/1, 69). Kenrick responded by defending his right 'to treat of any Political duty in the Pulpit' should 'a just occasion' arise (ibid., 70), a response that satisfied his congregation. A year later, however, in October 1792, he again courted controversy when he 'prayed for success to those who were endeavouring to promote the liberty & happiness of mankind' (ibid., 80). This apparent expression of support for the French revolutionaries led John Merivale to withdraw from Kenrick's congregation in protest. Although Kenrick was appalled at the violence of the terror in France, he deplored the British government's measures to restrict civil liberties and refused to observe the general fast on 1 February 1793, the day that Britain went to war with France. Continued criticism led him to offer his resignation in April 1793, but separate petitions of support from the men and women in his congregation persuaded him to withdraw his resignation. He none the less considered escaping the atmosphere of religious and political intolerance in Britain by following the example of his brother-in-law Ralph Eddowes, and emigrating to the United States, yet concern for the health and welfare of his wife and family seems to have dissuaded him. By 1798 he had decided to stay in Exeter, for he declined the invitation to become divinity professor at Manchester Academy. 
In October 1799 Kenrick and Joseph Bretland reopened the dissenting academy in Exeter that had flourished under Joseph Hallett and had been revived by Samuel Merivale in the 1760s; it was known as the third Exeter Academy. Three pupils were in attendance by mid-October, and, as Kenrick reported to his father, 'this is but a small beginning, but we hope it may come to something more. A Subscription has been opened & a Society formed for ye support of Divinity Students wch will I hope in time do much good' (Byng Kenrick, 125). Kenrick rented the house adjacent to his own to house boarding pupils, the first of whom, Coffin, was a grandnephew of Richard Price, and sent for the academy's library, which since 1786 had been loaned to Hackney Academy and was no longer in use, Hackney Academy having closed in 1796. The two tutors divided the teaching between them: Kenrick took responsibility for logic, metaphysics, moral education, the evidences of natural and revealed religion, the 'New Testament', and Jewish antiquities, and shared the teaching of Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and English composition and elocution. Eleven students, including James Hews Bransby, underwent the whole course, and four others, among them Kenrick's eldest son, John, received a part of their training before the academy closed on 25 March 1805. 
While on a preaching tour Kenrick died suddenly, 'as he was walking in the fields, near Wrexham' (Bogue and Bennett, 4.273), on 22 August 1804. He was buried on 26 August in the dissenters' burial-ground at Rhosddu, near Wrexham. In addition to four sermons published separately during his lifetime, two volumes of 'Discourses on Various Topics' (1805) were published posthumously, as was Kenrick's most important work, 'An Exposition of the Historical Writings of the New Testament' (3 vols., 1807). The 'Exposition' demonstrated Kenrick's considerable learning, yet was soon to be superseded by the new methods of historical criticism and philology developed by German scholars. 
Kenrick's fourth son, 


@@@@@


doc= 15416


Kenrick, William (1729/30-1779), writer and translator, was the son of Robert Kenerick, staymaker, of Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Mary (1708/9-1789). A member of a Baptist family, Kenrick attended probably either Philip James's Baptist school or Thomas Squire's Quaker school. Apprenticed in 1745 to Thomas Bennett, a mathematical instrument maker in London, Kenrick abandoned his apprenticeship after three years, in favour of a career in literature. 
Kenrick's verse satire, 'The Town' (1748), was followed by the much more complex but still essentially juvenile 'Old Woman's Dunciad' (1751). He also issued two equally unmemorable prose satires on his literary contemporaries and a further verse satire, 'The Pasquinade' (1753), ridiculing John Hill. Never one to limit his options, Kenrick resorted to panegyric in a bid for patronage, with his 'Monody to the Memory of... Frederick Prince of Wales' (1751), but neither abuse nor flattery earned him much public recognition. 
However, Kenrick's fluent pen quickly found an appreciative welcome in the periodical press. By 1750 he was editing a monthly literary miscellany, 'The Kapelion', with Francis Stamper. They became embroiled in (or invented) a paper war with Christopher Smart's rival publications, 'The Student' and 'The Midwife'. Kenrick was also significantly involved in the production of an opposition newspaper, 'Old England' (April 1751 - February 1753). His literary and political views came together when he turned to the stage to lampoon Henry Fielding, whose political views had already made him a target for 'Old England'. The performance was suppressed by the lord mayor of London, but published under the title 'Fun: a Parodi-Tragi-Comical Satire' (1752). 
In February 1753 Kenrick published his most popular work, 'The Whole Duty of Woman'. Resurrecting a late seventeenth-century title to capitalize on the success of Dodsley's 'Oeconomy of Human Life', Kenrick's guide to female conduct went through at least five editions in his lifetime and remained popular well into the next century. This uncharacteristic work may have been a purely commercial venture undertaken to support his new family. On 12 March 1752 he had married Mary Edge ('b'. 1726/7) with whom he had two daughters and three sons. The eldest son, William Shakespeare Kenrick, succeeded his father as editor of the 'London Review' in 1778. 
Between 1753 and 1756 Kenrick ventured abroad, though he returned periodically, as the births of his second and third children testify. He may have studied in the Netherlands, and he certainly mastered French and German during this period. He penned a defence of English foreign affairs, 'L'Observateur observe, ou, Lettre d'un Hollandois a un de ses amis' (The Hague, 1756), but later complained that his one venture into political writing had proved fruitless. 
Perhaps Kenrick's travels inspired him to a more philosophical view, expressed in his 'Epistles to Lorenzo' (1756; substantially expanded as 'Epistles Philosophical and Moral', 1759). The epistles, in blank verse, were initially acclaimed; the 'Monthly Review' hailed Kenrick as 'a genius whose temperament and disposition more resembled the immortal Author of the 'Essay on Man' than any other poet' (vol. 16, quoted in Brewer, 48). Thus Kenrick was understandably annoyed when his 1759 version met with a far less warm reception. He took the reviewers to task in 'A Scrutiny, or, The Criticks Criticis'd' (1759), then abandoned longer poems and turned reviewer in revenge. By July 1759 Kenrick was imprisoned in the king's bench. Since he was taken in by the actress Jane Lessingham upon his release in late 1761 or early 1762, it would appear that his wife had died in the interim. 
Armed with a good knowledge of European languages and in need of a steady income, Kenrick replaced Oliver Goldsmith as the chief reviewer for Ralph Griffiths's 'Monthly Review'. Soon afterwards he wrote an exceptionally cruel review of Goldsmith's 'An Enquiry into the Present State of Polite Learning in Europe' (1759) for which Griffiths forced him to apologize. Kenrick also sent an anonymous letter to the 'St James Chronicle' in 1767 accusing Goldsmith of plagiarism, a charge Goldsmith successfully refuted. From 1758 to 1766 Kenrick gruellingly subjected almost all foreign-language publications to an 'admirable, if frenzied, astuteness' (Fussell, 43). Kenrick also took over from Robert Lloyd (who was himself imprisoned for debt) as editor of the 'St James Magazine' from February 1764 until its demise in June. 
While in the king's bench and subsequently immersed in foreign literature for the 'Monthly Review', Kenrick undertook translations to supplement his income. He began with Rousseau's 'La nouvelle Heloise', published as 'Eloisa' in 1761, and by 1767 had translated virtually all of the French philosopher's works (fourteen volumes). Kenrick was clearly interested in Rousseau's ideas, but he and his booksellers were also responding to public demand, which they satisfied with translations of the works of Salomon Gessner ('Rural Poems', 1762) and of Voltaire ('Treatise on Religious Toleration', 1764). While translation was standard fare for the denizens of Grub Street, Kenrick was unusually talented: 'Never an enthusiast, he was fully aware of weaknesses in Rousseau's position; but he also saw the futility of dogmatic abuse, and his criticism throughout was the most analytical and unbiased of any of the contemporary commentators upon Rousseau' (Sewell, 62). 
These translations represented the zenith of Kenrick's intellectual reputation. As translator, his name clearly had selling power, for in 1771 his name alone adorned the title-page of 'Elements of the History of England, from the Invasion of the Romans to the Reign of George II', even though Gilbert Stuart and John Langhorne each contributed a quarter of the translation from the work by Abbe Millot. Even more significantly, his efforts brought him scholarly acknowledgement when he was created doctor of laws by the faculty of Marischal College, Aberdeen, in February 1772. With John Murdoch he translated 'A Natural History of Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals' (1775) from the French of Buffon and at his death he was editor of a fourteen-volume translation of Voltaire's works (1779-81). 
Having regained some semblance of financial security through his employment on the 'Monthly Review', Kenrick was able to marry again; on 5 May 1764 he wed Elizabeth Piercy Perrins ('bap'. 1744). The couple had no children, and Elizabeth died two years later. During this period Kenrick often visited Thomas Worlidge, the painter responsible for the only known portrait of Kenrick. When Worlidge died in the same year as Elizabeth, Kenrick published several elegiac poems and composed the artist's epitaph. 
Either distraught from grief or emboldened by an arrangement to edit a ten-volume edition of Shakespeare for 100 guineas per volume, Kenrick forsook the 'Monthly Review' for the theatre, presenting a Shakespearian-inspired comedy entitled 'Falstaff's Wedding' (1766). Kenrick prefaced his play with a typically arrogant and ironically contemptuous remark to the critics: 'The author foresaw that these mice would necessarily be nibbling; he has therefore, purposely left some rotten holes in the cheese, that the poor little animals may be kept doing; for, considering them as real objects of pity, he would by no means have them starve for want of employment. (p. vi)' Although 'Falstaff's Wedding' played only one night, Garrick permitted Kenrick to stage a second comedy, 'The Widow'd Wife', the next season, which ran for nine nights and was translated into German in 1773. 
Kenrick's larger ambitions, however, were severely disappointed when George Steevens agreed to compile a Shakespeare edition without payment and Kenrick's lucrative agreement was cancelled. This loss added poignancy to Kenrick's appearance in September 1766 at the Shakespeare jubilee as Shakespeare's ghost. Modest stage successes kept Kenrick solvent through this period, but he returned to periodical publishing in November 1768 with the 'Gentleman's Journal', which survived only a fortnight, and contributed to the 'Universal Museum' and, after 1773, to the 'Westminster Magazine'. By the end of January 1769 Kenrick was editing 'Critical Memoirs of the Time' and was a founding editor of the 'Morning Chronicle' that same year. He also published individual poems in literary magazines, many of which were ultimately collected in his 'Poems; Ludicrous, Satirical and Moral' (1768; with additions, 1770). 
During this period Kenrick also sought to engage Samuel Johnson in controversy. In an exceptionally long review, later published separately (1765), Kenrick meticulously catalogued the imperfections in Johnson's edition of Shakespeare, then issued his 'Defence of Mr Kenrick's Review' (1766) in response to an essay by Johnson's supporter James Barclay. When Kenrick subsequently published his own 'New Dictionary of the English Language' (1773), with a guide to pronunciation, he drew almost entirely on Johnson's efforts and must have further galled the great lexicographer. Kenrick also composed 'An Epistle to James Boswell, Esq.' (1768), accusing Johnson of immoral cynicism and offering Rousseau as a moral guide superior to Boswell's admired Pasquale Paoli. In response to these provocations Johnson maintained a stoic silence. 
Unable to incite Johnson, Kenrick contemplated a similar assault on William Warburton. In 1769 Kenrick wrote to John Wilkes, with whom he was on good terms, asking for notes on Pope because 'The publication of a new edition affords so fine an opportunity of mauling the Bishop of Gloucester, that I would not lose it for the world' (BL, Add. MS 30870, fol. 116'r'). Wilkes ultimately passed his notes to Joseph Warton, and Warburton was spared Kenrick's ire. 
The sole controversy in which Kenrick's arguments prevailed concerned his views on adultery and divorce, originally published anonymously in 1771 to support Richard Grosvenor's lawsuit against his wife for her liaison with the king's brother, Henry, duke of Cumberland. Kenrick is reputed to have received $500 for this slim volume, probably his most lucrative publication, and later expanded his views in 'Observations, Civil and Canonical, on the Marriage Contract' (1775). 
During these years Kenrick also continued to write for the stage, though his relations with the dramatic companies were never easy. His plays were all reasonably entertaining, but his incessant arguments with the patentees meant that his productions rarely came to the boards without much delay and rancour. After the production of 'Falstaff's Wedding' Kenrick and Garrick disputed the distribution of the final night's proceeds and by 1771 Kenrick was corresponding with George Colman about an opera for Covent Garden, despite having quarrelled with Colman in print a few years earlier. Colman, who had accepted a Kenrick comedy for the 1772-3 season, opted to stage Goldsmith's new play, 'She Stoops to Conquer', instead. Kenrick replied with a libel in the 'London Packet' that insulted not only Goldsmith but also a female friend; for this affront Goldsmith assaulted the publisher and had to donate $50 to charity to avoid prosecution, while Kenrick reportedly played the part of innocent bystander. Kenrick's 'Duellist' was presented later in 1773, but the first performance was complicated by an argument over Charles Macklin's employment and the play closed, though it too was later translated into German. 
Kenrick's most famous, and shameful, controversy arose in 1772, when he published 'Love in the Suds', accusing Garrick of a homosexual relationship with the disgraced Isaac Bickerstaff. The pamphlet went through five editions in the year, until Kenrick, fearing imprisonment for libel, finally suppressed the work and issued an apology in November. Kenrick's resentment stemmed from delays in producing his plays, not from any moral qualms, and the tasteless cruelty of the attack ensured his opprobrium and forced him to confine his opinions to the pages of the 'London Review'. 
Having lost the contract to edit Shakespeare, Kenrick instead collected his friend Robert Lloyd's 'Poetical Works' (1774). That same year, unwilling to let his Shakespearian insights languish, Kenrick converted his critical notes into a series of successful lectures on the bard. Although he twice had to move to larger venues to accommodate the crowds, the series faltered after March 1774 and then metamorphosed into a much grander proposal to establish 'A Public Academy, for the Investigation of the English Language, and the Illustration of British Literature' ('Morning Chronicle', 20 Aug 1774). 
The school never eventuated, but its intended curriculum formed the basis for Kenrick's final venture, the 'London Review of English and Foreign Literature', which first appeared in January 1775 and survived its founding editor by six months. As editor and chief writer, Kenrick finally exercised complete sovereignty over a critical empire. Although the magazine did not uphold its initial promise of illustrative plates and coverage of all new publications, it rivalled the established reviews and became known for its extended critiques and philosophical interests. 
Amid all these publishing ventures Kenrick also found time to develop his long-standing fascination with perpetual motion. As early as 1761 Kenrick (with the support of Thomas Bennett, his former master) had sought a patent for a perpetual motion machine, but refused to supply the details requested by the attorney-general. He claimed to have experimented with the design for more than fifteen years before he presented his arguments in two publications and displayed his device at a series of three lectures in 1770-71. Even the physics of his day recognized the impossibility of such an invention, and Kenrick found few subscribers for a proposed stock offering, though he attracted much notoriety and ridicule. He none the less remained undaunted, returning to the attorney-general in May 1779, less than a month before he died, still in search of a patent. 
Throughout the final decade of his life, incessant financial demands required Kenrick to pursue an impressive variety of undertakings. He needed to sustain a new family with his third partner, Elizabeth (died 1818), with whom he had three daughters between 1770 and 1775. The two apparently never wed, though her 1818 obituary refers to her as his 'relict' ('GM', 1818). On 27 June 1776 Kenrick was back at the altar, this time with Frances Gymer. The two had no children, but this may have been just as well since Kenrick spent most of 1777 and half of 1778 in the Fleet prison for debt when a warehouse fire consumed most of an issue of the 'London Review'. In 1778 Kenrick finally saw the performance of his only opera, 'The Lady of the Manor', and at the end of the year he closed his theatrical career with a Christmas farce, 'The Spendthrift'. By the beginning of 1779 he could no longer sustain the pace and called upon his eldest son to assist him with the 'London Review'. 
The lingering illness that led to his death, on 10 June 1779, aged forty-nine, remains unidentified. His funeral and burial took place on 13 June, in Chelsea Old Church. The church has been substantially altered and no memorial remains. The probate record a year later lists him as 'late of the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields'. Frances survived him. 
From his early engagement with his literary contemporaries in the 1751 paper war to his 1778 'Observations on Soame Jenyns's 'View of the Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion'', Kenrick was rarely without a public enemy. He relished controversy and always sought the last word. If no one would oppose his views, he was not above writing replies to himself, as he did in a theological tract ('The Grand Question Debated', 1751) and its reply. He dismissively described himself as 'a pretender to almost all kinds of writing' ('The Pasquinade', 20n.), and his career typified the life of a professional writer, working at various times, frequently simultaneously, as periodical reviewer and editor, translator, dramatist, poet, controversialist, and inventor. Kenrick achieved notoriety in several fields, but sullied his reputation through unjustified attacks on more famous contemporaries. His almost boundless energy and broad learning were impressive, but his unwavering arrogance and irascible temper vitiated his accomplishments. As Alexander Chalmers judiciously concluded almost two centuries ago: 'Dr. Kenrick was really a man of talents, and deficient only in the knowledge of making a proper use of them; it was his misfortune likewise to settle upon no regular plan of study, and to fancy himself equal to any task which his necessities imposed upon him. (Chalmers, 19.324)' 



@@@@@


doc= 15417


Kent, James (1700-1776), organist and composer, was born at Winchester on 13 March 1700, the son of a glazier. He was a chorister at Winchester Cathedral (1711-14) and then at the Chapel Royal (1714-18) under Dr William Croft. Through the influence of the subdean, John Dolben, he was appointed organist to the parish church of Finedon, Northamptonshire, in 1718. He resigned in 1731 on being elected organist of Trinity College, Cambridge, remaining there until he succeeded John Bishop as organist of Winchester Cathedral and Winchester College. He was married to Elizabeth, daughter of John Freeman, a singer in the theatre and in the choirs of the Chapel Royal, St Paul's, and Westminster Abbey. He resigned in 1774 and died in Winchester on 6 May 1776. 
Kent published 'Twelve Anthems' (1773), and after his death 'A Morning and Evening Service with Eight Anthems' ('c'.1777) was edited by Joseph Corfe. He had assisted William Boyce in the preparation of his 'Cathedral Music' (1760). His anthem 'Hear my prayer', for two solo trebles, may be taken as representative of his work, which was both extravagantly praised and excoriated: his work drew so heavily from G. B. Bassani and others as to open him to charges of unscrupulous plagiarism. 


@@@@@


doc= 15418


John Gwent (d. 1348), Franciscan monk, who died at Hereford, and 


@@@@@


doc= 15419


Sion Cent (fl. 1400-1430), Welsh-language poet, wrote a eulogy to the people and land of Brycheiniog (Brecon) which suggests a link with that area, and, although it was not necessarily his native region, the border area of south Wales was certainly his sphere of activity. Kent was a common enough surname in that area, and is not in itself proof of any link with the parish of Kentchurch in Herefordshire. The portrait at Kentchurch Court once thought to be of Sion Cent is now known not to be so. Sion Cent was not a professional bard, but clearly had some bardic training and made effective if unsophisticated use of the 'cywydd' metre ['see 'Cywyddwyr (act. c.1330-c.1650)]. It has been suggested that he was educated at Oxford University, where he would have been influenced by the empirical philosophy of 'scientia experimentalis', which may have provided a basis for his attack on the Platonic ideals of the Welsh bards. One of his most famous statements is 'Ystad bardd astudio byd' ('The estate of a poet is to study the world'). Learned elements in his poems include references to ecclesiastical authorities such as Peter Lombard and detailed knowledge of the 'Bible'. The only firm basis for dating Sion Cent's career is his debate with Rhys Goch Eryri, which was a consequence of Rhys's elegy on the death of Gruffudd Llwyd and subsequent debate with Llywelyn ab y Moel in the 1420s. Sion was not a young man at that time, and it seems therefore that the Glyn Dwr rebellion and its aftermath was his period of activity, a period which is reflected by the grim spirit of his poetry. 
Sion Cent's critique of Rhys Goch Eryri's work focuses on the claim that the bardic muse was of divine origin, and he argues instead that the falsehoods of praise poetry prove it to be inspired by the devil. In keeping with this rejection of bardic ideals, Sion Cent's poems ruthlessly demonstrate the worthlessness of all the worldly values celebrated by the bards. Their emphasis is on the transience of life and the horrors of death, with the aim of turning people's attention away from this world to the next. The influence of the preaching friars is clear, and there are many parallels with the religious verse of medieval Europe. Sion Cent was the first Welsh poet to use the technique of the repeated refrain, which was certainly due to English influence. Although the bards took no account of his moral criticisms of their work, Sion Cent's influence on Welsh literature of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries was considerable. There were clearly a number of other poets writing similar verse, whose work is falsely attributed to Sion Cent in the manuscripts on account of his fame as a religious poet. The attributions total close to one hundred poems, but of these only eighteen are now accepted as genuine. 
Sion Cent the poet was later confused with several other figures of similar name and became a popular character in the folklore of the Welsh marches, famed as a trickster and wizard. Two of these misidentifications, in particular, seem to have contributed to his reputation for learning, namely those with 


@@@@@


doc= 15420


Nathaniel Kent (1708-1766), scholar, was born on 17 April 1708 at Weedon, Northamptonshire, but his parentage is unknown. He was a king's scholar at Eton College and went to King's College, Cambridge in 1725 as a scholar. He was awarded a BA in 1729, an MA in 1733, and became a fellow of King's College. He was ordained in 1731 and was a priest at Ely from 1732. In 1744 he became insane, but he recovered and by 1748 was headmaster of Wisbech School. Later he became curate of Kersey in Suffolk. While at Cambridge, Kent published an edition of Lucian, 'Excerpta quaedam ex Luciani Samosatensis operibus, in usum Tyronum' (1730). Latin notes and a Latin version accompanied the text, and the work was reprinted several times in London. Kent died in 1766. 


@@@@@


doc= 15421


Kent, Nathaniel (1737-1810), land agent and writer on agriculture, was the younger son of Ambrose Kent of Penton Mewsey, Hampshire. In 1755 he began work as a clerk at Portsmouth Dockyard, and later he held a secretarial post on the staff of Admiral Geary, at Portsmouth. From 1762 to 1765 he was in Brussels as secretary to Sir James Porter, minister-plenipotentiary, and while there he studied Flemish farming methods. On his return to England in 1766, he was asked by Sir John Cust, speaker of the House of Commons, to write an account of farming in the Austrian Netherlands, and he was encouraged by Cust and Thomas Anson, MP for Lichfield, to leave the diplomatic service and became an agricultural adviser. He became manager of Anson's property in Norfolk. Soon afterwards he met Benjamin Stillingfleet, the naturalist. 
In 1775 Kent published 'Hints to Gentlemen of Landed Property'. This was one of the first works to set out detailed plans for model cottages. It also advised landowners to drain their land, and recommended enclosure, favouring either the Flemish eight-course system of crop rotation or the Norfolk six-course system. This work made him famous, and by 1793 he had a land agency in London at Craig's Court, Charing Cross, in partnership with John Claridge and William Pearce; the firm carried out land and rent valuations, and acted as an estate agency. From 1791 Kent managed the royal estates at Windsor Great Park and Richmond Park, and by 1797 he had converted 1400 acres of parkland at Windsor into two farms, one run on the Flemish system and the other on the Norfolk one. 
Kent was asked to write a report on Norfolk for the board of agriculture in 1796. His later writings included 'The Great Advantage of a Cow to the Family of a Labouring Man' (1797), and 'An Account of the Improvements made on the Farm in the Great Park of His Majesty the King at Windsor' (1799). 
In 1808 Thomas Coke of Holkham, president of the Norfolk Agricultural Society, presented Kent with a silver goblet in recognition of his services to agriculture. Kent contributed to the progress of the 'agricultural revolution' by making improvements while managing large estates. 
Kent is known to have had a wife called Armine, but nothing else is known about his family life. He died of apoplexy at Fulham, Middlesex, on 10 October 1810. 
Another 


@@@@@


doc= 15422


Kent, Thomas (b. in or before 1410, d. 1469), administrator, was presumably of Kentish ancestry and 'of gentle birth'. He was probably at Oxford before going to Italy, where he lectured on canon and civil law at the University of Pavia in 1440-41, and became a doctor of both laws by 1442. He returned to England soon afterwards and briefly held two London rectories before being appointed in March 1444 to succeed Adam Moleyns (died 1450) as secondary of the privy seal office and clerk of the king's council. This appointment gave him considerable authority and he frequently signed council warrants. In 1445 he was appointed under-constable of England with a salary of 100 marks a year, and was seen as one of the court faction who in the parliament of November 1450 were alleged to have been 'misbehaving about your royal person', and whose members were to be excluded from the king's presence ('RotP', 5.216). It had no effect upon Kent, who, apart from his activities at the council, was very frequently sent on diplomatic missions to France, Burgundy, Prussia, Scotland, Brittany, and Spain. In July 1455, for both excessive service and old age, he was granted an indult permitting him to avoid fasting in Lent. He appears to have avoided political involvement, for he retained his appointment under Edward IV, though by 1462 he was ceasing to play any real part in the affairs of the council. He did, however, play an important part in the negotiations of 1467 for the marriage of Edward's sister Margaret (died 1503) to Charles, duke of Burgundy. 
Kent lived in the parish of St James Garlickhythe, London, and was a citizen of London. He appears to have married twice -- first, by 1451, Isobel, and second, Joan, widow of Thomas Dounton of London, who survived him. His will, made in January 1469, asked that he be buried next to his first wife, Isobel, in St James Garlickhythe. Kent bequeathed a long list of canon- and civil-law books, which he donated to the use of the prerogative court of Canterbury if housed in a suitable building near St Paul's Cathedral: if not, they were to go to All Souls College, Oxford. There is mention in the will of landed property in London and in various places in Kent, including Headcorn, Langley, and Brussyng, and also a tenement and land in Bishop's Lynn, Norfolk. Kent appointed as executors his wife and two former subordinates in the privy seal office, Richard Langport and William Tilghman. He died between 9 January and 15 March 1469: there is no evidence that he left any children. 


@@@@@


doc= 15423


Kent, Thomas (d. 1489), astronomer, was elected probationary fellow of Merton College, Oxford, in 1480 and was chaplain of the university at his death. Noted in the college register as 'a good astronomer' (Emden, 'Oxf.', 2.1039), he is said to have issued predictions as to the severe winter and famine of 1490. He died of the plague on 7 September 1489. Later antiquaries recorded his interment in either the college chapel or its burial-ground. He is said to have written treatises on astronomy, but nothing produced by him is known to have survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 15424


Kent, William (bap. 1686, d. 1748), painter, architect, and designer of gardens and interior furnishings, was baptized William Cant in St Mary's Church, Bridlington, Yorkshire, on 1 January 1686, the son of William Cant and his wife, Esther Shimmings. 
In his will registered on 25 June 1739 William Cant senior was described as a joiner, and he may have been responsible for the joinery in his house -- Kent's birthplace -- at 45 The Toft, Bridlington. Cant was no 'humble' craftsman, but obviously of local standing and some affluence; his son probably attended the town's grammar school in the Bayle. Apprenticeship lists in Hull do not support George Vertue's claim that Kent was apprenticed to a coach and house painter there in 1701; Vertue may be confusing the support given to Kent by friends in Bridlington with an apprenticeship taken out in the City of London. Vertue further reports that Kent broke this apprenticeship in 1706: if true, this may imply a self-willed young man. 
The next two years of Kent's life went unrecorded. He may already have met the antiquary John Talman, possibly through Talman's friend and fellow antiquary Samuel Gale, son of the dean of York. However, it was in Bridlington that Kent had, in Vertue's words, 'the Good fortune to find some Gentlemen of that Country to promote his studyes, [who] raisd a contribution and recommended him to propper persons at London to direct him to Italy' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.139). These included Kent's first patron, Sir William Wentworth of Bretton Park, West Riding, and Sir Richard Osbaldeston of Hunmanby Hall near Bridlington. This local patronage led to the next and formative stage in the young man's career when in July 1709 Kent (no longer Cant) set sail to Italy in the galley 'Swallow' accompanied by Talman and the Cambridge virtuoso Daniel Lock. Thus by the age of twenty-five Kent had distanced himself from the circumstances of his provincial birth and become a metropolitan friend of the Italophile son of the distinguished architect William Talman. 
The 'Swallow' docked at Leghorn on 15 October 1709, and the trio of travellers arrived in Pisa on 20 October for a month's stay. They were in Florence from 18 November and left that city in April 1710. For Kent this Florentine period was one of the discovery and assimilation of Italian art in churches and private collections. Excursions are recorded to Pistoia and Lucca, and the virtuosi, dealers, and artists in Florence whom they met included the painter Giuseppe Scacciati, the sculptor G. B. Foggini, his pupil Agostino Cornacchini, and the antiquary Lorenzo Magnolfi, who acted as Talman's agent. Talman certainly, and maybe Kent and Lock too, then walked to Rome via Siena to save money. Talman lodged with the German dealer Antonio Axer on the Corso, while Kent and Lock shared lodgings with Thomas Edwards the painter, on the strada Paolina off the Corso; by 1717 Kent had moved along the street to lodge with the painter Giuseppe Pesci. On 9 May 1710 Talman wrote to his father, 'we are all in separate lodgings, but agree very well, and every Thursday ['ye couriosty day'] we spend in seeing fine palaces, as last Thursday we saw Borghese Palace' (Parry, letter 78). On 5 July 1710 he wrote again, observing Kent's 'bashful temper and inexperience in writing' (ibid., letter 103). By now Kent had probably entered the studio of Giuseppe Chiari (1654-1727) to start formal training as a painter. 
As a pupil of Carlo Maratta, Chiari would have looked up to and taught the classicism of Raphael and his school. There would be extensive copying of old masters, notably Guido Reni and Correggio, and obviously study of Raphael's work in the Vatican Loggia, the Farnesina, and the Villa Madama. In the studio with Kent was the Irish painter Henry Trench, who evoked from Vertue an anecdote that illuminates Kent's friendship with Richard Boyle, third earl of Burlington and fourth earl of Cork: Lord Burlington in Rome, wrote Vertue, 'lookt upon' Kent to be 'the better painter of the two by much' -- and because of this Trench 'took an occasion to write an expostulatory letter to this noblemen setting forth the difference of meritt on his side, more than Kent, [but to the only effect that] Lord Burlington would read it to Kent, by way of mortification -- and mirth' (Vertue, 'Note books', 4.163). This smacks of a tale humorously related by Kent himself. No drawings survive from this period in Kent's studio training: at this juncture -- around 1710-12 -- his daily tasks must be recreated from the reports and letters of his friends in Rome. He attended Talman's St Luke's feast for the leading virtuosi in May 1711 ['see 'Society of the Virtuosi of St Luke] and observed Talman's project for a monumental painting on the subject of 'Learning & arts are ye chief accomplishments of a Nobleman' (Parry, letter 183) to be executed by Chiari and Trench. He must have made many excursions, although apparently not to Naples between October and December 1710 with Talman and the portrait painter William Aikman. In March 1712 Kent accompanied Humphry Chetham, a merchant, and Lock to the Villa Aldobrandini; in April he went with Chetham to the Villa Borghese. About this time Kent met Talman's friend Burrell Massingberd of South Ormsby in Lincolnshire, initiating his joint support with his friend Sir John Chester of Chicheley, Buckinghamshire, of a gift of $40 a year in hope 'of your becoming a great Painter' (Massingberd to Kent, 14 May 1713, Lincoln Diocesan Archives, 2MM B19A), no less than the 'Raphaelus' 'secundus'. 
Kent's apogee as Chiari's pupil was in June 1713, when he was placed second in the second tier of painting classes at the Accademia di S. Luca for a drawing of the 'Miracle of S. Andrea Avellino', for which he received a silver medal from the pope. This award was trumpeted in England as if he was indeed the second Raphael. All that Rome has to offer of Kent's sojourn there is his 'Glorification of St Julian', a fresco in the cupola of S. Giuliano dei Fiamminghi in Rome, the contract dated July 1717: it is unknown what Chiari really thought of this decidedly mediocre and conventional composition. However, two British noblemen arrived in Rome who would severally change the whole course of Kent's life, drawing out of him latent interests and passions which hitherto had only been sensed by Talman perhaps. The first was the third earl of Burlington, who was there from 30 September to the end of December 1714, but apparently ill in bed all the time. Apart from Massingberd's exhortation to Kent that 'Lord Burlington is coming full of money... and loves pictures mightily' (Massingberd to Kent, 5 July 1714, Lincoln Diocesan Archives, 2MM B19A), there is no evidence of a meeting then. The second nobleman was Thomas Coke of Holkham, who arrived in Rome on 7 February 1714. Kent's introduction to the young Coke, the self-confessed 'perfect virtuoso and great lover of pictures' (Ingamells, 225) occurred in Chiari's studio, where Coke had engaged the architect Giacomo Mariari to teach him to draw architecture. When Coke and Kent set off for a companionable tour of northern Italy in June 1714, the artist's interests began to broaden. Kent was both bear leader and collector's agent on this expedition. His journal, 'Remarks by way of painting & architecture' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D.1162), begun on 6 July 1714, shows him becoming increasingly observant of architecture and gardens, but not yet attracted to the work of Andrea Palladio, to judge by the single day they spent in Vicenza. Unfortunately, Kent's sketchbook, in which he made 'sketches of some piece in every place I came' (Kent to Massingberd, 24 Nov 1714, Lincoln Diocesan Archives, 2MM B19A), is lost. By the time Coke left Italy in June 1717, a lifelong friendship had been cemented. 
How Kent began a similar friendship with Burlington is unclear. It is manifest during Burlington's visit to Genoa and the Veneto after August 1719 and when Kent was travelling from Florence to Genoa with Sir William Wentworth on the way home. Writing from Paris on 15 November 1719, Kent recollected his stay with Burlington in Genoa, and in particular how his lordship 'lik'd my designs so well both painting & Archetecture that he would make me promis at least to begin to paint for him the fierst when I come over' (Kent to Massingberd, 15 Nov 1719, Lincoln Diocesan Archives, 2MM B19A). Exactly what Kent meant by 'Archetecture' is unclear, but he probably referred to interior decoration. A year earlier Kent wrote to Massingberd that he was drawing 'continualy ornements and archetecture... things yt I think will be necessary for use in England' (Kent to Massingberd, 15 Nov 1719, Lincoln Diocesan Archives, 2MM B19A), but nearly ten years would pass before he designed an architectural exterior. Nevertheless, Kent, in his plans for the future, must have envisaged architecture proper as a subject for his professional consideration. About October to November 1719 Burlington had told him of plans 'to get architects to draw all the fine buildings of Palladio' (ibid.), and there is acknowledgement of the neo-Palladian reformation in architecture taking place in England in Kent's criticism (1719) of the 'Dam'd Gusto [that is, taste for the baroque] that has been [in England] for this sixty years past' (ibid.). 
So much of Kent's subsequent artistic achievement can be seen as an extension of his idiosyncratic self, not least in his drawings, and in many of the tasks he was happy to execute: a pram for little Dorothy Boyle, a lady's dress ornamented with the five orders of architecture, so that she appeared a 'walking Palladio in petticoats' (Lord Ilchester, ed., 'Lord Hervey and his Friends', 1950, 115-16), the uniform for the bargemen of Frederick, prince of Wales, a dog kennel, a fantastic silver surtout. This man of humble origins, who could never quite shake off the half-educated idiosyncrasy of his spelling and composition, had already earned the sobriquet of 'il Signor' when he was welcomed into Burlington House, Piccadilly, the most advanced artistic and fashionable household in London. Clearly Kent had established a personal relationship with Burlington before returning to London, for as early as 30 January 1720, hardly unpacked from ten years in Italy, he could refer to Burlington House as 'our house' when reporting Burlington's impending marriage to Lady Dorothy Savile, hoping 'vertu will grow stronger in our house and architecture will flourish more' (Kent to Massingberd, Lincoln Diocesan Archives, 2MM B19A). In London Kent met Handel and the musicians of the Italian opera and the newly formed Royal Academy of Music, the poets Alexander Pope and John Gay, and the painter Charles Jervas. The prickly Pope and Lady Burlington loved him as much as anyone, and all consorted and lived in harmony. 
Kent's easy-going and warm-hearted familiarity and his fundamentally happy temperament inspired quick affection. Some referred to him as 'il Kentino', or 'the Little Rogue Kent', or 'the Honest Signior'. No correspondence better describes Kent's character than that between Kent, Burlington, and Pope. Poet and artist constantly teased each other, variously reporting to each other: Kent to Burlington, November 1738: '[Pope is]... the greatest glutton I know... [he] told me of a soupe that must be seven hours a making' (G. Sherborne, ed., 'The Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 4, 1956, 150); Pope to Burlington: '[Come] and eat a mutton stake in the manner of that great Master, Signior Kent' (ibid., 3, 1956, 517); Pope to Burlington, January 1740: 'If he [Kent] proceeds in his carnality & carnivoracity, he must expect not to imitate Raphael in anything but his untimely end'; and Pope to Burlington, July 1734: '[Kent is] a wild Goth... from a Country which has ever been held no part of christendome' (ibid., 3, 1956, 417). In Benedetto Luti's Roman portrait of Kent in 1718 the soft features, the open eye, and the double chin of the gourmand and 'bon-vivant' can be recognized; the chins are accentuated in Bartholomew Dandridge's portrait of 'c'.1730, and even more exaggerated in Lady Burlington's sketch of Kent ('c'.1730s) drawing at a table. These images give a sense of the mirthful character reflected in the witticisms of his drawings and his lively bucolic writing which was so often, as Burlington observed, 'more allegorical as ever'. 
The impulsive Kent was a perfect foil to the austere lord, who was a rigid theorist and learned scholar, the affection of each man for the other being based on the attraction of opposites. Kent's mistress, the fat Drury Lane actress Elizabeth Butler, and their two children, to whom he bequeathed his moneys, is not proof that Kent was only heterosexual. An agreeable companion to Lady Burlington when her lord was on his travels, he became her drawing master, inundating her with news from town when she was away in the country. Unlike others who were patronized by the great, Kent was no sycophant. Nor was he a political creature; indeed he seemed almost apolitical. He confessed as much when he wrote to Burlington in that troubled Jacobite year of 1745 of his solitary enthusiasm reading a book on the Farnese Gardens and the plans of the Palatine: 'as Politicks are not my Genius, it diverts me much now at nights to look and read of these fine remains of antiquity' (Burlington collection, Chatsworth). If his lord was at least a closet Jacobite -- and even this is uncertain -- Kent was neither concerned, nor reported as such; there is no evidence that either he or Burlington was a freemason. 
In fulfilment of his prophecy in November 1719 that he would 'feirst' start work at Burlington House, Kent was soon proposing a sketch for the Great Room with ornaments 'al Italiano'. By late 1720 a 'Banquet of the Gods' was painted for the ceiling and probably grisaille ornaments for the cove: in the adjacent room was an 'Assembly of the Gods'. If contrasted with Sebastiano Ricci's oils on the staircase, or the displaced Antonio Pellegrini canvases now at Narford Hall, Norfolk, Kent was immature in composition and figural work. Surprisingly it was not Sir James Thornhill, the king's sergeant painter, but Kent, who in March 1722 was offered the commission to decorate the new Cupola Room in Kensington Palace, followed by the king's drawing-room (1722-3), the privy chamber and king's bedchamber (1723), the presence chamber and council chamber (1724), and the king's gallery, great and little closets, and staircase (1725-7). The commission was Burlington's doing, arousing violent enmity from William Hogarth, Thornhill's son-in-law, and at once set up opposing camps: those committed to Burlington's Italianate programme of reformation appearing on one side, and those promoting Lord Harley's native British one, including the architect James Gibbs, Thornhill, and Charles Bridgeman the gardener, on the other. 
The novelty of the Cupola Room was to set above the chimneypiece a marble relief by J. M. Rysbrack of a copy of a Roman marriage in the Palazzo Sacchetti (the reliefs in the stone hall and dining-room at Houghton are distinguished later examples, also by Rysbrack). Both the design for the Kensington drawing-room, and that signed and dated 1725 for the saloon at Houghton, are still late Roman baroque in composition and colouring. However, the ceiling of the Kensington presence chamber (and bedchamber and council chamber; destr.) are in the antique grotesque manner first recommended to Kent by Talman in 1717. Chiari would have approved, for the style is Raphaelesque, deriving from the decoration of the Villa Madama via both Kent's own firsthand study and drawings after antique Roman ceilings by Francesco Bartoli specially commissioned by Coke in 1718. The Kensington ceilings were the first in the eighteenth-century revival of this mode. In the Cupola Room at Kensington (from 1722) and on the king's grand staircase there, and in the king's gallery (1724), at Houghton, Norfolk (from 1726), Raynham Hall, Norfolk ('c'.1728), the Blue Velvet Room, Chiswick ('c'.1728), and at Stowe House, Buckinghamshire ('c'.1730), Kent consistently used grisaille ornaments in grey green enlivened by gilt ornament, often on mosaic grounds based on antique precedent (a technique which he termed 'al Italiano'). In this type of decoration he was far more accomplished than in conventional painting: the staircase at Houghton is a 'tour de force' of 'trompe-l'oeil' grisaille painting. He painted a grotesque ceiling at Rousham as late as 1738 and Bartoli-style coffered ceilings with painted insets at 22 Arlington Street in 1741, and at 44 Berkeley Square in 1743: both are in the style of Giulio Romano. When Kent first took responsibility for the design of the whole room is still unclear: it is not known, for instance, if Colen Campbell was responsible for the architectural wall frames in the Burlington House Great Room. Unfortunately, several of Kent's early commissions are not fully documented: ceilings for Canons, Middlesex, owned by James Brydges, first duke of Chandos; substantial interior work for Thomas Pelham-Holles, fourth duke of Newcastle, at Newcastle House, Lincoln's Inn Fields (1725); and Wanstead House, Essex (early 1720s?), where Kent painted ceilings and designed furniture and, if Hogarth's 'Assembly at Wanstead' (1729) is to be trusted, a complete room. Certainly by 1724 in the hall at Ditchley House, Oxfordshire, and at Houghton Hall, Norfolk, from 1725, Kent was in full command of the architectonic decoration of walls, including chimneypieces and doors, combined with movable wall furniture. Now he was the decorator, furniture designer, and ornamentalist. Attention to interiors and what they contained led in due course to consideration of the architectural whole, and concurrently to the surrounding garden and landscape. 
Kent attained this achievement through the normal medium of design drawings, but what was abnormal was his mode of presentation. Unfortunately the designs for Burlington House, which would have been most revealing, have disappeared in recent times. To judge by his earliest surviving design -- for the Kensington drawing-room ceiling in 1722 -- his unconventional style was not yet apparent, nor did it appear at Ditchley in 1724 (hence early misattributions to Gibbs of Kent's design for the hall). But it was full-blown by the time he was working on Houghton in 1725 and the dining-room for Charles Fitzroy, second duke of Grafton, in 1728. The idiosyncratic characteristics of his new style were a three-dimensional painterly manner of elevation and section, the employment of a yellowy bistre wash over freehand drawing without use of ruler, and the many witticisms and personal pentimenti added. As if she was looking over his shoulder at him drawing Grafton's dining-room, Kent sketches in the head of Lady Burlington; in views of Chiswick a dog pees against his leg; while a donkey brays under the triumphal arch at Holkham. These amusing pentimenti abound. Kent composed as a painter, and although his office did produce conventional working drawings of plan and elevation for execution at the site, he rarely used the ruler, but in perspective washed his way across paper just like a topographical artist. For an architect this is unique: Burlington, Henry Flitcroft, and Isaac Ware never emulated his picturesque manner. It had several sources. One signal influence was to be found in the early 1720s in the library of William Cavendish, second duke of Devonshire, at nearby Devonshire House in Piccadilly: Claude Lorrain's precious 'Liber veritatis'. It is inconceivable that the curious Kent did not examine the bistre-yellow-washed arcadian compositions by a painter familiar to him as a student in Italy. Another influence is the volume of Inigo Jones's masque designs acquired by Burlington about 1724, in which are to be found parallels with the drafting style of Kent's water garden projects for Chiswick in the early 1730s. If Kent's newly invented mode was unconventional for architectural design, it was revolutionary when he turned his mind to landscape. 
Concurrent with mural paintings, Kent soon considered the design of furniture: in this too he struck out in unfamiliar directions. The first evidence of his abilities as a furniture designer is in the Houghton saloon elevation, dated 1725: this showed furniture and pictures in position, as indeed he was to propose at Kensington. Significantly, this mode of presenting a design has precedents in England only in drawings by John Talman. The Houghton side-tables shown in the design are of a scrolled foliate sort, not unlike the Chiswick Gallery tables, which may have first been made for the Old House at Chiswick shortly before 1724. His furniture must be assessed with his drawings made in 1725 for Pope's 'Odyssey' (1726), engraved by Peter Fourdrinier. Kent's first attempt at book illustration occurred in 1720 with the frontispiece to 'Mr Gay's Poems on Several Occasions', and significantly this is conventional, with none of the baroque flourishes to be found in the Veneto-Florentine-Roman style furniture and decoration of the 'Odyssey' illustrations, and of course likewise in the 1725 Houghton design. What is exceptional in Kent's translation of this Italian style, formulated by such designers as Andrea Brustolon, Giovanni Giardini, and G. B. Foggini, into his own furniture, is his singular incorporation of classical ornament such as Vitruvian scroll, wave moulds, Greek key, enclosed guilloche, interwoven bands, key meander -- essentially the vocabulary of Palladio's ornamental trim. It first appears at Kensington, and it is tempting to envisage Burlington and Kent together discovering Jonesian (that is, Palladian) ornament through their joint study of the designs by Palladio, Jones, and John Webb bought by Burlington from John Talman in 1720-21. With this austere classical ornament Kent combined into his furniture compositions, foliate, scallop shell, fish scale, and reversed scroll ornament, using large shells in particular as terminations, as in the green velvet state bed at Houghton (1732), or as focal points on chair rails or table centres. 
Although Kent's furniture is strongly sculptural, it is also architectonic. In the same category as furniture must be judged the state barge designed for Frederick, prince of Wales (1732). There was clearly sympathy between prince and artist: in the prince's masquerade of 1731 he was a shepherd attended by eighteen huntsmen 'dressed after a drawing of Kent's, in green waistcoats, leopardskins and quivers at their backs... antique gloves with pikes up to their elbow, and caps and feathers upon their heads like a Harry the 8th by Holbein' (Lord Ilchester, ed., 'Lord Hervey and his Friends', 1950, 115-16). If the design of Kent's furniture is seen as grammatically wilful, and if wilful means breaking the rules, then it has affiliations with the mannerist tendencies to be observed in his architecture after 1730. Not surprisingly, the furniture designer soon turned to consider ornamental items and utensils. The key document for these is a book by Kent's acolyte John Vardy, 'Some Designs of Mr. Inigo Jones and Mr. William Kent' (1744). Here are illustrated fourteen designs for chandeliers, tureens, dish covers, candlesticks, cups and covers, and various items of plate that seem mostly to have been made after the mid-1730s: they include a table centre as part of a service for Frederick, prince of Wales (1745-6), Colonel Pelham's gold cup (1736), and silver chandeliers for George II at Herrenhausen. 
Kent's education as an architect began at Chiswick, not in Italy, although his sketchbook and what was stored in his memory provided a rich quarry. By 1719 Burlington had determined to be an architect, and by 1721 he was designing Tottenham Park, Wiltshire, for Lord Bruce, and in 1722 the Westminster dormitory. In 1723, with the design for General Wade's house in Old Burlington Street, he was delving into the designs by Palladio. By 1725, when the decision was taken to build his villa at Chiswick, Burlington had established professional drawing offices managed by Henry Flitcroft, his clerk of the works, in Burlington House and at Chiswick: this was Kent's learning ground. Crucial was Burlington's discovery of Jones's ornamental vocabulary through the study of his surviving works and his designs, the first step towards Burlington's emergence as the British Vitruvius -- an achievement from which Kent cannot be excluded. The Jonesian vocabulary is evident in Kent's designs for chimneypieces through the 1720s: these were not the literal translations from Jones as favoured by Burlington, but incorporated Jonesian elements and ornament. The real catalyst that converted Kent the decorator into Kent the architect was the task given him by Burlington in 1724 to edit 'The Designs of Inigo Jones... with some Additional Designs' (by Burlington and himself), which appeared in two volumes in 1727. The watershed between decorator and architect occurred about 1730, and it is significant that only one design for exterior architecture by Kent survives before that date. By February 1731 Isaac Ware had advertised his 'Designs of Inigo Jones and Others', containing garden buildings by Kent that must all have been designed about 1730: the Temple of Venus at Stowe, Buckinghamshire, a temple and obelisk at Shotover, Oxfordshire, and two garden buildings at Claremont, Surrey. By about 1730, too, Kent had designed the Queen's Hermitage in Richmond Gardens, and at Pope's Twickenham Villa garden ornaments and the Shell Temple. The first architecture of any substance is Kew House, for Frederick, prince of Wales, designed in 1730. The new refronting -- incorporating open pediments -- derived from the reconstruction drawings by Palladio of the Roman baths, then in Burlington's possession; these were edited by Burlington as 'Fabbriche antiche disegnate da Andrea Palladio' (1730), for which Kent provided a title-page and tailpieces and Ware drawings for the engraver. 
As this one work transformed Burlington from a Palladian into a proto-neo-classic Vitruvian architect, so too was it a powerful influence upon Kent. This is first manifested in Kent's unexecuted designs for the Painted Chamber at Westminster in 1730, boasting an antique Roman front with a tripartite window set under a Diocletian one, lighting a gallery based upon a Roman reconstruction by Palladio. The encircling ornamental Roman Trajanesque frieze has no precedent in conventional European architecture before 1760. The difficulty of disentangling Kent's work from Burlington's can be seen when this Westminster project is compared with Burlington's Vitruvian York assembly rooms, also begun in 1730. It is even more evident when Burlington, Kent, and Coke (now Lord Lovell) conspired to design Coke's Holkham Hall, Norfolk, from 1733. Holkham was a collaborative effort, demonstrated when Coke wrote to Burlington on 26 November 1736, 'I shall wait on you with my portfeuill and make the Signor scold, for now we must think of the inside of the rooms' (Burlington correspondence, Chatsworth). Kent was directly responsible for the exterior, the hall, and the inside of the south-west pavilion. The executant architect and clerk of the works was Matthew Brettingham, who completed the interior in a less disciplined version of Kent's decorative style long after the deaths of Kent and Burlington -- and subsequently claimed the whole as his own in 'The Plans and Elevations of the Late Earl of Leicester's House at Holkham' (1761). Holkham is a perfect fusion of Palladian and Jonesian elements: the tower house is derived from Burlington's Tottenham crossed with Jonesian Wilton House, with Palladian windows set in relieving arches, and incorporating many elements from Chiswick. Its columnar hall of imperial Roman grandeur was a worthy successor to the York assembly rooms, and served as a model in private and public works throughout the world for the next two centuries. 
The Westminster commission was a result of Kent's membership of the board of works. Through Burlington's influence he had a seat on the board as master carpenter from May 1726. In 1728 he was favoured by a 'new constituted place' of surveyor or inspector of paintings in the royal palaces, and in 1735 became master mason and deputy surveyor of the works. His works in this capacity began in 1731 with the Royal Mews on the site of the present National Gallery and Trafalgar Square. Kent's many designs show him experimenting with mannerist devices, such as keystones breaking up into entablatures or partly rusticated string courses, reflecting his study of Giulio Romano. In the final mews design Kent turned to more conventional sources found in Jones and Campbell, combined with a novel adaptation of the wall of Palladio's nave of San Giorgio Maggiore with Diocletian windows in blank arcading to light the interior of the stalls, themselves based upon what were believed to be Jones's stables at Holland House, Kensington, published by Ware in his 1731 book. The method by which Kent breaks up the facade into separate and sometimes discordant elements has been analysed by Rudolf Wittkower. It occurred in the pavilion fronts at Holkham, in the Link Building added to Chiswick in 1733, in the model for a royal palace in Richmond Gardens (1734), and in many unexecuted designs for buildings, both large and small. But this manner of design is also to be recognized in interiors: notably the mannerist wall elevations of the proposed Westminster Painted Chamber (1730), Queen Caroline's Library in St James's Palace (1736), and in the stringing out of the pavilions of the Horse Guards designed by Kent shortly before he died in 1748. Clearly Kent was the favoured architect of the board, although it is not clear how far the Burlingtonians -- Burlington, Kent, Flitcroft, Ware, and Vardy -- really were conspiring to establish a national Palladian style for England. Certainly Kent's Mews of 1731 and the Treasury buildings of 1733 stood out as prominent new works on the London scene, in particular the Treasury; this showed Kent departing from the Palladian and Burlingtonian norm in the use of rustication to articulate facades as wall mass, minimizing or eliminating exterior orders. 
Had Richmond Palace been built, and Kent's and Burlington's designs for a new houses of parliament, the situation would have been different. In March 1733 Burlington is reported to have a design in hand, following the rejection of designs by Hawksmoor. From then until at least 1739 numerous schemes and more than 100 drawings were produced. Except for one interior of the House of Lords, dated 1735 and idiosyncratically drawn by Kent, many are plans and elevations copied by draughtsmen in the works office. However, the presence of a large number in Kent's hand demonstrates the importance he gave this project, and also shows that he was capable of competing with those in his office as a conventional draughtsman. In effect, they comprise the York assembly rooms, Holkham, and Richmond Palace, writ large on the scale of imperial Rome. In the earlier schemes the purity of Burlington's Vitruvian architecture shines out, but when the project was revived early in 1739, Kent alone was in control, producing more conventional elevations as a worthy successor to the celebrated designs by Jones and Webb for a Whitehall Palace. Like that palace, the houses of parliament designs have entered the mythology of great lost opportunities. 
In his late works of the 1740s Kent began to unshackle himself from the Burlingtonian norm. Worcester Lodge at Badminton House, Gloucestershire, completed just after Kent's death, would have received the imprimatur of Giulio Romano as a great work, even if one on a small scale. As David Watkin has percipiently observed, it maintains 'a perfect balance between the opposing tensions of Baroque and Palladian' (Colvin, 'Archs'., 581). This is true too of the Banqueting House at Euston, Suffolk (1746), and if baroque implies movement, nothing could be more baroque than the staircase in 44 Berkeley Square (1742), which would not evoke surprise if found in a Turinese palace by Fillipo Juvarra. The suggestion of a connection with Juvarra is not far-fetched: that architect was in London in 1720, and made a gift of a sketchbook to Burlington in 1730. The staircase at 44 Berkeley Square is a piece of theatre, recognized as such in the words of Horace Walpole: 'as beautiful a piece of scenery and, considering the space, of art, as can be imagined' (H. Walpole, 'Anecdotes of Painting', 1798, 491). Baroque too is the extraordinary vaulted system of the saloon ceiling in 22 Arlington Street (1741). Yet late in life, concurrent with the Worcester Lodge, at Wakefield Lodge, Northamptonshire, the last work for his patron Charles Fitzroy, second duke of Grafton, Kent produced a house that might have found a place in Nicholas Ledoux's Parisian works. Frontally it is a Palladian tower house with Roman bath open pediments. However, the austerity of its elevations, the succession across the second storey of semi-blind lunettes -- the huge centre one spanning the width of the single storey portico, and the ground-floor Palladian windows -- blind where the outer lights should be, endow this hunting-lodge with qualities that would not look out of place in France in the 1770s. 
Among Kent's board commissions the gateway to the Clock Court of Hampton Court Palace (1732) and the screen to Westminster Hall (1739) were Gothic -- as too was the Gothic pulpit and choir furniture in York Minster (1741), and the choir screen in Gloucester Cathedral (1741). To these can be added the wings to the Tudor gatehouse of Henry Pelham's Esher Place, Surrey (1732), the wings and fenestration to Rousham House, Oxfordshire (1738), and the attributed Laughton Tower, Sussex, built for Pelham. This phenomenon of the 1730s allowed Kent to play pioneer in the making of an associational Gothic that earlier had occasionally been practised by Wren and Hawksmoor. In Howard Colvin's apt words, these works 'establish him as the creator of an English rococo Gothic happily free from antiquarian preoccupations' (Colvin, 'Archs'., 581). Esher in particular, and Kent's Gothic works engraved by John Vardy, established a Gothic formula adopted throughout the first half of the eighteenth century. Shortly before his death Kent drew upon these Gothic experiences when preparing the illustrations for Thomas Birch's 1751 edition of Spencer's 'Faery queen'. 
When, by 1730, Kent had turned to the professional design of architecture he was also ready to consider gardens and parkscape. What he achieved was coloured by his memories of ten years in Italy, the 'garden of the world'. During his Italian years Kent expressed no view of what he saw of gardens. His visual responses then were intuitive rather than based upon book learning, which would come later. The ten years he spent in the Burlington House circles following 1719 were crucial, certainly through his study of Claude's 'Liber veritatis'. He may have recorded Italian villa gardens in his sketchbook, but even so, such sketches would have been partial. What he did not see personally, he would have studied in such works as G. B. Falda's 'Li giardini di Roma' of 1683. Only later would he have read the English translation in 1707 of J. F. Felibien's 'Villas of Pliny' to learn about ancient Roman gardens, and later still Robert Castell's 'Villas of the Ancients Illustrated' (1729). It is far more likely that his real education began in England after 1720, observing the revolution that Vanbrugh and Hawksmoor were effecting in the making of the sublime Roman templescapes at Castle Howard with temples, belvederes, pyramids, obelisks, arches, and Roman bridges. So talked of was this garden that surely Kent or Burlington would have gone over to Lord Carlisle's from Burlington's Londesborough, barely 25 miles cross-country. Kent was also aware of the partial emancipation of the old formal gardens once constrained by their walls and avenues that had continued apace during the first twenty years of the century. His view of these old gardens is only recorded through the pen of Lord Lovell, who wrote to Burlington in 1736 about 'those damned dull walks at Jo: Windhams those unpictoresk those cold & insipid strait walks wch make the signor sick' and mischievously referred to Kent as 'Signor Cazzo Vestito' (Burlington correspondence, Chatsworth). What is amazing about Kent the gardener is the burst of activity altering gardens around 1730. He was at Pope's house at Twickenham; at Stowe, Buckinghamshire, from 1730 to 1735, creating the Elysian Fields and at least seven garden buildings; in Richmond Gardens, Surrey, erecting Queen Caroline's Hermitage -- and in 1735 Merlin's Cave; at Shotover, Oxfordshire, establishing a new area of landscape garden with a temple and an obelisk; and at Claremont, Surrey, radically altering the formal Vanbrughian gardens and adding three more temples and buildings. By 1733 the renovations at Chiswick had commenced, with Kent now entirely in charge of all buildings and landscape; and the new garden for Frederick, prince of Wales, at Carlton House, Pall Mall, London, was begun with its octagonal domed temple, virtually a Chiswick in miniature. By 1735 the huge Roman layout of Holkham, Norfolk, was commenced as a miniature Castle Howard; and Esher Place, Surrey, was well in progress as perhaps the most complete and satisfying of all Kent's creations: 'Kent is Kentissime there' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.71), as Walpole wrote to George Montague in 1748, meaning more perfect perfection. Walpole's rapturous description of Esher (to Montague) on 19 May 1763 evokes more than any other the Georgian aesthetic response to a Kentian garden: 'The day was delightful, the scene transporting, the trees, the lawns, cascades, all is the perfection in which the ghost of Kent would joy to see them... in short it was Parnassus as Watteau would have painted it' (ibid., 10.72). In 1738 Kent began to modify the old formal layout at Rousham, Oxfordshire, to surround the extended house in the Gothick style for his old friend General Dormer. To these must be added work in the 1740s at Badminton, Gloucestershire, Euston, Suffolk, and Horseheath Hall, Cambridgeshire. The list is certainly incomplete. It was Walpole, the first biographer of Kent, who in his essay 'On Modern Gardening', by writing that Kent 'leapt the fence and saw that all Nature was a garden' (H. Walpole, 'On Modern Gardening', ed. W. S. Lewis, 1931, 43-4), first mistakenly set him up as a prologue to Capability Brown. Kent would not have acknowledged this: his stretches of natural landscape were always of limited extent, tied in at their extremities by ha-has, and ornamented with garden buildings scenographically situated. A catalyst was the preparation of the four frontispieces to James Thomson's 'The Seasons', published in 1730: they are Claudian, but Claude with Palladian buildings. As with Kent's response to Italian gardens, he was an intuitive designer whose only grand set piece was Holkham, where no doubt Coke had many a 'scold' with the 'signor' in devising this semi-formal layout. Kent did not use measuring rods and line: as Sir Thomas Robinson percipiently observed in 1734, 'There is a new taste in gardening just arisen... after Mr Kent's notion of gardening, viz., to lay them out, and work without either level or line' ('Carlisle MSS', 143-4) -- referring to Carlton Garden, Claremont, Chiswick, and Stowe. Kent's drawings bear this out and effect a revolution in the manner by which he literally paints his groves across sheets of paper and transforms them into reality. 
Vertue attributed Kent's death to a dropsical inflammation ending in 'a mortification in his bowells & feet especially inflamd'; until the last on 12 April 1748 he was 'attended... with great care at Burlington house'. A week later he was taken to his beloved Chiswick in 'A herse & 9 morning coaches' and buried in the church there 'in his noble patron's vault' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.140). In his will he stipulated exactly what all his friends were to receive in his memory, and was particularly generous to Elizabeth Butler and their two children. Kent's designs are scattered through many public and private collections. The bulk are held in London by the British Museum, the Public Record Office, the Royal Institute of British Architects, Sir John Soane's Museum, and the Victoria and Albert Museum; in Oxford by the Ashmolean Museum, and in the Devonshire collections at Chatsworth, Derbyshire. John Dixon Hunt's monograph publishes nearly all the garden and landscape designs. 
Kent's achievement as painter, designer, architect, and gardener cannot be judged in isolation from his character. One illumines the other. His was a natural genius who broke out of the shackles of a provincial birth. The relationship of this low-born attractive man with the high-born Burlington has encouraged speculation as to the nature of that relationship. Certainly it was unusual and uncommon to have been taken into the household of the Boyles and treated as an equal, until laid to rest in their family vault at Chiswick. Even as early as 1719, barely six months after they had first met, Kent was using the familiar 'we' when referring to his and Burlington's artistic affairs. It was not necessarily a homosexual relationship, but was undoubtedly an attraction of opposites, the love of one man for another. As Pope's letters demonstrate, Kent was beloved by all who came into friendly contact with him. 
As a painter Kent was never more than a competent decorator, not of the mettle of a Thornhill. Nevertheless, he struck out in new directions, particularly with the revival of antique-inspired Grotesk ceiling painting. This served him well for the internal embellishment of the neo-Palladian architecture promoted and practised by Burlington from 1720, and after 1730 jointly with Kent. However, only rarely was Kent wholly party to the pedantic sources used by Burlington. His architecture was a far more powerful statement expressed in a language sometimes matching the idiosyncrasies of his writing and personality. He strove for a surface articulation and movement alien to Burlington, who had not studied the mannerist architecture of Giulio Romano in Mantua. This would profoundly affect the later works of James Paine and Robert Adam. 
Never did a painter's eye so influence the presentation of architectural designs. Kent was not trained to use the ruler. Instead, his are painterly picturesque compositions enlivened with whimsical pentimenti that have far more client appeal than the conventional orthographic plan, elevation, and section. He revolutionized the making of garden designs. He abandoned the gardener's rod and line and painted his proposed garden scenes for others to transpose into reality. 
In all he did in gardens, although Italy was never far from his thoughts, he was also keenly aware of the templescapes of Sir John Vanbrugh and Colen Campbell. He was masterful at adapting and softening earlier layouts of the formal Bridgeman school with his groves and clumps and judiciously sited garden buildings. Some of the episodes of his planting are as natural as anything by Capability Brown. To paraphrase Walpole, Kent did see that all nature could be a garden, one in which he pioneered painterly and graduated flower planting. 
Nothing could be described as more idiosyncratically Kentian than the type of furniture he was first designing for Houghton from 1726. Furniture as it had conventionally evolved from that of the late Stuart and Williamite courts reached a juncture, after which Kent created a style of furnishing appropriate for, and integrated into, the neo-Palladian interior. In this, as in everything he designed, the product could not be mistaken for that by any other designer of his time. It is truly Kentian. 


@@@@@


doc= 15425


Kent, William (1751-1812), naval officer, was the son of Henry Kent of Newcastle upon Tyne and Mary ('b'. before 1734), daughter of William Hunter, shipmaster of Leith, near Edinburgh. His uncle on his mother's side was Vice-Admiral John Hunter, governor of New South Wales (1795-1800). Kent was educated at home, joined the navy in 1763, and became a lieutenant in 1781. After continuous service in home waters, in 1794 he was appointed to command the 'Supply'. He sailed for New South Wales in February 1795, reaching Sydney on 7 September. In 1791 Kent had married his cousin Eliza Kent (1765/6-1810), daughter of William Kent of Newcastle. 
After two trips to Norfolk Island with supplies, in September 1796 Kent took the 'Supply' to the Cape of Good Hope to procure livestock, and despite her deplorable condition he successfully completed his mission, returning to Sydney in the following May. In August 1799 he was transferred to the recently arrived 'Buffalo' and in 1799-1800 he repeated the South Africa voyage before taking her to England in October 1800. On his return to Sydney in October 1802 Governor King promoted him acting commander, and the next year Kent took the 'Buffalo' to survey New Caledonia, where he discovered the magnificent Port St Vincent harbour. Sailing on to Calcutta he again procured a large cargo of livestock which he brought back to Sydney in June 1804. In October he took to Port Dalrymple in Van Diemen's Land the party forming a settlement there, and reported on its harbour; the next year he returned to England with confidential dispatches explaining the seizure of two Spanish ships off Peru by Australian vessels. He arrived at Plymouth on 22 December 1805 with birds and plants for Admiral Lord St Vincent and Sir Joseph Banks, and in January 1806 he was promoted captain. From November 1808 he took command of the 'Agincourt' and the 'Union'. 
Captain Kent was an outstanding officer; governors John Hunter and Philip King both praised his services highly and both recommended his promotion. In the colony he was appointed to the vice-admiralty court, and as a commissioned officer he served in the criminal court, where he helped both governors against the prejudices and self-interest of Judge-Advocate Richard Dore and the officers of the New South Wales Corps. King appointed him a magistrate in 1802 and the following year to a committee investigating court martial procedure. Privately he was a successful settler. In 1800 he had sold the spacious mansion he had built on his land grant in Sydney to the government for $1539; an additional sale of livestock was valued at $407. Even so, in 1805 he held 1200 acres of land, 350 sheep and a few cattle. 
Kent's wife, Eliza, died on 29 January 1810, leaving one son and two daughters; all were born in Sydney between 1799 and 1805, but all followed their father to England. Kent died in the 'Union' off Toulon on 29 August 1812. His son William junior lived in strangely straitened circumstances in Cheltenham until he visited Australia in 1838 to realize his father's property. 


@@@@@


doc= 15426


Kentigern (d. 612x14), patron of the diocese (later archdiocese) of Glasgow, was allegedly the son of St Thaney, a British princess from Lothian, and a British prince called Owain. The possibility that this parentage is largely, if not completely, fictional must be taken seriously, however. All that can be said with any confidence about Kentigern is that he was a contemporary of King Rhydderch of Strathclyde, who appears as a contemporary of St Columba (died 597) in the life of Columba written by Adomnan, 'c'.697. Rhydderch may have established the see of his kingdom at Glasgow with Kentigern as its first bishop. It is possible, however, that Glasgow may have acquired this status only in the early twelfth century. 
There is very little information for Kentigern's life that can be regarded as contemporary or impartial. The main surviving medieval account is a biography written by the accomplished hagiographer, Jocelin of Furness (probably 'c'.1180). This work was intended to replace a life of the saint commissioned by Herbert, bishop of Glasgow from 1147 to 1164, of which only a fragment survives. Neither Jocelin of Furness nor the author of the earlier life, however, were primarily concerned to write a factual account of the saint's life as this would be understood today. Other hagiographical material is found in later works (notably the thirteenth-century Sprouston breviary and the Aberdeen breviary, published in 1510). The sources which these medieval accounts drew upon are a matter of scholarly discussion and conjecture, and it is doubtful whether any genuine information about the saint can now be convincingly identified. For instance, medieval accounts agree in making Kentigern receive his education at Culross under St Serf. St Serf, however, is likely to have flourished 'c'.700, a century later than his supposed pupil. 
It has been argued 'with some diffidence' that the life of the saint written by Jocelin of Furness contains an account of Kentigern's death which includes enough circumstantial detail to enable a plausible reconstruction of what occurred (McRoberts, 50). Not only are there elements in Jocelin's narrative of Kentigern's death which cramped his literary style, and which he presumably felt obliged to repeat because they were too well known, but there are liturgical aspects which would have become obsolete not long after Kentigern's day. According to this reconstruction, Kentigern's fatal illness struck him when he was performing the annual ceremony of baptism at the cathedral at the feast of the Epiphany. The saint was so decrepit that he had to wear a bandage round his head to support his lower jaw and prevent his mouth from hanging open. After delivering a homily from his ornate stone episcopal throne, he was assisted to the font. The water had been warmed to make the ceremony more tolerable in the midst of winter, and the aged bishop began to baptize the catechumens one by one. The effort was too much for him, however, and he collapsed, dying a week later, on 13 January. He was buried beside the altar of his cathedral. 
There is uncertainty about the precise year in which Kentigern died. In 'Annales Cambriae' it is recorded as nine years after the '160th year' after 444 but also two years before the '170th year', which would suggest 612 or 613. To add to the confusion, however, 'Annales Cambriae' placed the death of Aedan mac Gabran, one of the most famous kings of Dal Riata, six years earlier than Kentigern's death. Aedan probably died in 608, which would point to 614 as the actual date of Kentigern's death. It may be significant that Irish chronicles which share material with 'Annales Cambriae' placed the obits of Aedan and others two years too early, which could reinforce the suggestion that the notice of Kentigern's death in 'Annales Cambriae' is as much as two years wide of the mark. 
St Kentigern became the focus of a cult centred on Glasgow and was closely associated with the kingdom of Strathclyde. A cluster of dedications to the saint in Cumberland may reflect the recovery of this area by Strathclyde in the tenth century. His cult also spread as far as north Wales, and it has even been suggested that St Machar, patron of the diocese of Aberdeen, is merely St Kentigern in another guise. The existence of a Gaelic pet-form of his name, Mo Choe (or Mo Cha(tha)), besides the well-known Cumbric pet-form Munghu (Mungo), suggests that his cult became current among Gaelic speakers as well as the Britons of Strathclyde in the century after his death. He has remained as a powerful symbol of Glasgow's identity throughout the city's development as a medieval burgh and as a modern commercial centre and Mungo became a popular boy's name in Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 15427


Kentish, John (1768-1853), Unitarian minister, was born at St Albans, Hertfordshire, on 26 June 1768, the only child (after the death in infancy of a daughter born in 1773) of John Kentish (died 1814) and his wife, Hannah (died 1793), daughter and heir of Keaser Vanderplank. The Kentishes were a family of landowners and brewers whose importance in St Albans runs back at least to the fifteenth century. The elder John Kentish, at one time a draper, was the youngest son and ultimately the heir of Thomas Kentish, who in 1723 was high sheriff of Hertfordshire. 
Kentish was educated at the school of John Worsley (died 1807) at Hertford and in 1784 entered Daventry Academy as a divinity student. At Daventry he was a 'parlour boarder', with better accommodation than students on the foundation and with easier access to the chief tutor, Thomas Belsham. In September 1788 with two fellow students, John Corrie (1769-1839) and William Shepherd (1768-1847), he left Daventry for the new college at Hackney, following the prohibition by the Coward trustees, who controlled Daventry, against any use of written prayers; the next year Belsham, having turned Unitarian, also moved to Hackney. 
In the autumn of 1790 Kentish left Hackney to become the first minister of a newly formed Unitarian congregation at Plymouth Dock. A chapel in George Street was opened on 27 April 1791 by Theophilus Lindsey, using a prayer book drawn up by Kentish and Thomas Porter, minister of the Treville Street congregation, Plymouth. In 1794 Kentish succeeded Porter, who, like many Unitarians in that repressive period, emigrated to the United States. In 1795 he moved to London as afternoon preacher at the Gravel Pit, Hackney, where Belsham had become the morning preacher in succession to Joseph Priestley in 1794, adding to this office appointment as morning preacher at Newington Green from 1799 to 1802 and at St Thomas's Street, Southwark in 1802-3. On 23 January 1803 he became minister of the New Meeting in Birmingham. On 28 October 1805 he married Mary (1775-1864), daughter of John Kettle of Birmingham (died 1808); there were no children. 
A full-length silhouette, executed in 1851, exhibits Kentish's short stature, portly figure, and old-fashioned costume with knee-breeches. He was a man of great personal dignity, and his weight of character, extensive learning, and ample fortune generously administered, secured him a wide respect rarely accorded a nonconformist minister. He was a sound scholar, versed in oriental languages and familiar with the works of German biblical critics. Relying heavily on biblical exegesis, he was a Unitarian of the most conservative type, holding closely to the miraculous foundation of revelation. His sermons, rigorously non-doctrinal and practical, were remarkable for beauty of style. In politics he was an old whig, as disapproving of radicals in the 1830s as he had been of his more extreme fellow students at Hackney. Until the 'Reform Act' of 1832 deprived him of his vote as a burgess of St Albans, he regularly supported the Spencer family, patrons of the borough, but looked dubiously on the narrow self-interest of other electors. 
Kentish published a number of separately printed sermons and a collection in 1848, the second edition of which (1854) carries an admirable memoir by John Kenrick (1788-1877). His most important and characteristic theological work is 'Notes and Comments on Passages of Scripture' (1844; 3rd edn, 1848). His memoir of the Revd Timothy Kenrick (1759-1804) is prefixed to Kenrick's 'Exposition' (1807). He was a frequent contributor to the 'Monthly Repository' and the 'Christian Reformer', usually with the signature N. In 1832 Kentish declined his stipend but remained a minister, continuing to preach frequently until 1844. He retained his faculties to a great age, but an attack of paralysis in 1850 began a slow decline. He died of pneumonia on Sunday 6 March 1853 at his residence, Park Vale, Edgbaston. On 15 March he was buried in the public general cemetery at Kaye Hill, Hookley, near Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 15428


Kenton, Benjamin (1719-1800), wine merchant and philanthropist, was born on 19 November 1719 at Fieldgate Street, Whitechapel, London, the son of Benjamin Kenton and his wife, Mary, who kept a small greengrocer's shop. He was educated at the parish charity school and at fifteen he was apprenticed to the landlord of the Angel and Crown inn, Whitechapel. In 1741 he became waiter and drawer at the Crown and Magpie in Aldgate, an inn frequented by sea-captains whose vessels berthed on the Thames. The owner had discovered the technique of bottling beer so that it withstood the high temperatures and rough passage around the Cape, and had built up a substantial export trade. The inn was also famous for its sign of a stone crown surmounted by a magpie carved in pear wood. When the landlord removed the magpie and changed the name of his beer to Crown Beer, the quality is said to have suffered. The loss of the magpie was blamed and trade declined. 
Kenton, however, was popular with the seamen. A witty and attentive waiter, contemporaries recalled how he kept two candles constantly burning on the bar to remind him that as they dimmed he needed to attend to every candle in the house. When the owner died, the customers put up the capital for Kenton to take over as landlord. His first task was to restore the magpie and, with it, the inn's reputation. Kenton prospered, and in 1765 moved to new premises in the Minories, where he quickly established himself as a wine merchant. With expert financial guidance from his banker friend, Thomas Harley (1730-1804), alderman of Portsoken ward, his business profits were transformed into a considerable fortune. 
Kenton was an active member of the Vintners' Company; in 1768 he was elected to its court and, in 1776, to the position of master. He donated $4250 to enlarge the company's almshouses at Mile End. A trustee of the Sir John Cass School and governor of the Foundling Hospital, he gave liberally to many charities, including the Whitechapel School where he was educated, and a number of other charity schools. He bequeathed $20,000 to Hetherington's charity for the blind, and $5000 each to St Bartholomew's, Christ's, and Bridewell hospitals. 
Kenton was a man of solid proportions, with a slight inward squint. He was predeceased by his wife (whose name is not known), and by his children, including at least one son and a daughter. His son became an eminent druggist in Lawrence Lane, Cheapside, and died a wealthy man in his own right. His daughter died from tuberculosis before her intended marriage to David Pike Watts, her father's clerk. Kenton had opposed the engagement, but ultimately the men became close friends and Watts, as Kenton's main beneficiary, reputedly inherited almost $300,000. Kenton died at his home in Gower Street on 25 May 1800 and was buried in St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney. An annual sermon to commemorate his benefactions to the Vintners' Company was established, and a street near the Foundling Hospital was named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15429


Kenton, Nicholas (d. 1468), Carmelite friar and preacher, was born in Kenton, Suffolk. He joined the order at Ipswich and undertook his early studies in London, where he was ordained subdeacon on 2 March 1420 and priest on 21 December 1420, before attending Cambridge University, where he had graduated DTh by 1444. In the same year he was elected provincial at Stamford, and held this office until he resigned in 1456. But he acted as vicar-general in later years, and in that capacity presided over the provincial chapter held in London in 1468 to elect a successor to John Milverton (died 1487), who was imprisoned in Rome. Kenton died shortly afterwards on 4 September 1468, in the Carmelite house, London. 
John Bale wrote that Kenton was known throughout England for his inspiring sermons and his skill in explaining complicated subjects. Kenton composed a collection of metrical prayers to the saints, written during his travels around the province, and Bale preserves one celebrating the canonization of Sant'Alberto of Sicily in 1453 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 73, fol. 91'v'). Other works, now lost, include theological lectures given at Oxford, collections of sermons, the lives of Elijah the Prophet and Cyril of Jerusalem, and a collection of over 212 letters. One letter survives, appealing to the king for the return of an errant friar, and John Bale preserves the text of another recommending Thomas Scrope (died 1492), along with notes on some others (TNA: PRO, C81/1793/25; BL, Harley MS 1819, fols. 196'v'-197, 200-200'v'). Kenton has been credited with writing the lessons for the Carmelite feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmel, but this is doubtful. The miraculous cure, through the intercession of Sant'Andrea Corsini, which is said to have happened to Nicholas Kenton at Florence, should more correctly be assigned to John Keninghale (died 1451), an earlier provincial. 


@@@@@


doc= 15430


Kenyon, John (1784-1856), patron of the arts and poet, was born in December 1784 in the parish of Trelawney, Jamaica, the eldest of three sons of John Kenyon (Kennion), wealthy sugar plantation owner, and his wife, a daughter of John Simpson of Bounty Hall. After the death of his wife in 1789, Kenyon's father brought John and his brothers Edward and Samuel to England, probably to the vicinity of Chester. On the death of their father about 1792, the boys' uncle Samuel Kenyon became their guardian and custodian of their considerable property. As a youth, John attended schools at Cheshunt (where Robert Browning's father was a fellow student), Fort Bristol, and Charterhouse School, London. He also received tutoring in science by William Nicholson of the Philosophical Institute. Kenyon matriculated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1802, but left without a degree in 1803 or 1808. He entered Lincoln's Inn in 1804. 
Kenyon lived at Woodlands, between Alfoxden and Nether Stowey, between 1802 and 1812, and became acquainted with Thomas Poole, S. T. Coleridge, Robert Southey, and William Wordsworth. He also married in this period. His wife's death at Naples in 1818 terminated their European tour, begun in 1815. After his second marriage, to Caroline Curteis of Lewisham in 1822, Kenyon and his wife made Bath their headquarters, with frequent visits to London and the channel resorts until they left for a year in Italy in 1830 when they became acquainted with the Landors at Fiesole. On their return to London, the couple probably established themselves at 39 Devonshire Place, the home of Caroline's wealthy brother John Curteis, until her death on 6 August 1835. 
A seasoned traveller and a lion of London society, Kenyon made his home a mecca for the intelligentsia and for foreign travellers, especially Americans. Several names suggest the scope of his guest list: Charles Babbage, Charles Dickens, Benjamin Haydon, Charles Macready, Sir Anthony Panizzi, Bryan Procter, and Henry Crabb Robinson. A close friend of Elizabeth Barrett, his distant cousin, and of Robert Browning, Kenyon was influential in igniting their famous correspondence and courtship and supported their marriage. To Kenyon, Browning dedicated his 'Dramatic Romances and Lyrics'. Failing to procure for Kenyon a copy of the picture of 'Andrea del Sarto and his Wife' in the Pitti Palace, Browning wrote and sent to him from Florence the poem 'Andrea del Sarto'. When the Brownings visited England, Kenyon offered them his home and there in 1856 Elizabeth Barrett Browning finished 'Aurora Leigh' and dedicated it to Kenyon in grateful remembrance of a friendship 'far beyond the common uses of mere relationship and sympathy of mind'. Another friend of several years was Sarah Bayley, a prominent Unitarian and intellectual, who aroused feelings of admiration and spiritual kinship in Kenyon on his first meeting her at Rome and Naples in 1840; she was to see him through his painful illness and death. 
Kenyon's encounters with George Ticknor and Edward Everett in Paris in 1817 promoted his acquaintance with increasing numbers of Americans whom he entertained and aided with letters of introduction. James T. Fields, George Hillard, Charles Eliot Norton, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, and James Lowell were guests at his renowned breakfast and dinner parties, as were Daniel Webster and his family whom Kenyon escorted to Oxford on the occasion of Webster's speech at the agricultural meeting in July 1839. Indeed, his later claim to fame rested largely on his generosity; his favourite role of host fostered his aptitude for arranging fruitful introductions, which in turn contributed to his popularity and extended his influence. Kenyon's reputation as a wealthy dilettante with a genial disposition and generous purse was universally acknowledged. Crabb Robinson's remark about Kenyon's having the 'face of a Benedictine monk and joyous talk of a good fellow' is legendary. The author of the obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (March 1857) emphasizes his acts of charity; George Hillard in his letter to the 'Boston Daily Courier' (9 March 1857), while noting him to be 'remembered more for what he did than for what he wrote', stressed his qualities as a scholar and gentleman. 
Kenyon published three volumes of poetry: 'A Rhymed Plea for Tolerance' (1833), a strong statement of his liberal religious thinking rather than an imaginative effort; 'Poems, for the Most Part Occasional' (1838); and 'A Day at Tivoli, with Other Verses' (1849). The prefaces and many of the poems, aptly called 'occasional', reflect his inherent modesty and familiarity with English literature and its backgrounds. His poem, 'Champagne rosee' appeared in the 'Oxford Book of English Verse' in 1939. 
Kenyon's reputation for generosity is confirmed by his will with its lengthy list of legacies which included $5000 to University College Hospital, $10,500 to the Brownings, and $5000 and Lime Cottage at Wimbledon to Miss Bayley. 
Kenyon died at his home, 3 Parade, West Cowes, on 3 December 1856, probably of cancer, although the death certificate reads 'natural decay'. His remains were interred in the Curteis family vault in St Mary's churchyard, Lewisham. 


@@@@@


doc= 15431


Kenyon, Lloyd, first Baron Kenyon (1732-1802), judge, was born at Gredington, near Hanmer, Flintshire, on 5 October 1732, the second (but first surviving) son, and heir, of Lloyd Kenyon (1696-1773) and Jane (1703-1771), the eldest daughter and coheir of Robert Eddowes, of Eagle Hall, Cheshire, and his wife, Anne. Kenyon's father, the son of a Manchester barrister, was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, and admitted to Gray's Inn, but became a landed gentleman and a justice of the peace. Lloyd, as his younger son, was educated at the village school in Hanmer and then at Ruthin grammar school before being articled to Mr Tomkinson, or Tomlinson, an attorney in Nantwich, Cheshire, for five years. The exact chronology is unclear; Kenyon's elder brother, Thomas, died in 1750, apparently the year after Kenyon began his articles. Kenyon was admitted to the Middle Temple on 7 November 1750 but seems to have remained in Nantwich to finish his articles and probably moved to London in 1753. As a student for the bar he followed the common practice of taking notes of cases in Westminster Hall; they were edited and published after his death as 'Kenyon's Reports', and covered the period from 1753 to 1759. In February 1755 he was living in Bell Yard, Carey Street, near the Temple. He was called to the bar on 9 February 1756, and through his long professional life worked and then presided in the highest courts of equity and the common law. 
Kenyon's earnings at the bar rose from $17 to only $80 after seven years, as he followed the north Wales and Oxford assize circuits and attended quarter sessions. He was good friends with John Dunning and came to the notice of Edward Thurlow, both of whom respected his knowledge of the law. In the 1760s they began relying on him heavily, recommending him to solicitors and rapidly forwarding his career. By the late 1770s his income approached $6000; his earnings from chancery business and arguing briefs was almost matched by fees for opinions. In 1778 and 1780 he refused judicial appointment at Westminster, which would have ended private practice and probably not led to the highest posts, which usually followed a parliamentary career. His eminence was recognized by Lincoln's Inn, where he was admitted in 1779. When he declined a justiceship of common pleas early in 1780 he was promised the chief justiceship of Chester, which would not have barred him from practice. Thurlow, by then lord chancellor, appointed him to Chester that summer; he had been named king's counsel on 10 July. He defended Lord George Gordon on the charge of high treason in 1781 but the verdict was won by Thomas Erskine, his junior, who made his reputation in the case. Kenyon much preferred office work. His opinions on stated cases were prompt, practical, and succinct -- on the game laws for Henry Paget, earl of Uxbridge, patent issues for Richard Arkwright, land titles, conveyancing, divorce, and all the other questions crucial to a wealthy clientele. As counsel and as judge Kenyon was decisive and expeditious, the epitome of a hard-working, practical lawyer. Wilberforce wrote of him bringing home cases to be answered 'as another man would crack walnuts, when sitting tete-a-tete with Lady K. after dinner' (Kenyon, 'Life', 137). 'Lady K.' was Kenyon's wife, his first cousin Mary (1741-1808), the daughter of George Kenyon, of Peel Hall, Lancashire, a barrister, and Peregrina Eddowes; they married at Deane, Lancashire, on 16 October 1773. 
Kenyon practised for over twenty-five years before becoming a parliamentary crown lawyer, an unusually long period for a future chief justice. An expected vacancy in the Commons for Flint Boroughs in 1774 disappeared, but in 1780 he was elected for the borough of Hindon, in Wiltshire, where Thurlow managed the interest of the Beckford family. His opponents unsuccessfully alleged bribery. Kenyon seems to have been loyal to the North ministry until after the fall of Yorktown, and from December 1781 opposed the continuation of the American War of Independence in the Commons. In April 1782 the incoming home secretary, William Petty, second earl of Shelburne, offered Kenyon the post of attorney-general in the second Rockingham administration, which he accepted on Thurlow's advice (17 April 1782). As chief law officer, to the dismay of some colleagues, he pursued the former paymaster-general of the forces, Richard Rigby, and the former treasurer of the navy, Welbore Ellis, for failing to account for monies, and advised the prosecution of John Powell and Charles Bembridge, the cashier and accountant in the pay office. The episode provided an opportunity to harass Edmund Burke, whose campaign against Warren Hastings Kenyon deplored. Burke, then paymaster-general, unwisely defended his clerks: one committed suicide and the other was later convicted. Kenyon remained attorney-general in Shelburne's administration, resigned when the Fox-North coalition took office in April 1783, and voted for William Pitt's motion for parliamentary reform in May. When Pitt took office at the end of the year he persuaded a reluctant Kenyon to serve again as attorney-general from 26 December, with the expectation of appointment as master of the rolls, a common reward for politically useful lawyers since it could be held by a member of the Commons. Kenyon spoke rarely in the House, explaining the law with respect to a few proposed tax bills, defending his reputation for giving independent opinions, urging Thurlow's case for a tellership of the exchequer, and calling for an account of monies held by Rigby. His principal role was giving detailed legal advice -- as he had done for many years -- to Thurlow. 
Kenyon gave up the chief justiceship of Chester when he was appointed master of the rolls on 30 March 1784. He was sworn of the privy council on 2 April, elected to the Commons for Tregony, in Cornwall -- a Treasury seat -- on 5 April, and created a baronet (he was never knighted) on 28 July. He was appointed a lord commissioner of trades and plantations on 6 September 1786. He had a long professional association with the court of chancery, and as master of the rolls he impressed with his speed of decision and his impatience with professional delay: he once struck out an entire list of causes owing to the absence of counsel and solicitors. 
Twenty-four of Kenyon's speeches are recorded in the 1784 parliament. Nine dealt with the Westminster scrutiny of 1784, where he defended the government's position vigorously enough to move Charles James Fox to speak scornfully of his 'losing sight of the sanctity of his station both in this House and out of it' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 24.886). He subsequently was satirized in 'The Rolliad', where a mock portrait enlivens the title-page. In the Commons most of his speeches were legal arguments or assertions of his integrity as a lawyer and judge. He spoke frequently against the impeachment of Hastings and also against the proposed impeachment of Sir Elijah Impey, a friend; Burke referred sarcastically to the evident eagerness of the master of the rolls for elevation. Kenyon also spoke on the 'Ecclesiastical Courts Bill' (with some feeling on the evils of defamatory accusations) and on the shop tax of 1788. He clearly resented the attacks on his integrity that were part of parliamentary debate. His appointment as chief justice of king's bench meant that he never endured such treatment again, and he rarely spoke in the Lords. He surrendered the rolls on 7 June 1788 and, made serjeant-at-law, was appointed lord chief justice; he was created 'Lord Kenyon, Baron of Gredington' on 9 June. 
Kenyon's appointment as lord chief justice had been delayed, and disputed, in spite of Thurlow's and Pitt's support. His predecessor, William Murray, first earl of Mansfield, had wanted Francis Buller, a puisne justice of king's bench, to succeed to the chief justiceship, and stayed on the bench longer than might have been the case had he not wished to exclude Kenyon. 'The Times' reflected some of the considerable opposition to Kenyon's appointment, citing his lack of criminal practice and reporting from May 1786 on Mansfield's determination not to resign. In a parody of this jockeying the paper eventually reported the triumph of 'Sir Lloyd Kenyon's 'Sound Doctrine'' in 'the King's Bench Plate' ('The Times', 4 July 1788). That summer James Boswell heard it said that Kenyon did not deserve appointment because he lacked 'elegance of manners and a knowledge of the world'. Boswell differed: Kenyon was a hardworking 'real lawyer' who would be 'a good fuller's mill to thicken and consolidate the law, which was very necessary after the loose texture which Lord Mansfield had given it' ('English Experience', 234-5). This view of Mansfield, not uncommon, was undoubtedly Kenyon's. He believed law and equity should be entirely distinct in their separate courts, and in a direct criticism of the former chief justice he said 'I confess I do not think that the Courts ought to change the law so as to adapt it to the fashions of the times' ('Ellah v. Leigh', 1794). In his personality as in his traditionalism he also differed greatly from Mansfield. Kenyon was abrupt in speech and temper, often rude to counsel, not given to oratory unless it concerned an issue that touched him deeply. Usually his judgments were relatively short expositions (in part because he was likely to give an immediate and succinct oral judgment) of the technical points at issue, with fairly frequent references to manuscript cases in his own possession. 
Concern for moral principle appeared to govern Kenyon's decisions at least as much as concern for the letter of the law. In 'Read v. Brookman' (1789), he heard arguments that he could have sent to chancery. In 'Pasley v. Freeman' (1789) he agreed with Sir William Ashhurst and Sir Francis Buller to develop the tort of deceit to allow suits against third parties. The early nineteenth-century lord chancellor John Scott, earl of Eldon, later thought the case undermined distinctions between common law and equity, but the judgment was entirely consonant with Kenyon's great attachment to moral principle. He tried subsequently to extend the doctrine even further, an attempt repudiated by his brethren in 'Haycraft v. Creasy' (1801), to his great annoyance, Kenyon declaring 'that laws were never so well directed as when they were made to enforce religious, moral, and social duties between man and man'. He reversed a number of Mansfield's decisions in the area of land law. In contract law he strongly upheld the ancient common-law rule against the transferability or assignment of debts, repudiating moves made by Mansfield and Buller ('Johnson v. Collings', 1800). But it was in the law of marriage and that of markets that he most visibly rejected Mansfield's views, in seeking to impose his deeply held moral convictions on English society. 
Kenyon abhorred adultery, and in criminal conversation actions he allowed more weight to circumstantial evidence and encouraged juries to award huge punitive damages that effectively turned a civil suit into a criminal punishment. Such cases had been increasing in number before Kenyon was appointed but awards over $2000 increased fourfold while he was chief justice, and the increase in litigation that he encouraged merely reinforced his conviction that sexual misconduct was undermining social order. In 1799 he remarked that he wished adultery was punishable by death; he associated it with revolutionary irreligion and political sedition. His views were shared by many of his brethren on the legal and episcopal benches. By 1800, however, critics of Kenyon's crusade included Sir Richard Pepper Arden (master of the rolls) and Richard Brinsley Sheridan, who declared that exemplary damages in civil suits were exemplary nonsense. 
As master of the rolls in the 1780s Kenyon moderated some aspects of the law of dower that had gone against widows' interests in mid-century cases, a reflection of his conservative view of marriage. In 1792 he rejected the idea that a husband could get damages for adultery by his wife after a separate maintenance agreement, a doctrine reversed by his successor. Kenyon's judgment perhaps was influenced by his clear hostility to the implications of separation agreements: he may have thought that a husband willing to make one was inviting betrayal by his spouse. As early as 1797 he expressed doubts about the validity of separation agreements, and in 1800 established a precedent, in the case of 'Marshall v. Rutton', that strongly reaffirmed the ancient common-law idea of the legal unity of husband and wife. In doing so he overturned a line of cases by Mansfield in which contract ideology had permeated more traditional notions of marriage, making it possible to enforce separate maintenance agreements that gave the separated wife power to contract, and to sue and be sued for her debts. Kenyon objected that this would: 'place the parties in some respects in the condition of being single, and leave them in others subject to the consequences of being married; and... would introduce all the confusion and inconvenience which must necessarily result from so anomalous and mixed a character. ('Marshall v. Rutton')' The courts in other areas found no difficulty in making distinctions in such 'mixed' cases; it seems likely that Kenyon reaffirmed marital unity for the same reasons that he deplored the prevalence of divorce. His stance was shared by Eldon and by Kenyon's successor as lord chief justice, Edward Law, first Baron Ellenborough; both subsequently worked from 'Marshall' to more refined rules that none the less confirmed the diminished autonomy of the separated wife. 
Kenyon's hostility to market reasoning appeared most strongly in the last decade of his life. In 1857 John Campbell, first Baron Campbell of St Andrews, published a hostile biography of Kenyon in the third volume of his 'Lives of the Chief Justices'; in it he expressed incredulity that Kenyon had sought in 1801 to reaffirm as common-law offences the crimes of forestalling, regrating, and engrossing foodstuffs, famously compared by Adam Smith to the crime of witchcraft. Kenyon's decision responded to the two great dearths of 1795-6 and 1800-01, which presented courts and parliament with a political as well as a social crisis. Kenyon believed that immoral speculators had driven prices to artificial heights; he deplored the fact that Edmund Burke had led parliament to repeal the old criminal legislation in 1772. The chief justice encouraged successful prosecutions in 1800 of John Rusby, a dealer in the Mark Lane corn market, and Samuel Ferrand Waddington, a dealer in hops in Kent and Worcestershire. Kenyon believed that convictions in these cases would save the poor from starvation, establish precedents for the future, and prevent disorder by showing the mob that the state would protect them. The denunciations of the chief justice and the other judges in fact encouraged the mob. Huge food riots took place in London in September 1800, and the rioters celebrated Lord Kenyon in song and graffiti. Most of the cabinet were horrified by Kenyon's doctrine and its results. As popular disorder and political criticism grew in 1801, the judges began to draw back, and by 1802 the prosecutions still before the courts died with the chief justice, as did his doctrine of market criminality. Kenyon took a similar view of labour markets, in which he denounced the criminality of trade union activity ('combination') but equally strongly condemned combination by masters, and threatened to punish them more severely: 'The law of England held the balance even, upon the scale of Justice, between the rich and poor. Those who were to administer that justice, from their feelings as men, which he hoped he should always carry about him, were naturally led to protect the lower orders of the community, and who, some of them, had perhaps no other protection than the Law. ('Morning Chronicle', 23 Feb 1799)' Kenyon was acutely aware that it was a revolutionary age. His family's letters express fear of the Jacobin mob, notably during the protests against the so-called 'Two Acts', in November and December 1795, in May 1796, and in November 1800. Kenyon took precautions: early in 1799 he ordered from Birmingham, presumably for his domestic defence, six huge blunderbusses -- 'deadly instruments each capable of killing 50 men at a shot (more I believe than his Lordship's mouth ever sent from this world at one judgement)' (Matthew Robinson Boulton to James Watt, 4 Feb 1799, Birmingham City Archives, Boulton and Watt Collection, parcel B). In court he presided at several of the most important state trials of the period. His charge to the jury in 'R. v. Stockdale' (1789) gave the whole issue of seditious libel to the jury, an apparent rejection of Lord Mansfield's insistence that libel was a matter of law for the judge, and led to suggestions that he sympathized with the defendant, the bookseller John Stockdale, a supporter of Warren Hastings. His apparent inconsistency in subsequently opposing the 'Libel Act' in 1792 -- he was joined in a formal protest by Thurlow and several others that it could lead to 'the confusion and destruction of the law of England' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 29.1537-8) -- can probably be explained by his belief that the judges should be able to adapt the doctrine to the necessity of the case, including the dangers of a period of revolution. Among his other state trials were those of John Frith in 1790, for throwing a stone at the king's carriage; of Patrick William Duffin and Thomas Lloyd in 1792, for a satiric squib held to be seditious; of Thomas Paine in 1792, 'in absentia', for 'The Rights of Man', part 2; of John Frost in 1793, for seditious words; of Daniel Isaac Eaton in 1793, for publishing Paine; and of John Lambert, James Perry, and James Gray, also in 1793 (the ''Morning Chronicle' case'), for advertising a meeting of the Society for Constitutional Information, allegedly constituting a seditious libel. In the ''Morning Chronicle' case' Kenyon strongly supported the government view of the law of seditious libel and condemned the 'horrid doctrines' (Howell, 22.1017) abroad in the country; the jury none the less acquitted, after prolonged deliberations. In the trial of John Frost of the Corresponding Society for seditious libel, in May 1793, Kenyon supported the argument of the prosecution that words on the face of it seditious threw the burden on the defence to disprove intent. He emphasized also that the seditiousness of particular words changed with the danger of the times; the jury convicted. In the trial of Daniel Isaac Eaton in July 1793, for selling Paine's 'Rights of Man', part 2, in spite of his clear support of the prosecution and a charge arguably contrary to the 'Libel Act', an acquittal followed. 
Kenyon was later criticized for attending the pretrial examinations of Hardy and Horne Tooke by the privy council, but did not sit on the cases, reputedly because of fears that he would be intemperate on the bench. He heard several cases after the passage of the 'Treasonable Practices Act', in November 1795, and the 'Seditious Assemblies Act', the so-called 'Two Acts' ('36 Geo. III c. 7, 8'), which he supported. The law of conspiracy was developed rapidly by the judges in these years, and in the trial in 1796 of William Stone, for treason, justices Sir Nash Grose and Sir Soulden Lawrence, also on the bench, persuaded Kenyon to accept evidence of conspiracy that he was at first inclined to exclude. He also heard the cases of John Reeves in 1796, on the charge of libelling the constitution, and Thomas Williams in 1798, for publishing Paine's 'Age of Reason', in which he advertised his own deep religious beliefs in his charge to the jury. In the trial of John Cuthell for seditious libel (1799) Kenyon denounced the redundancy of the 'Libel Act', claiming that it added nothing to the existing doctrine of the common law. In 1800 he presided over the acquittal of John Hadfield, on grounds of insanity, for firing at the king, and had him held until the enactment of statutory authority for such confinements. 
Chief justices frequently dominate their courts, and Kenyon was no exception, sometimes clearly piqued when his court did not follow him, which happened a half-dozen times in the fourteen years that he was chief justice. His profound Christian beliefs were often expressed in court. He had been a member of the Proclamation Society (founded in 1787 to enforce the proclamation of George III against immorality and idleness) until appointed chief justice, never failed to attend Sunday worship, and invoked the deity frequently in his later cases. Sir Richard Hill, Samuel Glasse, William Wilberforce, and other prominent evangelicals were among his friends and correspondents. Kenyon led a quiet private life, did not fit easily in polite society, and disliked and distrusted the world of fashion. He entertained seldom and rarely invited members of the bar to dine. His religious earnestness, lack of a university education, and parsimony all appeared ridiculous in a wealthy lawyer and leading judge. It was reported in 1786 that: 'The Master of Rolls, says a correspondent, keeps house with even greater strictness than any of the primitive Christians; for in his honour's mansion the domestics experience the Passion all the year in the parlour, and Lent all the year in the Kitchen. ('The Times', 4 July 1786)' The stories grew with his years, and after his death were preserved in the biography by W. C. Townshend. His unpopularity with many barristers and even more attorneys encouraged anecdotes about his ignorance of Latin, coarseness, and bad temper. His partiality toward some members of the bar, notably Thomas Erskine, was notorious, as was his disdain for other counsel, including Edward Law. On one occasion he was bested. John Horne Tooke had been a companion of Kenyon when they were students at law, and in 1792 (though not a barrister) he defended himself in an action brought by Fox. His wit and subtle insolence toward the bench led Kenyon to shed tears of frustration. 
Condemning gaming, aristocratic divorce, and duelling, Kenyon attracted much hostility from the fashionable world. The prince of Wales (afterwards George IV) rebuked him for alluding to his support of a gambling club in 1799. In the same year the barrister Henry Clifford (1768-1813), a nephew of the fourth Baron Clifford of Chudleigh, made a reference to newly created peers in 'R. v. Flower', tried before Kenyon. Kenyon in turn made a slighting allusion to Thomas Clifford, first Baron Clifford of Chudleigh. Clifford retaliated in print: 'we seldom observe in our hereditary peers, those pedantic notions of impracticable morality, or that boisterous impetuosity of manners, which sometimes accompany and disgrace, even in the highest situations, those who have been raised to them from the desk, merely on account of their industry and professional success. (Howell, 27.1066)' In the following year, charging a jury in an adultery case, Kenyon criticized the loose morals of the opponents of the bill to criminalize adultery brought by William Eden, first Baron Auckland. One of them, Frederick Howard, fifth earl of Carlisle, complained of breach of privilege in the Lords. Pitt had to ask the king to restrain the prince of Wales and the royal dukes, who apparently supported Carlisle. Kenyon confided to his diary: 'That puppy and adulterous profligate the Earl of Carlisle was to bring on his Motion... against me for breach of privilege in alluding to his infamous speech on the Bill against adultery, but he withdrew his Motion' (10 June 1800; A. Aspinall, ed., 'Later Correspondence of George III', vol. 3, 1967, 358). George III liked Kenyon and in 1795 asked him whether the coronation oath prevented him assenting to measures for Catholic emancipation from the penal laws (the chief justice thought not); the king appears also to have been sympathetic to Kenyon's stand on the marketing offences. 
Kenyon's relationship with his wife was one of great mutual respect and affection. They corresponded frequently when Kenyon was on circuit or when they were apart for other reasons. During the demonstrations against the ''Two Acts'' Lady Kenyon wrote from Bath: 'If there are Riots or danger let me come to you directly and share every danger with the Man of my Heart' (25 Nov 1795; Kenyon MSS, Lancashire RO, quarto box 18). She followed his reputation closely in the press and wrote to other members of the family in praise of his jury charges; she particularly admired his rhetoric in the adultery case of Arthur Annesley, ninth Viscount Valentia. In 1796 Kenyon threatened to punish gambling even when committed by the fashionable world, and provoked a spate of caricatures, including several of Lady Buckinghamshire (Albinia Hobart) and Lady Archer in the pillory. Lady Kenyon observed that one of them was 'a very ridiculous good print if it will but deter from deserving the reality of it' (Lady Kenyon to the Hon. George Kenyon, Christchurch, 20 May 1796, misdated 1795; Kenyon MSS, Lancashire RO, quarto box 19). In spite of such satires Kenyon enjoyed good press. His hostility to dishonest attorneys and legal chicanery was frequently praised. He was considerate of the students who attended his court (in Guildhall they sat in a box near the bench) and explained the issues in the record while counsel were speaking. Many men and women of evangelical persuasion wrote to him of their appreciation of a godly chief justice, particularly after his attack on market speculators. 
Kenyon made one of the great judicial fortunes. In 1782, when chief justice of Chester and attorney-general, he earned $11,542, $7555 of it from private clients. His earnings -- rivalled by very few other lawyers -- came largely from opinions on cases, rather than advocacy, for which he had no particular gifts. His judicial posts also were immensely remunerative. The mastership of the rolls was worth between $2500 and $4000 a year in salary and fees. The chief justice of king's bench received $4000 a year and had offices in king's bench worth about $15,000 a year in his gift. Kenyon (like other chief justices) named his sons and other relatives to several: Lloyd (1775-1800) as filazer; George Kenyon (1776-1855), later second Baron Kenyon, as joint chief clerk. In 1804 Lord Ellenborough appointed Kenyon's youngest son, Thomas (1780-1851), as filazer, and in 1810 shared the post of 'custos brevium', now in his possession, with George. Members of the family still occupied several offices in the mid-1830s. 
Kenyon made shrewd purchases in Flintshire and Denbighshire, and extensively rebuilt Gredington Hall. From 1796 to 1798 he was lord lieutenant of Flintshire, and from 1796 to 1802 'custos rotulorum' of that county. He invested in government securities and lent money to landowners, and was the first judge to invest in canals. At his death, in 1802, his fortune was about $260,000, the sixth largest of the 139 judges for whom figures are available in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The illness and death of his eldest son, Lloyd, who died on 15 September 1800, almost overwhelmed Kenyon with grief. In his will he asked to be buried with him; he left $30,000 to his surviving younger son, Thomas, a jointure of $2500 to his widow, and the rest as a life estate to his elder son, George. His own health and strength declined, and he sat at assizes for the last time, on the home circuit, in the summer of 1801. In the spring of 1802 he went to Bath for the waters, and died there on 4 April. Lady Kenyon died on 8 August 1808 at her home near Ellesmere, Shropshire. They are buried at Hanmer, where a memorial commemorates Lord Kenyon's devotion to 'Religion, Law, and Order'. 


