@@@@@


doc= 15432


Keogh, John (c.1650-1725), Church of Ireland clergyman and scientist, was born near Limerick at 'Cloonclieve' (probably Clooncleagh in co. Tipperary), the son of Denis Keogh and his wife ('nee' Wittington), widow of a clergyman named Eyres. The Keoghs, descended from an old Irish Catholic family, the Mac Eochaidh, had lost their lands near the rivers Shannon and Mulkear during the Cromwellian wars. John Keogh was educated by his protestant mother who kept him at a school in Dublin, where he entered Trinity College in 1669. He was a scholar of the college in 1674, proceeded MA in 1678, and took orders in the episcopal Church of Ireland. He twice competed unsuccessfully for a fellowship of the college. John Hodson, possibly a relative and bishop of Elphin, appointed him to a living in that diocese and he was installed prebendary of Termonbarry in February 1678. 
Keogh married in 1679 Avis Clopton, daughter of Dr Rous Clopton, of an old Warwickshire family that had settled under Cromwell near Athlone, and his wife, formerly Mrs Day. The Keoghs may have had as many as twenty-one children. He settled down to a scholar's life at Strokestown, co. Roscommon, where he also kept a school and prepared pupils for the University of Dublin. His favourite studies seem to have been Hebrew and the application of mathematics to mystical religious problems. Keogh wrote a demonstration of the Trinity in Latin verse, which was shown by his son John to Isaac Newton who expressed approval of it. In his 'Scala metaphysica' Keogh attempted a mathematical demonstration of a dependence on God of a scale of beings from the highest angel to the lowest insect. A part of his extensive writings, none of which were published, may have been destroyed by a fire at his residence. However, a number of manuscript works, including a Hebrew lexicon, a work entitled 'De orthographia', Latin and Greek grammars, and an 'Analogy of the four gospels', were saved. Some of Keogh's manuscripts were deposited in the library of Archbishop William King and subsequently sold. 
In 1684 and 1685 Keogh was associated with William Molyneux and the Dublin Philosophical Society. He wrote in March 1684 to Molyneux enclosing a detailed description of co. Roscommon intended as a contribution to the Irish part of Moses Pitt's 'English atlas'. In correspondence with Molyneux, Keogh expressed enthusiasm for the aims of the Dublin Philosophical Society and received information on its progress and activities. In December 1684 Keogh informed the society of various investigations including that of a philosophical character or characteristic. He worked on this topic for about a year and at the end of 1685 he presented a discourse to the society, then under the chairmanship of St George Ashe. His philosophical character may have proved a disappointment, however, and no more was heard of the project after 1685. In one respect Keogh stood out among the members of the society, namely in his extensive use of Latin in contributions. When in 1707 and 1708 the Dublin Philosophical Society was revived under its secretary Samuel Molyneux, Keogh was once again a corresponding member reporting on curiosities such as a giant tooth and rare plants grown in greenhouses near Athlone. 
Keogh died in 1725 and was survived by six of his children including sons Michael (died 'c'.1734) and 


@@@@@


doc= 15433


John Keogh (1680/81-1754), Church of Ireland clergyman and author of scientific and medical tracts. Like their father both sons entered the church. Michael was beneficed in the diocese of Elphin at Strokestown and John, after acting for some time as chaplain to James King, fourth Lord Kingston, obtained the living of Mitchelstown, co. Cork. John married Elizabeth, daughter of Dr Henry Jennings, a cousin of the duchess of Marlborough, and had three sons and three daughters. He died in 1754 aged seventy-three. His published books, 'Botanologia universalis Hibernica, or, A general Irish herbal... giving an account of the herbs, shrubs and trees... in English, Irish and Latin' (1735) and 'Zoologica medica Hibernica, or, A treatise of birds, beasts, fishes, reptiles, or insects... in this kingdom, giving... their names in English, Irish and Latin' (1739), emphasized the medicinal value of plants and animals and separate medical tracts were appended to these. A third work, in which he included an account of his family, entitled 'A vindication of the antiquities of Ireland and a defense thereof against all calumnies and aspersions cast on it by foreigners' (1748) contains an appended etymological tract on Irish names and is distinctly patriotic in character. 


@@@@@


doc= 15434


Keogh, John (1740-1817), campaigner for Roman Catholic rights, was born in humble circumstances to Cornelius Keogh (1708-1774), labourer, and Abigail Keogh (1711-1779) in Dublin. He made his fortune in silk and brewing in Dublin, and from the lease and purchase of land. In addition to his home at Mount Jerome, Harold's Cross, co. Dublin, he acquired property in counties Sligo, Leitrim, and Roscommon which, with investments, reputedly guaranteed him an annual income of between $5000 and $6000 in the late 1790s. He was a proud man, who 'boasted of his Milesian ancestry' (Wall, 164), and his economic achievements served to highlight how unjust it was that Catholics in Ireland had to live their lives under the shadow of the penal laws. He successfully stood for election to the Catholic committee for Enniscorthy in January 1781, and he subsequently represented St Andrew's parish, Dublin, and co. Leitrim. He attended few meetings in 1781 and 1782, but he voted with the majority on 11 November 1783 when the committee controversially asserted that it was the voice of Irish Catholics and effectively invited the volunteer grand national convention to include Catholic enfranchisement in its plan of reform. This did not come to pass, but in 1784 Keogh and a small number of Catholic activists supported the alliance of Dublin and Ulster radicals who advocated a plan of parliamentary reform that promised limited Catholic enfranchisement. This was not popular with the mainstream Catholic leadership, but the committee was able to avoid a split. 
The Catholic committee was largely inactive until the election in 1790 of a new committee, in which Keogh was to the fore, energized its ranks. Early in 1791 the committee determined to press actively for the repeal of the remaining penal laws but, on meeting with stiff resistance from the Irish administration, Keogh was authorized to travel to England to lay Catholic grievances before ministers. After three months he returned with a favourable answer, but the prospects of relief were undermined by the secession in December 1791 of Lord Kenmare and his conservative allies, following their failure to convince the committee to leave Catholic relief to Dublin Castle. However, instead of acquiescing in the refusal of the Irish parliament in 1792 to respond sympathetically, Keogh intensified the campaign. He drew on his extensive financial resources, on Wolfe Tone who was recruited as secretary to the committee, and on his own formidable determination, and a Catholic convention was assembled in Dublin on 3 December 1792. Guided by Keogh the convention appointed a deputation, of which he was a member, to present to the king a statement of the grievances under which the Catholics of Ireland laboured. The deputation was favourably received, and the 'Relief Act' of 1793, which gave Catholics the vote, followed directly. 
The 1793 'Relief Act' was the great triumph of Keogh's life, though he did not escape criticism because of his refusal to hold out for full emancipation, his failure to divulge all the details of his dealings with British politicians, and his agreement to dissolve the Catholic committee. He was tempted to take a more radical stand when Catholic expectations of emancipation were dashed by the precipitate recall of the lord lieutenant, Earl Fitzwilliam, in 1795. The subsequent Catholic delegation to London, of which Keogh was a member, was accorded a frosty response. As his membership of the United Irishmen in the early 1790s attests, Keogh shared at least some of their aims, and he may have become an active United Irishman for a time in the mid-1790s. However, his instinct for self-preservation was stronger than his desire for political change. He was arrested and his house searched on a number of occasions, but he kept radicalism at a sufficient distance to safeguard himself against prosecution. With the reanimation of Catholic politics in the aftermath of the Union, his renowned vanity allowed him to be tempted back into the limelight. He participated in the discussions of the merits of presenting a Catholic petition in 1804-5, but was uneasy at what he perceived as the elitism of the organizers and withdrew. He subsequently relented, but by 1810 he was soon eclipsed by younger men, such as Daniel O'Connell, who were not prepared to be guided by him. 
Keogh died on 13 November 1817 at Mount Jerome, and was buried beside his parents in St Kevin's churchyard in Dublin. Six years later his wife, Mary Keogh (1757-1823), died and was laid in the same spot. 


@@@@@


doc= 15435


Keogh, William Nicholas (1817-1878), judge, belonged to a Roman Catholic family formerly settled at Keoghville, co. Roscommon. He was born at Galway on 7 December 1817. His father, William M. Keogh (died 1865), was a solicitor and sometime clerk of the crown for the county of Kilkenny; his mother was Mary, daughter of Austin Ffrench of Rahoon, co. Galway. He was educated at the Revd Dr Huddard's school in Mountjoy Square, Dublin, and in 1832 entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he obtained honours in science in his first and second years. He left in his third year without having taken a degree. While at Trinity he was a frequent speaker in the debates of the Historical Society, and was awarded the first prize for oratory at the age of nineteen. In 1835 he was admitted a student of the King's Inns, Dublin, and in 1837 of Lincoln's Inn. In 1840 he was called to the Irish bar, and joined the Connaught circuit, where his family connections lay. In the same year he published, with Michael J. Barry, 'A Treatise on the Practice of the High Court of Chancery in Ireland', but he never obtained any considerable practice in that court. His natural gifts were those of an advocate rather than of a lawyer; a powerful voice, an impressive face, and an impassioned delivery were combined with a ready flow of vigorous and ornate language. 
Keogh soon acquired a fair practice, principally on circuit, where, as a junior, he held leading briefs in the most important cases, and his powers of advocacy were considered so formidable that special counsel were sometimes brought down to oppose him. In 1841 he married Kate, daughter of Thomas Roney, surgeon; they had a son and a daughter. At the general election of 1847 he was returned for Athlone as an independent Conservative, the only Roman Catholic Conservative elected to that parliament. After a time he was considered a Peelite. In 1849 he was made a QC. In 1851 he took an active and prominent part in the obstructive parliamentary campaign of the Irish brigade against the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Bill'. This greatly increased his reputation and popularity in Ireland. He was the principal speaker at a mass meeting of Roman Catholics held in Dublin in August 1851 to protest against the measure, and was one of the founders of the Catholic Defence Association established in consequence of it. In the same month, together with the other members of the Irish brigade, he made common cause with the tenant right movement led by Charles Gavan Duffy, and in the session of 1852 seconded in the House of Commons the 'Tenant Right Bill' of William Sharman Crawford. At the general election of 1852 he was again returned for Athlone, and he was subsequently among those MPs who assembled in Dublin and committed themselves to remain independent of, and in opposition to, any and every government that did not concede to their policy demands on land and religion. In December 1852 Keogh and the bulk of the Irish party voted in the majority which overturned Lord Derby's ministry. In the new ministry of Lord Aberdeen (December 1852) Keogh accepted office as solicitor-general for Ireland, while John Sadleir MP for Carlow, became a junior Treasury minister. The two men's names were thenceforth linked in obloquy by nationalist propagandists who accused them of betraying, through personal ambition, a policy and a party to which they were solemnly pledged. Subsequently their defection came to be depicted as the cause of a generation of Irish youth rejecting constitutional politics and embracing Fenianism. At the time Keogh was bitterly assailed by Gavan Duffy in 'The Nation' and by Frederick Lucas in 'The Tablet', and his re-election for Athlone was opposed. His appointment was also distasteful to the Conservatives, and was attacked by Lord Westmeath in the House of Lords. At Athlone he was supported by the Catholic bishop (Dr Browne) and clergy, and was re-elected by a large majority. In January 1855 the Aberdeen ministry resigned and in Palmerston's ministry Keogh was appointed attorney-general for Ireland and was sworn of the Irish privy council. He was re-elected at Athlone without opposition. In April 1856, on the death of Mr Justice Torrens, he was appointed a judge of the court of common pleas in Ireland. Among the remarkable cases in which he was counsel while at the bar were 'Birch v. Somerville' (December 1851), an action by the proprietor of 'The World' newspaper against the Irish chief secretary on an alleged agreement to pay him for supporting law and order in his paper; 'Handcock v. Delacour', in the court of chancery (February 1855), a case involving the title to a large estate in Galway, in which Keogh's reply for the plaintiff was so touching and eloquent as to draw tears from the chancellor; and 'R. v. Petcherine' (December 1855), the trial of a Redemptorist monk on a charge of profanely and contemptuously burning a copy of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible'; Keogh conducted the prosecution as attorney-general. 
On the bench Keogh soon acquired the reputation of a judge of ability and discernment. Though not a profound lawyer, he never failed to appreciate a legal argument, and his judgments were clear and to the point. He excelled in the trial of 'nisi prius' cases; his perception was quick, he grasped the facts of the case rapidly, and presented them to the jury with clearness and precision. In 1865 he was appointed, with Mr Justice Fitzgerald, to the special commission for the trial of the Fenian prisoners at Dublin and Cork, and before them Luby, O'Leary, O'Donovan Rossa, and the other principal conspirators were tried. Luby, in his speech after conviction, acknowledged the fairness of Keogh's summing-up to the jury. In 1867 the University of Dublin conferred upon him the honorary degree of LLD. In 1872 the celebrated Galway county election petition was tried before him. The candidates at the election were Captain J. P. Nolan (home-ruler) and Captain Le Poer Trench (Conservative); the former was returned by a large majority. His return was petitioned against mainly on the ground of undue influence exercised on his behalf by the Roman Catholic clergy. The trial lasted from 1 April to 27 May, and resulted in Captain Nolan being unseated, and three Roman Catholic bishops and thirty-one priests were reported to the house as guilty of undue influence and intimidation. That Captain Nolan was properly unseated on the evidence could hardly be contested, but in the course of his judgment Keogh commented on the action of the Roman Catholic bishops and priests in terms of unusual severity. His remarks were deeply resented, and aroused much popular feeling. Meetings were held at which he was denounced, he was burnt in effigy in numerous places, and the excitement became so great that special precautions had to be taken by the government for his protection. In the House of Commons Isaac Butt, the home-rule leader, brought forward a motion impugning the conduct of the judge; it was defeated by a large majority, only twenty-three voting in its favour (9 August 1872). For the remainder of his life Keogh was the subject of constant attack by the Home Rule Party. In 1878 his health began to fail, and he died at Bingen-on-the-Rhine on 30 September that year, some weeks after suffering a wound which may have been self-inflicted. He was buried on 3 October in the Catholic cemetery at Bonn. 
During the greater part of his tenure of office, Keogh had been one of the most conspicuous figures on the Irish bench. Genial and good-natured, he was popular in private life, where his ready wit and conversational powers made him an agreeable companion; he possessed an unusually retentive memory, and his fund of anecdotes was varied and entertaining. Although his attitudes had come to be strongly anti-clerical, Keogh's closest friend in the last decade of his life was James Healy, parish priest of Little Bray, co. Dublin, and a celebrated wit, and Keogh is believed to have received the last rites devoutly on his deathbed. 


@@@@@


doc= 15436


Keon, Miles Gerald (1821-1875), novelist and colonial official, the last male descendant of an old Irish family, was born on 20 February 1821 at Keonbrooke, Leitrim. He was the only son of Myles Gerald Keon (died 1824), a barrister, and Mary Jane (1787-1825), his second wife, who was a daughter of Patrick, Count Magawly, a title bestowed by the kingdom of Sicily. Following the death of his parents, Keon and his younger sister, Ellen Benedicta, were brought up by their maternal grandmother, Countess Magawly, and, after her death, by their uncle, Francis Philip, third Count Magawly, sometime prime minister of Marie Louise in the duchies of Parma, Placentia, and Guastalla. 
Keon was educated at the Jesuit Stonyhurst College, which he entered in March 1832. He won many prizes there. He left Stonyhurst in 1839, and after spending some time in France, he crossed to Algeria where he served briefly in the French army. He was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1840, but was never called to the bar. On 21 November 1846 he married Anne de la Pierre Hawkes. They had no children. 
For the next twenty years Keon earned his living as a journalist, contributing to 'The Tablet' and Colburn's 'United Service Magazine'. In 1846 he became editor of 'Dolman's Magazine', and subsequently worked for the 'Morning Post' for twelve years. He reported the coronation of Alexander II in St Petersburg in 1856, where he met Boucher de Perthes, who wrote about Keon in 'Voyage en Russie' (1859). Keon also wrote a number of popular novels. The most successful was 'Dion and the Sibyls: a Romance of the First Century' (1866). 
After an unsuccessful short visit to India as editor of 'Bengal Hurkaru', Lord Lytton appointed Keon secretary to the government of Bermuda in March 1859. He served there for the rest of his life. He died on 5 June 1875 at Flatts Village, Hamilton, Bermuda, and was buried at St Edward's Church on the island. 


@@@@@


doc= 15437


Keper, John (b. c.1547), poet, appears to have been born at Wells, Somerset. He entered Hart Hall, Oxford, in 1564, and graduated BA on 11 February 1569. He was still in residence in the hall in 1572. On 8 July 1580, being then MA of Louvain, he petitioned to be incorporated at Oxford, but the grace was refused, as he was suspected to be a Catholic. Keper's surviving work consists of several lyric poems in three volumes published under the name of Thomas Howell, 'The Arbor of Amitie' (1568), 'Newe Sonets, and Pretie Pamphlets' (1575?), and 'H. his Devises' (1581), in all of which he features as one of Howell's poetic correspondents. It has been conjectured that he was the J.K. who translated from the Italian of Annibale Romei 'The Courtiers Academie' (1598), but this seems unlikely. 


@@@@@


doc= 15438


Keppel, Arnold Joost van, first earl of Albemarle (1669/70-1718), courtier and army officer, was born in 1669 or 1670, probably in Gelderland, United Provinces, and was probably baptized on 30 January 1670 at Zutphen in Gelderland, the son of Osewalt van Keppel, lord of Voorst (died 1685), and his wife, Reinira Anna Geertruid van Lintelo tot de Mars. The Keppels were long established in Gelderland, and were descended from Walter, lord of Keppel ('fl'. 1179-1223). At his father's death Keppel found his estates heavily in debt; although he was of high birth, his prospects would depend on his own abilities. 
A page of honour, Keppel accompanied William, prince of Orange, to England in 1688 and remained with him following his accession to the throne with his wife, Mary II, in 1689. He came to William's attention in March 1691 when he broke his leg while hunting; William was impressed with his bravery while the wound was set, and later that year he appointed him a groom of the bedchamber; he may also have provided funds to redeem the lordship of Voorst from Keppel's creditors. William adopted Keppel as a protege. Keppel's outgoing manner made him many friends, including the king's mistress Elizabeth Villiers. He emerged as a leading representative of the younger generation at court and as such William came to find him more useful than his more withdrawn confidant William Bentinck, first earl of Portland. After the death of Mary, Keppel became William's closest companion. In 1695 he was appointed master of the robes and was installed in a suite communicating with that of William at Kensington Palace. Although contemporaries and later writers have inferred a homosexual relationship from this evidence, this was certainly not the case; William preferred his closest aide to have an adjoining room to his as his working practices needed his presence well into the night, and Keppel was renowned for his succession of mistresses. Keppel's loyalty to William was rewarded when on 10 February 1697 he was created Baron Ashford, Viscount Bury, and earl of Albemarle. 
The rise of the apparently frivolous Albemarle infuriated Portland, and Albemarle certainly raised no objections when Portland was sent to Paris as ambassador. Albemarle also used his influence to have John Churchill, earl of Marlborough, an antagonist of Portland, appointed governor to William, duke of Gloucester, the only son of Princess Anne and heir to the British thrones. 
In June 1697 Albemarle was made major-general on the English establishment and appointed colonel of the 1st troop of Horse Guards (Life Guards), although he sold this post to Portland in 1710. On 14 May 1700 he was made KG and became colonel of the first regiment of Swiss in the Dutch service. The earl later became colonel of the carabineers in the Dutch army, governor of s'Hertogenbosch, and deputy forester of Holland. In 1701 he married Geertruid Johanna Quirina, the daughter of Adama van der Duyn, lord of St Gravemoer, governor of Bergen op Zoom, and master of buckhounds to the stadholder. There was a son, William Anne Keppel (1702-1754), and a daughter, Sophia (died 1773), from the marriage. 
Shortly before William III died, and following Louis XIV's seizure of the barrier fortresses in the Spanish Netherlands, promised to the United Provinces at the treaty of Ryswick (1697), Albemarle was sent to the Netherlands to confer with the states general on future strategy against France. This delicate mission was accomplished with great skill, and Albemarle confirmed his friendship with Marlborough during this period. He was at William's side at his deathbed in March 1702, and the king is reputed to have whispered 'You know what to do with them' as he handed him the keys to his private cabinet and drawers. William bequeathed to his favourite 200,000 guilders and the lordship of Breevorst, although legal arguments about this last bequest with members of William's family went on for some years. 
Albemarle returned to the Netherlands in 1702, and as a general of horse in the Dutch army had an active part in the duke of Marlborough's campaigns in the Low Countries during the War of the Spanish Succession. In 1703 he was entrusted with the command of a major convoy bringing supplies to the allied forces at Maastricht, and brought off a difficult task with great ability. Marlborough stayed at Albemarle's house just before the march to the Danube began in 1704, an indication of the friendship between the two men. Albemarle was present at the forcing of the lines of Brabant in 1705, and correctly urged an active pursuit of the beaten French and Bavarians, against the wishes of his fellow Dutch commanders. He also fought at Ramillies (1706) and Oudenarde (1708). During the protracted siege of Lille (1708) Marlborough employed him with thirty squadrons of cavalry to cover the progress of a great convoy bringing supplies to the allied siege train from Brussels. The success of this hazardous enterprise, in the face of two powerful French armies, was largely on account of the earl's skilful conduct. In 1709 he was made governor of Tournai, after which he was actively engaged at the sieges of Bouchain and Aire (1711). Following Marlborough's dismissal he was in command of the allied garrison at Denain, when the fortress was stormed by Marshal Villars (24 March 1712). Despite a strenuous defence the Dutch troops were overwhelmed and the earl was taken prisoner. However, he was released soon afterwards; that winter he entertained Prince Eugene of Savoy at his house. 
On the death of Queen Anne in 1714 Albemarle was sent by the states general to George I with congratulations on his accession to the throne of Great Britain. He was entrusted with the reception of the king and his entourage at the Dutch border 'en route' for London. Albemarle died at The Hague on 30 May 1718 and was succeeded by his son, William Anne, as second earl. His widow died in December 1741 at The Hague. 
Albemarle, who enjoyed a generally wide popularity, was described as a generous and charming man, but was rather absorbed in his own pleasures in youth. William III was very taken with his good looks and fine manners, though more importantly recognized his emerging talents as an administrator and an officer. His early role as royal favourite has overshadowed his undoubted ability as a military commander. This quality, while perhaps not of the first rank, enabled Marlborough to employ Albemarle on important tasks requiring high capability and judgement. 


@@@@@


doc= 15439


Keppel, Augustus, Viscount Keppel (1725-1786), naval officer and politician, second son of William Anne Keppel, second earl of Albemarle (1702-1754), and his wife, Anne (1703-1789), second daughter of Charles Lennox, first duke of Richmond, was born on 25 April 1725. His family were prominent whigs, and this background would prove highly significant for Keppel's future career. 
In 1735 Keppel left Westminster School and, when aged ten, entered the navy on board the 'Oxford' and served for two years on the coast of Guinea. There followed three years in the Mediterranean with Commodore Clinton in the 'Gloucester'. Back in England, he moved in 1740 to the 'Prince Frederick' and then to the 'Centurion' (60 guns) with Commodore George Anson on his famous voyage of circumnavigation. Keppel was active in the various landings and captures, including that of the treasure-laden Acapulco galleon 'Nuestra Senora de Covedanga'. Anson, his ever approving and influential patron, made him an acting lieutenant. On the 'Centurion''s return to England in 1744, Keppel passed his lieutenant's examination on 25 July and was at once confirmed in that rank. Scurvy had deprived him of many teeth and much hair, but he was fit enough to join the 'Dreadnought' on 11 August. On 7 November he was made commander of the sloop 'Wolf', and on 11 December, when aged nineteen, he was posted to the frigate 'Greyhound'. 
In February 1745 Keppel shifted to the 'Sapphire' (40 guns) and cruised off the south of Ireland with some success. From November he commanded the 'Maidstone' (50 guns) and cruised for over a year in the soundings and the Bay of Biscay. Frustrated near Belle Ile by the escape of some small French vessels, Keppel, on 29 June 1747, pursued a large one. He ran onto hidden rocks and the 'Maidstone' was wrecked. Having, with most of his crew, been rescued and made prisoner by the French, Keppel wrote with a patrician's easy assurance to Maurepas, the French navy minister, and was politely transported back to England, where he was exchanged. His men also soon returned. On 31 October a court martial acquitted Keppel of blame for the loss of his ship. Meanwhile the 'Anson' (60 guns) was being built at Bursledon and in November Keppel was formally appointed to her. Until 21 December he sat on the court martial of Captain Thomas Fox, who had shown inadequate aggression on 14 October 1747. Edward Hawke's victory left few pickings for such as Keppel when cruising with that admiral in 1748. 
After peace was concluded in October, Keppel was specially favoured by being appointed in 1749, when aged twenty-four, as commodore commanding in the Mediterranean. He was to apply judicious pressure to the dey of Algiers, ruler of a port that had long been a nest of piratical activity. Wearing his broad pennant in the 'Centurion' (now reduced to 50 guns), Keppel took with him a youthful Joshua Reynolds -- an act of patronage very welcome at that early stage of the painter's career. He sailed in July, and during the next two years visited Lisbon, Cadiz, Gibraltar, Algiers, and Mahon; and Reynolds wrote to Lord Edgecumbe: 'I have had the use of his cabin and his study of books, as if they were my own' (Keppel, 1.148). Eventually Keppel concluded an agreement with the dey protective of British commerce. Having also negotiated treaties at Tripoli and Tunis, he returned to England in July 1751. 
In 1754 the slide towards a new French war saw Keppel again appointed as a commodore. In February 1755, with the 'Centurion' and the 'Norwich', he took General Edward Braddock's transports into Hampton Roads. Late in July he was superseded due to Vice-Admiral Edward Boscawen's arrival on the American coast and on 22 August he returned to England with news of Braddock's defeat and death. Four days later he was ordered to commission the 'Swiftsure' of 70 guns. It was in 1755 that he was elected an MP for Chichester, a seat vacated by his elder brother, George Keppel, on succeeding as third earl of Albemarle. 
In June 1756 Keppel moved to the 'Torbay' (74 guns), his favourite ship, in which he remained until 1761. By then he was established as one of the most popular and best-regarded captains in the navy -- affectionately called 'little Keppel' by the sailors (Keppel, 2.235). There was, wrote Boscawen, 'no better seaman than Keppel, few so good, and not a better officer' (Rodger, 'Wooden World', 260). Meanwhile, having commanded a small squadron off Cape Finisterre and taken three French prizes, he returned in December to Spithead. In January he sat as a member of John Byng's court martial. Surprised by the ineffectiveness of the court's recommendation to mercy, he tried, ultimately without success, to persuade parliament to intervene. On 24 June 1757 he sailed with Boscawen and, having been detached with the 'Medway' (60 guns), took a rich prize. In September he took part in the disappointing Rochefort expedition. Nothing that Admiral Hawke and the fleet could do succeeded in persuading the army to land. Again under Hawke, in March 1758 Keppel participated in his foray into the Basque Roads. Later that year he was with the fleet under Anson. In September he was appointed to command the naval side of a joint expedition to Goree, a French settlement of some strategic significance on the west African coast. On 29 December Goree was duly taken. 
From May 1759 Keppel participated in Hawke's strategically crucial blockade of Brest, following which the 'Torbay' was prominent at the conclusive battle of Quiberon Bay, fought on 20 November in a forty-knot gale. Under attack by the 'Torbay', the 'Thesee', also of 74 guns, foundered with horrifying abruptness. True to what Keppel deemed a very 'English' penchant for 'humanity and pity' (Keppel, 1.446), he immediately hoisted out boats and, despite the perilous conditions, a number of French lives were saved. 
The fleet at Brest having been reduced to a remnant, Keppel was in March 1761 chosen to command the naval part of a major joint expedition to take Belle Ile. Wearing his broad pennant in the 'Valiant' (74 guns), he had his protege Adam Duncan with him as flag captain. By June the operations had been crowned with success, relations between army and navy -- so frequently difficult -- having been notably good. Keppel continued to command off Brest and Belle Ile until January 1762. Now, with Spain entering the war on the side of France, the cabinet decided to attack Havana. The preliminary planning was done by Anson. Admiral George Pocock was the naval commander and Keppel's elder brother, Lord Albemarle, commanded the army. Augustus Keppel was appointed as commodore and naval second in command. Though rightly dubious about Captain Augustus Hervey's proposal to bombard the fortress El Morro from the sea, Keppel gave solid support. The fortress was taken after six weeks of hard fighting, before yellow fever quite prevailed. On 11 August Havana itself surrendered. The three Keppels -- Albemarle, Augustus, and Major-General William -- were hugely enriched by their share of the enormous prize money. The commodore received nearly $25,000. However, his health had suffered severely. Overall, the enterprise has been rated a masterpiece of planning, amphibious warfare, and naval prowess. On 21 October 1762 a promotion of captains to flag rank was extended to include Keppel, who at thirty-seven became a rear-admiral of the blue. He remained in command at Jamaica until January 1764 and did not reach England until June. 
By 1765 Keppel, who was an MP for Windsor from 1761 to 1780, had become actively involved in politics. Together with his able cousin, the duke of Richmond, and his friend and legatee Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Saunders, he was attached to the opposition leader, the marquess of Rockingham. In Rockingham's first administration (July 1765 to July 1766) Saunders and Keppel were naval lords at the Admiralty, and when Grafton succeeded Rockingham at the Treasury Saunders became first lord with Keppel now a senior commissioner. Keppel saw the need to improve Portsmouth Dockyard before any new conflict with France and Spain. However, on 27 November, to the king's understandable displeasure, Saunders and Keppel both resigned over the dismissal of Rear-Admiral Lord Edgecumbe, a fellow Rockingham whig, as groom of the bedchamber. While valued primarily for his naval knowledge and reputation, Keppel had become, by 1767, a leading member of the Rockingham faction. 
From October 1770 until January 1771 war with France and Spain threatened over the Falkland Islands and Keppel, having been promoted on 18 October 1770 to rear-admiral of the red, was again promoted on the 24th to vice-admiral of the blue, apparently with a view to his commanding the Channel Fleet. However, this did not silence Saunders and Keppel in their parliamentary criticisms of the Admiralty. With Lord Sandwich establishing himself ever more firmly as first lord of the Admiralty in Lord North's administration, Keppel's adherence to the opposition left him awkwardly placed as an admiral should war supervene. In November 1776 the king did ask him, as the obvious candidate (and a vice-admiral of the red since February), to be ready to command the fleet. His cousin Richmond warned Keppel that, however unfairly, blame for any subsequent naval reverse might be laid on him. The fact that the Rockinghams publicly sympathized with the rebellion of the American colonists did not endear them to the king and his ministers. The matter of Keppel's health also deserves notice. He seems never to have fully recovered from the fevers of Havana. His illnesses are mentioned in letters of 1765 and 1772; and in 1776 Keppel tells Rockingham that, having endured 'torments' from prolonged recourse to the waters of Spa, he is thankful to revert to his 'usual degree of pain' (Keppel, 1.425). 
By early 1778 France and Spain were ready to go to war. Britain, on the other hand, was burdened with heavy American commitments. As Keppel and Richmond had remarked in parliament, these commitments had left the British holding no fleet manoeuvres, whereas the French and Spanish had exercised ships of the line together. The allies, moreover, had overwhelming numbers of ships, many of them ready to fight. Privately, Sandwich and the Admiralty found the situation alarming. 
Keppel, having been promoted on 29 January to admiral of the blue, was appointed on 18 March to command the Grand Fleet. Writing to Lord Rockingham, Keppel hoped that his indifferent health would permit him to rise to the unpromising situation. It is a sign of Keppel's continuing naval expertise that he had already, on the 10th, asked for the 42-pound guns on the lower deck of his assigned flagship, the 'Victory', to be replaced by 32-pounders. 
On 24 March Keppel went down to Portsmouth and hoisted his flag. He found only six ships of the line, instead of the promised thirty-five, ready for the sea. Men, stores, and provisions were deficient. By May, however, a considerable force had been assembled, but early in June, to the detriment of the Channel Fleet, thirteen of the line were sent away to New York. Meanwhile Keppel had closely questioned Sandwich about the strategic options likely to confront him. The Admiralty's guidance was issued in secret instructions dated 25 April. If, for example, Keppel discovered that the Brest squadron was superior to his, he was to fight if the superiority in numbers was not very apparent. However, should the enemy fleet, whether at sea or in port, prove manifestly superior, he was to retire to St Helens, where reinforcements would be gathering. Again, since neither France nor Spain had actually declared war, Keppel was not to attack their shipping if it was innocuous. 
On 13 June Keppel sailed towards Brest with twenty-one of the line. Two French frigates precipitated a brush and the French government dated hostilities from 17 June. From prisoners taken, Keppel concluded that thirty-two ships of the line were ready for sea at Brest and he therefore fell back to St Helens, as instructed. Angry merchants blamed the unreadiness of the Admiralty. 
Keppel sailed again on 9 July and by the 11th he had thirty ships of the line. In the 'Victory' (100 guns) his estimable old friend Rear-Admiral John Campbell was, at his own request, Keppel's first captain. Robert Harland, a captain under Hawke on 14 October 1747 and now a vice-admiral of the blue, commanded the van division. In command of the rear division was a more junior vice-admiral of the blue, Sir Hugh Palliser. He was a highly competent officer who had been controller of the navy and knew well its material strength and weaknesses. Less fortunate, certainly from Keppel's viewpoint, was Palliser's membership, latterly as senior naval lord, of Sandwich's Board of Admiralty. Should a reverse be suffered, the potential for recrimination was considerable. 
On 8 July the French fleet had issued from Brest under the command of the comte d'Orvilliers, furnished with vacillating instructions which induced caution. Owing to thick weather, it was not until the 23rd that d'Orvilliers sighted the British line. Overnight he passed ahead of it to gain the weather gauge, but during the manoeuvre two of his ships became separated to leeward and had to go into Brest. Now he also had thirty of the line and some frigates. 
Having been foiled by d'Orvilliers's nocturnal manoeuvre, Keppel had to work from leeward, in foggy, squally, unsettled weather, to close on his enemy. He knew that nothing short of a decisive naval victory could wrest the strategic initiative from the Bourbon powers. On 27 July, with the wind continuing west-south-west, both fleets stood to the north-west. Endeavouring to converge on the now visible French, Keppel, somewhat like Hawke in November 1759, hoisted the general chase signal early in the day. At 9 a.m. the French wore in succession so that their admiral, by closing the gap, could see Keppel's chasing fleet more clearly. Towards 10 a.m. the wind backed southwards by two points (22 degree ), affording Keppel a better chance of closing. Soon afterwards he tacked, still without signalling a line of battle, so as to close on the rear of the enemy. In a squall of rain, the wind veered, making it easier for the British to get within range. Meanwhile, however, hidden in the rain, d'Orvilliers realized that action could no longer be avoided. He again changed course so that the two fleets were now heading towards each other on opposite tacks. D'Orvilliers had thus adroitly avoided Keppel's threatened concentration on his rear. Having at last converged close enough to be able to engage his elusive enemy, Keppel, who had avoided the loss of time consequent on signalling a line of battle, did not hoist that signal now. Improving on Thomas Mathews's notorious failure to cope with a somewhat similar situation in 1744, he simply hoisted the flag to engage. The two fleets, very roughly in a line, but with the French in somewhat better order, approached each other with the French further off the wind (still at west-south-west) than the British, so that Harland's van division was further from the enemy than was Palliser's rear division. Palliser's ships and some of Keppel's, including the 'Victory', therefore received successively the fire of most of the French fleet. Five British ships were crippled and fell away to leeward. 
At 1 p.m. d'Orvilliers, having passed clear of the British, signalled to wear in succession, so that, by standing southward, he could engage Keppel, also now standing south, from leeward. Keppel manoeuvred to cover his crippled ships. With a view to counter-attacking the enemy, he signalled for Palliser to come to his support. Palliser's division, endeavouring to repair the considerable damage suffered, was lying to, having by then fallen astern and to windward of Keppel's centre division. Palliser afterwards claimed that the signal was hidden from him. Keppel may well have expressed frustration at the time. He sent a frigate to communicate with Palliser by speaking-trumpet, a fact tellingly (if one-sidedly) confirmed at Keppel's trial. Anyhow, the incident had no bearing on the outcome of the action because d'Orvilliers, having had trouble with his own communications, abandoned his chance to attack Keppel's ships from leeward. D'Orvilliers had had the best of it in terms of manoeuvre and damage to the mobility of the British. He had denied Keppel the decisive victory that could have given Britain the strategic initiative in the war. D'Orvilliers therefore retired to Brest to make good his damages. Because the British, as was their habit, had concentrated their fire on the hulls rather than the masts of their enemy, the French casualties were somewhat heavier -- according to John Creswell 163 killed and 573 wounded against 133 killed and 375 wounded in Keppel's fleet. But British hulls had also suffered. The hull of Palliser's flagship, the 'Formidable' (90 guns), suffered more than seventy shot-holes, five of them under water. 
On 29 July Keppel wrote to Sandwich, with whom he had maintained quite good relations (as indeed he had with Palliser): 'The object of the French was at our masts and rigging, and they have crippled the fleet in that respect beyond any degree I ever saw' ('Private Papers of... Sandwich', 2.128). Light is thrown on the improved gunnery of the French by Palliser's letter to Sandwich of 10 August, in which he says that the French gunners were more effective than numbers of their often little-trained British counterparts, owing to the French corps of seaman gunners (established in 1767). Palliser also complained of the incomplete work of the Ordnance department when preparing the fleet for sea. 
At the battle of Ushant, given that he did not enjoy that clear-cut ship-for-ship superiority that he and most British admirals of the century had been wont to assume, Keppel had, considering his continuing poor health, behaved with obvious spirit. Remembering also some disadvantage by way of previous fleet exercises, his tactical handling of the action against a skilful, evasive foe may be rated as more than adequate. 
In August Keppel wrote to Sandwich praising the efforts of all his admirals in getting the fleet ready to sail again from Portsmouth. Keppel, hoping for a more conclusive encounter with the French, sailed again with the fleet on 23 August. He cruised off Ushant without achieving contact with the French. Meanwhile, by 28 October when he returned to Spithead, the fuse for the Keppel-Palliser affair had been lit. An account of Keppel's frustration at the time of Palliser's failure or inability to respond to his signals during the afternoon of the battle had appeared in a newspaper. The sensitive Palliser prepared a laudatory and exculpatory letter for Keppel to sign for publication. This Keppel refused to do. More papers took up the story, which received mention in the House of Commons. On 9 December Palliser presented to the Board of Admiralty, of which he was still a member, a demand for Keppel's court martial -- a demand disastrous for his own career and damaging to the cohesion of the navy. 
With Sandwich and the government coming under attack, the Admiralty was perhaps over-prompt in immediately issuing orders for Keppel to be tried. The opposition was much incensed, as indeed were most of the officers in the navy. The five rather absurd but capital charges held that Keppel had improperly and half-heartedly marshalled his fleet, approached the fight in a manner unbecoming an officer, shown undue haste in quitting the conflict, run away from the scene, and failed to pursue the enemy. Until this point the relationship between Keppel and Sandwich had been maintained on a very reasonable footing. Now, at a blow, that mistrust of Sandwich previously expressed to Keppel by such as Richmond was apparently justified. Horace Walpole, himself an opposition whig, makes the most of the affair. Richmond had recently again been hounding Sandwich in parliament. Therefore (writes Walpole) Sandwich, who had been 'cunning' and 'treacherous' towards Wilkes, 'could not resist the impulse of attacking Keppel with the same arms' -- that admiral being 'cousin-german and dear friend' of Richmond. In the Commons on 12 December Temple Luttrell moved for Palliser (also an MP) to be court-martialled himself 'for disobedience of signals'. Palliser, for his part, explained that he had waited for five months before charging Keppel because it was only the other day that Keppel 'had declared that he would serve with him no more'. Keppel himself spoke 'with a mixture of pathetic modesty and sublime dignity'. He said that the 'charges attacked both his life and his fame' and he called for the trial 'to clear both, though he lamented the mischiefs' that it might occasion. His 'few sentences were littered with so much majesty and grace that the House melted into tears' ('Last Journals of Horace Walpole', 2.222-5). Most naval officers, with the venerable Lord Hawke at their head, expressed outrage at the decision to have Keppel tried. 
On 9 January 1779 the court martial began at Portsmouth and continued for five weeks. Thirty captains, some lieutenants, and several masters testified. Together with the admirals Harland and Campbell, nearly all the witnesses (with Captain John Jervis particularly effective) refuted the charges to the noisy satisfaction of Keppel's relatives, friends, and political allies who attended each day in his support. Among them were the marquess of Rockingham, two royal dukes, Richmond and two other dukes, and Keppel's second cousin Charles James Fox, together with Richard Brinsley Sheridan and Edmund Burke. During the trial Palliser's manner was 'poor and passionate', while Keppel's was 'cool', 'temperate and modest'. 'Keppel stood to hear his own praises sounded higher even than he had grounds to expect; Palliser saw himself the opprobrium and outcast of his profession' ('Last Journals of Horace Walpole', 2.245). On 11 February the court pronounced the charges malicious and unfounded. That evening there were riotous celebrations in London and elsewhere. Popular resentment was vented on Palliser's London house and on the gates of the Admiralty. Keppel became a national hero. Palliser had soon to face his own court martial. Though exonerated, he lost all his appointments. 
Keppel, whose health had not improved, declined in any case to serve again under Sandwich, and some other flag officers made similar damaging gestures. Although dissension in the service persisted for a time, Keppel began to lose some of his popularity as he continued, despite the war, to denounce the administration. In 1780 Rockingham fruitlessly nominated Keppel (from September MP for Surrey) as first lord of the Admiralty. Finally the news of Yorktown led to Rockingham's second administration and, in March 1782, Keppel became first lord. Having been on 8 April promoted admiral of the white, on 26 April he was raised to the peerage by an unenthusiastic George III as Viscount Keppel and Baron Elden. In office Keppel accomplished little of note. He appointed some of his strong supporters, such as Samuel Barrington and Hyde Parker, to important seagoing commands and gave Harland a seat at the Admiralty. His decision to replace Rodney with Admiral Hugh Pigot proved embarrassing when news soon afterwards arrived of Rodney's victory at the Saints. Despite his diplomatic skills, he found, like other first lords, that he could not work well with that indispensable controller of the navy Charles Middleton. After Rockingham died in April, Keppel remained uncomfortably in Shelburne's administration. Unhappy with the peace preliminaries, he resigned in December, and was replaced at the Admiralty by Lord Howe. From April 1783 he was again first lord until the Fox-North coalition was dismissed in December. 
Keppel quite cheerfully bore worsening infirmities until he died on 2 October 1786. He had never married, though he apparently kept mistresses, for instance in 1758 and 1763. His title died with him. Small in stature, with a nose permanently dented by a blow received early on from a footpad, he left an indelible impression of cheerful agreeability and charm, coupled with an underlying firmness in getting his way. By 1778, however, he was corpulent and -- often with good reason -- more inclined to gloom. Up to 1762 his naval career, especially in combined operations, had been outstanding. Thereafter his political interests complicated and tended to limit his naval achievements. 


@@@@@


doc= 15440


Keppel, Frederick (1729-1777), bishop of Exeter, was born on 30 January 1729, the fourth son of William Anne Keppel, second earl of Albemarle (1702-1754), and his wife, Anne (1703-1789), daughter of Charles Lennox, first duke of Richmond. George Keppel, third earl of Albemarle, and Augustus Keppel, Viscount Keppel, were his brothers. He was educated at Westminster School and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1752, MA in 1754, and DD by diploma on 19 October 1762. One of fifteen children, Keppel sought a career in the church rather than following his brothers into the armed forces and was ordained in February 1753. He married, on 13 September 1758, Laura (1734-1813), eldest natural daughter of Sir Edward Walpole, who in 1784 left her Lacy House, Isleworth, and most of his fortune. The marriage produced one son and three daughters. 
Though regarded as an able preacher, Keppel's rise in the church probably owed more to the royal connections of his eldest brother, the third earl of Albemarle, who was a protege of the duke of Cumberland and a favourite of George II. Keppel's career shows that the support of the duke of Newcastle was not always necessary to success in the mid-eighteenth-century church. He was a chaplain-in-ordinary to both George II and George III, and was appointed by the former to a canonry at Windsor (19 April 1754), despite Newcastle's objection that he was too young. Through his wife Keppel also had close connections to the Walpoles and the Waldegraves. 
Keppel's father-in-law, Sir Edward Walpole, wrote to William Pitt the elder in August 1761, asking whether it was 'agreeable to him to make Mr. Keppel a bishop at this juncture' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 2.134-5), and although this application was unsuccessful he was consecrated bishop of Exeter on 8 November 1762. Though it was rumoured that the preferment was bestowed upon him on account of Albemarle's capture of Havana, Horace Walpole, his uncle by marriage, maintained that the see was promised to him the day before the news came. He also held 'in commendam' the archdeaconry of Exeter and a prebendal stall in that cathedral, and obtained the promise of translation to the more lucrative bishopric of Salisbury on the next vacancy. In 1765 he relinquished this promise for the deanery of Windsor, to which he was appointed, with the registrarship of the Order of the Garter. Augustus Hervey commented, 'all things are crowded into three or four people's pockets' (Smith, 3.91). 
Despite his pluralism, Keppel was an attentive diocesan who gained a reputation for generosity. In 1764 he confirmed almost 24,000 on his first visitation tour. He spent large sums of money improving the episcopal palace at Exeter and in relieving the needs of the poorer clergy in his diocese. Polwhele praised his distribution of patronage, and the philologist Jonathan Toup was among those he promoted. 
Keppel was an active member of the House of Lords, especially through 1770, generally following the lead of his brothers, who were allied with the Rockingham whigs from 1765. Keppel thus spent most of his parliamentary career in opposition. Though he seldom spoke, he subscribed to five protests between 1767 and 1775, and often voted against the ministry. In March 1776 he preached a sermon before George III advocating peace with America, and on his deathbed he 'thanked God that he had not given one vote for shedding American blood' ('Last Journals of Horace Walpole', 2.86). He died at the deanery, Windsor, on 27 December 1777 of 'dropsy of the stomach' ('London Chronicle') and was buried on 2 January 1778 in St George's Chapel, Windsor. Keppel published little: a set of verses as part of his university's collection of poems on the death of the prince of Wales in 1751 and two sermons. Historiographically, however, he made a major contribution to the study of his era by copying and editing the manuscript memoir of the second Earl Waldegrave, which was entrusted to him by his sister-in-law. It was subsequently published in 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 15441


Keppel, George, third earl of Albemarle (1724-1772), army officer and politician, was born on 5 April 1724, the eldest son of William Anne Keppel, second earl of Albemarle (1702-1754), and his wife, Anne (1703-1789), daughter of Charles Lennox, first duke of Richmond. Viscount Bury, as he was styled until succeeding his father in 1754, was educated at Westminster School from 1732 to 1740. 
Bury followed his father -- a notorious spendthrift who left little but debts -- into a military career. He made effective use of family connections and his friendship with William, duke of Cumberland, George II's favourite son, whom he had met at Westminster. Entering the Coldstream Guards in 1738 as an ensign, he was a lieutenant-colonel by the time he served as one of Cumberland's aides-de-camp at Fontenoy (1745). At Culloden (1746) he drew the first shots of the battle when Cumberland ordered him forward to reconnoitre the Jacobite artillery; later he was almost killed when the finery of his uniform led an errant highlander to mistake him for the duke and narrowly miss at close range. Bury had the honour of carrying the news of the victory to George II. Bury's career continued to prosper. His uncle, Charles Lennox, second duke of Richmond, returned him to parliament for Chichester in 1746, but he showed little interest in the Commons and continued to rise in the army. He became colonel of the 20th foot (1749), major-general (1756), lieutenant-general (1759), colonel of the King's Own dragoons (1755), and privy councillor and governor of Jersey (1761). A lord of the bedchamber to Cumberland from 1746, his loyalty to his patron was fierce. 
In 1760 Albemarle (as he had become in 1754) accepted a challenge from General George Townshend that arose in part from the latter's caricatures of the duke (the duel was averted by the intervention of another officer). After Cumberland died in 1765, Albemarle was named his executor by George III who instructed him to 'destroy everything that his uncle... might have desired to keep concealed' (Whitworth, 238). To the regret of later historians Albemarle effectively culled the duke's papers of politically sensitive material. 
Albemarle's success at advancing his military career through connections at court drew criticism from some contemporaries. Wolfe lumped him with his father as 'showy men who are seen in palaces and the courts of Kings... They have a way of trifling with us poor soldiers that gives many honest, poor men high disgust' (Wright, 185-6). Horace Walpole characterized him as 'ambitious, greedy, and a dexterous courtier' (Walpole, 2.221). 
During the Seven Years' War Albemarle declined offers to command the St Malo and Martinique expeditions. In 1762 he accepted command of the land forces sent to take Havana. The expedition also included his brothers Augustus Keppel, second in command of the naval forces, and William, a major-general in the army. Albemarle organized a successful landing on 7 June 1762 and forced Havana's surrender on 12 August, though some historians have criticized the slowness that resulted from his reliance on conventional siege warfare. While losing relatively few men to Spanish arms, Albemarle suffered near crippling losses from disease: of 5366 men lost by the army (whose total strength was about 16,000) from 7 June to 9 October 1762, 4708 died from disease. Though Cuba was usefully exchanged for the Floridas in the peace settlement, the losses incurred greatly reduced the manpower available to meet the challenge of Pontiac's rising in North America in 1763-4. This experience probably contributed to the decision to maintain a larger military establishment in the colonies and to seek new sources of revenue to support it. Albemarle's subsequent governorship of Cuba proved controversial. He deported the bishop of Havana for non-co-operation and provoked criticism from merchants who complained (with reason) that he imposed illegal taxes on them. Albemarle himself received more than $122,000 in prize money. In recognition of his triumph George III awarded him the Garter in 1765. 
After his return from Cuba, Albemarle became increasingly involved in politics. As Cumberland re-emerged as a figure of importance in the early part of George III's reign, Albemarle frequently acted as his point of contact with the political world and followed his patron into supporting the first Rockingham administration in 1765. After Cumberland's death Albemarle gave his allegiance to the Rockingham whigs and went into opposition with them in 1766. Albemarle was generally regarded as one of the party leaders, though his efforts to foster a union in 1766-7 with the duke of Bedford's followers failed. He never fully recovered his health after his return from Cuba, and his political involvement in his later years was limited by periodic bouts of ill health. Perhaps his greatest contribution to his party was to bring his brother Admiral Augustus Keppel into its ranks. His brother's court martial and acquittal in 1779 made him one of the whig political heroes of the American War of Independence. 
Albemarle married relatively late: on 20 April 1770, at Bagshot Park, Windlesham, Surrey, he married Ann ('bap'. 1743, died 1824), youngest daughter of Sir John Miller, baronet, of Chichester and his wife, Susan Combe. They had one child, William Charles Keppel (1772-1849), who succeeded to the earldom. Albemarle also had two children with his mistress, Sarah Stanley. He died ('very rich', according to Lady Mary Coke) of 'the old complaint in his bowels' ('Letters and Journals', 4.131) on 13 October 1772, and was buried on 22 October at Quidenham, Norfolk, an estate bought with prize money from the capture of Havana. Rockingham mourned him to Burke as 'so honourable, so worthy and so kind a friend' (27 Oct 1772, Burke, 'Correspondence', 2.348). 


@@@@@


doc= 15442


Keppel, George Thomas, sixth earl of Albemarle (1799-1891), army officer, second son of William Charles Keppel, fourth earl of Albemarle (1772-1849), and his first wife, the Hon. Elizabeth Southwell (died 1815), daughter of Lord de Clifford, and grandson of George Keppel, third earl of Albemarle, was born in Marylebone, Middlesex, on 13 June 1799. His childhood was passed with his grandmother, the Dowager Lady de Clifford, then governess to Princess Charlotte of Wales. The princess, three years his senior, often tipped him liberally. He was at Westminster School from the age of nine until nearly sixteen, but was an indifferent student. When Dr Page, the headmaster, pronounced him unfit for any learned profession, an ensigncy was obtained for him in the 3rd battalion of the 14th regiment. The battalion, consisting chiefly of untried officers and raw recruits, was in the Netherlands, and Keppel, whose commission was dated 4 April 1815, joined it in time to be present at the battle of Waterloo, where he was in the thick of the fighting on the ridge. Footsore and ragged, he marched with the victorious troops to Paris. He returned home with the battalion at the end of the year, and when it was disbanded served with the 2nd battalion of the regiment in the Ionian Islands. This battalion was disbanded at Chichester in 1818, when Keppel was appointed to the 22nd (Cheshire) regiment, with which he served in Mauritius and at the Cape, returning home with the regiment in 1819. For a time he was equerry to the duke of Sussex. 
In 1821 Keppel was promoted to a lieutenancy in the 24th regiment, was transferred to the 20th, and ordered to India. There he served as aide-de-camp to the governor-general, the marquess of Hastings, but on Hastings's resignation in 1823 he obtained leave to return home overland. Relying on a slight knowledge of Persian acquired during the long passage out to India, he visited the ruins of Babylon and the court of Tehran, from there journeying to England by way of Baku, Astrakhan, Moscow, and St Petersburg, then a rare feat. His published account is an interesting book. Keppel next served as aide-de-camp to the Marquess Wellesley when lord lieutenant of Ireland. He obtained a company in the 62nd (Wiltshire) regiment in 1825, and after studying at the senior department of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, obtained a majority on half pay unattached on 20 March 1827. He was not on full pay again, but he rose steadily, finally attaining the honorary rank of general (on half pay of his former commission) on 7 February 1874. In 1829 he visited the theatre of war between the Russians and Turks, was with the English fleet in Turkish waters, visited Constantinople and Adrianople, and travelled in the Balkans. Keppel married on 4 June 1831 Susan (died 3 Aug 1885), third daughter of Sir Coutts Trotter, bt; they had a son, William Coutts Keppel, seventh earl of Albemarle, and four daughters, of whom two predeceased their parents. 
In 1832 Keppel was returned as a whig MP for East Norfolk in the first reformed parliament, and sat until 1835. In 1837 he unsuccessfully contested Lyme Regis, and in 1841 Lymington. In 1846 he became one of the private secretaries to Lord John Russell, the new premier, and in 1847 was returned for Lymington, for which he sat until 1849, the year of his father's death. On the death of his insane brother, Augustus Frederick, the fifth earl, on 15 March 1851, he succeeded to the title. He was appointed a trustee of Westminster School in 1854, in succession to the first marquess of Anglesey, and was long the 'father of the trust'. He was a familiar and popular figure in London society. He retained his faculties to the end, and held receptions on each anniversary of Waterloo, at his daughter's house in Portman Square. 
Albemarle's publications included 'Personal Narrative of a Journey from India to England' (2 vols., 1825), 'Narrative of a Journey Across the Balkans... and a Visit to... Newly Discovered Ruins in Asia Minor' (1830), and 'Fifty Years of my Life' (1876). Some of his speeches in the House of Lords, including those on the 'Marriage Bill' and on torture in the Madras presidency, both in 1856, were printed as pamphlets. 
Albemarle died at his London residence, 8 Portman Square, Marylebone, on 21 February 1891, and was buried at Quidenham, Norfolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 15443


Keppel, William Anne, second earl of Albemarle (1702-1754), army officer, was born at Whitehall, London, on 5 June 1702, the only son of Arnold Joost van Keppel, first earl (1669/70-1718), and his wife, Geertruid Johanna Quirina van der Duyn (died 1741). He was baptized at the Chapel Royal, and Queen Anne, after whom he was named, was his godmother. During his father's lifetime he was styled Viscount Bury. At an early age he travelled to the Netherlands with his father where he was educated. On his return to England he was appointed (25 August 1717) captain and lieutenant-colonel of the grenadier company of the Coldstream Guards; and in 1718 he succeeded to his father's title and estates. 
In March 1720 Albemarle accompanied his colonel, William, first Baron Cadogan, upon his diplomatic mission to Berlin and Vienna to negotiate Spain's incorporation in the Quadruple Alliance, at that time including Britain, France, Austria, and Prussia. In 1722, at his family seat in Gelderland, Albemarle entertained the bishop of Munster. He was made lord of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales in October 1722, a position he retained when the prince became George II, and held until 1751. On 21 February 1723 he married, at Caversham, Oxfordshire, Lady Anne Lennox (1703-1789), second daughter of Charles, first duke of Richmond. Albemarle was made a knight of the Bath on 18 May 1725, upon the revival of that order, and in 1727 he was appointed aide-de-camp to the king. On 22 November 1731 he was made colonel of the 29th regiment of foot (later the Worcestershire regiment), then at Gibraltar, which he held until 7 May 1733 when he transferred to the colonelcy of the 3rd troop of Horse Guards. 
On 26 September 1737 Albemarle replaced George Hamilton, first earl of Orkney, as governor of Virginia, a post he held until his death though he never visited the colony. As the absentee governor he was vigilant in the exercise of his powers of appointment and patronage, which brought him into conflict with William Gooch, lieutenant-governor of the colony from 1727 to 1749. When Albemarle asserted his right to appoint naval officers of the colony in the late 1730s this drew forth a strong rebuke from Gooch. Gooch was not only angry at this interference in an area he considered his prerogative, but feared the appointment of incompetent placemen to technical positions. On this occasion a compromise was achieved in which the lieutenant-governor nominated officers with the agreement of the executive council but Albemarle reserved a right to fill vacancies when they occurred. In the long run this was a one-sided battle. At the end of his term of office Gooch lamented that since Albemarle's appointment nearly every office in the colony had been 'given away in England' (Morton, 2.507). 
Albemarle was promoted brigadier-general on 2 July 1739 and major-general on 18 February 1742. He went to Flanders with John Dalrymple, second earl of Stair, in 1742, where he was put in command of the Household Cavalry. In 1743 he was on the staff at the battle of Dettingen, where he led his troop of 'the Blues' against the French household cavalry and had his horse shot from under him. He was transferred to the colonelcy of the Coldstream Guards, his old regiment, in 1744 and was promoted lieutenant-general on 26 February 1745. At Fontenoy he commanded the brigade of guards in the English front line. He was ridden over when facing a French cavalry charge, suffering a severe contusion on the chest. The duke of Cumberland mentioned his conduct in his official dispatch. 
In November 1745, following the Jacobite rising, Albemarle joined General George Wade as his second in command at Newcastle, with reinforcements from Flanders. After the fruitless marching of that autumn he was appointed to Cumberland's staff in Scotland in early 1746. On 22 March he was ordered to take command of the advance party of the government army, consisting of two regiments of horse and two brigades of infantry, sent forward to Strathbogie to clear the way for the main army. At Culloden he commanded the first line of the royal army. His appointment to succeed Cumberland as commander-in-chief in Scotland, dated 23 August 1746, was accepted with reluctance. Prebble writes: 'On the whole he behaved with tact and judgement but his views on what should be done to suppress the rebellious spirit of the Scots were conventional and matched his general disapproval of the country' (Prebble, 304). He carried forward Cumberland's plan of pacification with new fortifications and road building. Most of the Culloden battalions were returned to Flanders and the policing of the highlands became a matter for small detachments of mounted troops under the command of junior officers. Albemarle quickly moved his headquarters to Edinburgh, where he set up an espionage network of doubtful quality, which failed to prevent Charles Edward Stuart's eventual escape to France. With the onset of winter and the weak condition of his garrison forces, Albemarle feared a new rising. However, by dint of insistent and repeated petitioning he was released from his command and ordered to join the staff in Flanders in late January 1747. He commanded the British infantry at the battle of Val or Laffeldt later that year and afterwards was appointed commander-in-chief of the British forces in the Low Countries. At the peace of 1748 he was sent as ambassador-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to Paris. During his tenure of office it was believed by Horace Walpole among others that his mistress, Louise Gaucher (died 1765), sold government instructions to the French court. 
On 22 June 1749 Albemarle was made a knight of the Garter. On 12 July 1751 he was appointed groom of the stole and a privy councillor, and in 1752 he was one of the lords justices during the king's absence in Hanover. In 1754 he was sent back to Paris to demand the liberation of some British subjects detained by the French in America, where he died suddenly on 22 December 1754. His remains were brought to England and buried in the chapel in South Audley Street, Grosvenor Square, London, on 21 February 1755. 
Albemarle was survived by his wife, Anne, who was lady to the bedchamber to Queen Caroline and a favourite of the king. When in January 1750 she was robbed by nine men in Great Russell Street, London, the king gave her a gold watch and chain the next day. She died on 20 October 1789 at New Street, Spring Gardens, Middlesex. The couple had had eight sons and seven daughters, including George Keppel, third earl; the admiral Augustus Keppel, Viscount Keppel; and Frederick Keppel, bishop of Exeter. 
Albemarle left his wife and numerous children nothing on his death. His deserved reputation as the Spendthrift Earl has been established for posterity by the pen of Horace Walpole, who wrote to Sir Horace Mann on 19 May 1750 that at the embassy in Paris he kept 'an immense table there, with sixteen people in his kitchen; his aides-de-camps invite everybody, but he seldom graces the banquet himself, living retired out of town with his old Columbine -- what an extraordinary man! With no fortune at all, and with slight parts, he has $17,000 a year from the government, which he squanders away, though he has great debts, and four or five numerous broods of children of one sort or other! (Walpole, 'Corr.', 20.156)' Upon Albemarle's death Walpole noted that when he married he had $90,000 in the funds, to which his wife brought $25,000 more, most of which he squandered, leaving only $14,000 which was sufficient to cover his debts. George II granted his widow, Anne, a pension of $1200 a year. 


@@@@@


doc= 15444


Keppel, William Coutts, seventh earl of Albemarle and Viscount Bury (1832-1894), politician, was born in London on 15 April 1832, the eldest son of George Thomas Keppel, sixth earl of Albemarle (1799-1891), and his wife, Susan (died 1885), third daughter of Sir Coutts Trotter, bt. From 1851 to 1891 he was styled Viscount Bury, his father's second title. He was educated at Eton College, and in 1843, when eleven years old, was gazetted ensign and lieutenant in the 43rd regiment. In 1849 he became lieutenant in the Scots guards, and during 1850-51 he was private secretary to Lord John Russell. In 1852 he went to India as aide-de-camp to Lord Frederick Fitzclarence, commander-in-chief at Bombay. In the following year he came home on sick leave, retired from the army, and in December 1854 went to Canada as superintendent of Indian affairs. This experience produced his 'Exodus of the Western Nations' (2 vols., 1865), which is really a history of North America, with particular reference to Canada. While in Canada he married, on 15 November 1855, at Dundurn, Sophia Mary, (died 5 April 1917), daughter of Sir Alan Napier MacNab, speaker of the Canadian parliament, and his second wife, Mary, 'nee' Stuart. They had three sons and seven daughters. 
After his return to England Bury was, on 30 March 1857, elected as a Liberal for Norwich, a notoriously corrupt borough. He was re-elected on 29 April 1859, and again on 28 June following his appointment by Lord Palmerston to the post of treasurer of the household. His election was, however, declared void on petition and on 1 December 1860 he was returned for Wick burghs. He stood for Dover at the general election of 1865, but was defeated, and he ceased to be treasurer of the household in 1866 when the Conservatives came into power. On 17 November 1868 he was returned for Berwick. In 1874 he was defeated for Berwick, and in 1875 for Stroud. He next became a Conservative, and on 6 September 1876 was raised to the peerage during his father's lifetime as Baron Ashford. From March 1878 to April 1880 he was under-secretary for war under Beaconsfield, and in 1885-6 he held the same office under Lord Salisbury. On Easter Sunday 1879 he was received into the Roman Catholic church (his father-in-law's earlier conversion had led to uproar in Canada). He had a public row with W. E. Gladstone in 1880 about the Vatican Council of 1870. 
Bury, who was created KCMG in 1870, was an enthusiastic member of the volunteers and in 1860 published a pamphlet on their reform. In the same year he was made lieutenant-colonel of the Civil Service rifle volunteers, and volunteer aide-de-camp to the queen in 1881. He was also author of 'The Rinderpest Treated by Homoeopathy in South Holland' (1865) and with G. Lacy Hillier of 'Cycling', in the 'Badminton Library' (1887), a popular work in its day. Bury succeeded his father as seventh earl of Albemarle on 21 February 1891, and died, of paralysis, at Prospect House, Barnes, Surrey, on 28 August 1894, being buried on the 31st at the family seat, Quidenham, Norfolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 15445


Ker, Andrew, of Cessford (d. 1526), border chieftain, succeeded his grandfather, Walter Ker of Caverton, as a minor in 1501. His father, Sir Robert Ker of Caverton, a courtier who became warden of the Scottish middle march, was killed by John Heron of Crawley at a border 'day of truce' about 1500. His mother was Christian Rutherford. Andrew Ker was of lawful age to be served heir to his grandfather in 1511. He fought at the battle of Flodden (1513) and became warden of the middle march on 10 August 1515 for a yearly fee of $100 Scots. Also known from his Christian name as Dand, he swore the oath of wardenship promising to keep good rule in the borders. Following in his father's footsteps, he became a cupbearer to James V at a fee of 20 merks per annum with livery. After 21 September 1507 Ker married Agnes, daughter of Sir Patrick Crichton of Cranstoun Riddel, who had been granted the rights to his marriage by the crown in return for $466 13's'. 4died Scots. Agnes was the widow of George Sinclair, son and heir of Sir Oliver Sinclair of Roslin, who died about 1507. On 20 February 1509 the lands of Auld Roxburgh were confirmed to her in liferent. With Ker she had at least three sons and two daughters, including Mark Ker, later commendator of Newbattle Abbey. 
Cessford was never very far from the tangled politics surrounding the minority of James V. In 1514 he supported the return of the duke of Albany as governor of Scotland, and after the downfall of the third Lord Hume in 1515 Albany rewarded Cessford with the wardenship of the middle march and informed the English warden, Thomas, Lord Dacre, that Cessford was a 'man of gude' who would not avenge his father's murder ('LP Henry VIII', 2/1, no. 808). Ker was to have been warden of the east march as well, but he refused this as he did not want to 'meddle with the East Marches' (ibid., 870). As warden Ker became the target of English raiders; Lord Dacre regarded him as forgetful and rash, and Cessford Castle was attacked by English soldiers during Anglo-Scottish fighting in 1519. Ker remained in office, however, and was even made a commissioner to treat for an Anglo-Scottish truce in January 1521. The negotiations proved futile as full-scale war broke out in 1523. 
By remaining an ally of Albany Cessford incurred the wrath of James V's uncle Henry VIII, leading to the siege of Cessford Castle by Dacre on 21 May 1523, which led to casualties on both sides. Had Cessford not 'surrendered the place on being allowed to depart with bag and baggage' it is doubtful if the English would have taken it as 'the wall was 14 feet thick' ('LP Henry VIII', 3/2, no. 3039). Cessford's revenge came in July 1524, when 2000 Scots repulsed 1000 English raiders at Smailholm in the Scottish middle march. Although hurt himself, Cessford would have been pleased that his father's murderer, the 'bastard Heron', was killed. Cessford was subsequently warded for disrupting the administration of border justice and for feuding with Scott of Buccleuch. He then allegedly changed his allegiance to England, and was dismissed from his wardenship during March 1525 in favour of Queen Margaret's second husband, the sixth earl of Angus. He nevertheless promised to serve as a deputy to Angus and advise him on border matters. 
Cessford's term of office had not been helped by his cousins the Kers of Ferniehirst, who often refused to obey him as warden of the middle march, despite proclamations ordering them to do so. His alliance with Angus exacerbated his difficulties with the Kers of Ferniehirst over the lordship of Jedforest, which had begun before 1520. By 1526 Cessford was supporting Angus against the powerful earl of Arran, whom Sir Andrew Ker of Ferniehirst defended. These two main branches of the Ker kindred could temporarily reconcile their differences to oppose other factions, as when in July 1526 they joined forces to defend the young James V against a threat of kidnap by their territorial rival, Walter Scott of Buccleuch, who had sided with a faction wishing to liberate the king from the control of the Douglases. Ironically it was this action, rather than any internecine border feud, that led to Ker's death at Darnick Moor on 24 July 1526. 
Cessford's killer was not Buccleuch, as alleged in some sources, but one of his Elliot servants. Buccleuch was blamed, however, and did not receive a pardon until September 1528. The Ker and Scott families persevered in a blood feud for much of the sixteenth century. Walter Ker, who was still a minor, succeeded his father and was rewarded by a grateful James V with his family's now-customary office of cupbearer to the king. The Cessford estates and the rights to Walter's marriage were granted to the safekeeping of the latter's uncle, George Ker of Faldonside. 


@@@@@


doc= 15446


Ker, Andrew, of Ferniehirst (d. 1545), border chieftain, was the eldest son of Thomas Ker (died 'c'.1484), the first Ker laird of Ferniehirst, and his wife, Margaret Ker. He was referred to as Andrew Ker of Crailing in 1491, but had taken his father's designation of Ferniehirst by 1500. By 6 November 1501 he had married Janet Home of Polwarth; they had at least three sons and four daughters including Robert Ker of Ancrum, progenitor of the earls of Lothian. Their eldest son, Thomas, died in 1524, so their second son, John, became heir. Other siblings were well provided for, as this successful branch of the Kers accumulated much property in Jedforest, Jedburgh, Ettrick Forest, and Haddingtonshire, as well as from Kelso Abbey. Ker often resorted to litigation to establish and protect his family's property rights. From the abbreviation of his Christian name he was known as Dand Ker throughout his adult life; he is occasionally confused with Andrew Ker of Cessford during the first decades of the sixteenth century. 
Politically the Kers of Ferniehirst were bound to the fifth and sixth earls of Angus until 1528 when the crown took control of the forfeited Angus estates. The Kers benefited financially and socially from the downfall of the house of Angus as the Rutherford lairds of Hundalee and Hunthill then gave bonds of manrent (contracts of mutual obligation) to Ferniehirst instead of to Angus. The Kers were also significant landlords within the town of Jedburgh. Their joint father-and-son office of baillie of Jedforest was confirmed in 1515, as being held from the earl of Angus, and in 1542 from the crown, for $10 Scots per annum. In 1520 the sixth earl and Ferniehirst were in dispute about this office and held rival courts. Ferniehirst and his eldest son were also baillies of Jedburgh Abbey's lands within Roxburghshire for an annual fee of $10 Scots. These bonds and offices undoubtedly made the Kers of Ferniehirst the most powerful family within this part of the Scottish middle march. 
Beyond his local influence Ferniehirst was involved with national politics and international affairs connected to the Anglo-Scottish frontier. After the defeat at Flodden in 1513 he attended the Scottish council at Perth. In 1515 he attended parliament for the first time, and he returned again in 1526 to deny charges of treason laid against him by the earl of Angus. Despite being declared 'clene and innocent' he went back to parliament only once more, to condemn the death in 1526 of his kinsman Andrew Ker of Cessford ('APS', 2.303-4). Ferniehirst began his long service in border administration around 1502 as a deputy warden of the middle march. He was warded in 1516 to keep better rule upon the borders, but he served his country well in time of war. For example, he harried English attackers after Flodden, attacked Wark-on-Tweed in 1522, and burned parts of Norhamshire in 1533. He was badly injured during the Wark attack, but recovered before Ferniehirst and Jedburgh were targeted by English forces in September 1523. There was intermittent friction with the Cessford branch of the Kers over control of the middle march, but their direct blood relationship ensured that this did not erupt into a blood feud. Jointly held wardenships and deputy wardenships were often used as a compromise in this dispute. The killing of Andrew Ker of Cessford provoked a long and bitter feud with the Scotts of Buccleuch; the marriage of Sir Walter Scott to Ferniehirst's daughter Janet in 1530 represented one attempt to settle it, though this ended in divorce. 
After Cessford's death in 1526 Ferniehirst continued to serve as a deputy warden, and in 1528 he was elevated to the commission for Anglo-Scottish peace that led to the treaty of Berwick. In 1530 the king recognized Ferniehirst's local power and influence by making him a border commissioner, but he had to swear to a bond of 10,000 merks to enter notorious Liddesdale thieves, hold a justice ayre at Jedburgh, and deliver any of his own men demanded by the opposite warden. It was not until 1538 that Ferniehirst held the middle march wardenship in his own right. He remained in command until 1542, though he reluctantly shared power with Robert, fifth Lord Maxwell, as keeper of Liddesdale in 1541-2. In 1539 Ker was described as 'a shrewd old practitioner of the Border' and was arguably at the peak of his power ('LP Henry VIII', 14/1, no. 50), having successfully apprehended various troublemakers within his domain and implemented royal justice. In 1540 a grateful James V rewarded his loyalty by making his Jedburgh Forest lands into the free barony of Ferniehirst. Ferniehirst even managed to get a civil court action against him transferred from Edinburgh to Jedburgh, where his son-in-law, Sir James Douglas of Cavers, could be relied upon to give him favourable justice as sheriff of Roxburgh. 
This golden age for Ferniehirst was cut short by the renewal of English hostilities in the borders. In 1542 the English respected him as 'a wise and sober man' and clearly wanted him on their side (Bain, 1.347). At first Ferniehirst was loyal and fought off English attacks and bribes, but he was later described as 'so crafty an old fox', for playing one side against the other by simultaneously taking money from both English and Franco-Scottish forces, and he was criticized for being 'superstitious and Popish' in his religion ('LP Henry VIII', 18/1, no. 592). Nevertheless, persistent and brutal harrying of the Kers and the capture of Ferniehirst and his son in July 1544 led to their assuring to England. Ferniehirst was injured and held captive at Warkworth Castle. He begged to be returned home, but the English privy council mistrusted him. They let him home only in October after he had left his grandson Thomas as a hostage and placed a company of English soldiers in his house. In December he thanked the earl of Shrewsbury for sending 'Thome' to school, but requested that his heir John return as he was himself 'agyt' ('LP Henry VIII', 19/2, no. 768). He was then forfeited by the Scottish crown for 'tressonabill intercomonyng... with the auld inymeis of Ingland' (Livingston and others, 3.166). 
The assurance of the border lairds remained uncertain, however. They contributed to the Scottish victory at Ancrum Moor on 27 February 1545, but the devastation inflicted by Hertford's invasion in the following September led many lairds to reassure to the English though the house of the 'crasit and secklie' Ferniehirst was spared (BL, Add. MS 32656, fol. 148). John Ferniehirst attended the October parliament on his father's behalf and signed a bond to resist the 'auld Inymis of Ingland and defend the Realm' ('APS', 2.461-2), but the English garrisoning of southern Scotland forced the Kers to remain in English allegiance until the wars ended in 1549. When Ferniehirst died in October 1545 his grandson was still in English custody, but John Ker's succession was unimpeded. 


@@@@@


doc= 15447


Ker, (Charles) Henry Bellenden (c.1785-1871), law reformer, was the son of John Bellenden Ker, formerly Gawler (1764-1842), botanist, and his wife, Ann. He was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, London, on 18 February 1787. He joined Lincoln's Inn in London in November 1804, was called to the bar in June 1814, and afterwards practised as a conveyancing barrister. He was eventually appointed a conveyancing counsel to the court of chancery, and for some years was recorder of Andover. He married Elizabeth Anne, daughter of Edward Clarke, a solicitor. She was 'a very handsome, clever, and at heart most kindly woman, of whom he was in fact very proud, but they certainly did not hit it off together' (Ludlow, 46). They had no children. 
Ker was a contemporary at Lincoln's Inn of Henry Brougham, who provided the material for Ker's first article in the 'Edinburgh Review', on the education of the poor, in 1819. Ker possibly wrote two further articles at this time on the abuse of charities. He was an energetic member of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge and contributed woodcuts, and lives -- of Wren and Michelangelo, for instance -- to its 'Penny Magazine'. He promoted parliamentary reform from 1830 to 1832 and was a member of the Parliamentary Boundary Commission established by the 'Reform Bill'. He stood, unsuccessfully, as a whig for the Norwich constituency in the reformed parliament. He gave evidence before the real property commission in 1828 and sat as a member of the public records commission in 1831. 
Ker's most important work as a law reformer was in corporation law, conveyancing, criminal law, and statute law. In 1837 he produced for the Board of Trade a comprehensive report on partnership law and the possible adoption of the French conception of the limited partnership into English law. Ker's suggestion of a system of registration of large partnerships was implemented in the 'Joint Stock Companies Act' (7 & 8 Vict. c. 110) of 1844. These developments were significant in the eventual acceptance of limited liability companies. Ker was an early advocate of a deeds' registration system for conveyancing transactions, and he was a member of the real property commission that recommended such a system in 1850. He was also responsible for drafting the 'Real Property Amendment Act' (8 & 9 Vict. c. 106) of 1844. 
In 1833 Lord Brougham, as lord chancellor, appointed Ker a member of the royal commission on the criminal law, which was instructed to digest the criminal law into a single statute. This commission produced eight reports between 1834 and 1845 which culminated in 'An act of crimes and punishments', the first draft code of English criminal law. Lord Brougham attempted to enact this code, but the lord chancellor Lord Lyndhurst decided to appoint another commission to reconsider it. Ker was a member of this commission also, and it produced five reports between 1845 and 1849. It proved impossible to enact their recommendations, though their efforts contributed to the seven criminal-law consolidation acts passed in 1861. Ker was possibly the most important member of these commissions: indeed, it was largely due to his badgering of Brougham that Lyndhurst appointed the second commission. 
Ker had a lifelong commitment to the improvement of statute law. His 'great interest and labour' during the first years of the criminal law commission was the preparation of its outline for the reform of statute law ('Parl. papers', 1835, 35.365). He gave evidence before a select committee of the House of Commons in 1836 on the improvement of statutory drafting, and contributed an article on statute law to the 'Edinburgh Review' in 1847. In early 1853 the lord chancellor Lord Cranworth took up the cause of statute law reform, establishing an informal statute revision board of five members and appointing Ker at its head. In August 1854 Lord Cranworth replaced this board with the statute law commission, which included many senior lawyers, judges, and politicians. Ker was its primary working member. He continued to serve on this commission until its demise in 1859. 
The 1853 board and the subsequent commission attracted considerable criticism, much of which was personally directed against Ker. The 'Law Review' and the 'Law Magazine and Review' devoted a series of articles to the failures and defects of the board and the commission, calling attention at one point 'to evidences of the eminent inability and unfitness for his task which are to be found in Mr. Bellenden Ker... Ten thousand years would not produce a result in the present fashion of working' ('Law Review', 22.93-5). There was criticism in both houses of parliament of the commission's expense and lack of progress. Nevertheless, Ker retained the confidence of Lord Cranworth, who often consulted him on legislative matters, and Lord Brougham paid warm tribute in the House of Lords to his work. Fitzroy Kelly defended the commission in the Commons and referred to the difficulties in translating its work into legislation. Ker retired from practice in 1860 and lived the rest of his life in Cannes, France, where he bought a house with his presumed sister-in-law, the artist Harriet Ludlow Clarke. He died in Cannes on 2 November 1871. He was survived by his wife. 
Ker was interested in art and science; he became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1819 but lost his membership in 1831 through non-payment of dues. The story that he resigned in 1830 in protest against the election of the duke of Sussex as president is incorrect. He sought reinstatement, claiming the burden of other work for his failure to pay, but received no response. He was an original member of the Arundel Society (founded in 1848, for producing printed copies of paintings by old masters) and was interested in the foundation of schools of design. He was one of the first private growers of orchids and wrote a series of articles in the 'Gardeners' Chronicle'. He had a hasty temper and a sarcastic manner, and he was quick to criticize the work of others. In 1829, for instance, he took up claims of financial mismanagement of the Horticultural Society, which resulted in voluminous correspondence with its secretaries. He was also an energetic and innovative, if sometimes impractical, law reformer. He exemplified the tireless organizer of detail -- in the form of data, papers, articles, reports, and draft legislation -- whose perseverance and labours provided the foundation for the transformation of the law during his lifetime. He enjoyed strong friendships, as is evidenced by his surviving correspondence with Brougham, Lyndhurst, and Cranworth. Physically, Ker was a short, rotund man, with a ruddy complexion. 


@@@@@


doc= 15448


Ker, James Innes-, fifth duke of Roxburghe (1736-1823), landowner, was born on 10 January 1736 at Innes House, Moray, the second of the three sons of Sir Hary or Henry Innes of Innes, fifth baronet (died 1762), and his wife, Ann, the daughter of Sir James Grant of Grant, sixth baronet, and the sister of Jean Grant, who married the first Earl Fife. During the rising of 1745 Moray was held by the Jacobites, and to avoid falling into their hands Innes was sent across the Moray Firth to Dunrobin Castle, seat of the earls of Sutherland. He was educated at the University of Leiden. 
Like many other noblemen of little fortune, Innes took up a military career. He was appointed captain of the 88th foot (the Highland Volunteers) on 7 November 1759, and of the 58th foot in 1779. His elder brother Henry had died by 1759, and so on his father's death on 31 October 1762 he succeeded as sixth baronet. His family claimed to have held Innes since 1160, and at one time possessed the whole territory between the Spey and the Lossie, besides estates in Banffshire; but for a century their fortunes had been ebbing, and in 1767 Innes was obliged to sell his ancient barony of Innes to his first cousin James Duff, second Earl Fife. He did not remain landless for long. On 19 April 1769 he married -- at St James's, Westminster -- Mary (1730-1807), the eldest daughter of Sir John Wray, twelfth baronet, of Glentworth, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Frances, the daughter of Fairfax Norcliffe of Langton, Yorkshire. His wife inherited the Langton estate soon afterwards, and on 31 May 1769 Innes assumed by royal licence the additional surname of Norcliffe. 
Perhaps following the reforming example of his brother-in-law Sir Cecil Wray, Innes-Norcliffe became a member of the Yorkshire Association, and he was one of the delegates who accompanied the movement's leader, Christopher Wyvill, to the meeting of delegates from county associations supporting parliamentary and economic reform in March and April 1781. He does not seem to have been politically active after this time. On his wife's death, on 20 July 1807, the Langton estate passed to her nephew Thomas Dalton. 
Innes-Norcliffe, however, was now pursuing a grander inheritance. On 22 October 1805 William Bellenden Ker, fourth duke of Roxburghe, had died, leaving no surviving children. Innes's paternal great-grandfather, Sir James Innes, third baronet, had married in 1666 Margaret Ker, the third daughter of Harry, Lord Ker (died 1643), himself son of Robert Ker, first earl of Roxburghe. The first earl had secured a regrant of his titles and estates in 1646, favouring first his grandson William Drummond and his descendants in the male line (the last of whom was the fourth duke), then the three younger sons of his daughter Jane, countess of Wigtown, and their descendants in the male line (provided the eldest surviving of the nominated heirs married the eldest surviving daughter of Harry, Lord Ker), and then the daughters of Harry, Lord Ker, in order of seniority, and their descendants in the male line, failing which, the earldom and estates should pass to the earl's nearest heir in the collateral male line. The dukedom of Roxburghe, created in 1707, had been given the same limitation, and, as the great-grandson of the only daughter of Lord Ker to have surviving descendants in the male line, Innes-Norcliffe claimed to have succeeded to the dukedom and estates. He took the surname Innes-Ker, and on 28 July 1807, eight days after his wife's death, married Harriet ('bap'. 1777, died 1855), the daughter of Benjamin Charlewood, of Windlesham, Surrey, and his wife, Mary, who had married as her second husband the engraver Valentine Green. The new Lady Innes-Ker had previously lived 'as a sort of companion' (Farington, 'Diary', 9.3234) to her husband's daughter. 
Innes-Ker's claims were challenged by a number of rivals: Lady Essex Ker, the sister of the third duke; Major-General Walter Ker of Littledean, Roxburghshire, collateral heir male of the first earl; William Drummond of Logiealmond, Perthshire, collateral heir male of the fourth duke; and John Bellenden Ker, in whose favour the fourth duke had entailed the property. It took three days (15, 16, and 20 June 1809) for Lord Chancellor Eldon to state in the House of Lords the grounds on which he preferred Innes-Ker to the other claimants. The litigation continued until 11 May 1812, when the House of Lords finally recognized Innes-Ker as fifth duke of Roxburghe. 
Roxburghe thus inherited Floors Castle, near Kelso, Roxburghshire, and the other ducal properties, since the House of Lords overturned the entail settling them on Bellenden Ker. He quickly sold the library of John Ker, third duke, in order to pay his legal costs. Roxburghe enjoyed his new status by supporting several of his wife's impoverished relatives, some of whom were members of the circle of the diarist Joseph Farington. In 1814 he executed a deed of settlement which placed his estates and property in the hands of trustees, benefiting the heirs of the original entail but protecting the position of his wife and guaranteeing legacies to members of his and his wife's families. At the age of eighty he fathered a son, James Robert Henry (1816-1879), who eventually succeeded him as sixth duke, and the trust deed was amended to provide for his son's minority. Roxburghe died at Floors on 19 July 1823, and was buried in the Ker family vault at Bowden, Roxburghshire. His widow married, at Chelsea on 14 November 1827, Colonel Walter Frederick O'Reilly of the 41st foot. She died on 19 January 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 15449


Ker, John, of Kersland (1673-1726), spy, was born John Crawfurd at Crawfurdland, Ayrshire, on 8 August 1673, the eldest son of Alexander Crawfurd of Fergushill, and grandson of John Crawfurd, laird of Crawfurdland. He assumed the title and arms of Ker of Kersland in 1697 when he acquired Kersland through his wife, Anna, younger daughter of Robert Ker of Kersland. Following Robert Ker's death the estate passed to his son, Daniel Ker of the Cameronians, who was killed at the battle of Steenkerke in 1692, then to his elder daughter, Jean, who sold it to Anna's husband four years later. At the time Crawfurd acquired Kersland he was already in financial trouble, and within a few years his situation worsened so drastically that half of his property was feued and mortgaged to others. In the dedication of his 'Memoirs' (published in 1726), Ker denied that money motivated him to carry out intelligence work for the government. Nevertheless his increasing impecuniosity very probably did lead him into espionage and the betrayal of members of the Cameronian sect of Presbyterians, among whom he was accepted as a leader. 
During 1706 Scots from a series of social backgrounds and of opposing religious and political persuasions were involved in protests against the treaty of union then under negotiation with English ministers. Even Jacobites in the highlands had hopes of making common cause with the staunch Presbyterian Cameronians of the south-west, and Ker claimed that in order to achieve this the highlanders 'industriously concealed their true Design', namely, the restoration of the Stuart Pretender (Ker, 1.28). On learning that the Cameronians were to meet at Sanquhar in Nithsdale to decide whether to accept the offer to join forces with the highlanders, the duke of Queensberry sent Ker to persuade them to reject the proposal. Ker accepted the commission, explaining afterwards: 'It was then I embarked so heartily in those Measures, which afterwards gave me so much Sorrow; altho' I declare solemnly, that instead of any Mischief in View at that Time, I had rather the Misfortune to believe that I was doing good Service to my own Country, and the Protestant Interest. (ibid., 1.31)' He rode into Nithsdale 'full of unbridled Zeal' (ibid., 1.32), and there persuaded the sect to withhold its support. This, he claimed, was instrumental in blocking the plans of opponents of the union. 
Others disputed Ker's role at that time and afterwards. The writer of the preface to the account of Nathaniel Hooke, Louis XIV's agent in Scotland at the time (published in 1760), commented savagely: 'As to the ostentatious offers of the Laird of Kersland, that gentleman's vanity and restless character is too well known in this country, to lay the smallest stress on what he advances' (Hooke, 'Secret History', iii). George Lockhart of Carnwath also despised Ker, asserting that as he 'was known to be a person highly immoral and guilty of several base actions, such as forgery and the like, no person of the least note would have the least intercourse with him, yet he found means to ingratiate himself with several people of no great rank, from whom he picked up stories. (Lockhart, 1.302)' On his return to Edinburgh after persuading the Cameronians to reject the Jacobite overture, Ker was assured that Queen Anne would recognize the service he had rendered her government, and he was granted royal licence to associate with disaffected individuals in order to gather intelligence. By so doing he was 'thereby led into farther Labyrinths, and added to my misfortunes' (Ker, 1.37), being soon, according to his own account, the employer of spies and agents across the country. The first of these 'labyrinths' involved infiltration of Jacobite plotters in the period preceding James Stuart's attempted rising of 1708. With Anne's royal licence in his pocket Ker boldly negotiated with the Jacobites, who referred to him by several codenames -- Thomas Trustie, Wilks, Wicks, and the Cameronian Mealmonger. Claiming to represent Cameronians of five shires, he held talks with a Roman Catholic named Strachan, offering 13,000 men for the Pretender's service and volunteering to travel to France as a hostage to their loyalty (Hooke, 'Correspondence', 2.308-9). In August 1707 he even urged the French to act soon. 'We are all convinced that the only way to save Scotland is to restore our king,' he wrote. 'The opportunity is excellent; it never was so good; and if you lose it, it will never be found again' (Hooke, 'Secret History', 106-7). Stuart agents revealed much of their plans to Ker, including a plot to seize Edinburgh Castle, and even supplied him with the cipher used in correspondence between Scotland and France. All this was passed to Queensberry, who once again assured him he would be rewarded. 'Truly, I dare say, I was rewarded just as I deserved', he boasted (Ker, 1.47). But before the year was out Ker's duplicity had been discovered, and the duchess of Gordon told Hooke, 'Mr Wicks is turned a knave' (Hooke, 'Correspondence', 2.517). In March 1709 Ker travelled to London, where the lord treasurer, Lord Godolphin, paid him the money he was due. However, according to Lockhart, Ker was paid $500 to $600, which was increased to at least 2000 guineas after he threatened to reveal Godolphin's connections with the Jacobites (Lockhart, 308). 
Four years later Ker claimed he was sent to Vienna to promote a scheme for harassing French and Spanish trade. When the emperor rejected his plan, he apparently remained and passed on all the information he could to the Electress Sophia of Hanover. For his trouble he was presented with 'the Emperor's picture in gold, set round with diamonds' (Ker, 1.87). From Vienna Ker moved to Hanover, where he claimed to help secure the Hanoverian succession, and had the pleasure of informing the new British royal family that 'my Joy is so exceeding great, that I think all my Labour and Industry is more than rewarded' (ibid., 1.93). He received a couple of gold medals as a token of his majesty's favour, but wanted more. He asked for the governorship of Bermuda and was refused because, he said, he would not bribe the appropriate officials. He moved on to Holland and then to London, where he offered his services to the government at the start of the 1715 Jacobite rising, but these were rejected, and he was left at the end of the rebellion lamenting the misfortune of so many of his countrymen whose suffering he claimed he might have prevented had he been allowed to intervene. John Ker's life continued on a downhill path, with failure of an attempt to interest the emperor of Austria in the East India Company, and an unsuccessful plan to set up a trading company in the Austrian Netherlands. 
During his time abroad Ker's wife, in desperate financial straits, had to make over her furniture and plate to friends in return for money to support herself. In 1718 he sold Fergushill to John Asgill and Robert Hackett for $3600, and half of it was mortgaged back to Ker for $2600. In spite of every effort he ended up in the king's bench debtors' prison in London, where he died on 8 July 1726. He was buried in St George's churchyard, Southwark. His widow soldiered on, producing a forged deed in the name of her elder sister, Jean, through whom Kersland had come to her. However, the estate and barony of Kersland was eventually sold in 1788. The couple were survived by their three daughters: Elizabeth, who married John Campbell of Ellangieg in Argyll, and Anna and Jean, of whom no further details are known. Ker's 'Memoirs' was published in three volumes in 1726, the last posthumously. Even so the publisher, Edmund Curll, incurred the wrath of the government for publishing 'a False, Scandalous and Malicious Libel' and was fined 20 marks and forced to stand in the pillory at Charing Cross for a day. Curll, however, had the last word, publishing the government's accusations against him as an appendix to the third volume, reprinted in 1727. 


@@@@@


doc= 15450


Ker, John, first duke of Roxburghe (c.1680-1741), politician, was the second of three children of Robert, third earl of Roxburghe ('c'.1658-1682) and his wife, Margaret (1658-1753), eldest daughter of John, first marquess of Tweeddale. On 13 July 1696 Roxburghe's elder brother, Robert, fourth earl of Roxburghe, died, aged eighteen, and Roxburghe was served heir male and of entail to his brother on 22 October. 
Roxburghe played a significant part in Scottish politics in the years from 1702 onwards. George Lockhart of Carnwath, who was normally a political opponent of Roxburghe, wrote that Roxburghe: 'was a man of good sense, improven by so much reading and learning that, perhaps, he was the best accomplish'd young man in Europe, and had so charming a way of expressing his thoughts, that he pleased even those 'gainst whom he spoke. (Lockhart, 1.95)' James, second duke of Queensberry, who led Queen Anne's Scottish administration, was keen to discredit his opponents, regardless of whether they were Jacobites or, as in the case of Roxburghe, his fellow whigs. In the winter of 1703-4 Roxburghe, John, ninth earl of Rothes, and George Baillie of Jerviswood went to London to counter the disinformation that Queensberry was spreading about them. They were successful, and Sidney, first earl of Godolphin, head of Anne's English administration, had Queensberry sacked. In 1704 John, second marquess of Tweeddale, formed a new Scottish administration, composed of whigs formerly in opposition: they were known as the 'new party', and subsequently as the squadrone. Roxburghe served as secretary in this administration, from October 1704 to May 1705. 
Tweeddale's ministry were discredited by their acquiescing in the judicial lynching at Leith, in March 1705, of the crew of an English ship, the 'Worcester'. They were promptly replaced by a ministry made up of Queensberry's cronies under John, second duke of Argyll. None the less the squadrone, once again in opposition, decided to support the Scottish government in the votes that led to the Union of 1707. Recent historians have given much of the credit for this decision to Roxburghe. He believed, or at any rate self-interestedly professed to believe, that the Scottish parliament would vote for union. He phrased this belief succinctly in a letter of 28 November 1705 to George Baillie: 'The motives will be, Trade with most, Hanover with some, ease and security with others' ('Correspondence of George Baillie', 138). 
Under the terms for the Union the Scots were to be compensated for undertaking to help service the pre-Union English national debt. The squadrone were duped into thinking that they would be allowed to help disburse this 'equivalent' money, but this did not happen. As a sop to Roxburghe's pride he was on 25 April 1707 created duke of Roxburghe, marquess of Bowmont and Cessford, earl of Kelso, viscount of Broxmouth, and Lord Ker of Cessford and Caverton, with the same remainder of these dignities as that of the earldom of Roxburghe. This was the last title ever created in the peerage of Scotland. On 1 January 1708 he married Mary (1677-1718), widow of William Savile, second marquess of Halifax, and eldest daughter of Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham. Their only child, Robert, was born about 1709, and succeeded his father as second duke of Roxburghe. 
Roxburghe continued to play a part in the politics of the newly created British state. He was elected as one of the sixteen representative peers of Scotland in the general elections of 1707, 1708, 1715, and 1722. In March 1709 he was sworn of the privy council. From 1 August to 28 September 1714 he served as one of the lords regent, before the safe arrival in Britain of George I. In November 1715 he served as a volunteer soldier in the Hanoverian army that checked the Jacobite rising at the battle of Sheriffmuir. He was keeper of the privy seal of Scotland from 1714 to 1716, and then became the third (Scottish) secretary of state. 
As in the period before 1707 Roxburghe was involved in the competition and jealousies among Scottish whigs. He supported the 'Peerage Bill' of 1719 and, though he was created a knight of the Garter in 1722, he backed John Carteret rather than the rising star, Sir Robert Walpole. Walpole seized the opportunity of the Shawfield riot to dismiss Roxburghe from office in August 1725, following upon a report by Archibald, earl of Ilay, that in Scotland 'by a long series of no-administration, the mere letter of the law had little or no effect with the people' (Coxe, 1.232). 
Thereafter Roxburghe, though he acted as deputy high constable (Scotland) at the coronation of George II in 1727, lived largely in political retirement. He did not stand for election as a representative peer in 1727, nor did he attend the election at Holyrood Palace. Floors Castle, Roxburghshire, had been built for him by Sir John Vanbrugh in 1718. He died on 27 February 1741 at Floors, aged about sixty, and was buried at Bowden parish church, also in Roxburghshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 15451


Ker, John (d. 1741), Latin poet, was born at Dunblane, Perthshire. He was for a time schoolmaster at Crieff, Perthshire, and on 25 March 1713 became a master at the Royal High School, Edinburgh. He composed memorial verses on the death of Archibald Pitcairne (1652-1713), the Latin poet and most important Jacobite literary figure in contemporary Scotland. In 1717 Ker became professor of Greek at King's College, Aberdeen, the first special teacher of the subject there. 
In 1725 Ker published in Edinburgh 'Donaides, sive, Musarum Aberdonensium de eximia J. Fraseri munificentia carmen eucharisticum', a poem celebrating the distinguished dons and alumni of Aberdeen University. Further memorial verses include those on the Latin lyricist Sir William Scott of Thirlestane (1624?-1725) and, for the university, 'Fraserides, sive, Funebris oratio et elegia in laudem J. Fraserii', in 1731. In 1727 appeared his paraphrase of the 'Song of Solomon', 'Cantici Solomonis: prior vario carminum genere, altera Sapphicis versibus prescripta... auctore Joanne Kerro'. The volume also contained Arthur Johnson's paraphrase of the same biblical text, dedicated to Charles Edward Stuart as king of Great Britain. Both works were reprinted in 1739, together with a number of original Latin poems, some with similar dedications, by Patrick Adamson, William Barclay, Robert Boyd, George Eglisham, Arthur Johnston, John Johnston, and William Hogg in an anthology, 'Poetarum Scotorum musae sacrae', edited by William Lauder. Ker's strong Jacobite sympathies seem to have been no barrier to higher academic appointments, for on 2 October 1734 he succeeded Adam Watt as professor of Latin at Edinburgh University. Here he studied law and associated again with friends of high school days, enjoying both popularity and the great respect of his students. He also taught the humanity course and was praised by Alexander Carlyle as 'very much master of his business' ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 31). 
Ker contributed greatly to the growth of antiquarianism so characteristic of the eighteenth century and had a distinct influence in reviving exact Latin scholarship in Scotland. The Latin ballad on the battle of Killiecrankie versified in English by Walter Scott is most probably Ker's. He died in Edinburgh on 19 November 1741. 


@@@@@


doc= 15452


Ker, John, third duke of Roxburghe (1740-1804), book collector, was born on 23 April 1740, at Hanover Square, London, the oldest of four surviving children of Robert Ker, second duke ('c'.1709-1755), and his wife, Essex (died 1764), daughter of Sir Roger Mostyn, third baronet. He succeeded to the dukedom on 20 August 1755, while a schoolboy at Eton College, which he left in 1758. Later he travelled in continental Europe, where he became friends with Christiana Sophia Albertina, eldest daughter of the duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, and intended to marry her. But in September 1761 Christiana's younger sister, Charlotte, married George III. If Roxburghe had married Christiana, she would have become Charlotte's subject. The obituary of Roxburghe in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1st ser., 74, 1804, 383) says that this problem of etiquette, 'operating with some other reasons, broke off the negociation'. 
Whatever the other reasons, Roxburghe never married, and it is a plausible interpretation that his unlucky romance changed the character of his life. Certainly, Sir Walter Scott, who was personally acquainted with Roxburghe, was of this view: 'Youthful misfortunes, of a kind against which neither rank nor wealth possess a talisman, had cast an early shade of gloom over his prospects, and given to one so splendidly endowed with the means of enjoying society that degree of reserved melancholy which prefers retirement to the splendid scenes of gaiety. (Scott, 44.446)' Roxburghe did become a lord of the bedchamber (1767), knight of the Thistle (1768), groom of the stole and first lord of the bedchamber (1796), privy councillor (1796), and -- being permitted to retain the Thistle, which was unusual -- knight of the Garter (1801). He enjoyed a role at the court as friend of George III, which would explain why he lived much of the time in London; he purchased a house at 13 St James's Square in 1795 and kept his main library there until his death. This friendship with the king was itself supported by their shared interests in book collecting; George Nicol, bookseller to both George III (since 1781) and the duke, comments on the king's appreciation of Roxburghe (Nicol and Nicol, 20 [18]). When at Floors Castle, his Scottish family home, Roxburghe was, as we know from Scott's description, keen on outdoor pursuits, but book collecting was his primary interest. In 1807 Nicol wrote that it was the duke's 'favourite plan to pass through life among his books, studiously endeavouring to conceal, from the world, his eminent talents, and his extensive knowledge. And so successful was he in this endeavour, that neither his neighbours in the country, nor his friends in the Capital, seem to have been much acquainted with them. (ibid., 19-20 [17-18])' This passion for book collecting may well have had a family origin. The Valdarfer Boccaccio (Boccaccio, 'Decamerone', 1471), which most sensationally sold in 1812 for $2260, a record price for a single book until 1884, features in a story told by Sir Walter Scott. Two famous collectors, Lord Oxford (either Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford, or Edward Harley, second earl of Oxford) and Lord Sunderland (Charles Spencer, third earl of Sunderland), were dining with Roxburghe's father when they talked about the 1471 Boccaccio, which the second duke duly acquired and, on a later occasion, produced for them. 'His son... who never forgot the little scene upon this occasion, used to ascribe to it the strong passion which he ever afterwards felt for rare books and editions' (Scott, 44.446-7). There are serious chronological problems with this anecdote, but Roxburghe was himself clear about the origins of his interest, and it is likely to contain a kernel of truth. 
It is difficult to judge when Roxburghe's collecting began in earnest, as it is very poorly documented. The earliest noteworthy acquisition that can be dated is the purchase, in 1788, of two volumes of black-letter ballads previously owned by Thomas Pearson (Nicol and Nicol, 5). Roxburghe was himself passionately interested in ballad literature and added a third volume. The three volumes, now in the British Library, were published by the Ballad Society as 'The Roxburghe Ballads' (ed. W. Chappell and J. W. Ebsworth, 9 vols., 1869-99). His library grew apace, and at his death it totalled an estimated 30,000 volumes. The most significant part was the collection of early English literature, with twenty-three English incunabula, including fifteen Caxtons, and a large number of rare sixteenth-century editions; he also owned rare and important early Scottish books. Analysis suggests that he was driven not so much by a desire to own early or fine books regardless of their content (otherwise it would be strange that he owned no more than about 120 incunabula, and never acquired a copy of the 'Gutenberg Bible') as by his subject interests. Thus, he followed up the romances among his English literature collection with manuscripts of French Arthurian texts and a wide selection of romances from across mainland Europe. That he collected by theme is also shown by George Nicol, who noted that at the time of his death Roxburghe was 'in full pursuit of collecting our dramatic authors' (Nicol and Nicol, 14). 
Roxburghe died at his London house of an inflammation of the liver on 19 March 1804, and was buried at Bowden, near Melrose. He was survived by two sisters, but his younger brother, Robert ('b'. 1747), had died in 1781, and his successor in the dukedom was the seventh Lord Bellenden. However, the fourth duke died in 1805, leaving a disputed succession. Only when this was resolved in 1812 was the duke's library -- in both London and Floors Castle -- sent to the sale rooms: in London in two parts, beginning 18 May (forty-two days) and 13 July (four days), totalling $23,341, and in Kelso on 16 September 1813. Roxburghe's fame really stems from the sale of his library, which has gone down in the history of book collecting as the high point of obsessive collecting for which Thomas Frognall Dibdin coined the term 'bibliomania' in his 'Bibliomania, or, Book-Madness' (1809). Roxburghe books are today the prized possessions of many of the world's great libraries, and their collector is immortalized by the distinction of having named after him one of the most exclusive and famous of bibliographical societies, the Roxburghe Club, which was formed at a dinner held on 17 June 1812, on the day when the Valdarfer Boccaccio was scheduled for auction. 


@@@@@


doc= 15453


Ker, John (1819-1886), minister of the United Presbyterian church, was born in the farmhouse of Bield, in the parish of Tweedsmuir, Peeblesshire, on 7 April 1819. His parents moved successively to Fillyside, a farm between Leith and Portobello, and to Abbeyhill, Edinburgh. While his father adhered to the established church, his mother was a seceder, and through that connection young John was exposed to the ministry of John Brown (1784-1858). After education at Edinburgh high school, Ker entered Edinburgh University in 1835 and distinguished himself in Sir William Hamilton's class, where he gained first prize. In 1838 he entered the Divinity Hall of the United Secession church. He also studied French and German, in the latter case committing an entire dictionary to memory, as well as Hebrew and Arabic. In 1842 Ker travelled to Germany, where he studied under Tholuck at Halle for six months. 
Licensed in 1844, Ker was called by the congregation of Clayport Street, Alnwick, Northumberland, to which he was ordained on 11 February 1845. He was reluctant to move from there, and it was only at the second attempt that he was translated to East Campbell Street Church, Glasgow, where he was inducted colleague to Dr Kidston and Mr Brash on 19 March 1851. The vigorous young minister soon arrested the decline in the congregation's fortunes and he embarked on an intensive pastoral ministry. He turned down a call to a Bristol charge and similarly declined a request to become his church's first home mission secretary. An expanded church with seating for 1200 was erected in Sydney Place, but Ker's health broke down in 1858 and thereafter he spent much time on the continent. A partial recovery of health allowed him to perform the duties of professor of practical training in the United Presbyterian College from 1876. It was a role to which he was perfectly suited and he was able to discharge his duties up to the time of his sudden death, from heart disease, at The Hermitage, Murrayfield, Edinburgh, where he lived with a married sister, on 4 October 1886. Ker was buried in the new Calton cemetery, Edinburgh, on 7 October. 
In spite of the inhibiting influence of poor health and although he lacked the attributes of a conventional leader, Ker was seen by contemporaries as one of the leading figures in his church. As a preacher he bore comparison with William Bruce Robertson (1820-1886), and his published 'Sermons' (1869) were hugely popular. His humour, learning, and graciousness endeared him to all he met: 'In the pulpit he was a king, in the class-room a master, in social life lovable, among ripe scholars and grand men the equal of the best' ('Christian Leader', 2 Dec 1886, 734). The travel and leisure forced on him enabled Ker to be still more cultured, and he was a keen antiquarian with a wide knowledge of Scottish history and an equal interest in current affairs. In 1869 he received the honorary degree of DD from Edinburgh University. 


@@@@@


doc= 15454


Ker, (John) Bellenden (1764-1842), botanist and man of fashion, was born John Bellenden Gawler on 10 May 1764, the eldest son of John Gawler (died 1803) of Ramridge, near Andover, Hampshire, and Caroline (died 1802), eldest surviving daughter of John Bellenden, third Lord Bellenden (died 1740). He was baptized on 5 June 1764 at the Temple Church, London. On 5 November 1804 George III, out of regard for Gawler's mother, and at the instance of his second cousin, William Bellenden Ker, seventh Lord Bellenden and fourth duke of Roxburghe, granted him a licence to take the name of Ker Bellenden in lieu of Gawler; he was, however, invariably known as Bellenden Ker. William, fourth duke of Roxburghe, died in 1805 without direct heir. During his lifetime he endeavoured to divert the succession in favour of Ker, and entailed his estates upon him, but both the entail and Ker's claim to the title were ultimately set aside by the House of Lords in favour of James Innes-Ker, fifth duke of Roxburghe, on 11 May 1812. 
Bellenden Ker was long known as a wit and man of fashion in London. Many stories were told of the charm of his conversation, and he was the hero of some 'affairs of gallantry'. In May 1796 George Annesley, Viscount Valentia, obtained $2000 damages against him in the court of king's bench for committing adultery with Annesley's wife, Anne, Lady Valentia. At an early age he obtained a commission in the 2nd regiment of Life Guards; he was appointed captain on 20 January 1790, and was senior captain in the regiment in 1793, when he was compelled to quit the army owing to his displays of sympathy with the French revolution. His attention must, however, have turned to botany, for in 1801 he brought out, anonymously, his 'Recensio plantarum', a review of all the plants illustrated up to that time in Henry C. Andrews's 'Botanist's Repository'. About the same date he began to contribute occasional descriptions of new plants to Samuel Curtis's 'Botanical Magazine', then under the editorship of John Sims, who highly commended Ker in the preface to the fifteenth volume. In 1804 Ker printed an important memoir on a group of plants, the Iridaceae, in 'Annals of Botany'. In 1812 the 'Botanical Register' was started in opposition to the 'Botanical Magazine' and Ker became the first editor. He held the office until about 1823, when John Lindley took sole control. When freed from botanical journalism, Ker revised his memoir on the Iridaceae of 1804, and brought out 'Iridearum genera', which was published in Brussels in 1828 and was his last important work on botany. On resuming work after a period of illness, he busied himself on 'An Essay on the Archaeology of Popular English Phrases and Nursery Rhymes', which was first published in 1834. He also wrote a number of occasional articles in various gardening papers. 
During the later period of his life Ker lived at Ramridge, where he died on 11 June 1842. The genus 'Bellendena' commemorates him. With his wife, Ann, who survived him, he had one son, Charles Henry Bellenden Ker. 


@@@@@


doc= 15455


Ker, Patrick (fl. 1684-1691), writer, is generally supposed to have been Scottish, or at least to have had connections with Scotland, though the only evidence of this can be derived from internal witness in his poetry (such as 'An Elegy on Mr John Forbes, Late Sheriff of Aberdeen') and the speculative testimony of a contributor, J. O., to 'Notes and Queries' in the late nineteenth century. The latter conjectures that Ker may have been compelled to leave Scotland for the greater tolerance of episcopalianism in England during a period of intense presbyterian conflict. 
Ker's cultural production is centred in London, and the period in which his works appeared in print, 1684-91, spans the later reign of Charles II and the ascendancy of James VII and II to the throne. Attribution of his work has been ambiguous, largely owing to the mere inscription of initials in some of his printed works. There is, however, a marked degree of internal textual correspondence and thematic echoes between the ascribed works, and, in one instance, a near identical ornamental illustration of the Trinity facing the frontispiece of two works, 'Flosculum poeticum' and 'The Map of Man's Misery'. 
The most powerful poetic expression of Ker's royalism is found in the collection 'Flosculum poeticum: Poems Divine and Humane, Panegyrical, Satyrical, Ironical' (1684). The volume opens with a politically impassioned series of verses on the execution of Charles I, 'Great king and constant martyr', an illustration of Charles in the oak subscribed 'O cruel English nation!' (p. 3), and frequent invocations of 'Loyal hearts'. There are briefer anti-Cromwellian pieces; poetry that celebrates the restoration of Charles II; occasional and dedicatory verse possibly addressed to Ker's London coterie, and a dramatic prologue; religious verse that is frequently subsumed by royalist defence; and a body of amatory and erotic poetry in conventional seventeenth-century anti-platonic, sensualist vein. 
Ker's political poetry in two single-sheet broadsides is found in the Luttrell Ballad collection, 'An elegy on the deplorable and never enough to be lamented death of the illustrious and serene Charles II' (1685), and 'A Mournful Elegy on the Deplorable Death of Charles II' (1685). These elegies proclaim the political renewal augured by the coronation of James VII and II. Ker is also the probable author of the Latin panegyric 'In illustrissimum, ac serenissimum, Jacobum II' (1685). 
Ker's other major printed work includes a religious almanac, 'The Map of Man's Misery' (1690), containing 'spiritual Meditations', and dedicated to Lady Rachel Russell on 24 January 1689; ''Logomachia', or, The Conquest of Eloquence' (1690), two rhetorical disputations on classical models; and ''Politikos megas': the Grand Politician' (1691), dedicated to the earl of Nottingham on 27 August 1690, a supposed 'translation' of a treatise by (the pseudonymous) Conradus Reinking. Reminiscent of Machiavelli's 'Il principe', it prescribes the most expedient political conduct, reveals 'the Secret Art of State-Policy', describes various duplicitous strategies -- 'How to speak one's mind freely without any danger' -- and even offers military advice to the 'Nobles, Statesmen, Judges, Lawyers, Justices of Peace' to whom the work is addressed. 
Ker, a moderately prolific polemicist and political writer, sustained, within the cultural context of late seventeenth-century London, traditions of episcopalian and royalist writing which had particular currency in Scotland. His association with Scotland, however, can only be inferred. 


@@@@@


doc= 15456


Ker, Robert, first earl of Roxburghe (1569/70-1650), politician, was the eldest son of Sir William Ker of Cessford (died 1600) and Janet Douglas, daughter of Sir James Douglas of Drumlanrig. Robert was probably born in 1570, being described as fifteen in November 1585 at the time of the fall from power of James Stewart, earl of Arran. He first received lands from the crown in March 1573, including his father's barony of Cessford. He seems to have married relatively young, his wedding to Margaret Maitland taking place on 5 December 1587. She was the only daughter of Sir William Maitland of Lethington, secretary of state under Mary of Guise and Mary, queen of Scots, and his wife, Jean Fleming, one of the famous 'four Marys', ladies-in-waiting to Mary, queen of Scots. Robert and Margaret had three daughters and one son, William, Lord Ker, who graduated MA from Edinburgh in July 1610 and died in France eight years later. In 1590 Robert Ker murdered William Ker of Ancrum, a member of the rival house of the Kers of Ferniehirst, under cover of darkness in Edinburgh. He was denounced a rebel, his property was escheated to the crown, and he fled to England immediately. He was called back late in the following year by John Maitland of Thirlestane, his wife's uncle, who was attempting to construct a favourable faction at court. Through Maitland's dealings, Ker received a remission under the great seal in November 1591. The feud between the houses of Cessford and Ferniehirst was not settled until 1607, when Robert Ker of Cessford apologized to the Ferniehirst Kers and paid them 10,000 merks ($6666 13's'. 4died). 
In January 1592 Robert received further lands as a result of the forfeiture of Francis Stewart, first earl of Bothwell. In the autumn of the following year, Maitland of Thirlestane and Ker went to Linlithgow with over 200 horse to lend support to the royal campaign against Bothwell, who had risen in arms. At this meeting Ker was reconciled with Lord Hume, another border rival. A few weeks later the young laird of Cessford left Edinburgh to go to his wife, accompanied only by one servant. By accident he encountered Bothwell, who also had only one companion, near Humbie and 'meiting twa for twa, they focht allong tyme on horsback'. Cessford's servant was wounded on the cheek but 'at lenthe beathe parteis so wearied with long fechting... they assentit baithe to let utheris depairt and ryd away for that tyme'. Ker returned to Edinburgh 'and tald the Kingis Majestie of that accident' (Moysie, 111). As a result orders were given to raze Bothwell's castle of Crichton. In the spring of 1594 Ker, by now warden depute of the middle march, was appointed, along with Lord Hume and the laird of Buccleuch, to muster troops in the Merse and Teviotdale to resist Bothwell once again. 
Ker's aid to the king against Bothwell increased his credit at court. In August he attended the baptism of Prince Henry and was one of four bearers of the 'paile' or canopy of velvet fringed with gold which was held over the infant prince. In October he was promoted warden of the middle march but, in spite of this, he is known to have carried on the border tradition of raiding into England. In February 1598 he was arrested by Sir Robert Carey and handed over to the custody of the archbishop of York, although, probably because of his position, he was released by the beginning of June. 
In May 1599 Ker was admitted to the reconstituted privy council and was thereafter a fairly regular attender at meetings of the council, although a number of quite prolonged absences after 1603 suggest sojourns at court in England. He attended his first convention of estates in December 1599, and late in the following year he was raised to the peerage as Lord Roxburghe on the occasion of the baptism of Prince Charles. He subsequently received various lands in the shires of Roxburgh, Dumfries, Peebles, and Berwick. Although licensed 'to depairt and pas furth of' Scotland in August 1602 ('Reg. PCS', 1st ser., 6.440-41), he does not seem to have taken advantage of this permission but he did accompany his sovereign on his journey south to take up the English throne in April 1603. His absence from the sederunts of the privy council until the beginning of 1606 would suggest that he may have remained at court for a good deal of that time. He did, however, attend parliament at Edinburgh in July 1604, when he was elected one of the lords of the articles, the committee which drafted acts and received petitions. He was also appointed one of the commissioners for negotiating a closer union with England. 
A long-standing feud with Sir Robert Ker of Ancrum, resulting from the murder of Ancrum's father, William, was resolved during 1606. After several appearances before the privy council, the parties agreed to be reconciled and 'choppit handis' before the council on 20 November ('Reg. PCS', 1st ser., 7.272). In 1607 Roxburghe was the commissioner to the synod of Merse and Teviotdale and to the presbyteries within that synod, on behalf of the privy council. In the previous December a packed general assembly at Linlithgow had agreed to have permanent or 'constant' moderators for these ecclesiastical courts but, knowing that there would be opposition within the kirk, prominent local landowners were commissioned by the council in an attempt to ensure their acceptance. In March 1607 Roxburghe sent a messenger to the presbytery of Melrose with a charge from the privy council ordering it to accept their nominated constant moderator within twenty-four hours, 'quhilk was thoucht be the presbiterie to be hard and precipitant deilling' (Melrose presbytery register, NA Scot., CH2/327/1, fol. 2'v'). They refused, and a week later Roxburghe turned up in person, yet still the presbytery stood firm. The matter dragged on through the summer with repeated pressure being applied by Lord Roxburghe yet, in October, the presbytery elected its own moderator in the usual manner. Roxburghe went to the synod in October and urged them to accept a constant moderator and to force their presbyteries to do likewise. According to Calderwood, a member of that synod, 'he got a flatt 'Nolumus'' (Calderwood, 6.680). 
In that year Roxburghe was granted the properties of the abbacy of Kelso by parliament, in which he was again elected one of the lords of the articles. Throughout the rest of his political career he was very much involved in parliamentary business, attending most meetings of the estates and being appointed to several parliamentary commissions on taxation and ecclesiastical affairs. He was also appointed to several privy council commissions and in 1610 was reappointed to the reconstituted privy council. 
Early in 1614, having been widowed, Roxburghe married for a second time, at Somerset House in London, the marriage contract being dated 10 January. His new wife was Jean Drummond (died 1643) ['see 'Ker, Jane, countess of Roxburghe], daughter of Patrick, Lord Drummond, and governess to the children of James VI; they had one child, Harry, born in 1618. On 18 September 1616 Roxburghe became the first earl of Roxburghe, Lord Ker of Cessford and Caverton, and was granted the right to make four knights on the occasion of his elevation. In spite of this he was disappointed at being passed over for the office of chamberlain; his wife fell from favour with Queen Anne and, as a result, they left court for a time. Although apparently initially reluctant to adhere to the five articles of Perth, particularly that which enjoined that communicants receive the sacrament kneeling, he was elected to the lords of the articles in the parliament of 1621 and voted to ratify them. In November of that year he was appointed to the inner 'cabinet' council, a subcommittee of the privy council for dealing with higher affairs of state. Two years later he was appointed to the commission for grievances, intended as a conduit to James VI for Scottish problems and complaints. He was at court at the time of the death of James VI and he attended the king's funeral. Roxburghe had been on a commission responsible for managing the affairs of Prince Charles in Scotland since 1619, and the new king soon confirmed his position as a privy councillor and a member of the grievances commission. He continued to be active in affairs of state, both in England and Scotland, in spite of his advancing years. 
In 1637 Roxburghe was made lord privy seal, in spite of his lack of Latin. He was in Edinburgh at the time of the anti-prayer book riot on 23 July and the bishop of Edinburgh used Roxburghe's coach to escape the angry mob after the morning service, the earl's footmen keeping them off with drawn swords. In the autumn the earl attempted to achieve reconciliation by acting as an intermediary between dissident ministers, including Alexander Henderson, and the bishops. In December, having been at court, he was sent by Charles I to Scotland 'to try if he could find aney way to compose bussines' but this did not bear fruit ('Historical Works of Balfour', 2.237). At the general assembly at Glasgow in November 1638, he was one of six royal nominees to be assessors to the marquess of Hamilton, the king's commissioner. The assembly refused to allow the assessors the right to vote, fearing a precedent which might allow the king to appoint any number of voting commissioner's assessors. In August 1639 he again attended the general assembly, as one of the assessors of the king's commissioner. He attended parliament in the same month but was initially debarred from the parliament house in 1641 because he had not signed the national covenant. After subscribing he was admitted and was soon appointed to a number of committees. 
During the 1640s Roxburghe remained prominent in politics, in spite of being in his seventies. He was on the covenanting committees of war for the shire of Roxburgh and the constabularies of Haddington and Lauderdale and he attended parliament regularly. In 1643 his son and his second wife died. He went on to marry Lady Isabel Douglas (died 1672), daughter of William Douglas, fifth earl of Morton. They had no children. Because of his support for the engagement with Charles I in 1648, he was stripped of all public office by parliament in 1649. He died in the following year, on 18 January, at his house of Floors Castle, near Kelso, and was buried in the family tomb at Bowden kirk on 20 March. His wife lived on until 16 December 1672. According to Roxburghe's direction, his estates and titles passed to his son-in-law Sir William Drummond, husband of his eldest daughter, Jean. 


@@@@@


doc= 15457


Ker, Robert, first earl of Ancram (1578-1654), courtier and politician, was the eldest son of William Ker of Ancram (died 1590) and Margaret, daughter of Alexander Dundas of Fingask. His father was assassinated in 1590 and his mother subsequently married Sir George Douglas of Mordington. In 1604 Ker was appointed groom of the bedchamber in the household established for Prince Henry and Princess Elizabeth, and by 1607 he had been knighted, and had married Elizabeth (died 1620), daughter of Sir John Murray of Blackbarony. Early in 1607 he went abroad 'for doing my lawfull affaires and bissiness' ('Correspondence', 1.8-9). He was in Paris in March 1608, and after his return to Britain again gained office at court, as a gentleman of the privy chamber and captain of the king's guard in Scotland. Following the death of Prince Henry in November 1612 he became a gentleman of the bedchamber to Prince Charles and resigned his captaincy of the Scottish guard so that he could attend the prince regularly. In 1616 he was granted a pension of $2400 Scots ($200 sterling) from Scottish revenues. A duel with Charles Maxwell of Terregles in February 1620 briefly interrupted his career at court. Ker killed his opponent in the duel, fought near Newmarket, and was banished on being found guilty of manslaughter, but there was agreement that his opponent (who had previously twice killed opponents in duels) had been at fault. He was, therefore, pardoned in October and returned to his duties at court. His first wife having died, in 1621 Ker married Anne Portman, eldest daughter of William Stanley, sixth earl of Derby, and widow of Sir Henry Portman. 
In January 1623 Prince Charles set out for Spain, accompanied by the duke of Buckingham, to woo the Spanish infanta, and in April Ker and other courtiers left to join them in Spain, returning with the prince in November. Grants to him by the prince indicate his regard. In December 1622 he was paid $1000 sterling, and in April 1623 King James authorized pensions for him and his wife: the latter, worth $500 sterling a year, brought an agonized comment from the English treasurer about 'the King's favours to his servants being without end' ('Correspondence', 1.xvi). 
Ker's career at court continued to prosper after his master, Charles, acceded to the throne in 1625, and Ker sat in the English parliament for Aylesbury in 1625 and for Preston in 1628-9. The marriage of his eldest son, William Kerr, to the countess of Lothian led to William's being created earl of Lothian, and Ker busied himself in ensuring that his son could live up to the new rank. Ker was evidently made a baronet in 1631, and was admitted to the Scottish privy council on 23 June 1631, but he saw his future as continuing to lie primarily in England and transferred Ancram and other lands in Scotland to his son. He accompanied King Charles on his visit to Scotland in 1633, as master of the privy purse, and in the coronation honours was created earl of Ancram on 24 June. This was the pinnacle of his career. In 1639 he evidently lost the keepership of the privy purse. Some attributed this to his 'long and evident infirmity', others to retaliation for the support his son Lothian was giving to the Scottish covenanters in resisting the religious policies of Charles I (ibid., 1.xx). Ancram kept his post as a gentleman of the bedchamber until about 1644, but age had probably prevented him remaining with the king after the outbreak of civil war in 1642 and letters in 1643 were addressed to him in London. The pension granted him many years before was now paid irregularly, and by 1647 he was having to seek protection from debtors. 
The execution of the king in January 1649 led Ancram to reflect that 'I am creeping down the hill, or rather upp the hill from this world to a better' ('Correspondence', 1.xxii). The execution and the abolition of monarchy were probably joined by financial considerations, as his pension was no longer paid at all, in persuading him to leave London, and in November 1649 he was staying at his son's house of Newbattle; but he found no safe refuge there, as his arrival at Dordrecht in the Netherlands in September 1650 evidently reflects his reaction to Cromwell's invasion of Scotland. Ancram settled in Amsterdam, and his last years were ones of struggling to subsist. 'I am now leirn'd to be 'penny wyse', though I was formerly 'pound foole'' (ibid., 1.xxiv). After being visited by two of his grandsons he wrote to Lothian, their father, 'there is nobody more dear than you and yours are to your most loving father' (ibid., 1.xxv). This, written on 9 December 1654, was his last letter, and he died, in Amsterdam, with 'satisfaction to himself' and 'the great content and admiration' of those who were with him, on 18 December (NA Scot., GD40/XII/42). A year before he had been 'striving, by God's assistance, to be ready to die', and had desired a quiet burial, without pomp or fuss ('Correspondence', 1.xxv). In the event his Dutch creditors prevented his body being buried at all, and even after some of his debts were paid he was still unburied in May 1655, when Cromwell intervened to demand that the funeral be allowed to take place. When he was finally interred is unknown. 
Ancram spent his life as a courtier, and showed no sign of trying to gain political influence or use his position to advance any faction except personal and family interests. Beyond family and court, his main interests were literary. He corresponded with the poets William Drummond of Hawthornden and John Donne, and looked after Donne's papers while he was abroad. When Samuel Daniel died in 1619 he left his papers to Ancram. Having heard psalms sung in French and Dutch translations, Ancram himself in the early 1620s translated some of the psalms into English to be sung to the same tunes. Thus three parts of 'the Reformed Church' separated by language through 'the curse which [God] inflicted on mankynd at Babell' could, he hoped, worship God 'with one hart and voice... howsoever they differed in speech' ('Correspondence', 1.2.488). But Ancram modestly did this work for recreation, and his psalms remained unpublished until 1875. A sonnet in praise of a solitary life was inspired by a sleepless night in the bedchamber at court in 1624, but declaring his poems 'few and evil' he merely sent his 'starved rhime' to his friend Drummond. 


@@@@@


doc= 15458


Ker, Sir Thomas, of Ferniehirst (d. 1586), border chieftain and administrator, was the second son of Sir John Ker (died 1562), laird of Ferniehirst, and his wife, Katherine Ker of Cessford. Thomas inherited the Ferniehirst estates on his father's death in 1562 and married Janet Kirkcaldy of Grange around the same time. They had five surviving children -- Andrew, first Lord Jedburgh; William Kirkcaldy of Grange (who succeeded to his mother's lands and took her surname); Mary, who married James Douglas, commendator of Melrose; Julian, married first to Sir Patrick Home of Polwarth and then to Thomas Hamilton, first earl of Haddington; and Margaret, who wed Robert, second Lord Melville. By 1569 Janet had died, and in that year Sir Thomas married Janet Scott, sister of Sir Walter Scott of Buccleuch. The match represented an attempt to pacify a blood feud between the Kers and Scotts, and despite its shaky origins proved a success. Janet bore Sir Thomas three more sons and a daughter -- Thomas of Oxnam; Mr James (whose son Robert became second Lord Jedburgh); Robert Carr or Ker, earl of Somerset, the infamous favourite of James VI and I; and Anne, who in 1583 was noted as a possible bride for the sixth earl of Huntly, but who eventually married John Elphinstone, second Lord Balmerino. 
Thomas Ker is first recorded as a hostage for his grandfather, Andrew (Dand) Ker of Ferniehirst, during the 'rough wooing' of the 1540s. In December 1544 Dand thanked the earl of Shrewsbury for sending 'Thome' to school in England. This education perhaps accounts for Thomas's being noted as a protestant when he brought a preacher to Kelso in 1553. In 1560, when the Scottish Reformation began in earnest, John Knox noted him as 'godly and forward' ('Knox's History', 1.261). Ferniehirst continued to support the Reformation, but had returned to Roman Catholicism by the mid 1560s through the influence of Mary, queen of Scots. Ker had to run the family estates after his father's death in 1562 and may have had less time for religious activities. His renewed adherence to Roman Catholicism was concrete, rather than 'politique', for in October 1582 the general assembly of the Church of Scotland wanted to 'call before them the Laird of Pharnihirst, his ladie and daughter for going to Mess in France' in order to force them to subscribe the protestant confession of faith ('Booke of the Universall Kirk', 589). 
Ferniehirst continued his family's feud with the Scotts and was consequently summoned before the privy council in November 1562. Nevertheless he was knighted about this time. In 1568 he made a will because he feared an imminent attack by Scott of Buccleuch, but his marriage to Janet Scott calmed these tensions for a while. In the political sphere Ker defended the newly wed Queen Mary against the rebellious forces of the earl of Moray during the 1565 chaseabout raid. Thereafter he never left the queen's cause and after her escape from Lochleven Castle in 1568 he rejoined her forces; he could not, however, prevent their defeat at Langside and Mary's subsequent flight into exile. The queen then corresponded with Ker as if she were still in power, advising him to keep good order and give ready service when it was required. On 26 August 1569 Mary wrote that she hoped to deliver her next message to him in person. The failure of the 1569-70 northern rising must have been a great disappointment to Sir Thomas, who sheltered the rebel earl of Westmorland and his followers at Ferniehirst Castle. The English had their revenge when the forces of the earl of Sussex and Lord Hunsdon launched a two-pronged attack on the houses of those who had abetted the rebels; Ferniehirst Castle was razed to the ground during April 1570. 
More disaster followed when Ker gave his support to the 'queen's party', which opposed the 'king's party' during the civil wars of 1570-73. This was a time of confused government, with rival parliaments meeting during 1571. Marians holding Edinburgh Castle elected Ferniehirst provost of Edinburgh on 20 June 1571; he was subsequently forfeited by the king's men on 28 August 1571 at Stirling. Now labelled a firebrand, he took part in the attack by the queen's men on the rival parliament. During this sortie into Stirling, the regent Lennox, grandfather of James VI, was killed, an eventuality which made a restoration of Ferniehirst's estates unlikely. Ker continued to cause trouble in 1572 by leading an attack on Jedburgh because that town had backed his territorial rival, the earl of Angus. 
Sir Thomas then joined his father-in-law, Sir William Kirkcaldy of Grange, in defending Edinburgh Castle against the English-backed forces of Regent Morton and the king's men. The Marian defenders surrendered in May 1573, yet just before this capitulation Ferniehirst escaped from the castle and went into England to shelter with his friend Sir John Forster, warden of the English middle march. The English privy council ordered Forster to keep him there to prevent his going to France. After Forster had entered a submission on Ferniehurst's behalf, Morton denounced the latter's character, saying he had 'never heard of any submission of Ferniehurst that in honour or reason could be thought worthy of an answer' ('CSP for.', '1572-4', 300). Ker returned briefly to Scotland in November 1573 to survey English damage to his properties near Jedburgh. He then complained to Forster that Jedburgh's burghers and Morton's soldiers did 'daily cut and destroy his woods, harass his tenants, and slay his deer' (ibid., 439). Sir Thomas did not mention that he had attacked Morton's lands in 1570-71. By September 1574 he was still in Forster's company as he appeared with other rebels at a border 'day of truce', where they conferred with fellow Scottish borderers. 
Morton was furious and by December 1574 had ensured that the forfeiture of Ferniehirst's lands was absolute by granting most of them to the earl of Angus. Ferniehirst travelled to France and remained there until the downfall of Morton in 1581. His debts mounted as he borrowed money from such people as Sir John Forster and Sir Cuthbert Collingwood of Eslington in England, his aunt Dame Isobel Ker of Cessford, John Angus, a Scottish merchant in Paris, and James Beaton, erstwhile archbishop of Glasgow, who was similarly exiled in France. Whether these debts were ever repaid is unclear. Ferniehirst hoped that Queen Mary would repay Beaton, but during 1583-4 Collingwood resorted to demanding his money from Dame Janet Scott as Ferniehirst's factor. Dame Janet was trying to alleviate her husband's debts in France and Scotland by asking Queen Mary to chase up the Spanish pension he had been promised. In an intriguing correspondence Mary sent a ring to Lady Ferniehirst, who reciprocated by sending back political news from Scotland. 
Ker had been licensed to return from France in 1580 probably through the influence of the earl of Lennox and an offer of manrent to Regent Morton. That offer was quickly abandoned on the downfall of Morton, at whose execution on 2 June 1581 Ferniehirst 'stood in a shott over against the scaffold, with his large ruffes, delyting in this spectacle' (Calderwood, 3.575). Later that year Ferniehirst was pardoned for all crimes committed between June 1567 and November 1574 and fully restored to his estates; ratification followed in 1583. He was appointed provost of Jedburgh on the king's command in 1581, in order to oust pro-Angus officials in the burgh, while in 1582 the hereditary office of baillie of Jedforest was returned to him upon the forfeiture of the earl of Angus. Ferniehirst was in such great favour in 1582 that he was also granted a five-year protection from all his creditors. 
Ferniehirst returned to France in 1582 to avoid the regime of the protestant Ruthven raiders, who had ousted his patron the earl of Lennox. But he returned to Scotland in 1584 and allied himself with the new chancellor of Scotland, the fifth earl of Arran. His first victim was his old rival William Ker of Cessford, whom he unfairly engineered out of the office of warden of the Scottish middle march. His appointment as warden had disastrous consequences, however, when in July 1585 Lord Francis Russell was killed in mysterious circumstances during a day of truce between Ferniehirst and Sir John Forster. David Hume of Godscroft noted that 'whether by chance or of set purpose is uncertain' (Hume, 402). The blame was nevertheless placed on Ferniehirst, with Arran as his suspected accomplice. As Russell had been Forster's son-in-law, the incident also strained Anglo-Scottish relations. 
Ferniehirst had many men with him, but they were not 'ranged in order of battell' as later reports suggested. He was, after all, a pompous man known to like a large garrison around him, and Arran had given him twenty-five hagbutters to carry out his warden duties. Russell was 'slaine in the myddest of his owne men', which suggests a prearranged murder plot. However after the murder both Forster and Ferniehirst 'stood together and made a quietnes', and then took order over pledges and prisoners and 'parted quietly oute of the feeld' (Bain, 1, nos. 330-31). James VI warded both Arran and Ferniehirst and refused to hand Ferniehirst over to the English government. There may have been some enmity between Ferniehirst and Russell as Russell had been intercepting his letters. Russell had called him half lunatic in May 1585, perhaps in response to his arrogance. Ferniehirst swore that he 'would rather the blood of one of his own friends had been shed', but in truth his reputation was shattered by this incident, one that still remains an enigma (TNA: PRO, IND1/6887). 
Ferniehirst's fall from power caused his wife to return from France in 1585; she lived until the mid-1590s. Meanwhile, on 24 February 1586 Henry Widdrington of the Berwick garrison recorded that 'Sir Thomas Carre the lard of Farnihearst is deceased in the towne of Aberdene' (Bain, 1, no. 417). Still grieving for his son-in-law, Sir John Forster wrote 'I am sorie that he and some betters had not beine hanged' (ibid., 1, no. 421). This was an ignominious end for a man who had once been a powerful border laird and supporter of Queen Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 15459


Ker, Sir Walter, of Cessford (1510-1582), border chieftain and administrator, was the eldest son of Andrew Ker of Cessford (d. 1526) and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Sir Patrick Crichton of Cranstoun Riddel. His father was killed near Melrose in 1526 by a follower of Sir Walter Scott of Branxholm, during an unsuccessful attempt to free James V from the guardianship of the earl of Angus. Sir Andrew's death gave rise to a bitter feud between the Kers and the Scotts. Walter's uncle, George Ker of Faldonside, acted as his tutor until he was served heir on 12 May 1528, aged eighteen. Cessford was cup-bearer to James V from 1528 to 1536 and occupied the office of warden of the Scottish middle march, with a jurisdiction which encompassed Teviotdale, during the years 1535-8, 1542-51, and 1558-70. His position as a border law officer did not, however, prevent his engaging in reiving. The lands of Cessford and Primside in Morebattle parish, Roxburghshire, were created free baronies for him in 1542. He married Isobel ('c'.1515-1585), daughter of Andrew Ker of Ferniehurst, before 27 September 1543. They had six children: Sir Andrew Ker of Caverton; William Ker of Cessford, who succeeded his father as warden; Thomas; Agnes, who married John Edmonston of that ilk; Isobel, second wife of John Rutherford of Hunthill; and Margaret, who wed Alexander, fifth Lord Home. 
During the so-called 'rough wooing' Cessford faced intermittent accusations of collaboration with the English, but on 15 October 1545 he appeared before the council to bind himself to the defence of the nation. Following the Scots defeat at Pinkie on 10 September 1547, however, Cessford submitted to the duke of Somerset at Roxburgh and assured to England. The English exploited his feud with the Scotts to enlist him in raids on Newark Castle and the Buccleuch lands in January 1548. Then in October the Kers burnt Catslack Tower and with it Lady Elizabeth Ker, mother of Walter Scott of Branxholm and also Cessford's own great-aunt. England's grip on the borders was subsequently undermined by French intervention and Cessford was replaced as warden by Scott of Branxholm in 1550, exacerbating the tension between the two men. Knighted by Governor Arran in June 1552, on the evening of 4 October following he avenged his father when with his friends he stabbed Scott of Branxholm to death on Edinburgh High Street, Hume of Cowdenknowes urging Cessford to 'strike for thy father's sake' (Fraser, 2.210). The murderers were outlawed, but on 8 December the crown elected to banish them to France, ordering the Kers to raise 100 horsemen to serve in the continental wars. Their exile was never enforced and a remission was eventually granted on 16 May 1553. On 28 August 1559 Cessford was appointed a commissioner to treat with the English for the ransom of prisoners of war. He joined the protestant lords of the congregation at Leith in April 1560 and sat in the Reformation Parliament. He was frequently censured throughout Queen Mary's reign for his failure as warden to provide adequate redress to people complaining of breaches of the march laws, a failure partly caused by the refusal of his kinsman, Sir Thomas Kerr of Ferniehurst, and his followers to co-operate with him. There was rarely any consistency about relationships among the Ker chiefs, whose long-standing rivalry in the middle march often set them against each other. 
In March 1564 a contract arranging marriages between the Kers and the Scotts was made to settle their feud, and Cessford was required to seek the laird of Buccleuch's forgiveness for the murder of the latter's father in St Giles's Kirk, Edinburgh. Significantly, Cessford and Ferniehurst only agreed to stand surety for their own followers, rather than for all of their surname. Like the majority of the realm, Cessford remained loyal to the crown during the chaseabout raid, the revolt by the earl of Moray and duke of Chatelherault in 1565. However, after the queen married the earl of Bothwell in 1567 he opposed her later that year at Carberry Hill, and in 1568 fought valiantly with the king's men at Langside, alongside his son-in-law Lord Home. As a committed protestant Cessford was a natural supporter of Moray's regency, and he assisted the regent's expeditions to suppress Liddesdale in 1569. By contrast Ferniehurst, who had reconverted to Catholicism in the late 1560s, remained loyal to Mary and between 1570 and 1573 acted and was virtually recognized by the English as warden of the middle march. Cessford avoided direct confrontation with him, and in July 1570 pragmatically allowed a Marian raid on Wark, led by Ferniehurst and Buccleuch, to pass and return through that march unchallenged. Despite agreeing to ride against Ferniehurst in February 1571, Cessford made no direct response to his kinsman's attempts to burn Jedburgh, perhaps as a result of his own differences with the Rutherfords among the townsmen. However, he joined with Lord Ruthven's force, which rode from Leith to Jedburgh's rescue in February 1572, and was present at the convention which elected the earl of Morton regent in November. 
Four years later Morton antagonized Cessford by seeking to divide the area of the middle march under his jurisdiction, and in August 1578 Sir Walter accompanied the earls of Atholl and Argyll when they rode from Edinburgh to Stirling to secure the regent's deposition before the king. When recommended for an English pension in March 1580 Cessford was noted to be a man 'of great power, constant, stout, valiant' ('CSP Scot.', '1574-81', 386). Appointed a gentleman of the king's bedchamber in October, he initially favoured the duke of Lennox's regime but evidently grew disenchanted, for he signed the secret band which preceded the Ruthven raid in 1582. He died some time later that year and was probably buried in Bowden parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 15460


Keroualle, Louise Renee de Penancoet de, 'suo jure' duchess of Portsmouth and 'suo jure' duchess of Aubigny in the French nobility (1649-1734), royal mistress, was born in September 1649 at the Manoir de Keroualle, the family home near Brest, Brittany, France, the second of three children of Guillaume de Penancoet, count de Keroualle (died 1690), and his wife, Marie-Anne (died 1709), daughter of Sebastien de Ploeuc, marquess of Timeur and of Kergolay, and his wife, Marie de Rieux. Keroualle boasted an ancient lineage but was of relatively minor and apparently somewhat impoverished Breton nobility, while his wife was a connection of the powerful Rieux family. Louise was probably educated at the nearby convent of the Ursulines of Lesneven. Towards the end of 1668 she was appointed a maid of honour to Henriette-Anne, duchess of Orleans and sister of Charles II ('Madame'), and in June 1670 she was one of her entourage on her visit to England for the signing of the secret treaty of Dover. The death of Madame shortly afterwards proved a turning-point in Louise's life as she was one of Madame's household who were then taken into the service of Charles II's queen, Catherine of Braganza. 
The familiar account by Bishop Burnet of de Keroualle having caught the king's eye at Dover and the duke of Buckingham and Louis XIV then deliberately sending her back in order to ensnare Charles is not supported by other evidence, although the exact circumstances of her new appointment remain unclear. She arrived in September or October 1670 to take up her position as maid of honour and was soon noticed at court, the diarist John Evelyn writing that in November he saw Louise, 'that famed beauty, (but in my opinion of a childish simple and baby face)' (Evelyn, 3.564). Contemporary portraits suggest her features and figure were rounded and that she had dark hair and brown eyes. After about a year Louise became the mistress of Charles II (1630-1685), probably during the October 1671 visit of the court to Newmarket when she was invited to stay at Euston, the home of Lord Arlington, expressly with the intent of attracting the king there. The French ambassador colluded in this arrangement and was soon able to report that it had proved successful. Some ten months later, on 29 July 1672, Louise gave birth to her only son by the king, whom she named Charles. She soon became established as the king's main mistress: on 19 August 1673 she was created Baroness Petersfield, countess of Fareham, and duchess of Portsmouth, and was at the same time appointed a lady of the queen's bedchamber. The new duchess's success enabled her to arrange a marriage for her sister, Henriette-Mauricette, who came to England in 1674, was given a pension of $600 a year, and married Philip Herbert, sixth earl of Pembroke. Portsmouth's son was given the last name of Lennox and the young Charles Lennox was created baron of Settrington, earl of March, and duke of Richmond on 9 August 1675, and on 9 September lord of Torboulton, earl of Darnley, and duke of Lennox in the Scottish peerage. 
In October 1676 Portsmouth's main pension from Charles II was established at $8600 a year for life. Her annuities had increased to $11,000 by December 1680 and, with the addition of many payments over and above her pensions, in the last four years of the reign she seems to have collected an average of some $20,000 a year. She was probably the most expensive of Charles's mistresses, but the figure of $136,668 often quoted as having been given to her in 1681 from secret-service money is a mistaken calculation (GEC, 'Peerage', appx M, 130-31). At some point before her son was born Portsmouth was given apartments of her own in Whitehall at the end of the Matted Gallery, which she gradually extended until they consisted of some twenty-four rooms and included about 60 to 70 foot of the gallery. Portsmouth occupied these apartments until the end of the reign, and they became a focal point for her ascendancy at court, where she put on magnificent entertainments and provided the main alternative to meeting the king in his own or the queen's rooms. John Evelyn described them in 1675 as 'luxuriously furnished and with ten times the richness and glory beyond the Queene's' (Evelyn, 4.74). Portsmouth's success was not, however, always assured. In 1674 Charles II contracted a sexually transmitted disease which he passed on to Portsmouth, who reportedly suffered far worse effects from it than he did; this may have been the cause of her recurrent ill health thereafter. Moreover, Nell Gwyn, the king's other mistress at this time, was a constant source of irritation to Portsmouth, and the arrival of Hortense, duchess of Mazarin, in England in December 1675 was potentially an even greater threat. It was soon apparent that the king was attracted to Hortense and this, coupled with Portsmouth's illness in April 1676, gave rise to many rumours that their relationship had become purely platonic and that she would soon be displaced altogether. In August that year Portsmouth, in obvious distress, poured out her troubles to the French ambassador; in December, in the ambassador's presence, she complained to the king of his infidelities, recalling the previous disastrous consequences. However, the king's affair with Mazarin was short-lived, and Portsmouth had regained her position by 1677. 
Portsmouth was careful in her alliances with the king's ministers: in 1673 she fell out with Lord Arlington, whose fortunes were declining, and transferred her allegiance to his rival Thomas Osborne, earl of Danby, the new lord treasurer, in 1674. She assisted Danby's son in gaining a post in the king's bedchamber in 1674, and in April 1676, on reports that Danby and the duke of York had fallen out at Newmarket, she made a hurried journey there in order to support Danby. Portsmouth's progress to the centre of court politics was closely watched and encouraged by Louis XIV, who hoped that she would be useful in promoting French interests. In 1673, however, Portsmouth greatly annoyed the French king by advancing one of the mademoiselles d'Elbeuf as a bride for the duke of York and refusing to desist despite requests conveyed by the French ambassador. The ambassador was not impressed by her apparent ill will towards France, and in his opinion she merited no kindness from Louis XIV. However, at the request of Charles II, in 1674 the estate of Aubigny in France was given to her for life and afterwards to her son. This seems to have encouraged Portsmouth to ask Louis XIV for several positions for her relations in France; although these were refused, an expensive pair of earrings was presented to her in 1675. These gifts saw a significant change in attitude: Portsmouth now frequently expressed gratitude to Louis XIV and began to facilitate access to Charles II for the French ambassador in her apartments, to report useful information to the ambassador, and even, from 1676 onwards, to take part in discussions between the king and the ambassador concerning foreign affairs. In 1677, when it appeared that England was being drawn into war against France, an illness of Portsmouth's in December that year allowed Ambassador Barrillon to enjoy even greater privacy in his meetings with the king, as the rest of the court was shut out of her apartments. Portsmouth was then involved in proposals made in January 1678 to the French concerning a possible exchange of towns in the Spanish Netherlands, discussions in December concerning a secret subsidy for England in return for not calling parliament, and similar discussions in 1679 and 1680. Early in 1680 the ambassador offered inducements of $10,000 each to Portsmouth and her ally the earl of Sunderland to encourage them to facilitate an Anglo-French treaty. 
While always assuring the French of her zeal for their interests, Portsmouth kept very much to Charles II's negotiating position, and in fact these discussions did not result in an agreement. However, she certainly appeared to represent French interests and this, her Catholicism, and her association with Danby attracted unfavourable attention. In June 1678 she was indirectly criticized in the House of Commons by Henry Booth, and on 27 April 1679 was named by Thomas Mostyn in a speech that, fortunately for Portsmouth, was not followed up by other MPs. Clearly concerned to maintain her position, she had in fact broken with Danby by March 1679 and was at this point closely associated with Robert, earl of Sunderland, the new secretary of state. She was involved in his secret plans to invite William of Orange over to England in the summer of 1679, William being advised to 'make some application to her' as she had 'more power over him [the king] than can be imagined' ('Diary of... Sidney', 1.15), and in the autumn of that year they both supported the duke of York against the duke of Monmouth. The opposition kept up the pressure on Portsmouth. In addition to increasingly vitriolic satire, the campaign included the anonymous 'Articles of high treason, and other high crimes and misdemeanours against the duchess of Portsmouth', twenty-two charges accusing her of subverting church and state, which were circulating by 5 January 1680. These were to form the basis of a projected attack on her in the forthcoming parliament, which, however, was soon afterwards prorogued. Then in June 1680, at the Middlesex sessions, the earl of Shaftesbury and his followers entered an information against the duke of York as a recusant and at the same time against the duchess of Portsmouth as a 'common nuisance'. The attack on York and a difference with the duchess of York (who appeared to favour Portsmouth's rival Hortense, duchess of Mazarin) may have persuaded Portsmouth that abandoning her alliance with York was in her own interests. By August she had turned against him and some time afterwards she was reconciled with the duke of Monmouth. Early in October she arranged meetings between the exclusionist peer Lord Howard of Escrick and the king, and during the following parliamentary session she openly advocated the bill to exclude the duke of York from the throne. When things went badly for the exclusionists, it was reported on 24 October that she was 'crying all day for fear the Parliament should be dissolved' ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.181). The duke of York wrote in November that Portsmouth 'has play'd me a dog trick' (Emilia, La Marquise Campana de Cavelli, 1.340). Portsmouth also met with exclusionists such as Shaftesbury, and later the 'Southampton Whigs', a group led by such men as Ralph Montagu and William, Lord Russell. When their plans failed, her position at court appeared precarious. However, although Portsmouth had apparently become convinced of the need for exclusion, intriguingly she had acted at least in part with the king's knowledge, as both she and Charles II informed William of Orange when he at last visited England in August 1681. By this time Portsmouth appeared to be recovering her position, and in November 1681 a reconciliation was arranged with the duke of York, Portsmouth later using her influence with the king to allow York to return from Scotland. The king himself arranged a public reconciliation in November between Portsmouth and her inveterate enemy the marquess of Halifax in her apartments. In January 1682 she gave a banquet for the Moroccan ambassador, which was also attended by Nell Gwyn and the daughters of the duchess of Cleveland; 'concubines and catell of that sort... as splendid as jewells, and excess of bravery could make them', wrote John Evelyn disapprovingly (Evelyn, 4.267-8). The instalment of Portsmouth's son as a knight of the Garter in April 1681 and then as master of the horse in January 1682 confirmed her favour with Charles II. She was very much involved in her son's appointment and at least two borough corporations were sufficiently impressed by it to attempt to gain her favour. In 1683 the town of Portsmouth elected the duke of Richmond to the freedom of the borough, which may explain Portsmouth's gift to the town of a pair of silver flagons in that year, and the town of York replaced the duke of Buckingham with Richmond as their high steward, prompting Portsmouth to send a letter of thanks and assure them of her services. 
Portsmouth also resumed her role as an intermediary with the French ambassador, and increasingly appears to have pressed Charles to accept French policy. In January 1682 she encouraged him to accept a French conquest of Luxembourg and to resist calls for war with France. She then made a visit to France from March to June 1682. Travelling in great style, she met Louis XIV with messages from Charles II, and was given all the recognition and assurances of kindness that she could wish for. While there she was reported to be 'living at a vast rate... and [is] greatly complimented there; the people flock about her coaches' ('Ormonde MSS', 6.357). She went from Paris to Brittany, where she bought back the family estates of Keroualle and Mesnouales which her father had been obliged to sell. This visit visibly raised her status on her return, and she undertook her role in politics with renewed vigour: exchanging letters with Louis XIV, managing the reinstatement of her ally Sunderland as secretary of state in January 1683, supporting the duke of York's and Sidney Godolphin's return to the cabinet council in June and September the same year, and aligning herself with York and his allies against the marquess of Halifax. Persistent rumours of an affair between Portsmouth and the French nobleman Philip de Vendome in June-November 1683 alarmed the French ambassador, who thought Portsmouth was endangering her position, and he enlisted Louis XIV's support in removing Vendome from England. Despite these rumours, Charles II's esteem for his mistress showed no sign of decreasing: at his request Louis XIV agreed to create the estate of Aubigny as a duchy for Portsmouth in January 1684, and in November her son was naturalized as a French subject in order that he might inherit her property. She also bought further lands in France, near Brest, at about this time. In September 1684 she accompanied the king on a visit to the town of her title, Portsmouth, and as the king had not taken lodgings in the town (preferring to sleep in his yacht), her lodgings 'was the court in the daytime' ('Hastings MSS', 2.177). Her illness in October-November 1684 apparently caused a suspension of almost all business. A letter to her from Charles II probably belongs to this period, in which he writes, 'I should do my selfe wrong if I tould you that I love you better then all the world besides, for that were making a comparison where 'tis impossible to express the true passion and kindness I have for my dearest, dearest fubs. (Duchess of Portsmouth's MSS, Goodwood MS 3, unfol.)' On 22 November it was reported that 'since her grace's recovery she is greater and more absolute than ever' (Thomas Wyndham to Viscount Weymouth). Only a few months later, however, on 6 February 1685, Charles II died. According to the French ambassador, it was Portsmouth who on 5 February brought him the news that Charles was at heart a Catholic and pressed him to urge the duke of York to make the necessary arrangements. 
After the king's death Portsmouth's influence instantly ceased. Her son was removed as master of the horse and she returned to France in August 1685. In 1686 some incautious remarks concerning Madame de Maintenon almost occasioned an exile from the French court. She visited England in 1686-7 and was present at the marriage of her niece Charlotte to the son of Sir George Jeffreys in July 1688. After the revolution she lost her English pensions but was granted a substantial annuity by Louis XIV. Her apartments in Whitehall were destroyed in the fire of 1691. In the 1690s she lived in Paris, at 3-5 quai Voltaire. Her son Richmond, who had converted to Catholicism at her request in October 1685, secretly went to England in 1692, joined William of Orange, and reconverted. Eventually reconciled with him, she desired to go to England to try to reclaim her pension. She was granted permission in 1698 and visited England from July 1698 to February 1699, but her pension was not reinstated. On her return to France she lived in Paris and at her estate in Aubigny. The remainder of her life was spent in attempting to regain financial stability, in which she had some success (in 1716 she sold most of her lands in Brittany, and her French pension was greatly increased in 1718 and then converted to a life annuity in 1721), and in good works in the town of Aubigny, where she founded a convent. Her grandson Charles Lennox, second duke of Richmond, and his wife often visited her at Aubigny, and her last visit to England was in 1732-4. She died in Paris on 14 November 1734 and was buried there on 16 November in the church of the Barefooted Carmelites in the chapel of the Rieux family. Portsmouth's son having predeceased her, her grandson the second duke of Richmond inherited her property. 
Unlike Charles II's other mistresses, Portsmouth was not generally accounted a great beauty, nor was she renowned for her wit. On the other hand, her desire and talent for pleasing were noticed. Elizabeth, duchess of Orleans later commented, 'The Duchess of Portsmouth is the finest lady of her kind that I have ever met; she is extremely polite and interesting in her conversation' (Delpech, 193), and indeed in England the hospitality she provided in her magnificent apartments, her unfailing civility to other important courtiers, and her willingness to become an intermediary for Charles II made her a significant and enduring political force at the Restoration court. 


@@@@@


doc= 15461


Ker, Mark (1517-1584), landowner and administrator, second son of Sir Andrew Ker (d. 1526) of Cessford, Roxburghshire, and Agnes, daughter of Sir Patrick Crichton of Cranstoun Riddel, Edinburghshire, was born in Edinburgh Castle, of which Sir Patrick was then keeper. After graduating MA from St Andrews University he held several church livings, which he was dispensed to hold although under the canonical age. In 1547 the pope provided him to the abbacy of Newbattle, to be held 'in commendam' during the lifetime of the existing abbot James Haswell, and two years later he was dispensed from taking monastic vows. Technically a cleric, he remained the recognized heir to the properties of his powerful border family after the direct heirs of his brother, Sir Walter Ker. In 1555 he was accused of killing a French soldier in a fracas at Newbattle. He gained personal possession of the abbey estates in 1557 on Abbot Haswell's death. 
Ker sat in parliament in 1558 and probably in the provincial council of the Scottish church in 1559 (no list of those attending survives). At the same time he associated with the party that favoured religious reform and 'rapprochement' with England. He subscribed to the protestant Band of Leith in April 1560, and sat in the so-called Reformation Parliament the following August, voting for the adoption of the protestant confession of faith. He became an extraordinary lord of session and privy councillor in 1569 and sat on several government commissions and inquiries. In 1572 he was a negotiator with Queen Mary's remaining supporters, and he was one of three judges appointed to settle disputes (from the country south of the River Tay) arising from the terms of the pacification of Perth (23 February 1573). In 1575 and 1580 he was appointed to border commissions. Initially a supporter of the regent Morton, he was on the council which carried on the government on the latter's resignation in 1578 and took part in attempts at reconciliation with Morton's representatives. He became a close ally of Esme Stewart, made duke of Lennox, who arrived from France in 1579, and who some feared might become a focus for a revival of the queen's cause or even of the Roman Catholic faith. Ker, himself a protestant, was sent by Lennox to attempt an accommodation with the ultra-protestant party after the Ruthven raid (1582), in which that party tried to remove the king from Lennox's influence. 
Having shed his clerical character for a lay career, and having survived the political storms of the new reign, Ker also exploited the resources of the Newbattle lands which he had acquired on the eve of the Reformation settlement. Through an extensive programme of feuing, which sometimes involved the eviction of long-settled leasehold tenants, the development of coal workings and salt pans, and the sales of wool from huge flocks of sheep, Ker became a wealthy man, possessed at death of an estate valued at just over $16,000 Scots. He treated the surviving monks of Newbattle harshly, turning them out and only reluctantly paying their maintenance even after they took him to law. He converted the monastic site into a family home which, extended by his descendants, is one of the few Scottish country houses to take its name from the monastery it replaced. 
Some time after 1560 Ker married Lady Helen Leslie (died 1594), daughter of George, fourth earl of Rothes, and widow of Gilbert Seton the younger of Parbroath, with whom he had formed a relationship in the late 1550s. Their eldest son, Mark Ker, later first earl of Lothian, was born before 20 February 1559, when he and his mother had a charter of abbey lands from the commendator. Their other children were Andrew of Fenton, George, who became a Roman Catholic and was involved in the affair of the so-called Spanish blanks in 1592, William, and Katherine, who married William Maxwell, fourth Lord Herries, from a Roman Catholic recusant family. Ker also had an illegitimate daughter, Margaret, who married John Crawford of Roughsallow, Lanarkshire, while Helen Leslie had a son, David, and a daughter, Janet, from her first marriage. Mark Ker died, at Newbattle, on 19 August 1584, and his wife died on 26 October 1594. They were buried at Newbattle, and both left wills. 


@@@@@


doc= 15462


Ker, Mark, first earl of Lothian (b. in or before 1559, d. 1609), administrator, was the oldest son of Mark Ker (1517-1584), commendator of Newbattle, and Lady Helen (died 1594), daughter of George Leslie, fourth earl of Rothes. He was born before 20 February 1559, when his father, then technically a cleric, granted a charter of Newbattle Abbey land to him and his mother. His parents married some time soon after 1560. During his lifetime the Newbattle property was steadily transformed into a secular lordship in his favour. On 7 April 1567 Queen Mary made him a grant of the commendatorship for life, to be implemented on the death or demission of his father. In 1581 his father demitted the office in his favour, keeping the liferent, both their names appearing thereafter in charters of abbey land. This transaction was the equivalent of the way in which a secular landowner's son might become 'fear' (recognized heir) during his father's lifetime. On 21 August 1584, only two days after his father's death, Mark younger had a ratification from James VI of the 1567 grant. On 28 July 1587 he had a charter from the king granting him and his heirs all the lands belonging to the former abbacy of Newbattle, and on 15 October 1591 he was created Lord Newbattle, all the abbey territories being united into one lordship. 
On 10 July 1606 Ker was created earl of Lothian. Concurrently with the transformation of the Newbattle Abbey title and lands into a secular lordship, the monastic buildings were gradually replaced by a private dwelling, of which Sir John Scott of Scotstarvit wrote: 'And the father and son did so metamorphose the buildings that it cannot be known that ever it did belong to the church, by reason of the fair new fabric and stately edifices built thereon... instead of the old monks has succeeded the deer. (J. Scott, 'The Staggering State of Scottish Statesmen', 1754)' Mark Ker followed a career in royal and public service. In 1580, as Mr Mark Ker of Prestongrange, he was made a gentleman of the chamber to James VI. In 1577 he was made master of requests, the appointment being confirmed in 1581. On 18 December 1581 he appears in the privy council record under that title, and thereafter attended many meetings of the council and served on many of its committees. On 8 December 1598 he was among those councillors chosen to sit at Holyroodhouse on Tuesdays and Thursdays to assist the king in the dispatch of business. In September 1599 he was appointed collector of a tax of 200,000 merks levied for certain foreign embassies. In the legal field, he was appointed to succeed his father as an extraordinary lord of session (judge) on 12 November 1584, and in January 1597 he had confirmation of the office of justiciary in the regality of Stow, sold to him by Lord Borthwick. On 28 July 1600 he was commanded to reside at his castle of Neidpath, near Peebles, in order to apply effectively the act of 1567 for the pursuit of thieves. On 19 September 1604 he was made acting chancellor during the absence of the earl of Montrose, then a commissioner in England at the discussions on the proposed Anglo-Scottish parliamentary union. He was also involved in church affairs. In January 1606 he was one of the assessors chosen at Linlithgow for the trial for treason of ministers opposed to the king's ecclesiastical policy, who were imprisoned in Blackness Castle. 
Earlier, Ker and other judges had refused to be influenced by the king's attempts to force the court of session to come to an adverse decision against Robert Bruce, minister at Edinburgh, with regard to Bruce's claim to a life pension from the revenues of the abbacy of Arbroath. In 1608 he acted as assessor to the earl of Dunbar, the king's commissioner to the general assembly of the church, and in February 1609 he was on a commission to advise the king on how to bring 'peace and religion' to the isles ('Reg. PCS', '1607-10', 742). 
On being created earl of Lothian, Ker resigned his office of master of requests to his oldest son Robert. Some time before 29 March 1587 he had married Margaret, second daughter of John Maxwell, fourth Lord Herries of Terregles, and Agnes, baroness of Terregles in her own right; she died at Prestongrange on 8 January 1617. Their children were Robert, who became second earl of Lothian, Sir William Ker of Blackhope (who unsuccessfully claimed the title on his elder brother's death in 1624), James, John, Jean (who married, first, Robert, master of Boyd, second, David Lindsay, twelfth earl of Crawford, and third, Thomas Hamilton of Roberton), Janet (who married William Cunningham, seventh earl of Glencairn), Margaret (who founded Lady Yester's Church in Edinburgh and married, first, James, seventh Lord Hay of Yester, second, Sir Andrew Ker, master of Jedburgh), Isobel (who married William Douglas, first earl of Queensberry), Lilias (who married John, ninth Lord Borthwick), Mary (who married Sir James Richardson of Smeaton), and Elizabeth (who married Sir Alexander Hamilton of Innerwick). The earl himself died on 8 April 1609, having made his will at Newbattle on 1 March 1602 when he was about to leave on a journey through England and France. He left an estate valued at nearly $37,000 Scots. 


@@@@@


doc= 15463


Lord Mark Kerr (1676-1752), also an army officer, became a captain on 8 June 1693, and was wounded at Almanza on 25 April 1707. A brigadier-general at the capture of Vigo in 1719, he was appointed governor of Guernsey in 1740 and promoted general in 1743. When governor of Berwick upon Tweed in 1745, his reported quip to Sir John Cope, fleeing the Jacobite forces at Prestonpans, that he was the first general to have broken the news of his own defeat, was recorded in the contemporary ballad 'Johnnie Cope'. That year he became governor of Edinburgh Castle. He died, unmarried, in London, on 2 February 1752, and was buried four days later in Kensington. 


@@@@@


doc= 15464


Kerr, Norman Shanks (1834-1899), physician and temperance advocate, the eldest son of Alexander Kerr, a merchant and shipowner, was born at Glasgow on 17 May 1834. He was educated at Glasgow high school and matriculated in 1852 from Glasgow University, where he supported himself by working on the staff of Glasgow newspapers until he graduated MD and CM in 1861. After a period as resident surgeon to the Lock Hospital, Glasgow, he sailed as surgeon on Canadian mail steamers. 
In 1871 Kerr began to practise medicine at Dunstable, where he was the public vaccinator. Three years later he settled at St John's Wood in London and was appointed a parochial medical officer for St Marylebone, a post he retained for twenty-four years. He was twice married: first, in 1871, to Eleanor Georgina, daughter of Edward Gibson of Ballinderry, Ireland; she died in 1892, leaving four daughters and a son, Arthur (died 1933), a rector in the Church of England. Kerr's second marriage, in 1894, was to Edith Jane (died 1922), daughter of James Henderson of Belvidere Lodge, Newry, co. Down, Ireland. She served as a vice-president of the British Women's Total Abstinence Union. 
The advancement of temperance was a life's work for Kerr. Although he may have consumed alcohol during his time as a ship's doctor and at Dunstable, he was otherwise a life abstainer. He joined the United Kingdom Alliance in 1858, having, at the age of nineteen, already become a founder and secretary of the Glasgow Abstainer's Union. In Glasgow he promoted counter-attractions to discourage the drinking of alcoholic beverages, such as the Coffee Tavern Company and Saturday evening concerts at City Hall. He was also an active member of the Total Abstinence Society, which operated in connection with the University of Glasgow. Later he was vice-president of the Marylebone Temperance and Band of Hope Union, and honorary secretary of a local branch of the Church of England Temperance Society. 
Kerr sought to organize medical opinion behind legislation for the compulsory treatment of drunkenness. He argued that drunkenness was a disease rather than a crime or a social problem. However, he did not completely break with the older moralistic condemnation of drunkenness, and stigmatized drunkards as suffering from a type of degeneration that left them morally weak. Despite the conclusions that could be made from his efforts in Glasgow, as a physician he argued for the importance of heredity in creating drunkards against those who stressed the effect of social environment. 
Kerr promoted his views through a number of organizations and publications. For many years he was a member and sometimes chairman of the inebriates legislation committee of the British Medical Association. He was elected president of the Society for Promoting Legislation for the Control and Cure of Habitual Drunkards, which he had helped found in 1876. Most important, in 1884 he founded a successor organization, the Society for the Study and Cure of Inebriety. Until his death Kerr served as president of the new society and edited its 'Proceedings'. In addition he was vice-president (and from 1881 honorary secretary) of the Homes for Inebriates Association and senior consulting physician to the Dalrymple Home for Inebriates, at Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire. He was corresponding secretary to an American organization, the Association for the Cure of Inebriates, and vice-president of the International Council of Medical Jurisprudence. He wrote several books and many articles, including 'Inebriety, its Etiology, Pathology, Treatment, and Jurisprudence' (1888). The 'Habitual Drunkards Act' of 1878 and the 'Inebriates Act' of 1898 resulted in large part from Kerr's labours. 
In his 1905 memorial lecture T. D. Crothers characterized Kerr as 'calm' and 'optimistic', a tactful speaker and writer who won over temperance reformers predisposed to reject the disease theory, and a masterful organizer who secured the active co-operation of people with discordant views. 
Kerr was an Anglican and a Liberal. Retiring for reasons of ill health, he moved to Hastings in Sussex, where he died at his home, 46 Wellington Square, on 30 May 1899. He was buried in the following month at Paddington cemetery in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 15465


Kerr, Robert, first marquess of Lothian (1636-1703), nobleman, was born at Newbattle House, Edinburghshire, on 8 March 1636, the son of William Kerr, third earl of Lothian (c.1605-1675), and Anne Kerr (died 1677), daughter of Robert Ker, second earl of Lothian, and countess of Lothian in her own right. Styled Lord Kerr of Newbattle, he was educated at the University of Leiden (1651-3), and at Saumur, Angers, and Paris (1654-7). In January or February 1660 he married Lady Jean (died 1700), daughter of Archibald Campbell, marquess of Argyll. His father resigned the estates in his favour in 1665. He helped to keep law and order in the borders, commanding a troop of horse from 1668 to 1676, and perhaps volunteered in the Third Anglo-Dutch War before a secret visit to Paris in September 1673. He succeeded to his father's titles in October 1675. 
Poor health took Lothian to Paris and Montpellier from autumn 1679 until summer 1680. Taking the test in 1681, he was briefly a privy councillor from 4 January 1686 until purged with other opponents of the repeal of the penal laws on 16 September. He supported the revolution of 1688 and was appointed a privy councillor on 18 May 1689, and justice-general and sheriff-principal of the shire of Edinburgh on 3 August, as well as serving as a Treasury auditor and in other minor posts until his death. In 1690 he succeeded his uncle Charles as earl of Ancram. 
A moderate presbyterian, perhaps influenced by Bishop Robert Leighton, a former minister of Newbattle, Lothian was appointed high commissioner to the general assembly sitting in January 1692, charged with implementing the king's recommendation that the assembly admit episcopal ministers into the kirk who were prepared to accept the confession of faith and submit to the authority of the presbyterian church courts. The presbyterians accepted reports that the king would not press the matter against their unanimous opposition, a belief strengthened by Lothian's moderate tone and his faithfulness in keeping the king's instructions secret. For a month the assembly stalled by attending to routine business, and considered a few episcopalian addresses only at the commissioner's request. Lothian astounded the clergy when on 13 February 1692 he admonished them for failing to unite with their brethren, and as instructed suddenly dissolved the assembly without the usual appointment of another date. Despite Lothian's protests the moderator appointed a date in August 1693, but a constitutional crisis was avoided because an assembly was not held on that date. Partly blamed for the failure of the king's policy, and again beset by ill health, which drove him to Bath in 1693, Lothian consoled himself with his stringed instruments and by improving his house at Newbattle. Having long struggled to maintain the precedence of his title, in 1695 he was humiliated by a parliamentary vote ranking him below other earls, but on 23 June 1701 his support for the court was rewarded with the title of marquess of Lothian. Appointed a commissioner for the Union with England on 25 August 1702, and a privy councillor and commissioner of exchequer on 4-5 February 1703, he died suddenly at London on 15 February, aged sixty-six. A post-mortem examination revealed a diseased gall bladder and the effects of 'whooring and the clap' (Walter Scott to Robert Scott, 26 Feb 1703, NL Scot., MS 594, no. 2174). He was buried in the family vault at Newbattle parish church. 
Lothian's movable estate, including unpaid salary and his investments in the Darien Company, amounted to $15,213 13's'. Scots. Of his six sons and five daughters, William Kerr, second marquess of Lothian, became a soldier. A younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 15466


Kerr, Robert (1757-1813), scientific writer and translator, was born on 20 October 1757 at Drumsheugh, Edinburgh, the son of James Kerr (died 1768), jeweller and goldsmith and MP for Edinburgh city from 1747 to 1754, and his second wife, Elizabeth (1713/14-1799), daughter of Lord Charles Kerr of Cramond, director of chancery in Scotland. Kerr was educated at Edinburgh high school and at the University of Edinburgh and became surgeon to Edinburgh Foundling Hospital, but relinquished a successful medical career to manage a paper mill at Ayton, Berwickshire, which eventually proved a failure. He married at St Cuthbert's Church, Edinburgh, on 27 June 1778, Julia Wardrope. They raised two sons and two daughters. Kerr returned to Edinburgh about 1810. 
In later life Kerr occupied himself with historical writing and with translating a broad range of scientific works. His 'Elements of Chemistry' (1790), drawing on the text of A. L. Lavoisier, and his 'Animal Kingdom, or, Zoological System of Linnaeus' (1792), a translation of part one of Linnaeus's 'Systema naturae', gained him election as fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1805. Kerr's works were largely derivative, and his translations were often only extracts or parts of the originals. His 'Essay of the Theory of the Earth' (1813) was criticized in the 'Edinburgh Review' for its misleading title; it was in fact the introductory essay to Georges Cuvier's four-volume 'Recherches sur les ossements fossiles', researches on the fossil bones found in a specific geological setting. Kerr's biographical 'Memoirs of the Life, Writings and Correspondence of the Late Mr William Smellie' (1811) related to the Edinburgh printer, naturalist, and antiquary, who died in 1795, not his medical namesake. He also compiled the first ten of the eighteen volumes of 'A General History and Collection of Voyages and Travels' (1811-24). He died at Edinburgh on 11 October 1813 and was buried in Greyfriars churchyard. His son David Wardrope Kerr, a medical student, died in 1815 aged nineteen; he was survived by another son, then a captain in the navy, and two married daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 15467


Kerr, Schomberg Henry, ninth marquess of Lothian (1833-1900), diplomatist and politician, second son of John William Robert Kerr, seventh marquess of Lothian, and his wife, Lady Cecil Chetwynd Talbot, only daughter of Charles Chetwynd Talbot, second Earl Talbot, was born at Newbattle Abbey, near Dalkeith, on 2 December 1833. His elder brother, William Schomberg Robert Kerr, born on 12 August 1832, succeeded as eighth marquess of Lothian on his father's death on 14 November 1841, but himself died without issue on 4 July 1870. A noted bibliophile, he bequeathed to Oxford University money for the foundation of the marquess of Lothian's prize, awarded annually to a historian. 
Schomberg Henry Kerr was educated at Trinity College, Glenalmond, and at Oxford, where he matriculated from New College on 20 October 1851. He left the university without a degree, entered the diplomatic service, and was appointed attache at Lisbon. He was transferred in 1854 to Tehran, and thence in 1855 to Baghdad. During the Anglo-Persian War of 1856-7 he served as a volunteer on the staff of Sir James Outram, by whom he was publicly thanked at the close of the campaign. He was afterwards attache at Athens, and in 1862 was appointed second secretary at Frankfurt. He served in the same capacity briefly at Madrid in 1865, then was moved to Vienna. 
On 23 February 1865 Kerr married Lady Victoria Alexandrina Montagu-Douglas-Scott, second daughter of Walter Francis Montagu-Douglas-Scott, the fifth duke of Buccleuch, and his wife, Lady Charlotte Anne; they had three sons and five daughters. Kerr succeeded his elder brother, William Schomberg Robert, as ninth marquess of Lothian and fourth Baron Ker of Kersheugh, Roxburghshire, on 4 July 1870, and in right of the latter peerage took his seat in the House of Lords on 30 March 1871. He moved, on 19 March 1874, the address in answer to the queen's speech, and on 5 August following took the oaths for the subordinate office of lord privy seal of Scotland, which he held until his death. He was sworn of the privy council on 6 February 1886, and in Lord Salisbury's second administration succeeded A. J. Balfour as secretary for Scotland, and, as such, 'ex officio' keeper of the great seal of Scotland and vice-president of the committee of council for education in Scotland (11 March 1887). The sphere of his administrative duties was further enlarged by a statute of the same year (50 & 51 Vict. c. 52). He held office until the fall of the administration in August 1892, during which period he had charge of the measures of 1889 for the reform and re-endowment of the Scottish universities and the reform of Scottish local government, and several other measures closely affecting Scottish interests. 
Kerr was a member of the Historical Manuscripts Commission, was elected in 1877 president of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, and received in 1882 the degree of LLD from the University of Edinburgh, of which he was lord rector in 1887-90. He was also vice-president of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society and a member of the governing body of the Imperial Institute. In 1878 he was elected KT and in 1899 a knight of grace of the order of St John of Jerusalem. He was colonel from 1878 to 1889, and afterwards honorary colonel, of the 3rd battalion of the Royal Scots regiment, and captain-general of the Royal Company of Archers from 1884 until his death on 17 January 1900. He died at 39 Grosvenor Square, London, and was buried at Newbattle Abbey. He was succeeded by his third son, Robert Schomberg Kerr. His widow married Bertram Talbot, and died on 19 June 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 15468


Kerr, William, third earl of Lothian (c.1605-1675), politician, was the eldest son of Robert Ker, first earl of Ancram (1578-1654), and his first wife, Elizabeth (died 1620), daughter of Sir John Murray of Blackbarony. Soon after James VI's accession to the throne of England, Robert Ker was appointed to the bedchamber of Prince Henry, and in 1613 he became gentleman of the bedchamber to Prince Charles. Thus William Kerr grew up around the court at St James's. He matriculated as a fellow-commoner from Queens' College, Cambridge, in Lent 1621. In March 1621 William's 'first chamber fellow', Patrick Curwen (future MP for Cumberland), left the college to get married, and Robert Ker wrote to console his son, and tell him that 'Your present business is your booke, and the place Cambridge' ('Correspondence', 1.16). However, William does not seem to have graduated at the university, and we next hear of him in Paris, in April 1624, where he seems to have gone to complete his education. In November he left Paris to begin his grand tour and, after travelling through a number of French towns, visited Turin, Milan, Modena, Bologna, Florence, Siena, Rome, and Venice, and then returned to Paris via Switzerland. His journal of the tour is preserved in the Newbattle collection (NL Scot., MS 5785). As a document of the Renaissance rather than the Reformation, the journal contains admiring descriptions of Italian cities and no disparaging remarks whatsoever about popery. He mentioned his visit to the Sistine Chapel, where 'Michaell Angelo' had painted the last judgment, 'counted the best peace in the world' ('Correspondence', 1.xlvii). 
On completing his education Kerr became a soldier, and raised a company of troops to take part in the duke of Buckingham's ill-fated expedition to the Ile de Re in 1627, during the war with France. In 1628 he participated in the equally unsuccessful attempt to relieve La Rochelle, sailing with the earl of Morton and the earl of Lindsay. In 1629 he fought for the Dutch against the Spanish when 's-Hertogenbosch was besieged by Henry, prince of Orange, and was present when the Spanish troops surrendered the town on 14 September after five months of resistance. In 1630 Kerr returned to Scotland, and on 9 December married Lady Anne (died 1667), eldest daughter of the late Robert Ker, earl of Lothian and heir to the earldom, apparently to be inherited upon her marriage to one of the name of Kerr. Her father had left the Newbattle estates, to which she was heir, heavily in debt, but Sir Robert Ker, father of William, drew from his own estate to cancel the debts, and the lands were granted to William and his new wife. On 31 October 1631 William Kerr was created earl of Lothian and Lord Kerr of Newbattle. He received the patent from the privy council in January 1632. Over the next few years he lived a quiet domestic life. Between 1631 and 1654 his wife gave birth to nine daughters and five sons. Their eldest son, Robert Kerr, was born in 1636, eventually succeeded his father as the fourth earl of Lothian, and was created marquess of Lothian in 1701. 
In the mid-1630s Lothian maintained contact with disaffected noblemen such as Argyll, Rothes, and Balmerino, and on 20 September 1637 he signed the supplication against the service book. On 18 October Lothian and Rothes had to escort Bishop Sydserf through the streets of Edinburgh to protect him from anti-prayer book rioters. His father had urged him to 'carie my self warily in these bryles', and Lothian insisted that he had no intention of being 'mutinous'. He prayed that 'God Almighty move the King's harte to gentlenes, and that he urge not on this church that that there is sutch a generall aversion to' ('Correspondence', 1.96). In February 1638 he signed the national covenant, and in November he was chosen as a ruling elder for the presbytery of Dalkeith in the Glasgow general assembly. In March 1639 he was with the covenanting forces who captured Dalkeith House. He also raised a regiment of about 600 horse from Haddington and Jedburgh, and in June he was with the covenanting army at Duns. Following the treaty of Berwick, Lothian and five other covenanters were invited to meet the king at Berwick. Although he accepted the invitation, many were opposed to Lothian and Montrose visiting the king, since both were regarded as lukewarm covenanters whom the king might persuade to desert the cause. Lothian sat as a member of the Edinburgh general assembly in August, and in 1640 he played a full part in the second bishops' war, raising a regiment of 1200 men from Teviotdale. He was a colonel in the covenanting army that crossed the Tweed on 21 August, and on 31 August was appointed governor of Newcastle upon Tyne. He was later reported to be the author of 'A true representation of the proceedings of the kingdome of Scotland since the late pacification' (1640). In letters to his father, he insisted that the covenanters were not acting in opposition to the king, and had 'noe thoughts of prejudice towards this Kingdome where we are'. They had simply acted out of 'necessitie', and would 'never returne but with assurance to injoy our religion in puritie, and our nationall liberties'. Although the covenanters would like England to 'gett a reformation like ours', they had not come south 'to reforme Church and State'. 'We shall never refuse the King civill and temporall obedience; if more be demanded we can not give it, and in our lawful defence WE DARE DIE' ('Correspondence', 1.104-5). 
Lothian remained at Newcastle until August 1641, when he returned to Edinburgh to attend parliament. Appointed to the privy council he was, in November, appointed one of parliament's commissioners to continue treaty negotiations with their English counterparts. In the wake of the Irish rising his remit, like that of his colleagues, was expanded to include Scottish military intervention in Ireland. He was appointed lieutenant-general of the Scottish army designed for Ireland, and colonel of a foot regiment which sailed on 24 April 1642 and remained there until February 1644. However, instead of accompanying his men to Ulster, Lothian was selected by the privy council in December 1642 to go on an embassy to France, with royal approval, with regard to France's Scots guard. He set sail on 21 January 1643, and though the mission was delayed at first, it went successfully. By 27 September he was back in London. When he returned to the king at Oxford to report on his embassy, he was arrested for suspected treachery and eventually imprisoned in Bristol Castle, where he almost died from illness. On 3 January 1644 the committee of estates in Edinburgh passed an act approving his mission to France, and the English House of Commons also passed resolutions calling for his release. He was finally released in exchange for Sir Charles Goring in March 1644. The earl of Clarendon claimed that from this day forwards Lothian 'continued amongst those who upon all occasions, carried the rebellion highest, and shewed the most implacable malice to the person of the King' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.383). Burnet added that despite his father's loyal service, Lothian was 'ever much hated by the king' ('Burnet's History', 1.28). 
Lothian was present at the Edinburgh parliament in June, and on 17 July an act was passed ordering compensation for his expenses and losses incurred during his diplomatic mission. On 4 September he left Edinburgh to rejoin his regiment, now engaged in the pursuit of Montrose, but he refused to take command of the covenanter expedition after Argyll's resignation. His regiment lost at least 375 men at the battle of Auldearn on 9 May, contributing little to the war effort thereafter. In July and August Lothian took an active part in the sessions of parliament. In early 1646 he was named to that section of the committee of estates assigned to attend the Scottish army in England, and he was with General Leslie's forces when Charles I arrived at Newark in May. Later he received an order to go to treat with the king at Newcastle, and when Charles was given up to the English, Lothian attended him to Holmby House in February 1647. He opposed the engagement of December 1647, and became a key figure in the kirk party government after the defeat of the engagers in August 1648. In December 1648 he and two others were sent to London to uphold Scottish interests. They protested against the trial of Charles I and wrote to the Commons and to Fairfax and Cromwell in a futile attempt to halt proceedings against the king. On 24 February they presented a paper to the English parliament condemning the regicide and the alteration of government, and upholding Charles II. Clarendon condemned this as a 'very calm protestation', and claimed that they were under orders from Argyll not to offend the English regime or give 'a ground of a new war' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 5.7-11). However, the Commons placed guards on their lodgings, and when they tried to follow the orders of the Scottish parliament and sail to the Netherlands to see Charles II, they were arrested and imprisoned at Gravesend, then taken to Berwick and detained there, before finally being allowed to return to Scotland. 
On 10 March 1649 Lothian was made secretary of state, a position he nominally held until the Restoration. He was also among the commissioners sent to Charles II at The Hague in March 1650. Another commissioner, the minister John Livingstone, later complained that Lothian had been too conciliatory towards Charles because he was worried that the king would not come to Scotland if he heard all the covenanters' demands. The conciliatory approach succeeded in that Charles landed at Aberdeen on 23 June 1650, but in the wake of the covenanters' defeat at Dunbar, Lothian and others were condemned by a remonstrance of the synod of Fife for their 'crooked ways' in the negotiations with the king in the Netherlands ('Correspondence', 1.xcv). Lothian and Argyll were now caught between those who wanted more purging of persons considered unworthy allies in the cause of the covenants, and those who wanted to readmit engagers to the army. On 1 January 1651 two of Lothian's sons were among the train bearers as Charles II was crowned at Scone. In March, with other covenanter nobles, Lothian argued for four hours with the king against readmitting the Hamiltons and other engagers to the army. With the final defeat of Charles and the Scots at Worcester, Lothian's days as a high-profile politician came to a close. Throughout the 1650s he resided at Newbattle, apart from a number of months between June 1655 and May 1656 in London, where he tried in vain to gain compensation for the expenses he had incurred on public business. Although there were rumours that he was inclined 'to take employment' under the protectorate ('Diary', ed. Laing, 150), this did not happen. In 1660 he travelled to London, where he had an interview with the king and presented a paper defending his conduct since 1637. He was forced to resign as secretary of state, and though he was given a pension of $1000, this does not seem to have been paid in full. On 27 July 1661 he accompanied Argyll to the scaffold, along with his eldest son, who had married Argyll's daughter. Lothian refused to abjure the covenants and was fined $6000 in 1662. Despite the efforts of friends, the fines were not reduced, and he insisted that he could not afford to pay. On 5 August 1665 he assigned his estates to his son Robert, Lord Kerr of Newbattle, retaining only 'a mean portion' of life-rent. Because of his dire financial situation he was also forced to sell Ancram House. His wife died on 25 March 1667, and from this point little information about Lothian survives. He himself died in October 1675 at Newbattle Abbey. 
Lothian's letters and personal manuscripts provide us with privileged access to his mentality. In contrast to Wariston, Lothian was no fervent militant, though his Calvinist piety was genuine. He reflected on approaching communion with 'true fayth in the promyse of salvation through the alone meryts of Jesus Chryst' (NL Scot., 'Miscellanies, or, Commonplace book', Newbattle MS 5788, fol. 9), and referred occasionally to election, 'the covenant of grace', and the necessity of divine revelation (NL Scot., 'Maxims', Newbattle MS 5787, fols. 3-4, 60-60'r'). When his wife died, he looked forward to her resurrection, and wrote, 'I kisse the rodde. I stoope and lay my selfe loue under His mighty hand, whoe doth every thing well' ('Correspondence', 480). He wrote enthusiastically of the 'excellent sermons' of the fiery puritan Stephen Marshall ('Correspondence', 192-3), though his favourite preacher was the eirenic minister of Newbattle, Robert Leighton, who became a bishop after the Restoration. When Leighton resigned his charge in 1652 Lothian wrote that this would be 'a great griefe to me, for never did I gett soe mutch good by any that stoode in a pulpitt' ('Correspondence', 373). Although Lothian refused to abjure the covenants after 1660, he did not oppose the established church, and continued to act as patron of parish churches. 
Lothian was also a sophisticated connoisseur of Renaissance culture. He collected many paintings for Newbattle Abbey and made impressive alterations to the property. In 1666 he listed 1361 books in his library catalogue, the vast majority of which he had collected himself (NL Scot., Newbattle MS 5818). The largest proportion were in French, and many others were in Latin or Italian, with only a few in English. The catalogue lists only a very small number of theological books, such as Bayly's 'Practice of Piety' and Owen's 'Communion with God'. Instead, the collection was rich in humanist works of history, philosophy, geography, politics, and even science. Besides classical works by Homer, Virgil, Cicero, Seneca, and Tacitus, Lothian had also acquired the writings of Machiavelli, Lipsius, Montaigne, Bacon, and Rabelais. His unpublished maxims reflect the influence of such authors, for they reveal his love of history and revolve around the key humanist concepts of virtue, honour, prudence, moderation, public good, and peace (NL Scot., Newbattle MS 5787). Lothian does not fit the stereotype of the covenanter as bigoted presbyterian zealot. His allegiance to the covenanters reminds us of the diversity of the movement which the ineptitude of Charles I's Scottish policies in the 1630s had produced. 


@@@@@


doc= 15469


Kerr, William, second marquess of Lothian (bap. 1661, d. 1722), army officer and politician, was baptized at Newbattle, Edinburghshire, on 27 March 1661, the eldest son of Robert Kerr, fourth earl and first marquess of Lothian (1636-1703), and his wife, Lady Jean Campbell (died 1700), daughter of Archibald Campbell, marquess of Argyll. Nothing is known of his early years and education, but on 30 June 1685 he was contracted to marry his cousin Lady Jean Campbell ('c'.1661-1712), daughter of Archibald Campbell, ninth earl of Argyll. They had a son and four daughters. Not surprisingly given his Campbell connection, Kerr was a zealous promoter of the revolution of 1688. In 1692 he succeeded as fifth Lord Jedburgh by virtue of a contract made in 1669 between his grandfather William Kerr, third earl of Lothian, and Robert Kerr, second Lord Jedburgh. In the Scottish parliament he was an adherent of the court, as was his brother-in-law Archibald Campbell, tenth earl and first duke of Argyll. He combined politics with a military career, becoming colonel of the 7th dragoons on 1 October 1696. He became a brigadier-general in 1702. He succeeded his father on 15 February 1703, and was promoted major-general on 1 January 1704. 
Lothian was now a political associate of his nephew John Campbell, second duke of Argyll, who was appointed commissioner for the session of the Scottish parliament in 1705. It was owing to Argyll's influence that Lothian received a promise from Queen Anne to be made a knight of the Thistle. Lothian proposed on 31 July 1705 a first reading for the bill setting in motion a treaty of union. After the session on 30 October 1705 he received his 'green ribbon'. Thereafter his fortunes tended to follow those of Argyll, and when Argyll was outmanoeuvred by James Douglas, second duke of Queensberry, Lothian was left out of the commission to negotiate a union with England. He was also disappointed in his attempt to succeed General George Ramsay as commander-in-chief in Scotland and had to wait until 25 April 1707 for the colonelcy of the foot guards which he had coveted for over a year. However, with Argyll back in favour by October 1706 and James Ogilvy, earl of Seafield, writing on 7 November 1706 that 'the Duke of Argyll influences the M. of Lothian and his own friends' ('Letters Relating to Scotland', 101), Lothian supported the union in 1706, voting for the first article on 4 November 1706 and for ratification on 16 January 1707. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 1 January 1707. At Argyll's behest Lothian was chosen a Scottish representative peer in 1707 and again in 1708, but was unseated in February 1709 following a series of petitions objecting to the votes of some peers. John Macky described Lothian when aged about forty-five as 'very handsome; black, with a fine eye', and having 'abundance of fire and may prove a man of business when he applies himself that way; laughs at all revealed religion, yet sets up for a pillar of presbytery' (GEC, 'Peerage'). A few years later Daniel Defoe thought Lothian had 'made himself odious by scandalous vices and immoralities, and sordid covetousness' (ibid.). 
Following Argyll's decision to switch to the tories in 1710, Lothian appears to have assisted the tories in the 1710 election. He certainly felt able to solicit a British peerage from Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford, in June 1711 and was still asking for instructions on elections from Oxford in 1713. He ceased to be colonel of the Scots guards in 1713, and no doubt followed Argyll into opposition in early 1714. The ineligibility of Scottish peers to sit in the Lords under new British titles clearly rankled and he signed a petition to George I on the subject in November 1714. Back in favour under the new dynasty, in 1715 Lothian was elected a Scottish representative peer. He died in London on 28 February 1722 and was buried on 6 March in Westminster Abbey. His wife had died on 31 July 1712. He was succeeded by his son, William. 


@@@@@


doc= 15470


Kerr, William Henry, fourth marquess of Lothian (c.1712-1775), army officer, was the eldest son of William, third marquess ('c'.1690-1767), and Margaret (died 1759), daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Nicholson of Kemney, first baronet. Until his father's accession to the marquessate in 1722 he was known as Lord Jedburgh; afterwards, as earl of Ancrum. He was appointed a cornet in his grand-uncle Lord Mark Kerr's regiment (the 11th dragoons) on 20 June 1735. On 6 November of that year, at St James's, Westminster, he married Lady Caroline D'Arcy (died 1778), only daughter of Robert, third earl of Holdernesse; she brought him $20,000. On 9 January 1739 he was made captain in Cornwallis's regiment of foot (the 11th) and in 1741 he was promoted captain and lieutenant-colonel in the 1st regiment of foot guards (the Grenadier Guards). 
Ancrum acted as aide-de-camp to William, duke of Cumberland, at Fontenoy (30 April 1745), where he was wounded by a shot in the head. On 4 June 1745 he was promoted to the brevet rank of colonel in the army and on 22 June returned to the 11th dragoons with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. Together with his regiment he joined Cumberland's forces in England in the summer and autumn of 1745, in pursuit of the Jacobite army. In early 1746, after the battle of Falkirk, he joined the government army in Scotland, now under Cumberland's command. In March Cumberland placed him in command of a small force of 100 troopers and 300 foot, dispatched from Aberdeen to take a quantity of Spanish arms and powder stored at Castle Corgaff, at the head of the River Don. Upon his approach the Jacobites quitted the castle, having destroyed the munitions. He returned safely without loss, causing Cumberland to report, 'during the whole expedition he has behaved with the greatest prudence and caution, and much like an officer' (Williams, 39). 
At the battle of Culloden, Ancrum was placed in command of the cavalry on the extreme left wing. His orders were to move forward on the flank in readiness for a general pursuit of the highland army, once it was broken and in retreat. Cumberland noted that he carried the pursuit, 'with so good an effect that a very considerable number were killed' (Brett-Smith, 18). Indeed the royal cavalry inflicted terrible casualties across Culloden Moor, and Ancrum, although 'a chivalrous and compassionate man' (Prebble, 115), was ineffectual in preventing the slaughter. His brother Robert, a captain in the grenadier company of Barrel's regiment, which met the full onslaught of the highland charge before it was turned and broken, 'was the person of greatest distinction who was killed there' ('Scots peerage', 5.480). 
Immediately after the battle Ancrum was sent to the east coast of Scotland to suppress any continuing signs of revolt and to prevent Charles Edward Stuart's escape. After Cumberland's departure he was placed in command of the royal cavalry in Scotland. He rejoined Cumberland on the continent in August 1747 and on 1 December that year was made colonel of the 24th foot, later the South Wales Borderers. 
Ancrum represented Richmond in parliament between 1747 and 1763 in the interest of his brother-in-law, Robert D'Arcy, fourth earl of Holdernesse. In the Commons he followed Cumberland's political lead. On the death of his grand-uncle in 1752 he became colonel of the 11th dragoons (8 February) and on 5 November 1755 he was promoted major-general. He served as lieutenant-general under the command of Charles Spencer, third duke of Marlborough, in the expedition to St Malo in 1758. He left his Commons seat in March 1763 after Holdernesse sold Richmond to Sir Lawrence Dundas. 
Ancrum succeeded as fourth marquess of Lothian on his father's death on 28 July 1767. On 26 October 1768 he was chosen one of the sixteen representative peers in Scotland, and invested a knight of the Thistle at St James's Palace. He was promoted to the rank of general in 1770, and died at Bath on 12 April 1775. The marchioness died on 15 November 1778. They had three children: William John, fifth marquess; Louisa, who married Lord George Henry Lennox; and Willielmina, who married John Macleod, colonel in the Royal Artillery. 


@@@@@


doc= 15471


Kerrich, Thomas (1748-1828), artist and antiquary, was born at the vicarage, Dersingham, Norfolk, on 4 February 1748, the only son of Samuel Kerrich (1696-1768), vicar of Dersingham and rector of Wolferton and West Newton, Norfolk, and his second wife, Barbara (1706-1762), elder daughter of Matthew Postlethwayte, archdeacon of Norwich. Educated at Dersingham school, he soon demonstrated his precocious artistic talents. In 1766, following in his father's footsteps, he had begun a series of studies of the early fourteenth-century knight's effigy in his father's church of Banham, carefully recording evidence of colour and patterning on the monument. His parents had applied to William Hogarth for advice but he, in praising a 'pretty performance', dissuaded them from letting their son take up art for a living on the grounds that the profession was overcrowded. Accordingly Kerrich was educated at Magdalene College, Cambridge, whence he graduated BA in 1771 as second senior optime. He was elected to a Wort's travelling scholarship and set out for a four-year tour of the continent in the company of his pupil, Daniel Pettiward, of Trinity College, Cambridge. Throughout his grand tour Kerrich drew medieval monuments. He travelled first to the Netherlands where he fell in love with the work of Rubens and Heemskerk. He was awarded a silver medal for his drawing by the Academy of Painting at Antwerp. He travelled to France, where he spent much of 1772-3 in Paris. Either on this visit, or on his next visit in 1784, he drew in Le Mans, in Cambrai, and the monument to Philippe le Hardi then still reposing in the Chartreuse at Dijon. He spent a year in Rome where he drew classical antiquities as well recording the monuments of medieval knights in Modena, Milan, Siena, Florence, Pisa, Lucca, Bologna, and Civita Castellana; he also gained a deep understanding of Italian medieval architecture. 
By 1775 Kerrich had returned to Cambridge where he gained his MA and was elected a fellow of Magdalene. In spite of William Cole's attempt to persuade him to become a portrait painter Kerrich entered the Church of England and was ordained priest at Peterborough on 20 May 1784. He returned to France that year where he gained access to the Cabinet des Dessins and recorded medieval tombs later destroyed in the Revolution. From 1789 to 1796 he served as president of Magdalene, then dominated by the evangelical party. Kerrich was no friend to the evangelicals, whose influence waned during his presidency. In 1793 he acted as taxor of the university and in 1796 he resigned as president. Two years later, on 13 September 1798, he married Sophia (1762-1835), the fourth daughter of the Cambridge physician Richard Hayles, at St Botolph's, Cambridge. They had one son, Richard (1801-1872), and two daughters, the younger of whom, Frances Margaretta, married the Revd Charles Henry Hartshorne, an antiquary. In 1798 Kerrich became a prebendary of Lincoln Cathedral and in 1812 of Wells. 
On 21 September 1797 Kerrich became Cambridge's protobibliothecarius and in the same year was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. His record as principal librarian of the university has not always been admired. He inherited a position where the problems of copyright were largely resolved and where four cataloguers had been recently appointed. A proper author and subject catalogue was put in hand in 1818. Edward Clarke was a sympathetic sub-librarian and under his influence Kerrich concentrated on acquiring, like his predecessor Richard Farmer, older European publications to complement works of art then in the library. 
Kerrich, who was a keen but discerning collector, was involved in many of the great projects of the infant discipline of art history: Horace Walpole's and James Essex's outline for a history of English architecture; Richard Gough's 'Sepulchral Monuments'; William Ottley's proposed history of early English painting; John Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery; Sir John Fenn's edition of the Paston letters, which he illustrated with his own lithographs of his portraits; and Sir William Musgrave's undertaking to acquire a complete list of all the pictures in country houses. A skilled and diligent recorder of ancient monuments, he was admired by Charles Stothard, who attributed his achievements to Kerrich's guidance. 
Kerrich published four scholarly papers on Gothic buildings and monuments in 'Archaeologia', which were accompanied by his own illustrations. The last of these, 'Observations on the use of the mysterious figure called Vesica Piscis in the architecture of the Middle Ages, and in Gothic architecture', expresses a correct interpretation of the proportions of the ground-plan of Old St Peter's, Rome, although it did not convince all its readers at the time. Kerrich's 'Catalogue of the prints which have been engraved after Martin Heemskerk, or, rather, An essay towards such a catalogue', which was published posthumously in 1829, stands today as the best study of its subject. It is disputed whether he or Robert Masters was the author of an anonymous 'Catalogue of portraits in Cambridge colleges' printed about 1790. William Musgrave's copy, in the British Library, is inscribed in his hand 'Masters', yet most scholars believe it to be Kerrich's work. His own copy is heavily annotated. 
Kerrich saw himself as unpopular but he was a friend to most of the antiquaries and artists of his time. He knew well John Flaxman, Joseph Nollekens, Henry Fuseli, Francis Douce, Samuel Lysons, and many of his father's generation, such as Thomas Martin of Palgrave. In 1778 he exchanged portrait prints with Horace Walpole. The brothers Facius engraved Kerrich's portrait drawings of numerous contemporaries. Kerrich was painted in turn in 1815 by Henry Perronet Briggs at the behest of his close friend, Edward Balme. In 1823 he became coheir, with Francis Douce, of the bulk of Nollekens's estate. 
Kerrich died at his house in Free School Lane, Cambridge, on 10 May 1828 and was buried in the chancel of Dersingham church. To the university he gave the twelfth-century leper chapel at Barnwell, near Cambridge, which he had bought and restored in 1816. To the university library he gave the portrait of the Lucasian professor, Nicholas Saunderson, by John Vanderbank, and to the Society of Antiquaries he bequeathed his remarkable collection of fifteenth- and early sixteenth-century English and European paintings. After his son's death the Fitzwilliam Museum acquired the best of his sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Netherlandish pictures, notably Rubens's sketches for a set of tapestries depicting the Triumph of the Eucharist, commissioned in 1623 by the Infanta Isabella for the convent of Descalzas Reales in Madrid, and Rubens's design for a title-page, published in 1641. 


@@@@@


doc= 15472


Kerrison, Sir Edward, first baronet (1776-1853), army officer, was born at Staithe House, Bungay, Suffolk, on 30 July 1776, the only son (there was also a daughter) of Matthias Kerrison (1742-1827) and his wife, Mary (died 1812), daughter and heiress of Edward Barnes of Barnham, Suffolk. His father, the son of a yeoman farmer, accumulated a fortune as a merchant and canal owner, and was reckoned to be worth a million pounds at his death, having invested extensively in landed property, including the Hoxne Hall estate in Suffolk. Sir Roger Kerrison (1740-1808), banker and twice mayor of Norwich, was his uncle. 
Kerrison entered the army as cornet in the 6th (Inniskilling) dragoons on 23 June 1796, was promoted captain in October 1798, and was transferred to the 7th hussars that year. With the 7th he served in the Helder expedition of 1799, taking part in the actions of 19 September and 2 and 6 October. He was promoted major in 1803, and lieutenant-colonel in 1805. In October 1808 he embarked with the 7th for Spain, and the following December was severely wounded on the plains of Leon. He commanded the 7th at the passage of the Oleron, in the action of Sauveterne, and at the battles of Orthez and Toulouse. At the battle of Orthez, the charge headed by Lord Edward Somerset, in which Kerrison with the 7th hussars took the chief part, was highly commended by Wellington. In 1813 he was promoted brevet colonel. 
Kerrison served in the 1815 campaign, and was slightly wounded at Waterloo, where his horse was shot under him; but he continued with his regiment, and took part in the occupation of Paris. He was knighted on 5 January 1815; was made CB on 22 June 1815 and KCH in 1821, and created a baronet by patent dated on 27 July 1821; he was made GCH in 1831 and KCB on 18 July 1840. He was tory MP for Shaftesbury from 1812 to 1818, for Northampton from 1818 to 1824, and for Eye, which he had purchased, from 1824 to 1852. He voted against Roman Catholic relief in 1813, 1816, and 1817. Promoted lieutenant-general in 1837, he became a general in 1851. 
Kerrison married, on 20 October 1813, Mary Martha (died 19 April 1860), daughter of Alexander Ellice of Pittencrieff, Fife. They had one son, Edward Clarence Kerrison, second baronet (1821-1886), MP, at whose death the baronetcy became extinct, and three daughters, the second of whom, Emily Harriet (died 1873), married in 1834 Philip Henry, Viscount Mahon, the historian, afterwards fifth Earl Stanhope. Kerrison died at his house, 13 Great Stanhope Street, London, on 9 March 1853. He was buried at Hoxne Hall, which he had inherited from his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 15473


Kerseboom, Frederick (1632-1693), painter, was born in Solingen in Germany. His family name was Casaubon according to Samuel Pepys, who described him in a letter of 30 August 1689 to John Evelyn as 'one of much less name than Kneller's, and a stranger' ('Letters and the Second Diary', 204-5). Kerseboom trained in Amsterdam before studying with Charles le Brun in Paris in the 1650s. He then spent fourteen years in Rome, two of them in Poussin's studio. 
In the 1680s Kerseboom moved to London with his nephew Johann Kerseboom ['see below']. There he executed a few Poussin-influenced history paintings, which are now known only from engravings. According to George Vertue, Kerseboom turned to portrait painting out of economic necessity (Vertue, 'Note books', 5.50). Few of his portraits have been identified. In 'Theophilus Leigh' (signed and dated 1685; Trustees of Stoneleigh Abbey Ltd, Warwickshire) Kerseboom presented his sitter with a somewhat rigid dignity, but his pendant portrait 'The Hon. Mary Leigh' demonstrates that the painter could depict a female sitter with elegance, and that he was familiar with the fashionable style of Willem Wissing in ladies' portraiture. Kerseboom also produced a half-length self-portrait and worked on glass (according to Buckeridge, 361-2). Frederick Kerseboom died in London and was buried in London at St Andrew's Church, Holborn, on 30 March 1693. 


While Johann Kerseboom's early works reveal the influence of Wissing, he developed his own stylistic idiosyncrasies, including a tendency to elongate the faces of his sitters. He is best-known for his portrait 'Robert Boyle', which became the standard image of the scientist. Several versions exist in the Royal Collection, at the Royal Society, the National Portrait Gallery, and elsewhere, and the portrait was engraved by, among others, John Smith in 1689. 
Johann Kerseboom sometimes collaborated with his friend the Dutch painter-engraver Jan Vander Vaart, as in the portrait 'Gilbert, Fourth Earl of Coventry' (Antony, Cornwall). Dated 1704, it was signed by Kerseboom and Vander Vaart. The friends may also have worked together on the full-length portrait 'Thomas Osborne, First Duke of Leeds' (1704; NPG). Johann Kerseboom died in London, where he was buried on 26 October 1708. In his will, dated 20 March 1694, Kerseboom stated: 'I stand indebted and doe owe unto my very loveing Friend John Vander Vaart of the parish of St. Paul Covent Garden in the county of Middlesex Painter a considerable sume of money which I am not at present able to pay... Therefore in Satisfaction I give and bequeath unto the said John Vander Vaart All my Estate.' One of his witnesses was the limner Bernard Lens. 


@@@@@


doc= 15474


Kersey, John, the elder (bap. 1616, d. 1677), mathematician, son of Anthony Carsaye or Kersey and Alice Fenimore, was baptized at Bodicote, near Banbury, Oxfordshire, on 23 November 1616. He was employed, probably in the 1630s, as tutor to Alexander and Edmund Denton, grandsons of the royalist Sir Alexander Denton, kt (1596-1645) of Hillesden House, Buckinghamshire. In the 1673 dedication of his 'Elements of... Algebra' to his former pupils, Kersey expressed gratitude to the family which 'gave both birth and nourishment to his mathematical studies'; his reference to Charles I as 'of ever-blessed memory' might or might not have been from conviction. 
By 1650 Kersey was established in London, in Charles Street, near the Covent Garden piazza, as teacher of mathematics and surveyor, and had made the acquaintance of Edmund Wingate, author of 'Natural and Artificiall Arithmetique' (2 vols., 1630). Wingate's stock of his 'Arithmetique' was becoming exhausted, and he had sufficient confidence in Kersey's ability to ask him to revise and augment the first part of this work for reprinting as a self-contained volume. In this second edition of over 480 pages, published as 'Arithmetique Made Easie' (1650), Kersey added a seven-chapter appendix. He 'framed totally anew, the Rules of Division, Reduction... delivered the Doctrine of Fractions... newly framed the Extraction of... roots'. There were eleven further editions by the end of the century, and from 1704 the work was edited by George Shelley (1666-1736) and continued to appear until 1760. 
This success encouraged Kersey to embark on his major work, the two-volume 'Elements of that Mathematical Art Commonly called Algebra' (1673-4). It was ready in 1667, and his friend John Collins (1626-1683) made strenuous efforts to persuade booksellers to undertake the printing, but times were hard and paper dear. A prospectus was issued early in 1672. In the May Isaac Newton (1642-1727) promised to subscribe, and by July had procured three other subscriptions from Cambridge. Richard Towneley (1629-1707) of Towneley, near Burnley, Lancashire, likewise subscribed and canvassed support. 
Kersey based his work mainly on English authors, including Harriot, Oughtred, John Wallis, and Isaac Barrow. Since the subject had only recently attracted attention, his list of all signs and abbreviations is especially interesting. Negative numbers he regarded as fictitious. By 1676 Collins reported that sales were good, and the book became a standard authority used by later authors, such as Edward Cocker. According to one writer, it was judged 'to be the clearest, and most comprehensive system... in any language' (Granger, 2.363-4). 
Kersey had been living at the sign of The Globe, Shandoise (Chandos) Street, off St Martin's Lane, Covent Garden, since at least 1670. He died there in mid-May 1677, having long suffered from a stone in the bladder, and was buried at St Paul, Covent Garden, on 23 May. Another John Kersey, presumably his son although nothing is known of a marriage, was a teacher of mathematics in Chandos Street in 1697 and probably died about 1698. The 'Wingate series' had no reference to Kersey the elder's 1677 death, but in 1699 new publishers described the author as 'late teacher of the Mathematicks'; possibly confused themselves, they confused posterity as well. 


Kersey the younger was in a publishing partnership with Henry Faithorne at The Rose in St Paul's Churchyard in 1681-6. Their 'Weekly Memorials for the Ingenious', an abstracting journal, appeared for a year from January 1682; after a quarrel with the anonymous editor, Kersey may have edited the latter issues. He was probably the translator of Plutarch's 'Discourse to an Unlearned Prince' (1685), reprinted in 1870 in 'Plutarch's Morals', vol. 4. In 1687 he took as apprentice his brother Alexander, who may have died before completing. He called himself 'Philobibl.' when revising and augmenting the folio sixth edition of E. Phillips's 'New World of Words, or, Universal English Dictionary' (1706; 3rd edn, 1721); he had added '20,000 hard words in arts and sciences', while stating that it was 'no part of our design to teach liberal or mechanical arts and sciences as a late learned author has attempted to do', referring to the 1704 'Lexicon technicum' by John Harris. In 1708 he published the octavo 'Dictionarium Anglo-Britannicum', a condensed 'portable' version of the 'voluminous' 1706 work. He was ostensibly still alive when a third, corrected and enlarged, edition appeared in 1721. 


@@@@@


doc= 15475


John Kersey the younger (b. c.1660, d. in or after 1721), lexicographer, was born about 1660, the son of John, citizen and stationer of St Paul's, Covent Garden, London, who was probably the second John Kersey aforesaid. This third man of the same name was apprenticed in the Stationers' Company on 6 October 1673 to John Martyn and freed on 11 October 1680. In the fourteenth edition (1720) of Wingate's 'Arithmetique' there appeared the claim that it was 'now exactly corrected by John Kersey, the last author's son', and the 'Dictionary of National Biography', following this source, also made Kersey the younger a son of Kersey the elder. 


@@@@@


doc= 15476


Arthur Kershaw (fl. 1800), journalist, may also have been James Kershaw's son. Educated at Wesley's Kingswood School near Bristol, he later contributed to the 'Monthly Magazine', and was employed by London booksellers in the enlargement of, among other titles, John Walker's 'Universal Gazetteer'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15477


Kershaw, James (bap. 1730?, d. 1797), Methodist preacher, was born in Halifax, and may be the individual of that name, son of another James Kershaw, who was baptized in the town on 8 September 1730. Details of his upbringing are unknown. He joined a Socinian club in Halifax, whose members deputed him and another, in 1761, to attend a sermon to be delivered by the evangelical Henry Venn at Huddersfield, in order 'to furnish matter of merriment for the next meeting'. But Kershaw left the church after the sermon exclaiming, 'Surely God is in this place; there is no matter for laughter here.' He subsequently called on the preacher, was converted, and became one of Venn's constant correspondents. Kershaw soon afterwards became known as an itinerant Methodist preacher; he accompanied John Wesley on some of his journeys in the north of England, and was with him in Scotland in 1764 and 1765. 
Kershaw settled at Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, about 1770, and was famous in the neighbourhood for his quack medicines. He continued to preach occasionally for the Methodists, and Wesley visited him at Tealby in 1786. Thomas Jackson remembered hearing him preach in a Yorkshire farmhouse: 'He was a fine-looking man, and was known in Yorkshire by the name of 'Dr Kershaw'. He travelled through the country in his own vehicle, preaching in the villages and giving medical advice to the labouring classes' (Jackson, 220). Charles Atmore described him as talented but unstable, a judgement borne out by James Everett's account of how he was so eager to impress the marquess of Rockingham when given an opportunity of preaching before him that he overshot the mark and brought ridicule and dishonour on the Methodism he represented. Similarly, his well-intentioned intervention in the dispute over the publication of James Hervey's letters to Wesley in 1764 only served to exacerbate the controversy. 
Much of Kershaw's leisure after leaving the itinerancy was devoted to writing. In 1780 he published 'An Essay on the Principal Parts of the Book of the Revelations'. The same year his epic poem 'The Methodist Attempted in Plain Metre' was published in Nottingham. Wesley's disapproval was less on the grounds of its lack of literary merit than for fear that it brought reproach on the Methodists and would hinder the sale and reading of more profitable literature. As a result, the Methodist conference of 1781 decreed that in future no preacher should publish until the text had been seen and edited by Wesley, and that any profits from such publications should be paid into a common fund. An even more ambitious work, 'The grand and extensive plan of human redemption from the ruins of the fall... in twelve familiar dialogues', appeared in 1797, the year of his death at Ashby-de-la-Zouch. 
No details exist of Kershaw's marriage, though he did have at least one son, John (died 1855), who entered the Wesleyan ministry in 1788 and was for four years (1823-7) the Methodist book steward, but found the administrative burden too great for him. Thomas Jackson found him 'a most amiable, friendly and upright man' whose acquaintances were struck by his striking resemblance to the duke of Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 15478


Kerslake, Thomas (1812-1891), bookseller, was born in July 1812 in Exeter, the son of William Kerslake. He was educated in Exeter and married Catherine Morgan of Bath. In 1828 he moved to Bristol, and with his brother-in-law Samuel Cornish of London began business as a secondhand bookseller in Barton Alley. In 1839 the partnership was dissolved and Kerslake moved to a shop at the bottom of Park Street, Bristol. In 1860 a disastrous fire in the premises resulted in the loss of many rare and valuable books and manuscripts (Kerslake had amassed a valuable collection of antiquarian and archaeological works before the fire). He continued at the same premises, but in 1870 he moved to Queen's Road, retiring shortly after this. 
Following his retirement Kerslake devoted himself to antiquarian studies and although self-taught he had a good command of Latin and modern languages. His main interests were in the hagiology and the Anglo-Saxon period of the south-west. He published a number of articles on these subjects, usually at his own expense, as well as contributing papers to national and local archaeological societies. His writings often contained original theories and complex and sometimes controversial arguments. 
One controversy in which Kerslake became involved was in the origin of the Pen Pits near Penselwood in Somerset. He believed that this group of amorphous surface undulations were the remains of an old British city and he published two papers on the subject: 'A primaeval British Metropolis' (1877) and 'Caer Pensauelcoit: a Re-Assertion' (1882). Others claimed that they were merely quarries. Under the auspices of the Somerset Archaeological and Natural History Society a Pen Pits Exploration Committee was set up; rather belatedly Kerslake was invited to join, but he refused. An excavation in 1884 by General Pitt Rivers in his role as inspector of ancient monuments concluded that the pits were quarries for quernstones and should not be scheduled, evoking from Kerslake a scathing paper: 'The Liberty of Independent Historical Research' (1885). 
Kerslake died at his home, Wynfrid, Clevedon, on 5 January 1891; his wife predeceased him in 1887. They had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 15479


Ketch, John (d. 1686), public executioner, is in himself an obscure figure. Neither his parents nor his date of birth are known. Parish and probate records provide a little information. Ketch married a woman named Katherine, who survived him, and he and his wife are probably the John and Katherine Catch whose daughter Susanna was baptized on 1 June 1668 at St James's, Clerkenwell, the parish where he was buried eighteen years later. At the time of his death he was living in Spread Eagle Court, which lay on the east side of Gray's Inn Road. 
Even in his own lifetime Jack Ketch's job as the common hangman of London, a position which he held from some point between October 1666 and November 1678, made him a figure of popular mythology: the presiding figure at the execution days which took place eight times a year at Tyburn. In the surviving record he has come down less as an individual in his own right than as a name deployed for satiric purpose in broadsides and pamphlets and a subject of gossip for newsletter writers. Some writers leapt on striking incidents in his life. However, more generally he was presented as the archetype of the hangman by political satirists in the feverish atmosphere of the late 1670s and early 1680s, as he presided at the executions first of the Catholic victims of the Popish Plot allegations, and then of the whig victims of the tory revenge. In using his name in broadsides and pamphlets, propagandists were attempting to exploit the broader place of the common hangman in the imagination of Londoners. 
That place was reflected in the appellation 'squire' that was frequently attached to Ketch's name, a status which went back to 1617 when a herald as a joke had granted the then hangman Gregory Brandon a coat of arms. It was also captured in the ironic grandiloquence of several pamphlets. When the Tyburn gallows was lying on the ground in September 1678, quite possibly through vandalism, 'The Tyburn Ghost' imagined 'Squire Ketch's Lamentation for the loss of his Shop' (title-page): 'The Tidings was quickly spread abroad. but when it arrived at Squire Ketch's Ear, `twas thought at first he would have Truss'd up himself for grief, that he should thus lose all Patience, and fill the Air with Exclamations against the villainous Authors of the Mischief. ('Tyburn Ghost', 7)' The following year 'The Man of Destiny's Hard Fortune, or, Squire Ketch's Declaration' exploited the opportunity for humour provided by the hangman finding himself imprisoned in the king's bench and Marshalsea prisons for debt: 'shall the famous, the well-known, the redoubtable Squire Ketch, Death's Harbinger, Pluto's Van-courrier, Vice-roy of Fate, and sole Monarch of the Triple Throne, now tamely be Catch-pol'd, Nabb'd, spirited, Shoulder-dabb'd, Enchanted, Lavendar'd, and laid up in pickle in one of the Devil's Pepper-boxes? (p. 4)' The pamphlet presented Ketch as a beleaguered tradesman. Twenty had died in his debt, 'having never a shirt on' (a reference to the hangman's perquisite of his victims' clothes); he had been burgled and 'two of the principal Apartments of that ancient Edifice stoln away' (referring to the collapse of the gallows). However, he was looking forward to an upturn in his trade: 'I hope I shall weather all my troubles, there shortly begins a Grand Mart on the Old Bayly, and other Customers are coming on apace; If things fadge right, I doubt not be before Midsomer to have twenty Guinnies with an Apprentice, and, in a Calesh of my own, wait upon my well-beloved Sons in a Cart or Sledg, when they perform their last Pilgrimage to TYBURN. (pp. 7-8)' The pamphlet also relished the cause of Ketch's debt, starkly contrasting with his reputation for hard drinking that other writers noted: he owed 'two and twenty pounds, and odd Farthings, for Milk, Oh abominable! The World sure will scandalize me for a Milk-sop, and think I fed like an old Britain, on nothing but Cows-baubby, drink only Whey like a Swine, or stuff my Guts every day with Fools, White-pot [a kind of milk pudding], and Custard. (p. 6)' 

Increasingly from the late 1670s Ketch's name was called upon with grim humour as the symbol of the appropriate response to treason. A broadside celebrating the execution of Edward Colman on 3 December 1678 for his alleged part in the Popish Plot, 'The plotters ballad, being Jack Ketch's incomparable receipt for the cure of trayterous recusants', was illustrated with a woodcut showing Colman being drawn to Tyburn on a sled with the pope's pardon in his hand, saying 'I am sick of a trayterous disease', while Ketch stood over him with a hatchet in one hand and a rope in the other, saying, 'Here's your Cure. Sir'. The theme was taken up in another broadside published early in 1680, 'The Romanists best doctor, who by one infallible remedy, perfectly cures all popish-diseases whatsoever in a quarter of an hours time, By an approved dose which never yet failed his Patients. Which approved remedy may once a month be had at Tyburn, near Paddington, of that famous physician of long practice, John Ketch, Esq; physician in ordinary to the pope'. It placed Ketch in a long line of such 'physicians' from the 1580s onwards. It assumed that the names of earlier hangmen such as Gregory (the nickname also of Richard Brandon who had succeeded his father) would have a resonance with London readers. The last of Ketch's predecessors, 'my Father Dunn', was credited with executing the Fifth Monarchists of Venner's rising in 1661 and Robert Hubert, the Frenchman hanged on 25 October 1666 for having started the great fire of London. The broadsheet concluded by listing those who had died for treason at Ketch's own hand -- from William Staley, hanged, drawn, and quartered on 26 November 1678, onwards. 
With the changing political atmosphere, Ketch became the executioner of whig conspirators such as the London activist Stephen College, whom he executed at Oxford on 31 August 1681. His name was now deployed by tory satirists, generally in passing references which took for granted his role of meting out justice to disloyal whigs. Thus one poem of 1683 had the dying earl of Shaftesbury lamenting 'Now heart, break heart, and baffle Ketch and all' (de Lord and others, 3.408), while another on the suicide of the earl of Essex in the Tower on 13 July 1683 reflected that: '
Had'st thou but few days courage to withstand, 

Jack Catch had done the business to thy hand. 
(ibid., 457)' 
'Langley Curtis his Lamentation in Newgate', responding to the gaoling of the whig printer, had as a running refrain Curtis bemoaning the fate of his party: '
There's none can defend us 

Till Ketch doth befriend us 

And send us a-hunting for Walcot below. 
(ibid., 499-504)' The last line was varied with the names of different executed whigs. Other satire placed Ketch centre stage. The ballad 'A Dialogue between Jack Ketch and his Journey-Man' (1683) has Ketch enjoining his assistant: '
Come prithee Nick, 

Look sharp, be quick, 

for now begins our Harvest; 

Throw by thy Coat 

Thou'st have a Cloak, 

for Charles is now in earnest: 

His Friends no more shall hang like dogs to please a bloody Faction; 

Our damn'd Phanatick Plotting Rogues, shall breed no more distraction. 

' The lengthy verse parody 'A Bill and Answer betwixt Jack Catch Plaintiff, and Slingsby Bethel & al. Defendants' (1686) imagined Ketch suing the republican Bethel, sheriff of London and Middlesex in 1680-81, for cheating him of his wages, and Bethel admitting that he was Ketch's father. The satire gained particular force from the story that Bethel had been the man who cut off Charles I's head: '
To speak on, tho' a friend to the profession [of hangman], 

And would again, upon the same occasion, 

Faithfully serve the People of the Nation. 

But to my great Content, dear Jack I see 

While you survive, there'l be no need of me, 

Thou art the Top of Fraternity. 
(p. 2)' There was, of course, another way of regarding Jack Ketch. His incompetence at the executions of William, Lord Russell, and James Scott, duke of Monmouth, became notorious -- the only two beheadings that Ketch performed and his most politically prominent victims. That notoriety was no doubt a matter of partisan hostility, but incompetence also muddied the sombre public message of execution -- only serving to highlight the stoicism of the victim and undercut the lesson of the legitimate power of the state -- and appeared unnecessarily cruel. According to an eyewitness at Russell's execution on 21 July 1683, 'The hangman gave him 3 blows, besides sawing with the ax, before he cut his head off' (Thompson, 2.32). Angry rumours of Ketch's incompetence and possibly deliberate inhumanity in executing the whig martyr were met by 'The Apologie of John Ketch, Esq.', purportedly Ketch's own vindication of himself: 'However since it is not fit that so Publick a Person as the Executioner of Justice and the Law's Sentence upon Criminals and Malefactors should lye under the scandal of untrue Reports, and be unjustly Expos'd to popular Clamour, I thought it a matter of highest importance to me to clear and Vindicate myself as to the matter of my Lord Russel's Execution, and the hard usage he is said to have had in the Severing of his Head from his Body.' Ketch denied that he had turned up at the execution drunk; that he had received 20 guineas from Russell the night before (though he had received 10 guineas on the scaffold); that after the first blow the peer had said to him, 'you Dog, did I give you 10 Guennies to use me so Inhumanely'; that his first blow had struck Russell on the shoulder; and that he had been consigned to Newgate for his incompetence. Above all, he denied that he 'had given my Lord more Blows then one out of design to put him to more then Ordinary Pain'. Instead he blamed Russell for the messiness of his own death, who, showing 'more Galantry than Discretion' had adopted an unsuitable posture and, refusing to have his eyes covered or make a signal, had flinched when the blow approached. Besides, Ketch had been disturbed as he was taking aim. 
The beheading of the duke of Monmouth on 15 July 1685 was even more botched. On the scaffold Monmouth handed Ketch 6 guineas and ordered his servant to pay the executioner more once he had done his job well. 'Do not serve me as you did my Lord Russel,' he reminded Ketch, 'I have heard, you struck him three or four times... If you strike me twice, I cannot promise you not to stir' ('An Account', 3). In fact Ketch took five blows and almost gave up halfway through the execution. Edmund Verney reported that after the first blow Monmouth 'lookt up, & after the third he putt his Leggs a Cross, & the Hangman flung away his Axe, but being chidd tooke it againe & gave him tother two strokes; and severed not his Head from his body till he cut it off with his Knife. (Verney, 2.404-5)' John Evelyn thought that Ketch's 'five Chopps... so incens'd the people, that had he not ben guarded & got away they would have torne him in pieces' (Evelyn, 4.456). Whig lampoon linked Ketch's name with that other brutal defender of the crown, George Jeffreys: 'While Jeffreys on the bench, Ketch on the gibbet sits' (Macaulay, 3.618). 
More work for Ketch followed in the wake of Monmouth's rebellion, among it the execution of the former sheriff Henry Cornish outside his house in Cheapside on 23 October. Early in January Ketch fell out with the current sheriffs, and was turned out of his place and gaoled in Bridewell for a week. His replacement as hangman was Pascha Rose, a butcher with a criminal record who was fined and sentenced to be whipped from Rosemary Lane to the Hermitage within days of his appointment. Rose's offence, like Ketch's, was insubordination. In October 1685 he had been brought before the magistrate Charles Osborne as a disturber of the peace; in December, brought before the same magistrate for bigamy, he was charged with having said, 'God damn Justice Osborne... I am sorry I had not a Rasour for him' (Jeaffreson, 4.300), and duly convicted at the January sessions. 
The version of these events recorded by the nonconformist diarist Roger Morrice is at best only partially accurate (he has both Ketch and Rose condemned by the City authorities, whereas in both cases they were punished in Middlesex), but gives some sense of the politicized gossip around Ketch's name. According to Morrice, Ketch had presented a bill 'for extraordinary charges in quartering of traitors, and boyling their bodies &c'. When he refused to pay such an exorbitant sum, 'Ketch told the sheriff if he did not pay it, he would serve him as he did his master Cornish'. Hauled before the lord mayor and aldermen, he tried to excuse himself by claiming that his words meant 'not that he would hang him, but that he should execute the offenders himselfe as he told his master Cornish in the like case' (DWL, Morrice Ent'ring Book P, 517). The parallel between Ketch's and Rose's offences was made even stronger in Morrice's version: 'Rose having executed some... came to the sheriff with a bill (which the sheriff somewhat roughly refused to pay) Rose told him if he had had a pistoll in his pockett he would have shot him thorough' (ibid.). According to Morrice it was Ketch who whipped Rose through the streets. 
Both Ketch's gaoling and Rose's flogging produced satirical broadsides. The broadside 'Jack Catch his Bridewel Oration' (14 January 1686) imagined him addressing his daughter who had come to view him in prison: '
Go, get thee home, thou little staring fool, 

When I come out thou shalt to th' Boarding School. 

' It relished presenting Ketch warning his hearers against the vices which had brought him to prison, an ironic variant on the commonplace theme of the sins which led to the gallows: '
Thus haughty 'Jack' you see will bate his Pride 

Rather than be a Tennant to St Bride. 

Then learn by me all you that stomach it 

All you that grumble as you thought not fit, 

To your superiors freely to submit, 

Least 'I' put in and nimbly tye the String, 

Which may perhaps too late repentance bring 

And you a Tune that does not please you Sing. 

' 
'Pleasant Discourse by Way of Dialogue between the Old and New Jack Catch' had Old Catch admitting that he had indeed been 'within a Spit and a Stride' of the same punishment as his successor. 
Rose was pardoned his fine in February 1686, and appears to have retained the office until he was himself hanged for housebreaking in April. Ketch was reinstated, but was dead within the year. He was buried in St James's, Clerkenwell, on 29 November 1686. His wife was granted the administration of his estate, the record of the grant recognizing Ketch's status as esquire. The antiquary Matthew Hutton provided an apt epitaph on Ketch's reputation for brutality when he reported to Thomas Comber that the whig pamphleteer Samuel Johnson 'was whipd on Wednesday but civilly used by the new hangman, Jack Ketch being buried 2 dayes before' ('Autobiographies', 1.150). 
Already by 1699 'A New Dictionary of the... Canting Crew' could define 'Jack Kitch' as 'the Hangman of that Name, but now all his Successors'. And for the next century and more 'Jack Ketch' was the generic name for the common hangman: the name 'vulgarly given to all who have succeeded him in his odious office', as Macaulay noted in 1848 (Macaulay, 3.618). 'Dine with John Wilkes, Sir! I'd as soon dine with Jack Ketch!' Boswell imagined would be Samuel Johnson's reply if he suggested such a meeting (J. Boswell, 'Life of Johnson', ed. R. W. Chapman, 1980, 765). A correspondent of Hannah More, Sir William Weller Pepys, paid testimony to the continuing appeal of Ketch's name when in looking for an example of his enthusiasm for all biography he admitted that 'were I to begin the Life of Jack Ketch, I should never quit him till I saw him hanged on his own gallows, and read his last dying speech' (W. Roberts, 'Memoirs of the Life and Correspondence of Mrs Hannah More', 3rd edn, 4 vols., 1834, 3.370). The nickname attached itself to even as notorious a hangman in his own right as William Calcraft, who was active from 1829 onwards. In the 1830s Edmund Gibbon Wakefield entitled an attack on the use of the death penalty for all but the most serious crimes, 'The hangman and the judge, or, A letter from Jack Ketch to Mr. Justice Alderson; revised by the ordinary of Newgate' while Charles Whitehead's 'The Autobiography of a Notorious Legal Functionary (Jack Ketch)' provided a parody of contemporary moralizing crime literature. 
However, the durability of Ketch's name was most strikingly witnessed, and indeed sealed, by his role as a foil to Mr Punch. The character of Punch came to England in the Restoration period and his persona was very much established by the early eighteenth century in the booths of Bartholomew fair and elsewhere. However, the classic Punch and Judy puppet show seems to have been a development of the late eighteenth century, its heyday in the decades around 1800. This was very much the Punch and Judy performed in the streets and back rooms of pubs for an adult audience, the show not yet rendered safe for the Victorian parlour or end of the pier. Judy, Jack Ketch, and Lucifer were the three characters most consistently present in versions of the show which had taken shape by 1820, in which the cheerfully amoral serial killer Punch slaughtered his way through wife and baby, the agents of the law, and finally Lucifer -- 'the triad of social controls: wife, hangman and devil -- marriage, law and morality' (Gatrell, 121). In some versions the show climaxed with Ketch's death rather than the Devil's. Bernard Blackmantle in 1826 described Ketch as 'a greater man than old Lucifer' and the scene where Mr Punch duped Ketch into putting his head in the noose as 'the ne plus ultra of [Punch's] exploits, the cream of all his comicalities... Mr John Ketch hangs suspended in the air -- Punch stands in a glorious triumph -- [and] all the world backs him in his conquest' (Leach, 53). 'Why were you so cruel as to commit so many murders?' Ketch asks Punch in the performance recorded by John Payne Collier; 'But that's no reason why you should be cruel too, and murder me,' Punch replies (Gatrell, 121). Ketch was the only puppet apart from Punch who needed dummy legs, for the jerking movements as he hanged. 
The Punch and Judy show presented a world turned upside down, where the hangman was defeated, and was distinctively plebeian. Yet in its sardonic reflections on the common hangman as the brutal guarantor of the social and political order, its grim acknowledgement of his power and its ironic take on the frail pretensions of the human agent who dispensed death on behalf of the state, it is not so far removed from the versions of Ketch that were deployed in the social satire and political propaganda in his own lifetime which so successfully imprinted his name in popular memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 15480


Ketel, Cornelis Govertszoon (1548-1616), painter and poet, was born in Gouda in the Netherlands on 18 March 1548. He was the illegitimate son of Elysabeth Jacobsdochter Ketel (died 1582) and Govert Janszoon van Proyen (died 1574), who was related to the Gouda glass painter Wouter Pieterszoon Crabeth. Cornelis received some training from his uncle Cornelis Jacobszoon Ketel, who was also a glass painter, and subsequently, about 1565, from the painter Anthonie Blocklandt in Delft. In 1566 he went to France, going to Fontainebleau and living in Paris. He was prevented from travelling on to Italy by an edict that commanded temporary residents to return to the Spanish Netherlands, which he did in 1567. 
After practising as a painter in Gouda for six years, in 1573 Ketel moved to London, where he initially resided in Southwark with the Netherlandish sculptor William Cure (Willem Keur), a friend of his uncle. In London in 1574 he married Aeltje Gerritsdochter (died 1606), also from Gouda, and the couple had three children who were baptized in London: Gedeon (1576-1579), Ezechiell ('b'. 1578), and Eve ('b'. 1579). The latter two were dead by 28 February 1595, as was another son, Rafel, who was born in Amsterdam in 1581. A further son, Andries, died before November 1613. The family lived in Bishopsgate, near Crosby Place in the City of London. Many of Ketel's wealthy merchant patrons were based in this area, such as Thomas 'Customer' Smythe (1522-1591), who apparently commissioned from Ketel a set of head-and-shoulders portraits of his large family. Nine of these survive, seven in a single British private collection, one in another private collection, and one in the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. They are all inscribed 1579, and the capital 'A' of the Latin word 'A[nn]o', also written thereon, is in a distinctive serpentine form frequently found on Ketel's British works. 
Ketel's earliest London commissions had come from the German merchants at the Steelyard, the Hanseatic trading base next to the Thames. These included the circular double-sided 'Portrait of a Gentleman, Probably Adam Wachendorff' (1574; Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam); the back of the wooden panel is painted with the device of a naked cherub blowing bubbles, with a Greek inscription that translates as 'Man's life is like a bubble' -- a meditation on the vanity of human life. In 1577 he depicted 'Sir Martin Frobisher' at full length (Bodl. Oxf.), the only surviving work from a commission from the Cathay Company for nineteen pictures, among them ones of the Inuit who had accompanied Frobisher back to England from his expedition in search of a north-west passage to China. Records for this commission show that Ketel was charging $5 for a full-length portrait and $1 for a head. 
In 1578, according to his Haarlem-based friend and biographer Karel van Mander (writing in 1604, while Ketel was still alive), Edward Seymour, first earl of Hertford, commissioned him to portray Elizabeth I, for which she sat at 'the house of Hantworth'. This work seems not to have survived. (The 'Sieve' portrait of the queen, now in the Pinacoteca Nazionale, Siena, was long thought to be this, but was found in 1988 to be signed by another Netherlandish painter, Quentin Metsys the younger.) Ketel was also said to have painted a portrait of Aubrey de Vere, twentieth earl of Oxford. 
In England, according to van Mander, Ketel received many portrait commissions, but none for the allegorical and historical paintings which he preferred to do. He therefore produced a large allegory, on canvas, 'with more than life-sized figures with the symbolic representation of how Power is overcome by Wisdom and Prudence' (van Mander, 358-9). This was purchased by a 'young... English merchant called Mr Pieter Hachten, who presented it to Sir Christoffel Hatten, who died as Lord Chancellor' (ibid.). A large fragment of this picture, signed by Ketel and dated 1580, was recently discovered (priv. coll., USA). 
In 1581 Ketel left for Amsterdam: it has been suggested that his free, painterly style of portraiture was out of tune with the more unshadowed, linear manner favoured by clients in England. He seems to have introduced the use of the full-length portrait for middle-class sitters to the northern Netherlands. In Amsterdam he painted many portraits, notably the large full-length group 'The Militia Company of Captain Dirck Jacobszoon Rosecrans and Lieutenant Pauw' (1588; Rijksmuseum). He also produced painted and drawn allegories, accompanied by poetic texts, most of which are now lost. The Danish-born painter Pieter Isaacszoon was his pupil. In 1598 he began making clay figures. From around 1599, so van Mander reported, Ketel experimented with painting without the use of a brush, using his fingers and, in 1600, his feet. These works seem to have been conceived as displays of technical virtuosity. In October 1607 he married, second, Ael Jansdochter (died 1630/31). In 1613 he was partially paralysed by a stroke. Ketel died in Amsterdam on 5 August 1616, and was buried there in the Oude Kerk three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 15481


Ketel, William (fl. c.1100), thaumaturgical writer, is mentioned only in a lost manuscript of unknown date which contained hagiographical material concerning St John of Beverley, and which was printed (from a transcript) by the seventeenth-century editors of the 'Acta sanctorum'. After the conclusion of Folcard's 'Life of St John Beverley', this manuscript contained a series of miracle stories relating to that saint and headed: 'Other Miracles Written by William Ketel, Clerk of Beverley'. The ensuing chapter began with a dedication, the Latin of which is evidently corrupt, but which was apparently addressed by 'William, least of the clerks of St John' to two of his superiors, who appear as 'Ethal.' and 'Thur.', and who had respectively the offices of provost and master (Raine, 'Historians of the Church of York', 1.261, n. 1). After the series of stories thus introduced, the manuscript preserved a second series, which began with an expression of astonishment that of all the clerks of Beverley only William, 'who is also called Ketel' (ibid., 292), should have related the miracles of St John. The same miracle stories as in the lost manuscript are largely found in BL, Cotton MS Faustina B.iv (twelfth-century), and there is also a selection in BL, Add. MS 61901 (fifteenth-century); but neither of these manuscripts contains the references to William Ketel. 
Allowing for the corruption of the dedication, one of the dedicatees of Ketel's miracle stories may have been Thurstan, provost of Beverley, who appears in charters of 'c'.1135-52, and died, according to John of Hexham, in 1152. This would suggest that Ketel worked in the first half of the twelfth century, which would not be inconsistent with the fact that the latest datable events in the miracle stories concern the reign of William the Conqueror (Ketel stated that he was relating miracles of which he had personal knowledge or which he knew on good authority). On the other hand, the dedication may mean that the provost was an otherwise unknown Ethal, and Ketel may have worked as early as the late eleventh century. Verbal similarities to Alfred of Beverley (who was writing about 1143) in Ketel's stories probably result from Alfred's having drawn on them rather than vice versa; and, if it is correct (which is not certain) that the reference in the stories to St John's 'former' tomb was made in relation to the tomb established after the translation of 1197, it is likely that this was a later interpolation. The miracle stories are not of great historical interest, although they do contain clues to the development of the cult of St John and of Beverley Minster as a building; and Ketel's account of the visit of King AEthelstan to Beverley appears to be the earliest version of this alleged event. Ketel was a Scandinavian name, properly spelled Ketill, and was widespread in eastern England. 


@@@@@


doc= 15482


Kethe, William (d. 1594), religious polemicist and translator, probably originated in The Mearns, Scotland. Very little is known about his early life; he may have lived in Exeter. What is certain is that by Edward VI's reign he had become a writer of militantly protestant broadside poems. 'A Ballet Declaring the Fal of the Whore of Babylone Intytuled 'Tye thy Mare, Tom Boye'' (1548?) satirized the Roman Catholic church, whereas 'Of Misrules Contending with Gods Worde by Name' (1553?) expressed confidence that the Edwardian regime would correct unscriptural practice. Following the succession of Mary I, Kethe exiled himself to Frankfurt am Main, Germany, arriving by December 1554 and entering the lists against the Marian government (particularly Lord Chancellor Stephen Gardiner, a Catholic hardliner) with 'William Keth his Seeing Glasse' ('c'.1555). A liturgical dispute now broke out among the English asylum seekers; a puritan faction led by John Knox and including Kethe, William Whittingham, John Foxe, and Anthony Gilby won the backing of John Calvin for their refusal to use the 1552 prayer book which contained ceremonies regarded as papist superstition. In August 1555 the group seceded from Frankfurt and headed for the protection of Calvin's Geneva; on 5 November 1556 Kethe was received into Knox's congregation there, having perhaps spent the interim with Foxe at Basel. Kethe was by now married to Elizabeth, a widow, who accompanied him; they did not have children. 
In 1557 Kethe and John Bodley travelled with another group of English exiles from Wesel in Germany to a Swiss refuge at Aarau. Kethe now espoused the radical political ideas developed by some of his colleagues. Christopher Goodman's 'How Superior Powers Oght to be Obeyd of their Subjects' (1558) encouraged the people actively to resist Mary as an idolatrous tyrant and Kethe endorsed this in his introductory poem: '
Whom fury long fosterd by sufferance and awe, 

Have right rule subverted, and made will their lawe, 

Whose pride how to temper, this truth will thee tell, 

So as thou resist mayst, and yet not rebel. 
(Warton, 4.225, n. 3)' Kethe also echoed the demand for violent resistance contained in Knox's 'Appellation' (1558) by including with it his metrical translation of 'Psalm 94' and an incitement to 'up and rise with me against this wicked band' (Ridley, 278). 
Kethe's lasting achievement was his translation of the 'Psalms' into English metrical verse. He was the single greatest Geneva-based contributor to the psalter published with the 1561 edition of the emigres' alternative liturgy, 'The Forme of Prayers and Ministration of the Sacraments Approved by J Calvyn'. The core psalms were taken from an earlier work by Thomas Sternhold and John Hopkins with the innovation that accompanying tunes were supplied. Kethe's own contribution of twenty-five psalms exhibited a strong French influence. His best-known psalm was 100 ('Al people that on earth do dwel'), known as the 'Old Hundredth', which he set to an existing tune by Louis Bourgeois. Kethe's 'Psalms' were enormously influential: all were included in the Scottish psalter (1564), fewer in the English psalter (1562). 
Mary's death and the succession of Elizabeth I were read as providential signs by the Genevans that the issues dividing them from the other exiles should be resolved. In December 1558 the leadership dispatched Kethe on a tour of the other congregations bearing a letter enjoining unity. He returned in January 1559 and probably assisted in the production of the Geneva 'Bible' (1560), which was as immensely popular with committed protestants over the following century as it was anathematical to conformists who deprecated its acceptance of resistance theory. Kethe received permission to leave Geneva in May 1560 and by 14 October 1561 had been appointed rector of Child Okeford Inferior, Dorset, by Henry Capel. As chaplain to William Whittingham he participated in the abortive attempt led by the puritan courtier Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick, to hold Newhaven (Le Havre), Normandy, against the French from October 1562 until July 1563. Thomas Wood's letter to Gilby of October 1565 demonstrates that Kethe retained contact with the Genevan brotherhood now based in London, and in 1569 he volunteered as preacher to Dudley's army which put down the rising of the northern earls. With the support of such a powerful patron, and that of local puritan gentry like Sir George Trenchard of Wolveton and the less unequivocally zealous John Williams of Herringstone, he apparently escaped harassment by the church courts, becoming the most prominent of the first wave of puritan clergy in Dorset. 
The printed edition of Kethe's assize sermon of 17 January 1571 preached at Blandford Forum, which was dedicated to Dudley, his 'right honourable very good Lord' (Lupton, 5.93), roundly condemned the Dorset county governors for failing to suppress papist attempts to stir up sedition following the queen's deposition by Pope Pius V the previous February. The lord lieutenant himself (either Lord Mountjoy or Sir William Paulet) was openly criticized for imprisoning rather than rewarding one local man who brought seditious papist literature to his attention. The populace of this conservative downland area persisted in sinful ways, which Kethe now condemned in his call for reformation: 'abuse of the Sabbath daye, bulbeatings, beare-beatings, bowlings, dicying, cardying, daunsynges, drunkeness, whoredome and sturdy vagabondes not looked into' (ibid., 94).Peter Birchet, who in October 1573 stabbed the sea dog Sir John Hawkins mistaking him for Sir Christopher Hatton, a courtier unpopular with the godly, has been linked with radical puritanism. However, the puritan Kethe encountered him shortly before the incident and thought him 'clean out of his wits' (Collinson, 150-51). Kethe signed his will on 24 January 1594 and died at his rectory before 6 June, when it was proved; he was buried at Child Okeford. His wife outlived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15483


Kett, Francis (c.1547-1589), physician and alleged heretic, was born in Wymondham, Norfolk, the son of Thomas Kett ('c'.1500-1553), gentleman, and his wife, Agnes (died 1573), and nephew of Robert Kett (c.1492-1549). After the death of her husband, Agnes married Stephen Verdon, who by his will of 1572/3 contributed to the costs of his stepson's education. Having been admitted as a sizar to Clare College, Cambridge, in Michaelmas 1566, Francis graduated BA from Corpus Christi early in 1570. Proceeding MA in 1573, he was elected a fellow of the college in the same year, and at some point he was ordained. On 27 December 1576 he was one of the signatories of a letter thanking the university chancellor, Lord Burghley, for his arbitration in college disputes. He did not marry. 
In 1580 Kett resigned his fellowship. He is unlikely to have influenced Christopher Marlowe, as used to be thought, because he left college soon after Marlowe's arrival there. He graduated MD in 1581, and in 1585 'Francis Kett, doctor of phisick' issued 'The Glorious and Beautiful Garland of Mans Glorification'. As its dedication to Queen Elizabeth might suggest, this contained nothing doctrinally untoward. But in 1588 Edmund Scambler, bishop of Norwich, framed 'Articles of heretical pravity' against Kett. Kett's views seem to have included both Arian and millenarian elements: according to the charges, he believed Jesus had suffered 'only as Jesus already, and shall suffer hereafter as Christ' (only then becoming divine); that 'Christ is now in his human nature gathering a church in Erthe in Judea'; and that 'this year of our Lord 1588 divers Jews shall be sent to divers countries to publish the new covenant' (Grosart, appx B1). A second official account reports that he also believed in soul-sleeping (psychopannychism). The Norwich minister William Burton reported his conviction that 'Christ is not God, but a good man as others be', but also noted that 'monstrous as he was in opinions, see how holy he would seem to be in his outward conversation. The sacred 'Bible' almost never out of his hands, himself always in prayer, his tongue never ceased praising of God' (Burton, 125). 
On 7 October 1588 Scambler wrote to Burghley, urging that Kett be speedily executed as a dangerous blasphemer. He was burnt in the ditch of Norwich Castle on 14 January 1589. Burton was a witness of his horrific death: 'when he went to the fire he was clothed in sackecloth, he went leaping and dauncing: being in the fire, above twenty times together clapping his hands, he cried nothing but blessed bee God... and so continued until the fire had consumed all his nether partes, and untill he was stifled with the smoke. (Burton, 125)' 



@@@@@


doc= 15484


Kett, Henry (1761-1825), college teacher and writer, was born in the parish of St Peter Mancroft, Norwich, on 12 February 1761, the son of Benjamin Kett, cordwainer and freeman of that city, and his wife, Mary. He was educated at Norwich grammar school, and in March 1777 was admitted to Trinity College, Oxford. In June he was elected to a Blount exhibition and, the following year, to a scholarship. In 1784 he was elected to a fellowship at Trinity, in which he remained for almost forty years. He undertook various college offices, was an able and kindly tutor, and an impressive preacher who made no enemies within the college. He was a well-regarded Bampton lecturer in 1790, select preacher in 1801-2, classical examiner in 1803-4, and senior fellow of Trinity from 1803. Yet he never achieved the college presidency or any position of real distinction in university life. This failure may be attributed to an apparent lack of purpose or ambition; his interests were eclectic and he enjoyed the lighter side of life. 
Kett's long face and straight, bony nose made him the victim of incessant teasing. His perceived equine features earned a crude nickname, Horse Kett, and a wide range of jokes, both learned and puerile ('an oat' -- that is, a note -- through his door), which he unfailingly took in very good part. A famous verse was composed about his poetical aspirations by his Trinity colleague Thomas Warton: '
Our Kett not a poet 

Why how can you say so? 

For if he's no Ovid 

I'm sure he's a Naso. 

' Equally well known was Dighton's caricature of the tall, lean figure published as 'A view from Trinity College' in 1807. 
Kett's life had several fresh, or false, starts. His first venture was poetry. In 1793 he stood for the professorship of poetry at Oxford, publishing his 'Juvenile Poems' in support of his case, but he was defeated by James Hurdis by twenty votes. In 1799 he published 'History the Interpreter of Prophecy', which had appeared in three editions by 1800. His translations of John Jortin's poems were published in Jortin's 'Miscellaneous Works'. In 1802 the professorship was again vacant; Kett canvassed but did not stand. 
By then Kett was focusing on the theory and practice of education. In 1802 he published 'Elements of General Knowledge', a two-volume work based on his own lectures and including moral guidance and detailed bibliographies for the undergraduate and schoolboy. This work was criticized by John Davison in 'A Short Account of Certain Notable Discoveries Contained in a Recent Work' (1804) but was resolutely defended by its author, who published, as 'S Nobody of King's College, Oxford', 'The Biter Bit, or, Discoveries in a Pamphlet of Certain Notable Discoveries' (1804); 'Elements' ran to an eighth edition in 1815. Kett was more daring to tackle the issue of female education, with 'Emily: a Moral Tale' (1809). Emily's exciting romance packs a wide range of moral teaching, natural history, and general knowledge into a simple narrative and epistolary structure. A second undergraduate text, 'Logic Made Easy' (1809), was Kett's least successful work. His over-simplification of Aristotle provoked a vicious and personal attack from Edward Copelston, who prefaced 'The Examiner Examined, or, Logic Vindicated' with a passage from 'The Aeneid' ending 'Equo ne credite, Teucri' ('Do not trust the horse, Trojans'). Crushed, Kett endeavoured to suppress the work. 
Kett always had a penchant for the light-hearted. He contributed five papers to Thomas Monro's weekly publication, 'Olla Podrida' (1788). He published a pleasant travel journal about the Lake District in 1798 and brought out his favourite bons mots as 'The Flowers of Wit' (1814). He was a regular contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and wrote two short biographies: one, of William Benwell, appended to 'Poems, Odes, Prologues and Epilogues Spoken at Reading School' (1804), and the other, a memoir of Henry Headley, which appeared in 'Select Beauties of Ancient English Poetry' (1810). 
A devout Christian, Kett endeavoured to live a godly life. In 1787 he was a major contributor to the fund organized by Samuel Parr for the destitute Dr John Uri, former cataloguer of oriental manuscripts. Kett wrote the preface and notes to 'Beauties of Christianity' (1813), Shoberl's translation from the French of Chateaubriand. From the second year of his fellowship until 1804 he held the incumbency of Elsfield, Oxfordshire, from Trinity's president, Joseph Chapman. Between 1812 and 1820 he was vicar of Sutton Benger, Wiltshire, and in 1814 Bishop George Tomline appointed him to the sinecure of the perpetual curacy of Hykeham, Lincolnshire. 
On Christmas eve 1823, aged sixty-two, Kett married Maria White at Dowdeswell, Gloucestershire, and left Oxford to live at her native Charlton Kings, in the same county. By all accounts his mental state was by now unstable and he was prone to depression; certainly he had withdrawn from active participation in college life for much of the preceding fifteen years. On 30 June 1825 -- on a visit to Sir J. Gibbons at Stanwell, Middlesex -- he drowned while swimming. As late as 1870 Kett's loyal friends were robustly defending his reputation against allegations of suicide. However, the fact that he left instructions in his will that he be buried in the parish where he died but, were he to die in London, that he should be buried in Stanwell, where the vicar was a personal friend, surely suggests more than an accident. On 28 November 1828 his widow married Thomas Nicholl. 
Kett, whose obituarist valued his estate at under $25,000, made generous bequests to relatives in Norwich and Somerset; in addition, after Maria's death half his estate was to be divided between the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, and the Clergy Orphan's School at Regent's Park. He left meticulous instructions regarding the disposal of his manuscripts and copyrights. He had been generous to Trinity College throughout his life, supporting building projects and donating portraits, and on his death he bequeathed $500 to the college's advowson fund, a final touch of irony from the man who had never wanted a college living. 


@@@@@


doc= 15485


Kett, Robert (c.1492-1549), rebel, was the fourth son of Thomas Kett, of Forncett, Norfolk, butcher and landholder ('c'.1460-1536), and his wife, Margery. His family was descended from the gentry family of Le Chat or Cat which can be traced back in the county to at least the early fourteenth century. That the Wymondham family from which Robert was descended was known as Kett alias Knight might suggest an earlier episode of illegitimacy. 
Little is known of Kett's early life. Although his immediate family was no longer gentle, he was a man of some wealth. He lived in Wymondham as a tanner, the description given him in contemporary accounts of the rising that took his name. Tanning was a trade that could require a significant level of investment; Tudor chroniclers suggested that his moveable property was worth 1000 marks (about $670). Kett also had extensive landholdings, including manorial interests, at Wymondham, in whose manorial court he was prosecuted for enclosing lands, which were said to be worth $50 a year. His tax assessments in the 1540s suggest lower levels of wealth. But in their ranking they confirm that Kett, with his brother William, who combined the trades of mercer and butcher at Wymondham, was among the wealthiest members of his community. Both brothers were members of the local guild of St Thomas Becket. Taken together, these shards of evidence suggest that Kett exercised a role and authority in his immediate surroundings commensurate with his wealth and that known to have been exercised by the middling sort of the period. He married, probably before 1515. His wife, Alice, with whom he had up to five sons and who survived him, has been tentatively identified as the daughter of Sir Nicholas Appleyard of Bracon Ash. If this identification is correct, it would confirm that Kett was a man of rising prosperity. 
In July 1549 rebellion broke out in Norfolk, to which Kett lent both name and leadership. The rising began with an attack on local enclosers, but swelled to a gathering of many thousands which camped at Mousehold Heath outside the regional capital of Norfolk from 10 July until final defeat by a royal army on 27 August. Although it is clear that there had been several earlier episodes of crowd action, the rising's beginnings have traditionally been dated to the celebrations held at Wymondham from 6 to 8 July to commemorate St Thomas Becket. Among the enclosers attacked there was John Flowerdew of Hethersett. Flowerdew, a successful lawyer, was locally unpopular because at the dissolution he had partially demolished the abbey at Wymondham which served also as the parish church. Tradition has it that Kett, who is known to have named one of his sons after the last abbot, Loye Ferrers, and who was said to have played a leading role in trying to prevent the despoliation of the abbey, became involved in the rising as a direct consequence of the feud with Flowerdew. When Flowerdew paid his attackers to throw down Kett's enclosures, Kett was said to have agreed to their destruction and to have offered himself as leader of the protesters. The protesters then decided to march to Norwich, a decision attributed (without supporting evidence) to Kett, where contemporary estimates put their numbers at anywhere between 16,000 and 20,000. 
The scale and discipline of the rising have been attributed to the qualities of Kett's leadership -- 'the force of personality of a great leader of men' (Bindoff, 3). But there is little direct or independent evidence of Kett's role. A later legal case provides a rare glimpse of Kett proceeding out of the camp to the sound of drums to greet a contingent from the Norfolk village of Tunstead, whose leader Kett appointed one of his captains. Joined (reluctantly, it was claimed) by several of Norwich's leading citizens, Kett issued written warrants, copies of which have survived, for the collection of supplies of food and weapons, and, it was alleged, for the destruction of enclosures and detention of local gentry. In these warrants Kett and the others referred to themselves as the king's 'amici ac delegati' ('friends and deputies') and to their assembly as 'the King's Great Camp' (Russell, 47 and n., 107). The protesters also established a representative council which drew up the famous list of grievances, with at their core concern for the rights of commoners and manorial tenants, to which Kett's name is first signatory. Most famously, Kett was said to have dispensed justice beneath a tree, which came to be called the 'oak of reformation', on both disorderly followers and unpopular local gentleman (who were imprisoned in a mansion on nearby Mount Surrey which later came locally to be called Kett's Castle). As the survival of a 'writ' from Kett to Yarmouth's rulers requesting their assistance in resolving an inheritance dispute suggests, Kett's role at the oak of reformation provided a court for others seeking justice. 
Kett's refusal of a royal pardon and the defeat of a royal army at the end of July marked a decisive change in the politics of the revolt. Late in August the arrival of another royal army, under the command of the earl of Warwick, led to his defeat after a fierce and bloody battle and to widespread repression. Kett was said to have abandoned Mousehold Heath for Dussindale in response to a prophecy that was thought to augur good fortune for the forthcoming battle: '
the countrie gnuffes, Hob, Dick and Hick 

with clubes and clouted shoon, 

Shall fill up Dussindale with bloud 

of slaughtered bodies soone. 
('Holinshed's Chronicles', 1038)' In so doing he threw away his previous advantage over Warwick's cavalry. The evidence for the prophecy, like the report of an ill omen presaged by a snake falling from a rotten tree into Kett's wife's bosom, comes from hostile 'histories' of the rebellion; it is more likely that Kett's move was forced by the threat to his supply lines. 
Kett was captured the day after the battle. By early September he and his brother William were prisoners in the Tower of London. On 26 November both were found guilty of treason by a special commission of oyer and terminer. By 1 December they had been returned to Norwich for execution. On 7 December 1549 Kett was hanged from the walls of Norwich Castle, while his brother was hanged from the steeple of Wymondham church. Following a post-mortem inquisition, whose panel included his old enemy John Flowerdew, held in January 1550, Kett's lands were seized by the crown and later given in reward to Lord Audley for his part in Kett's capture. 
Kett and the rising that took his name are bound together in a way that makes it impossible to discuss the one without the other. But it is important to note that the events in Norfolk were but the largest of a series of protesters' camps both elsewhere in East Anglia and in the south-east. His signature always appeared first on the various commands and articles of the protesters, which makes it clear that Kett played a prominent role. But Kett was not, as he is sometimes portrayed, the only leader of the rebellion. The subsequent labelling of the events first as Kett's camp and later as Kett's rising probably exaggerates Kett's leadership and obscures that of others. In a letter written shortly before the final battle, the duke of Somerset referred to 'ket and the other Archtraitours' (BL, Harley MS 523, fol. 52'r'). In addition to the known leaders of the other camps in Norfolk and Suffolk, there must have been a hierarchy of command in which Kett was joined by others. One such was John Wythe, a copyholder and headborough of Aylsham in Norfolk, denounced as 'the notablest offender that was in the time of rebellion' (Beer, 'Rebellion and Riot', 205) and sentenced to be hanged on his own door. The terse records of the subsequent judicial repression reveal the names of these other leaders, but not their role in the rebellion. 
Nevertheless, writing on 1 September 1549, immediately after the rising's suppression, Somerset could refer to 'One Kett, a tanner, being from the beginning the verie chief doer' (Russell, 214). It was the government's decision to try Kett alone with his brother that identified the man with the movement. Thus in subsequent written accounts Kett was made to lend his name to the rising. Existing studies of Kett's rebellion have perhaps failed adequately to acknowledge that the record of Kett's role throughout the rising rests heavily on (near-) contemporary 'histories' whose provenance deserve more critical interrogation. Authorship of the first of these histories has been attributed to a member of the Sotherton family of Norwich, part of the city's ruling circle, whose purpose was in part to exculpate Norwich's leading citizens from any complicity in the rebellion. The second 'history' was written by Alexander Neville, secretary to Matthew Parker, archbishop of Canterbury, who before his elevation had attempted to pacify the disorders by preaching to the rebels. Kett's role therefore has been written almost entirely from hostile sources. 
Given the total absence of any firsthand testimony by Kett, during either the rising or the judicial proceedings against him, it has been Kett's fate to have motives attributed to him that reveal more of successive authors' attitudes and of interrelated shifts in political allegiance and historical interpretation. For Alexander Neville writing in the 1560s, Kett was 'of an impudent boldnesse, an unbridled violence' (Neville, B3'r', D3'r'), while in the Elizabethan Holinshed's chronicle Kett was described as 'a man hardie and forward to anie desperat attempt that should be taken in hand' ('Holinshed's Chronicles', 1028). These were descriptions interchangeable with those of any who dared to disregard the early modern culture of obedience. They were clearly at considerable variance with the historical record, sketchy though it is. Even Sotherton was prepared to acknowledge that Kett admonished the protesters 'to be ware of their robbinge [and] spoylinge' (Beer, 'The commoyson', 83). But by the time of the English revolution Kett's vilification in print had meant that his was a name that could be invoked, along with those other bogeymen of the English landed classes, Wat Tyler and Jack Cade, to dissuade the English from opposing their king and letting loose again the many-headed monster of the people. 
Knowledge of Kett thereafter was kept alive by a curious form of local patriotism. This had seen the translation of Neville's original Latin account by a Norfolk minister and its subsequent reprinting, together with more popular accounts printed locally, a tradition that continues to the present with celebrations of Kett in print and poetry. In the short term, Kett's body, hanged in chains from the castle walls and left to rot, provided an immediate mnemonic; cases of sedition, prosecuted in Norwich in the immediate years after the rebellion, reveal a submerged plebeian tradition among those who had been Kett's supporters which fondly remembered the 'merry world' of Mousehold Heath and held 'Robert Kett... an honest man' (Rye, 22, 25). In the longer term the decision of Norwich's authorities to make 27 August an annual day for the ringing of bells in the city's many churches, and for a religious service commemorating their salvation (the latter continuing into the eighteenth century), helped to preserve a memory of Kett which functioned both as an inspiration for later radical movements within the city and as an object of early genteel tourism. 
It was the publication of the Reverend Frederick Russell's 1859 study of 'Kett's Rebellion in Norfolk' that marked an important shift in Kett's reputation nationally. In part a product of that tradition of local patriotism -- Russell had spent his childhood in Norwich fascinated by local reminders of 'Kett the hero' -- the work drew on the accounts of Sotherton and Neville, but added greatly to them from his own original archival work. Russell saw in Kett a man who had led a struggle against the feudal system who, though 'commonly considered a rebel, yet the cause he advocated was so just, that one cannot but feel he deserved a better name and better fate' (Russell, viii). His judgement that Kett's 'great misfortune had been to live before his time' set the tone for much subsequent work that relied heavily on his researches. In their sympathies for Kett subsequent writers reflected both broader political shifts and the ability of the English to celebrate rebels -- once dead. Kett, now an 'idealist and visionary' and moved by his 'hatred of mastery and thraldom and his love of equality and brotherhood', was claimed as an early (albeit Fabian) socialist, leader of an uprising 'waged by the peasants, with courage and with characteristic good temper and moderation, against their enemies the landowners' (Clayton, 69, 62, 11). Thus taken up by successive reformulations of the left, Kett achieved his apotheosis at Norwich on the occasion of the four-hundredth anniversary of the rising in the erection of a plaque 'in reparation and honour to a leader in the long struggle of the common people of England to escape from a servile life into the freedom of just conditions'. But the rediscovery of Kett as an ancestor by a late Victorian Tory mayor of Cambridge could result also in the publication of a family genealogy which resurrected Kett as a servant of the people whose 'high traditions' the family continued and which led, in its turn, to the erection in Cambridge of Kett House, an office block built in the 1960s, whose end wall is decorated with a large modernist sculpture depicting Kett at the oak of reformation. 
In the translation from traitor to popular hero, Kett himself remains a shadowy figure. His long afterlife has allowed successive writers to fashion him after their own interests, reading out from the blunt fact of rebellion his personal, political, and even physical attributes, for which little or no direct evidence exists. But at the core of the story of Kett lies a profound mystery. Why, in a political culture where rebellion could end on the gallows, should a man, then in his late fifties, himself an encloser, and whose wealth placed him on the borders of gentry status, offer himself as the head of a rising of the commons? A re-evaluation of the politics of the protests of 1549 offers some answer. The leaders of other 'camps' in East Anglia, as well as identifiable names among Kett's delegates, were drawn from a similar background, of some wealth and accustomed to exercise authority locally. Kett may have shared their sense of alienation from a local gentry who, engaged in a vigorous extension of seigneurial rights, threatened the interests of wealthy and poorer tenants alike. Protests in 1549, informed by a belief that popular grievances were shared by a royal government whose policies and pronouncements had encouraged a popular expectation of reform, sought to negotiate with, rather than to challenge, royal government. Kett's description of Mousehold Heath as 'the King's Great Camp', and his concern for justice and good governance in the fashioning of the protest, suggests that he shared both beliefs and objectives. At the first offer of pardon by the royal herald sent to Norwich, Kett was said to have replied, 'kings & princes were accustomed to grant pardons to such as are offendors... he trusted that he needed not anie pardon, sith he had done nothing but that belonged to the dutie of a true subject' ('Holinshed's Chronicles', 969). The words may well be apocryphal, but they suggest that Kett saw himself not as a rebel but as an ally of royal government in the defence of the commonwealth against oppression by the landed class and in the pursuit of justice and good government. It was this political role that he constructed for himself that perhaps helps to explain the government's otherwise improbable accusation that Kett had 'taken upon hym our royall power and dignitie and calleth himselfe M[aste]r and king of Norfolk and Suffolk' (BL, Cotton MS Vespasian F iii, fol. 46). The judgement of the most recent history of Kett's rebellion that Kett was politically naive and 'showed not the least comprehension of the realities of national politics' (Cornwall, 240-41) fails to do justice to his political strategy. Kett became a victim of the changed political circumstances that followed from the duke of Somerset's need to secure his own political survival by a demonstration to his fellow nobles of his ability to restore order. Paradoxically, it was Kett's death as a traitor that both preserved his memory and sealed his obscurity. 


@@@@@


doc= 15486


Kettell, Ralph (1563-1643), college head, was probably born between 4 April and 16 June 1563, the third son of John Kettell, gentleman, of Kings Langley, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Jane. On 3 April 1579, shortly before his sixteenth birthday, he matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, presumably at the instigation of Elizabeth, Lady Paulet, widow of the college's founder, Sir Thomas Pope, who lived nearby at Tittenhanger and who nominated him to a scholarship four months later. He graduated BA on 7 July 1582 and was elected to a fellowship the following year. He proceeded MA on 23 April 1586, BTh on 11 June 1594, and DTh on 9 May 1597. Trinity was to be Kettell's home for the whole of his adult life. The family link with the college was strengthened by the subsequent admission of his younger brothers Christopher and George. The young college was by no means secure in its finances or religion, but Ralph Yeldard, then president, was a competent administrator and a good example. Kettell played a full part in college life, and when Yeldard died in 1599 he was a natural successor. He was thirty-six, with a commanding physical presence and a gift for quick-fire repartee. 
From the beginning Kettell identified closely with his college and relished the minutiae of institutional life, while never losing sight of the bigger picture. A sound steward with a taste for litigation, he created an extensive archive of many of his activities expressly for the benefit of posterity. His writing was firm and compressed, his ink home-made. His greatest undertaking, the building of a new hall in 1620, was necessitated by the collapse of the original medieval structure, which had been undermined by his previous project, the digging of cellars below. It is tempting to see a direct link to his strategy for controlling drunkenness -- brewing good beer in house. But perhaps of even greater importance was his inculcation of an atmosphere of college loyalty, which surely helped Trinity weather the years of the political and religious turbulence that followed his death. In 1602 he drew up, and added to the statutes, a levy on all inherited capital or income from every member of the foundation, which he followed by instituting a very profitable plate fund. Before 1620 he had given his name to a substantial house on Broad Street, which he had built as a private investment. 
As president Kettell assumed from 23 January 1604 the rectorship of the college living of Garsington, Oxfordshire, and took his parochial duties equally seriously. He married soon after his election, but little evidence remains of his private life. In 1606 his infant daughter was buried two days after her baptism. In 1624 a wife, perhaps his second, was also buried at Garsington. His wide-ranging personal opinions, however, were noted by all who encountered him, and towards the end of his life his assiduity in such matters as supervising college lectures and his eccentricities, which included spying on the evening activities of undergraduates in their rooms, led to his becoming a figure of fun. John Aubrey, admitted to Trinity in 1642, is the source of many uncorroborated observations, which may be taken with a pinch of salt. But Aubrey saw the wisdom behind the 'sharp gray eies' ('Brief Lives', 175) and knew that Kettell's 'Hasty-pudding' brain (ibid., 177) should never be underestimated. He noted that in his religion Kettell was 'a right Church of England man' (ibid., 176), disliking extremes, avoiding factions, and actively doing good in secret. 
It was Aubrey's opinion that Kettell would have reached his century had not the civil war arrived in Oxford. He used his age to avoid taking the unpalatable protestation oath in 1642 and defied both the soldiers and the court ladies who subsequently invaded the scholarly seclusion of Trinity. Kettell died at his college in July 1643, possibly of typhus, which was prevalent in civil war Oxford, and was buried on 5 August in the chancel at Garsington. One of the fellows painted his picture, from memory, on a small board, which became part of the college's picture collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 15487


Catterick, John (d. 1419), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was from Yorkshire, quite likely from near the North Riding village. His immediate origins are unknown, but in his will he remembered two sisters, Matilda and Margaret, and also the latter's two daughters. Robert Catterick, to whom he gave a prebend in Lichfield Cathedral, was his nephew and inherited all his books. John Catterick was master of arts of Oxford by 1398, bachelor of both laws by 1401, and licentiate in canon law by 1406. Evidently he impressed his fellow student, Bishop Henry Beaufort of Lincoln, and had entered his service by 14 January 1400. His preferment came entirely from the bishop, notably as treasurer of the cathedral on 21 March 1403. When Beaufort was translated to Winchester, Catterick went with him as his chancellor in 1405, still holding this post in September 1408 when he made a visitation of the cathedral. He and Beaufort moved the emphasis of his preferments to Winchester too, notably as archdeacon of Surrey on 12 November 1410. 
Although Catterick was called 'king's clerk' on 2 March 1403, this was simply for a visitation of a hospital in the king's jurisdiction. It was the need for the king to justify his execution of Archbishop Richard Scrope, and control the consequent vacancy at York, that elevated Catterick's career from local to national; while Archbishop Thomas Arundel was aghast, Henry's Beaufort kin rallied round: on 3 July 1405 Catterick set off 'in all haste' to help defend the king's position in the Roman curia, returning to London only on 3 February 1406. Beaufort then had him included in his own mission to Calais, from 26 March to 22 May 1406; from 6 October to 23 December he was touring trading centres in Germany and the Low Countries; and until October 1411 he was often engaged in lengthy embassies to France to try to keep the truce with France or turn it into something more secure. Possibly his continuing association with Beaufort in both diplomacy and diocese reduced his attraction to Henry IV at that point, but on 18 April 1412 he was preparing to go abroad once more, reason unspecified. On 1 July 1409 he had been appointed as a papal notary, not in itself demanding attendance in the curia but a signal that he had made his mark, and in 1413 was referred to as a notary in the papal chancery. More to the point, on 22 May 1413 the new king, Henry V, who had made Beaufort chancellor immediately after his accession, appointed Catterick his permanent proctor to the Roman curia. 
On 27 April 1414 Catterick was papally provided to the see of St David's, was consecrated by John XXIII, perhaps at Bologna, and received the temporalities on 2 June. In a rare moment of public candour, the pope allowed him to retain some of his benefices until a 'fatter' see could be found for him. This became possible that same week, although distance meant the appointment to Coventry and Lichfield took time; he was elected by the chapter (perhaps on 23 July), received custody of the temporalities on 13 October, and was translated formally on 1 February 1415. Meanwhile, on 20 October 1414 he was appointed one of the king's representatives at the Council of Constance. He took part there in the deposition of his recent host, John XXIII, as one of the commissaries to take evidence against him. Shortly after 23 May 1415 he left for England, with a commission to collect papal revenues, but really to consult with his principals. He was home in time to receive French envoys at Winchester on 4 July and act as a witness to Henry V's will at Southampton on the 24th. 
On 20 July 1416 Catterick was reappointed by the king as a proctor at Constance, although his commission on 5 August to discuss the council with the duke of Burgundy probably delayed his journey. On 21 December he had a wide commission to seek trading opportunities with Aragon, Genoa, the Hanse, and German princes, probably through contacts at Constance. On 18 July 1417 he was named by the king as one of the five bishops who were to direct all English delegates at the council, enabling Henry to control the vote of this 'nation'. The day after the death of Bishop Robert Hallum at Constance on 4 September, Cardinal des Ursins wrote to the king recommending Catterick for the vacancy at Salisbury, noting the judgment and learning he had shown during the council. In fact, because of the vacancy in the papacy and the king's absence in France, John Chaundler, the innocuous dean of Salisbury, had the promotion by election and without papal provision; possibly Archbishop Henry Chichele, no friend to Beaufort, had a hand in this peculiarity. Meantime Thomas Polton, another of the English bishops at the council, had met Beaufort at Ulm and brought him to Constance. There Beaufort dramatically swung the English delegation and, in turn, the whole council to making an election of a pope and in effect ending its own existence. Catterick then went with Martin V in early 1418 into Italy in his former role as king's proctor, and was with him, for example, on 5 May 1419 at Mantua. In the previous month he had been authorized to take all Normans in the curia into Henry V's obedience. It emerged years later that he had also been working and paying out money to gain Beaufort a personal and diocesan exemption from the jurisdiction of the archbishop of Canterbury, which would have outraged Chichele and Henry V, had it come to pass. 
On 20 November 1419 he was elected to the see of Exeter, with royal assent. However, on 28 December he died at Florence, where the papal curia had been staying since February. In accordance with a codicil to his will, he was buried in the Franciscan church of Santa Croce there, in the centre of the nave near the choir. After some pious bequests to a few kin and of twelve cups to Beaufort, his residual estate went especially to 'poor land labourers who have lost animals by murrain and are otherwise depressed by misfortune' ('Register of Henry Chichele', 2.179), especially on his own estates. He had probably never seen these people. Just possibly he may have managed a brief visit to his Lichfield diocese in 1416, but he had always left the administration to deputies. It is unsurprising that he expressed no wish for burial there. 


@@@@@


doc= 15488


Kyteler, Alice (fl. 1302-1324), alleged witch, was a member of the Kyteler family of Flemish merchants who settled in Kilkenny in the thirteenth century. Her parentage is unknown but she is likely to be related to William le Kyteler, merchant of Ypres, who was trading in Ireland in 1277, to Joseph de Keteller who was buried in Kilkenny 'c'.1280, and to William le Kyteler, sheriff of Kilkenny in the early fourteenth century. She married four times, each husband being a member of a wealthy and well-connected family in the Kilkenny area. Her first husband was William Outlaw, merchant and moneylender of Kilkenny, whom she probably married 'c'.1280-85 as their son, also William Outlaw, was sovereign (mayor) of Kilkenny in 1305. She may also have had a daughter, Rose, with her first husband. By 1302 she was married to her second husband, Adam Blund of Callan, with whom she engaged in moneylending activities. Their wealth is exemplified by a legal case in that year involving the sum of $3000, which they had entrusted to William Outlaw. In June 1303 the king acknowledged a debt of $500 to Adam Blund and Alice his wife, a loan to help finance the Scottish wars. Not long before his death in 1307-8 Adam Blund quitclaimed to his stepson, William, all his goods and chattels, moveable and immoveable, jewels, gold, and silver and renounced all debts owed to him by William. By 1309 Alice was married to her third husband, Richard Valle, a landholder of Tipperary; in 1310 they assigned to William Outlaw two debts of 200 marks and $200 owed to them by others. After Valle's death 'c'.1316 Alice took proceedings against her stepson, Richard, for the recovery of her widow's dower. Between that year and 1324 Alice married her fourth husband, John Poer. 
It is for the accusations of sorcery and witchcraft brought against her by Richard Ledred, bishop of Ossory, in 1324 that Alice is chiefly known. The principal source is the 'Narrative of the Proceedings Against Dame Alice Kyteler', a detailed account probably drawn up by or on behalf of Bishop Ledred to justify and defend the part played by him in prosecuting Alice and eleven co-accused. It tells a dramatic story, portraying the bishop as a staunch defender of the faith and upholder of the jurisdiction of the church against a 'diabolical nest of heretics' combined with the might of leading members of the royal administration and ecclesiastical and lay magnates of the lordship of Ireland. The 'Narrative' opens with accusations of heresy and witchcraft against Alice, following a visitation of the diocese. Seven charges are listed but the sixth charge stands out as the one which must have given rise to the whole affair. It states that the sons and daughters of Alice's four husbands had brought accusations before the bishop that she had used sorcery to kill some of her husbands and to infatuate others, and that she had so enfeebled their senses that they had given all their possessions to her and her son, to the impoverishment of their own children. Her fourth husband, John Poer, is said at this time to be totally debilitated by her sorceries but to have discovered in her possession a sackful of detestable items which he brought to the bishop. As a successful moneylender and a thrice widowed lady Alice must have amassed a considerable fortune, and it is not surprising to find a charge of sorcery being brought against her by her stepchildren, who resented the wealth inherited at their expense and the favour shown to her son William. The co-accused are not listed until later in the 'Narrative' but it is soon apparent that William Outlaw is among them. Such charges were traditionally tried at common law and up to this time were regarded only as serious as the harm done to the victim; they bore no heretical implications. 
The other charges brought against Alice and her co-accused concerned denial of the faith, making sacrifices to a demon, invoking the aid of demons in the practice of their sorceries, concocting potions in the skull of a decapitated robber using assorted unsavoury ingredients, and finally Alice's employment of an incubus known as Robin Artisson, a lesser demon of hell. What is so remarkable about the Kyteler case is the introduction of charges of demonic association, unknown at this time in the British Isles. This is probably attributable to the presence of Bishop Ledred as prosecutor. At the time of his appointment to the see of Ossory in 1317 he was resident at the papal court at Avignon where the recent case against the templars had given currency to the notion that the practice of magic implied demonic association. Thus, when a casual charge of malefice and sorcery was brought against Alice by her stepchildren, Ledred was bound by his training at Avignon to look for evidence of consorting with demons, and the use of the inquisitorial procedure meant that confirmation of such fears was readily forthcoming. It seems likely that the lurid details of the 'charges' listed at the beginning of the 'Narrative' did not emerge until the examination under torture of some of the accused, especially Petronella of Meath. Petronella's confessions are detailed later in the course of the 'Narrative' and are clearly reflected in the list of charges appearing at the beginning. Without the protection afforded to Alice by her influential relatives and friends, Petronella was burnt at the stake on the morrow of All Souls' (3 November 1324). 
Bishop Ledred pursued the case against Alice with determination fortified by conviction, but he encountered strong opposition to his attempts to have her arrested. The seneschal of the liberty of Kilkenny, Arnold Poer, was contemptuous of the bishop's efforts and obstructed him at every move. When a day had been appointed for William Outlaw to appear before the bishop to answer the charges against him, Poer had the bishop imprisoned until the appointed day had passed. The bishop next wrote to Roger Outlaw, chancellor of Ireland from 1322 and a close relative of William, demanding the arrest of all the accused but he refused on the grounds that he could not issue a warrant until they had been excommunicate for forty days. When the bishop summoned Alice to appear before him she fled to Dublin before the day appointed. Bishop Ledred was himself twice summoned to Dublin to answer to the archbishop for having placed his diocese under interdict and on a countercharge of defamation brought by Alice. The tide had begun to turn in Ledred's favour when the justiciar, John Darcy, lent his support, and writs for the arrest of the accused were finally issued in July 1324. Some were arrested and interrogated by the bishop, others were released on payment of securities, but the 'mistress of all', Alice Kyteler, fled to England with Basilia, daughter of Petronella of Meath. 
With the departure of Alice, William Outlaw now became the focus of the bishop's attention. He was summoned to appear before the bishop to answer thirty-four charges, including heresy, aiding and abetting heretics, usury, perjury, adultery, and clericide. But when the council met in Kilkenny in July 1324 the chancellor, Roger Outlaw, and the treasurer, Walter Islip, took up residence with William and held court there, to the consternation of the bishop. Clearly William was not to be yielded up as readily as the less fortunate Petronella. Although the 'Narrative' states that the bishop had to refuse money offered by William's friends to secure his favour, a form of compromise was reached. William confessed to the charges in return for which a prison sentence was commuted to a penance, namely, to hear mass at least three times a day for one year, to feed a certain number of the poor, and to roof the chancel of the cathedral of St Canice with lead. Evidently William proved recalcitrant as in January 1325 the bishop had him committed to prison and cited to answer new charges. But the power of William's supporters was such that the new agreement reached on 17 January 1325 required only the addition of securities for his behaviour. On 25 January Roger Outlaw and ten of the principal landholders of Kilkenny acknowledged a debt of $1000 to the bishop of Ossory. 
The events of 1324 were largely responsible for Bishop Ledred's enforced and prolonged exile from his diocese which commenced in 1329. Arnold Poer, convicted of heresy by the bishop, died excommunicate in a Dublin prison in 1329; the chancellor, Roger Outlaw, accused of aiding and abetting Poer in his heresy, purged himself of the charge at the parliament in Dublin in 1329. But the ultimate fate of the chief protagonist, Alice Kyteler, is unknown to history. 


@@@@@


doc= 15489


Kettle, Sir Rupert Alfred (1817-1894), industrial arbitrator, was born at Birmingham on 9 January 1817, the fifth son of Thomas F. Kettle of Suffolk Street, Birmingham, a glass-stainer, fancy button and military ornament maker, and gilder. The family was descended from Henri Quitel, a Huguenot of Milhaud or Millau in Languedoc, who emigrated to Birmingham on the revocation of the edict of Nantes, and practised there the trade of glass-stainer. Rupert left Birmingham early in life and, after attending Wolverhampton grammar school, was articled to Richard Fryer, a Wolverhampton attorney. Resolving to qualify as a barrister, he entered the Middle Temple on 2 June 1842, was called to the bar on 6 June 1845, and soon obtained a large practice on the Oxford circuit. On 18 December 1851 he married Mary (died 13 July 1884), only child and heir of William Cooke of Merridale, Wolverhampton. They had four sons and three daughters. At the general election of 1857 Kettle, who was a Liberal of conservative inclinations, was requisitioned to stand against one of the two sitting Liberal MPs for Wolverhampton, but he decided not to pursue his candidature. 
In 1859 Kettle was appointed judge of the Worcestershire county courts, and subsequently he acted as chairman of the standing committee for framing the rules for county courts. His position as a judge and the owner of a substantial establishment in an area much affected by industrial disputes led him to take a particular interest in settling conflicts between employers and workers. In 1865, after a strike in the building trade at Wolverhampton had lasted seventeen weeks, Kettle, on invitation from both sides, succeeded in reaching a settlement based on a set of written working rules for the building trade in the town. The essential principle of the new system was that if the delegates of the contending parties could not agree, an independent umpire should have power to make a final and legally binding award between the delegates of the contending parties. The scheme found favour with the building employers and with the unions, whom Kettle came to see as helpful in securing workers' adherence to arbitration awards, and was rapidly extended to other towns, eventually including a large part of the English building trade. 
Describing his schemes in two pamphlets, 'Strikes and Arbitrations' (1866) and 'Masters and Men' (1871), Kettle gave evidence on their working to the royal commission on trade unions in July 1867 and publicized them at meetings of the Social Science Association. Boards were set up on these lines in the Staffordshire potteries (1868), and subsequently in the coal and iron industries. Although an innovator, Kettle was not a radical: he insisted on applying commercial principles to wage-bargaining, and in particular sought to link wages to the selling price of commodities. He viewed arbitration as an efficient means of determining the market for skilled labour, and tried to place the awards on a legally enforceable basis: but an act of parliament of 1872, which he drafted with lukewarm endorsement by the Trades Union Congress, proved a dead letter. While his methods were more legalistic than those developed by the other contemporary promoter of collective bargaining, A. J. Mundella, the two shared a belief that participation should be voluntary, a founding principle of British industrial relations over the next century. Kettle was much in demand as an arbitrator, presiding over the midland iron trade wages board, and arbitrating in the Teesside iron industry (1869 and 1873) and in the Northumberland coalfield (1875). He was commonly styled the 'Prince of Arbitrators', and on 1 December 1880 he was knighted on Gladstone's recommendation 'for his public services in establishing a system of arbitration between employers and employed'. In 1890 the postmaster-general, Henry Cecil Raikes, consulted Kettle during the strike of the Post Office workers. By 1892 arbitration work was taking up so much of his time that he resigned his county court judgeship. 
On 24 November 1882 Kettle was elected a bencher of the Middle Temple. He was one of the senior magistrates and a deputy lieutenant of Staffordshire, and he was assistant chairman of quarter sessions from 1866 to 1891. A supporter of church schools, in 1870 he was elected a member of the first school board for Wolverhampton. He was a watercolour artist of some ability, and several of his pictures were publicly exhibited. Kettle died at his residence, Merridale Hall, Wolverhampton, on 6 October 1894, and was buried on 9 October in the Wolverhampton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 15490


Kettle, Tilly (1735-1786), portrait painter, was born on 31 January 1735, at 4 Silver Street, London, the third of six children of Henry Kettle ('c'.1704- 'c'.1773), a coach-painter, and his wife, Ann. Since 1640 five successive generations of the Kettle family had been freemen of the Brewers' Company, although both Tilly Kettle's father and grandfather worked as painters. Kettle may have received some elementary training from his father, who exhibited a 'cilindrical picture; one side a conversation, the other a sleeping Venus' at the Society of Artists in 1772. The only surviving work by Henry Kettle is an unusual panel painting, 'An Anamorphic Vanitas', signed in mirror writing, and which was sold in America in 1997 (ex Christies, New York, 23 May 1997, lot 34). 
Tilly Kettle attended William Shipley's drawing school in the Strand, London, where he was a fellow pupil of the architect James Gandon. From there he may have progressed to the St Martin's Lane Academy and the duke of Richmond's sculpture gallery, although this has not been firmly established. During the early 1750s he was introduced to Joshua Reynolds, whose portrait of his pupil Giuseppe Marchi (RA) Kettle copied with minor alterations to the draperies. According to Gandon, when Kettle returned the original he was complimented on the quality of his copy by Reynolds, 'who, however, excused himself from lending any more pictures' (Gandon and Mulvany, 204). 
Kettle's earliest identified portrait, a self-portrait of 1760 (priv. coll.), displays the formative influence of Reynolds on his portrait style. His first exhibited work was an unidentified half-length female portrait, which he showed at the Free Society of Artists in 1761. By 1762 Kettle was busy repairing Robert Streater's allegorical ceiling painting at the Sheldonian Theatre, Oxford, during which time he also painted the portrait of Dr Francis Yarborough, principal of Brasenose College, which is signed and dated 1763. Both commissions were probably secured by his friend and patron Sir Richard Kaye, bt, dean of Lincoln, who introduced him to new clientele over the next few years. From the end of 1762 until about 1764 Kettle worked between Oxford and the midlands. During this time he painted the poet Anna Seward (NPG) and her elder sister, Sarah, as well as numerous portraits of the family of William Legge, second earl of Dartmouth and Sir John Holte, both of whom were related to Kaye. Through these connections he also painted a series of portraits of the Edwards family, including Gerard Ann Edwards, son of the celebrated heiress Mary Edwards. 
In 1764 Kettle was invited to take up the livery of the Brewers' Company, although he seems not to have responded. The following year he exhibited three works at the Society of Artists, including a full-length portrait of the actress Mrs Yates as the Chinese Princess Mandane in Arthur Murphy's adaptation of Voltaire's novel 'The Orphan of China' (Tate Collection). In the exhibition catalogue he registered his address as Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, although by 1767 he was living in Conduit Street. He continued to exhibit portraits at the Society of Artists until 1776, after which he switched his allegiance to the Royal Academy. In 1767 Kettle exhibited a portrait of Miss Eliot as Juno, in the manner of Reynolds, and the following year showed an ambitious group portrait entitled 'An Admiral in his Cabin Issuing his Orders', a portrait of Vice-Admiral Sir Samuel Cornish with Rear-Admiral Sir Richard Kempenfelt and Cornish's secretary, Thomas Parry. 
In August 1768 Kettle, possibly encouraged by Cornish, petitioned the East India Company to travel to Bengal to work as an artist. On 21 September permission was granted, and on 27 September securities of $1000 were given by his father and William Arnold, of Walbrook. Kettle set sail on 24 December 1768, on board the 'Nottingham', carrying letters of recommendation from Admiral Cornish and Laurence Sulivan, a director of the East India Company. Kettle, the first professional British artist to make a career in India, arrived in Madras on 2 May 1769. 
Kettle spent two years in Madras, among his first commissions a portrait of Lord Pigot, former governor of Madras (priv. coll.), which he had begun before his departure from England. His clientele at this time consisted of nabobs, merchants, and army officers. He also painted a group portrait of Muhammad Ali Khan, nawab of Arcot, with his five sons, which Kettle exhibited at the Society of Artists in 1771, as well as a single full-length portrait of the same sitter (V&A), which he painted of his own volition. More unusual was a series of genre pictures, including 'Dancing Girls (Blacks)' (National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi), which he exhibited at the Society of Artists in 1772, and a suttee scene showing a woman preparing for self-immolation on her husband's funeral pyre, which was probably displayed at the Free Society of Artists in 1776 as 'The ceremony of a gentoo woman taking leave of her relations and distributing her jewels prior to ascending the funeral pyre of her deceased husband'. 
By late 1771 Kettle was in Calcutta, where he stayed briefly before travelling to Fyzabad, at the invitation of Shuja ud-Daula, nawab of Oudh, whose portrait he painted on several occasions during the following year, including a full length with his son (Musee de Versailles, France). In addition to those surviving works from this period, notably the 'Dancing-Girl Holding the Stem of a Hookah' (Yale U. CBA), further pictures are known through copies by local Indian artists. During this time Kettle took an Indian 'bibi', or mistress, who bore him two daughters, Ann and Elizabeth, who were baptized in Calcutta respectively on 22 February 1773 and 30 April 1774. 
Kettle presumably returned to Calcutta by early 1773, where he stayed for three years. Among his numerous commissions were a large double portrait of Charles and John Sealy (Courtauld Inst.), Sir Elijah Impey, first chief justice of the supreme court (formerly high court, Dacca, Bangladesh, since des.), and Warren Hastings, whom Kettle painted on at least three separate occasions. 
On 30 March 1776 Kettle left Calcutta on board the 'Talbot', arriving in London in mid-November. Following what must have been a whirlwind courtship, he married Mary (1753-1798), younger daughter of the architect James Paine, on 23 February 1777. In a pre-nuptial settlement, dated 22 February, Paine provided $5000, and Kettle the sum of $3000, towards a trust fund. According to the sculptor Joseph Nollekens, the marriage was not a love-match but the result of Paine's 'shuffling, sordid, and dirty conduct' (Milner, 75). Initially Kettle and his wife lived in Berners Street, London, while a grander house was prepared for the couple in Bond Street. In 1777 Kettle also began to exhibit at the Royal Academy, showing his works there intermittently until 1783. Finding it difficult to attract new clientele, Kettle relied at this time upon the network of patrons established in India. These included Josias Dupre, a former governor of Madras, Rear-Admiral Richard Kempenfelt, and Sir Robert Barker, who commissioned a large picture entitled 'Shah Alam, Mughal emperor, reviewing the 3rd brigade of the East India Company's troops at Allahbad' (Victoria Memorial, Calcutta). More successful were his more intimate portraits, notably the double portraits of two girls, Elizabeth and Mary Davidson (Dulwich Picture Gallery, London), whose father Kettle had painted in India when he worked for the East India Company. Following his marriage Kettle had two further children, a daughter, Mary, and a son, James, born in November 1782. By now, however, Kettle was experiencing financial problems, which finally forced him, in 1783, to vacate his house in Bond Street. The precise reasons for Kettle's ruin are unknown, his friend James Gandon stating merely that his marriage had 'proved unfortunate and expensive... difficulties and demands of various kinds interfering with his professional pursuits' (Milner, 78). Pursued by creditors, Kettle travelled to Ireland, where he stayed briefly, before deciding to return to India. 
On 9 June 1786 Kettle made a will, in which he gave his address as Brussels, a ruse, it has been suggested, to evade his creditors (Milner, 79). Shortly afterwards he set out over land for India. By July he had reached Aleppo, where he painted what may have been his last portrait, 'The Turkish Janissary of the English Factory, Aleppo' (priv. coll.). Kettle is thought to have died some time before the end of 1786, possibly in the desert on his way to Basrah, although the exact date and circumstances of his death are unknown. His will was registered at the British cancellaria in Aleppo on 5 July 1787. Kettle's wife died at her sister's house in Gloucester Place, London, in April 1798, bequeathing $5000 each to her son and daughter. In 1810 Kettle's son enlisted in the British army in India, where he died in 1819. 


@@@@@


doc= 15491


Kettlewell, John (1653-1695), nonjuring Church of England clergyman and theological writer, was born on 10 March 1653 at Brompton in the North Riding of Yorkshire. He was the second, and eldest surviving, son of the three sons and one daughter of John Kettlewell (died 1659), merchant of Northallerton, Yorkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Ogle. Kettlewell was educated at Northallerton school under the zealous royalist Thomas Smelt. He matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 11 November 1670 as servitor to the principal, Dr Thomas Tully, and graduated BA on 20 June 1674. Kettlewell was elected to a fellowship at Lincoln College on 28 July 1675, partly through the influence of another alumnus of Smelt's school and future nonjuror, Dr George Hickes. Kettlewell proceeded MA on 3 May 1677. He was ordained deacon by the bishop of Oxford, Dr John Fell, in Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, on 10 June 1677, and priest on 24 February 1678. 
Kettlewell's first book, 'The Measures of Christian Obedience', was written between Christmas 1677 and Easter 1678, but not published until 1681, with a dedication, which Hickes had suggested, to Henry Compton, bishop of London. This work on the subject of a Christian's duty to obey the laws of the gospels went through six editions to 1714. It also attracted the attention of Anne Russell, countess of Bedford, who appointed Kettlewell as her chaplain, and of Simon, Lord Digby. As chaplain to the Russell family Kettlewell attempted to counteract the influence of Samuel Johnson, the radical whig chaplain to Lord William Russell, the countess's son. He failed at this, but shortly before his execution for participation in the Rye House plot in 1683 William Russell sent Kettlewell an affectionate message. Digby, a connection of the countess's by marriage, appointed Kettlewell as vicar of Coleshill, Warwickshire, after his first choice, John Rawlet of St Nicholas, Newcastle, had turned him down and recommended Kettlewell. 
Kettlewell read his first service at Coleshill on 10 December 1682. He was an effective vicar, providing poor families with copies of the 'Bible' and 'The Whole Duty of Man', and persuading the pious Digby to restore great tithes to the value of $100 to the living. He resigned his fellowship at Lincoln on 22 November 1683 and devoted his whole effort to his parish, where several charities were founded by his means and through gifts from Lord Digby and others. Part of Kettlewell's pastoral duty was to preach in preparation for the worthy reception of the eucharist. The sacrament was extremely important to Kettlewell's piety, and he wanted to encourage more frequent celebration and reception at Coleshill. His preparatory sermons were published in 1683 as 'An Help and Exhortation to Worthy Communicating', with a dedication to Lord Digby. 'An Help and Exhortation' went through ten editions to 1737. During the tory reaction Kettlewell earned a reputation as a very strong advocate of passive obedience and non-resistance. A sermon he preached to the clergy after the suppression of the Monmouth revolt, 'Measures of Christian subjection', was published after his death in his collected works. His sermons on the deaths of his patrons were published as 'A Funeral Sermon for the Lady Frances Digby' (1684) and 'Sermon on the Occasion of the Death of Simon, Lord Digby' (1686). At Coleshill, Kettlewell was a friend of the future founder of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, Thomas Bray, who long after Kettlewell's death would continue to recommend his doctrinal works. Despite his devotion to his parish Kettlewell had not given up hope of rising in the church: in 1684, on the death of the archdeacon of Coventry, George Downing, he petitioned the archbishop of Canterbury, William Sancroft, for two offices left vacant by Downing's death, the archidiaconate itself and the prebend of Alrewas. His petition was unsuccessful. 
On 4 October 1685 Kettlewell married Jane (died 1719?), daughter of Anthony Lybb (1607-1674) of Hardwick House in the parish of Whitchurch, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Mary Keate (died 1692). The two had been brought together by the curate of Whitchurch, William Musson, who performed the ceremony there. It included what was at the time the unusual feature of the couple's joint reception of the sacrament. Kettlewell's married life seems to have been happy, although Jane suffered from ill health and the couple had no children. Kettlewell's principal diversions from his work were music and walking. He played the violincello, bass viol, and violin. 
During the reign of James II, Kettlewell published a visitation sermon, 'The Religious Loyalist' (1686) and a work on Christian doctrine, 'The practical believer, or, The articles of the apostle's creed drawn out to form a true Christian's heart and practice' (1688), which developed out of his parish catechizing. 'The Practical Believer' went through six editions to 1713, and a Welsh translation by Richard ap Robert was published in 1768. Unlike many Church of England divines Kettlewell did not preach against Roman Catholicism during James's reign. During this time Kettlewell's sacramental and Laudian piety drew some unfavourable attention. After his wife's death Digby donated to Coleshill a set of silver communion plates solemnly consecrated by Sancroft, an act that seemed to many idolatrous. 
Kettlewell's life was drastically altered by the revolution of 1688. He followed his high tory principles with absolute consistency, continuing to preach against any form of resistance to James II. He quickly removed the dedication to Compton from 'The Measures of Christian Obedience' once he learned that Compton had appeared in arms for William of Orange. After the revolution he was harassed by local dissenters and supporters of William, as well as by soldiers passing through on their way to the war in Ireland. Kettlewell lost his vicarage in 1690 for refusing to take the oaths to the new sovereigns. He relocated to London, where he became one of the leading nonjuring writers and controversialists. His nonjuring publications include 'Of Christian prudence, or religious wisdom, not degenerating into irreligious craftiness in trying times' (1691); 'Christianity, a doctrine of the cross, or, Passive obedience under any pretended invasion of legal rights and liberties', published anonymously in 1691 and with Kettlewell's name in 1695; an anonymous contribution to the controversy over Dr William Sherlock's defence of taking the oaths, 'The duty of allegiance settled upon its true grounds, in answer to a late book of Dr. Will. Sherlock, entituled the case of the allegiance due to sovereign powers' (1691); and 'Of Christian Communion, to be Kept on in the Unity of Christ's Church' (1693). 'Of Christian Communion' was a particularly influential work among the moderate nonjurors who envisioned an eventual return to the national church, as in its conclusion Kettlewell endorsed attendance at the services of the established church for those laity without access to nonjuring services. His controversial writings are marked by an absence of rancour and personal abuse, while adhering firmly to the nonjuring position as the only right one. 
In the long run Kettlewell's devotional writings during this period were more influential than his nonjuring polemic. 'A Companion for the Penitent, and Persons Troubled in Mind' (1694) went through eight editions to 1794, and its office for the sick was employed and praised by as staunch a defender of the established church as William Wake. Sometimes published with 'A Companion for the Penitent' was another work of Kettlewell's, 'A Companion for the Persecuted, or, An Office for those who Suffer for Righteousness' (1693). 'Death Made Comfortable, or, The Way to Die Well' (1695) was published four times to 1722. 
Kettlewell's life as a nonjuror was quiet, and he was not attacked by the government. His extreme scrupulousness can be seen in his dealings with Hickes, who was disguised as a soldier while hiding from the government. Such was Kettlewell's horror of any deceit that he would never address the disguised Hickes by his assumed title of 'Major'. Kettlewell's closest friends in the nonjuring community, including the deprived bishop of Bath and Wells, Thomas Ken, and the layman Robert Nelson were of milder temperament and politics than the fiery Hickes. Kettlewell seems to have replaced John Tillotson as a spiritual guide for Nelson when Nelson abandoned the established church for the nonjuring movement. Kettlewell encouraged him in writing his classic 'A Companion for the Festivals and Fasts of the Church of England' (1704). 
Kettlewell had inherited a farm at Lowfields, near Brompton, from his father, and did not suffer the poverty of many nonjuring clergy. He was also supported from the great tithes of Coleshill, which the Digby family diverted to supporting nonjurors. Kettlewell's good financial situation enabled him to continue his lifelong habit of paying for all purchases on the spot and also to suggest remedies for the desperate financial situation of many nonjuring clergy without being seen as swayed by his own situation. Kettlewell interceded with Sir William Boothby for the deprived bishop of Kilmore, Dr William Sheridan, and proposed the establishment of a fund for the relief of deprived nonjuring clergy in a letter to the deprived nonjuring bishop of Norwich, William Lloyd, dated 20 December 1694. Circulars were distributed supporting the fund and appealing for donations. The project failed, however, as the government's attention was drawn to it. Prosecutions were launched, but they did not affect Kettlewell directly, as he had died in London after a long wasting illness on 12 April 1695. 
Kettlewell's deathbed was attended by his wife, sister, and surviving brother, Robert, the publisher of some of his books, as well as Nelson. Jane Kettlewell was named executor of his estate. Kettlewell had earlier settled the farm at Lowfields in a trust to be devoted to the poor of Northallerton and Brompton on Jane's death, which occurred about 1719. Nelson had been given charge of Kettlewell's books and papers, and published several books from Kettlewell's unpublished manuscripts. 'Five Discourses on so many Important Points of Practical Religion' appeared in 1696 with a biographical preface by Nelson. It was followed by 'An Office for Prisoners for Crimes' in 1697 and 'The Great Evil and Danger of Profuseness and Prodigality' in 1705. Nelson also sponsored the publication of the two-volume 'A Compleat Collection of the Works of the Reverend and Learned John Kettlewell' in 1719, prefaced with a biography of Kettlewell by Francis Lee that is the chief source for his life. 
John Kettlewell was buried on 15 April 1695 at the church of All Hallows Barking, London, where Archbishop William Laud had been interred. Ken performed the funeral ceremony, the only time after his deprivation that he is recorded as officiating in public. The funeral was quite crowded, with thirty or forty clergy and many laity attending. 


@@@@@


doc= 15492


Kettlewell, Samuel (1822-1893), theological writer, born on 31 March 1822, was the son of the Revd William Kettlewell, rector of Kirkheaton, near Huddersfield, and his wife, Mary Midgeley. He matriculated on 24 October 1846 at Durham University, and graduated as a licentiate of theology in 1848. He was ordained deacon in the same year, and priest in 1849 by the bishop of Ripon. He then became a curate at Leeds under Walter Farquhar Hook, and in 1851 he was appointed vicar of St Mark's, Leeds. This, his only incumbency, he resigned in 1870 to devote himself to literary work. He had already published a 'Catechism on Gospel History' (1851; 3rd edn, 1878), and two works suggested by the controversy over Irish disestablishment: 'A Short Account of the Reformation in Ireland', and 'Rights and Liberties of the Church' (both 1869). His energies were now mainly devoted to his work on Thomas a Kempis, and in 1877 he published 'The Authorship of the 'De imitatione Christi'', followed in 1882 by 'Thomas a Kempis and the Brothers of Common Life' (2 vols.; 2nd edn, 1884). These two books were the fruit of much research in England, Holland, and Belgium, and remain of importance for a Kempian studies. In 1888 Kettlewell published 'The Basis of True Christian Unity' (2 vols.), and in 1892 a translation of the 'De imitatione'. He had received the Lambeth MA in 1860, and in 1892, in recognition of his work, he was granted the Lambeth DD, the queen countersigning his diploma. He died on 2 November 1893 at his residence, Kesselville House, Eastbourne, where he had retired in 1870; he was twice married, his second wife, Margaret, surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15493


Keugh, Mathew (c.1744-1798), army officer and Irish nationalist, was born in co. Wexford. A loyalist acquaintance, Charles Jackson, claimed that Keugh was a drummer in the 33rd regiment during the American war. More certain is that Keugh rose from the ranks and was gazetted as an ensign in the 60th regiment on 31 October 1763. He was promoted lieutenant in the 45th foot on 14 July 1769 and transferred to the 27th Inniskilling regiment on 14 March 1772. He retired on the half pay of a captain-lieutenant in 1774 and returned to George's Street, Wexford, where his upstanding reputation and protestantism led to his appointment as a commissioner of the peace. He later disappointed conservative associates by supporting campaigns to reform the Irish parliament and for Catholic emancipation. Little is known of his marriage other than that it was childless and that his wife had been widowed. She was Beauchamp Bagenal Harvey's first cousin and the aunt of Sir Jonah Barrington's wife. 
Keugh was closely associated with socially prominent republicans such as Harvey and John Henry Colclough, who engaged in political agitation as early as 1791-2. His support of the whig viceroy, Earl Fitzwilliam, probably led to the revocation of his civil commission in 1796 although the authorities were clearly unaware of the strength of his radical convictions. Documents recovered from Keugh's house in June 1798 indicate his knowledge of Wexford's paramilitary leadership from late 1797. Although he was probably not a formally appointed officer, the United Irishmen prized members with military experience and it is very likely that Keugh's advice was sought by leading activists. He dined with high-ranking conspirators at Harvey's home in April 1798 and was one of the guests whose conversation aroused Jonah Barrington's suspicions. His outwardly passive conduct, however, enabled him to evade arrest with the advent of the rising and, crucially, he was not named in the confession extracted from Anthony Perry of Inch on 26 May. 
While many of his associates languished in gaol that evening, Keugh busied himself fortifying the county town against a possible rebel attack. Such activity may explain Mrs Brownrigg's claim that Keugh was later denounced, wrongly, as an Orangeman. His stature among United Irishmen was revealed on 30 May when the insurgents arrived and appointed him 'governor' of Wexford town. Keugh, assisted by William Kearney, chaired the eight-man committee which administered the 'Wexford republic' and provided logistic support to rebel forces in the field. His moderation reassured nervous neutrals and he responded as best he could to the appeals of imprisoned loyalists for protection. Only four prisoners were put to death in the town between 4 and 20 June, although matters were frequently chaotic. Keugh was technically superseded by Harvey about 7 June when the former commander-in-chief of the New Ross army was made 'president' of the Wexford-based council. Keugh in fact remained the military commander in Wexford town and took steps to bolster its harbour and land defences. Several contemporaries refuted allegations that Keugh concurred in the mass execution of loyalist captives on 20 June. His authority had evidently waned at this critical period to the point that he was incapable of imposing restraint on the extremists attached to Captain Thomas Dixon. 
Preserving lives was foremost in Keugh's mind on 21 June when, after consulting with his colleagues in his home, he decided to place the town in the care of Lord Kingsborough until its surrender had been negotiated. Captain McManus of the Antrim militia and Edward Hay were sent to contact Lieutenant-General Gerard Lake at Enniscorthy, who spurned the 'insolent' proposals on the 22nd. The issue was forced later that day when Major-General John Moore's column recaptured the undefended town. Keugh was one of the few insurgents not to have fled and apparently hoped that Kingsborough and others would intercede on his behalf. 
Keugh was court-martialled with eight others on 24 June and made a strong speech in which he denied complicity in atrocities. This plea and Kingsborough's support were insufficient to prevent capital conviction. Barrington sought a reprieve from Under-Secretary Edward Cooke in Dublin Castle and was told that Lake did not wish to diminish the exemplary function of the proceedings. Keugh was sent to the makeshift gallows on Wexford Bridge as planned at 11 a.m. on 25 June, where his call for a protestant clergyman elicited the sympathy of General Moore. He was attended by the Revd John Elgee, rector of Wexford. Keugh's head was removed to be spiked on the court house and his mutilated body thrown into the river as a mark of dishonour. 


@@@@@


doc= 15494


Key, Sir Astley Cooper (1821-1888), naval officer, the son of Charles Aston Key (1793-1849) and his wife Anne, 'nee' Cooper, was born at St Thomas Street, London, on 18 January 1821. He entered the navy in August 1833, attending the Royal Naval College at Portsmouth, where he won the annual silver medal competition. He passed his lieutenant's examination in August 1840, and after study on the 'Excellent' was commissioned on 22 December 1842. In February 1843 he joined the 'Curacao' for the east coast of South America, where in 1844 he transferred to the steam frigate 'Gorgon' (Captain Charles Hotham), a reflection of his decision to specialize in steam. On 10 May the 'Gorgon' was driven ashore near Montevideo. Key, using his training at 'Excellent', played a leading part in refloating her. He served at the battle of Obligado (fought against the Argentinians on the Rio Parana on 20 November 1845), in which he was slightly wounded, and he was promoted commander as of 18 November. Between 1847 and 1850 he commanded the steamer 'Bulldog' in the Mediterranean, being posted on 11 October 1850. In 1853 he took command of the screw frigate 'Amphion', and served in the Baltic in 1854 and 1855, taking a prominent part at Bomarsund, Sveaborg, and operations in the Gulf of Viborg. On 5 July 1855 he was nominated CB. In 1856 he was appointed to the steam battleship 'Sans Pareil', to command the inshore gunboat division. Shortly after this, in 1856, he married Charlotte Lavinia McNeill. In 1857 he took his ship to China with a detachment of marines, which he took to Calcutta during the early stages of the Indian mutiny, before returning to China to command a battalion of the naval brigade at the capture of Canton (Guangzhou) (28-9 December 1857). 
In 1859-60 Key served on the royal commission on national defence, and between 1860 and 1863 as captain of the steam reserve at Devonport. On the commission he demonstrated his expertise in naval technology, but also a glaring misunderstanding of the basis of British strategy. He had been appointed on the strength of his known views in favour of local coast defence to a commission predisposed to recommend forts, although British imperial and national security depended on the ability to use the sea not merely to prevent an invasion. In 1864 he became captain of the 'Excellent', and superintendent of the Royal Naval College. On 20 November 1866 he was promoted rear-admiral and became the first director of naval ordnance, a post he had helped to define. Here he demonstrated a preference for close action and simple muzzle-loading guns. In 1869 he served as admiral superintendent at Portsmouth and later Malta, before establishing the new Royal Naval College at Greenwich between 1872 and 1876. In April 1873 he became vice-admiral and in May he was appointed KCB. His wife died on 30 December 1874. In early 1876 he took command of the North American station, where he married Evelyn Bartolucci in October 1877 at Halifax, Nova Scotia. She was the daughter of an Italian dancing master and younger than Key's own eldest daughter. He returned in March 1878 to command the Baltic fleet formed during the Russian war scare. On 15 June 1879 he was appointed principal naval aide-de-camp to the queen, and in August became first naval lord, a post he held until the summer of 1885. When he left office he was granted a special pension of $500 per annum. 
Key was an early example of an officer who made his career through the mastery of new technology. Unfortunately for the navy, he never developed an equivalent comprehension of strategic needs. He was an obsessive centralizer, and revelled in the minutiae of administration, to the exclusion of the wider issues of policy. This was particularly problematic during the prolonged absences of the first lord of the Admiralty, Lord Northbrook, in Egypt, when he acted as the entire Board of Admiralty. 
Key became first naval lord in breach of a compact he had made with Geoffrey Hornby and Beauchamp Seymour that they would all refuse the post without some reform of the Admiralty. He did so apparently from financial embarrassment resulting from his recent second marriage and the marriage of his eldest daughter. A weak character, Key allowed his wife to become a major channel for influence. She was known as 'the Key to promotion'. Key had his own small group of followers in the service, mainly men of his own technical bent, who were referred to as 'the bunch of Keys'. Notable among them was John Fisher, who distanced himself from his old mentor after Key left office. Key's six years at the Admiralty witnessed steady, if unspectacular, progress in all areas. Northbrook was happy to leave naval administration to Key, who was happy to keep the estimates down to the figures he was given. Key was still committed to coast defence and had little comprehension of the navy's role in commerce protection. Under pressure from increasing French construction, he sanctioned the building of six Admiral class ironclads, ships noted more for the weaknesses caused by insufficient displacement than the success of the new breech-loading guns, which were a feature of the Northbrook board's term of office. The 1884 agitation for increased naval expenditure, which resulted in the 'Northbrook programme', was ill timed; not only was the navy markedly superior to the possible danger, but many of the programme's ships would be obsolete before completion. It was a mark of Key's isolation that in the absence of Northbrook his views were hardly noted by a government anxious to escape censure. When the Panjdeh crisis came in 1885, long signalled by Russian advances, the Admiralty was better prepared than it had been in 1878. Key could call on information from the foreign intelligence committee, set up in 1882, the results of the 1878 mobilization, and a number of new ships. 
If the mark of successful administration was to leave things better than before, Key's time in office was well spent. He has been criticized for not doing more, particularly on the strategic front, but this ignores the overriding primacy of the battle fleet in national strategy, and the real naval requirements close to home. Key was not an intellectual, and had no elevated ideas on sea power, but in this he was a man of his times. The navy spent the middle years of the century coming to terms with technology, and in the long peace after 1856 it was unsurprising that men such as Key -- and his successor in several posts, Arthur Hood -- should reach the highest position. By concentrating on practicalities, they provided the navy with the material that was vital to its strength. It was left to another generation to expound the principles of maritime strategy. The contrast between Key and his two rivals for the post of senior naval lord in 1879, Hornby and Seymour, was striking. Key lacked their experience afloat, and demonstrated little leadership. He had few followers, and evoked no lasting loyalty. 
On 24 November 1882 Key was nominated GCB, and on 11 August 1884 he was sworn of the privy council. He was at various times elected FRS and FRGS and was awarded an honorary DCL. After retirement he lived at Laggan House, Maidenhead, where he died on 3 March 1888. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15495


Key, Charles Aston (1793-1849), surgeon, born in Southwark, London, on 6 October 1793, was the eldest son of Thomas Key (died 1837), medical practitioner, and Margaret Barry. Thomas Hewitt Key was a half-brother by a second marriage. Aston Key was educated at Buntingford grammar school, Hertfordshire, and was apprenticed to his father in 1810. He attended the lectures at the United Borough Hospitals in 1812, and became a pupil at Guy's Hospital in 1814. In 1815 his apprenticeship to his father was cancelled, and he became a pupil of Astley Cooper at a large premium. That summer he travelled to Brussels with several other pupils and helped treat the injured after the battle of Waterloo. In 1817-18 he lived with Cooper, and in 1818 married Cooper's niece, Anne Cooper. Key became demonstrator of anatomy at St Thomas's Hospital, but resigned the post in February 1823, though he gave some of Sir Astley Cooper's surgical lectures for two sessions afterwards. In 1827 he edited the second edition of Cooper's work on hernia, which was little different from the first. 
Key had qualified at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1821, and in the autumn of the same year was appointed the first assistant surgeon to Guy's, succeeding to a full surgeoncy in January 1824. In this year he introduced the operation for lithotomy with the straight staff, using only a single knife all through. He also published 'A Short Treatise on the Section of the Prostate Gland in Lithotomy'. The success of his operations established his reputation as a surgeon. In 1825, on the separation of Guy's from St Thomas's, Key was appointed lecturer on surgery at Guy's, and his classes were for many years very popular. He resigned the lectureship in 1844. In 1845 he was one of the first elected fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons, and in the same year became a member of its council. In 1847 he was appointed surgeon to Prince Albert. Key died of cholera at his home in St Helen's Place, London, on 23 August 1849, leaving his wife and nine children. He was buried in the churchyard of St Dionis Backchurch. His son Sir Astley Cooper Key is separately noticed. 
Key was a great surgical operator and lecturer, his lectures being derived largely from the results of his own experience. He was not a well-read man nor a scientific pathologist, but he contributed fifteen papers to 'Guy's Hospital Reports' describing his varied surgical practice. In 1833 he published 'A memoir on the advantages and practicability of dividing the stricture in strangulated hernia on the outside of the sac'. He was one of the first surgeons in London to use ether as an anaesthetic and to ligature the subclavian artery successfully for the cure of an axillary aneurysm. His dexterity with the knife was remarkable: he was never known to make a mistake through inattention to details. In person he was of commanding presence, thin, and rather tall, with a slightly aquiline nose. In temperament he was brusque, short-tempered, and overbearing. 


@@@@@


doc= 15496


Key, Sir John, first baronet (1794-1858), lord mayor of London, the eldest son of John Key of Denmark Hill, Surrey, was born on 16 August 1794. He entered his father's business, that of a wholesale stationer, about 1818. The firm had been established in the last century, and then traded as Key Brothers & Son, at 30 Abchurch Lane, London. After several changes of address the business was finally removed to 97 and 103 Newgate Street. Key was elected alderman for the ward of Langbourn on 8 April 1823, and was sheriff of London and Middlesex in 1824. He served the office of master of the Stationers' Company in 1830, and in the same year was elected lord mayor. He was one of the leading supporters of the 'Reform Bill' in the City, and received the unusual honour of re-election to the mayoralty in the following year. 
During his second mayoralty, when William IV and Queen Adelaide had arranged to visit the City in order to open the new London Bridge, Key suffered some loss of popularity by advising the king and his ministers not to come to the City on account of the supposed unpopularity of the duke of Wellington. The visit passed off satisfactorily, and Key was created a baronet by William IV on 17 August 1831. He was elected member of parliament for the City in 1832 but retired in August 1833. He supported the immediate abolition of slavery, the introduction of the ballot and triennial parliaments, and the repeal of the corn laws. He removed in 1851 from Langbourn to the ward of Bridge Without, which he represented until 1853. In that year he was elected chamberlain of London after a poll, his opponent being Benjamin Scott, who afterwards succeeded him in that office. 
On 17 August 1814 Key married Charlotte, daughter of Francis Green of Dorking, Surrey; they had two sons and three daughters. He died at Streatham, London, on 14 July 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 15497


Key, Thomas Hewitt (1799-1875), Latin scholar, was born in Southwark on 20 March 1799. He was the youngest son of the physician Thomas Key, a member of an old Staffordshire family, and his second wife, Mary Lux Barry; the surgeon Charles Aston Key (1793-1849) was his half-brother. Thomas was educated at Buntingford grammar school, Hertfordshire, under the headmaster Samuel Dewe; he recalled that Latin and arithmetic were both well taught. In October 1817 he entered St John's College, Cambridge, and was elected scholar; in the spring of 1819 he migrated to Trinity College, where he also gained a scholarship. After graduating in 1821 (nineteenth wrangler) he hoped to enter the bar, but adhered to his father's wishes by studying medicine in Cambridge and at Guy's Hospital in London (1821-4). 
On 26 September 1824 Key married Sarah Troward (died 1884), daughter of the solicitor for the prosecution in the trial of Warren Hastings. In the same year, in Cambridge, he met Francis W. Gilmer, who had come to England to select founding professors for Jefferson's new University of Virginia. Key accepted the chair of pure mathematics as from 1 April 1825; he resigned in the autumn of 1827, and returned to England. The reason given related to the Virginian climate, but the difficulty of controlling sometimes unruly students may also have been a factor. On 18 July 1828 Key was appointed professor of Roman language, literature, and antiquities in the new London University (in 1836 renamed University College, London). He was recommended by his friend and Cambridge contemporary George Long, who held the chair of Greek, and whose Latin and Greek classes Key had taught at Virginia in 1825 during Long's absence in England. In 1832, jointly with his Cambridge contemporary Henry Malden, the professor of Greek, Key became headmaster of the secondary school which formed part of the university. In 1842 he resigned his chair and became sole headmaster of the school, and retained the post until his death in 1875. His own teaching included both Latin and geography. 
The London University School formed an integral part of the university and was housed in its premises. After its foundation in 1830 it had been run by a clerical headmaster: neither he nor his successor lasted long, and the school was near collapse when Key and Malden offered to bear the financial risk themselves. The refounded school of 1832 reflected the ideals of its parent body's founders in being unlike a conventional public school of the period. It had no chapel or religious instruction, neither playing fields nor corporal punishment; all subjects were optional; Latin and Greek verse composition was not taught, but natural science was part of the curriculum. The school (in 1838 renamed University College School) flourished during Key's reign, and grew to accommodate very large numbers: from 249 in 1833 to 623 at Key's death. 
On his appointment as sole headmaster Key was given the title of professor of comparative grammar, to which no salary was attached. This title, conferred at his own request, reflected a major interest of Key's. He had worked on Latin etymology while in Virginia, and in 1830 had been one of the founding members of a philological society set up in the London University, to whose meetings he contributed several papers. (The society was refounded in 1842 as the Philological Society of London.) In 1829 he had attended the lectures of his colleague Friedrich Rosen, professor of oriental languages, and from them took the characteristic Sanskrit mode of analysis of words according to their stems ('crude forms'). Rosen's influence can be seen in Key's review of Zumpt's 'Latin Grammar' ('Quarterly Journal of Education', January 1831); he expounded the 'crude-form' system in two articles in the 'English Journal of Education' (1850-51). Key's 'Latin Grammar on the System of Crude Forms' was first published in 1846; later editions appeared in 1858 and 1862. The book was, however, little adopted outside Key's own school, despite the advocacy of his pupil and colleague John Robson, later secretary to the College of Preceptors. Later in the 1840s Key began a Latin dictionary organized on the same principle. Planned as a short book, it turned into a much larger project. Progress was slow (by August 1852 the letter C had been reached), and in 1856 Key abandoned crude forms as an organizing principle. In 1865 he engaged the immigrant German classical scholar Wilhelm Wagner to work with him on the project. Wagner negotiated a contract on equal terms, but soon decided that Key wanted an assistant rather than a partner and gave up the task. (Wagner, a man of independent mind and unafraid to speak it, had already ruined his career chances in Germany by public criticism of his teacher and academic patron Friedrich Ritschl.) After Key's death the dictionary, still nowhere near completed, was prepared for publication by his pupil James Reid ('A Latin Dictionary', 1888). This was an act of misjudged devotion: the book was severely handled by reviewers. 
Key's Latin grammar reflects his wide reading in the language, and particularly his knowledge of Plautus and Terence, authors little studied in England at that time. As a comparative philologist he was, like many of his contemporaries, enthusiastic but uncontrolled: his was the type exemplified by George Eliot's Mr Casaubon and his search for the 'Key to all mythologies'. Key was, for example, willing to argue that 'bad' and 'better' came from the same root. At the meetings of the Philological Society, of which he was president for several years, he became something of an embarrassment: he gave over sixty papers to the society, many advancing extravagant etymologies. Key contributed articles on language to the 'Penny Magazine' (1833-42) of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (SDUK). In 1844 the republication of these articles in a single volume led to a controversy with J. W. Donaldson, author of 'The New Cratylus' (1839) and 'Varronianus' (1844), who charged him with plagiarism. This developed into a three-cornered battle with George Long, Key's colleague and Donaldson's teacher. The polemical pamphlets which ensued were subsequently collected and published by Key with an introduction ('The Controversy about the Varronianus', 1845). 
A number of campaigns claimed Key's attention and support. He was among the founders of the London Library, and became a member of its committee. He was also active in the recruitment campaigns of the late 1850s amid the perceived threat of an invasion from France. For the SDUK, on whose committee he served, he wrote not only on language but also on ancient geography, and provided maps for its atlas. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1860. 
Key died of bronchitis at his home, 21 Westbourne Terrace, Paddington, London, on 29 November 1875, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. He was survived by his widow and six of their seven children. Key's career had included chairs in three different subjects as well as his headmastership. To some of his pupils he remained an exemplary figure: tall, impressive, and genial -- the Red Queen to the White Queen of his shy colleague Henry Malden. His pupil John Hicks recalled that 'his presence [was] commanding, his voice sonorous' (Hicks, 14). Less than exemplary, however, was his reluctance to acknowledge his intellectual debts to Friedrich Rosen, and to give credit to his collaborator Wilhelm Wagner. A marble bust by Thomas Woolner was presented to University College by Key's pupils and friends, but has since disappeared. 


@@@@@


doc= 15498


Keyes, Roger (d. 1477), college head, was admitted to All Souls College, Oxford, as a legist in 1438 from Exeter diocese, and proceeded to the degree of BCnL. As warden from 1443 to 1445, in succession to the founding warden, Richard Andrewes, he was principally concerned with the building of the college, founded by Archbishop Henry Chichele in 1437, as Andrewes had been with concluding the legal arrangements to secure the college's endowments. Keyes's architectural involvement had begun earlier, in September 1441, when he succeeded the clerk John Druell as surveyor of the building works. In that post he was responsible for managing the workmen, overseeing the purchase of materials, co-ordinating work in the different building sites, and collecting and disbursing the necessary sums from Chichele's financial agents, to whom he had also to render accounts. Keyes accounted for the last quarter of 1441, through the following year, until December 1443. There is no reason to suppose that he would have had any particular say in the design of the college, although he has been described as its 'architect'. 
On 6 March 1454 Keyes was appointed rector of St Dunstan-in-the-East, London, and afterwards became also a canon of St Paul's, a canon of Salisbury, archdeacon of Barnstaple, and, by 1456, a canon and prebendary of Exeter. He was also appointed precentor of Exeter, a post he held until his death, and from September 1455 until April 1456 he was one of the keepers of the spiritualities of that see 'sede vacante'. 
In 1448 Keyes was appointed by Henry VI supervisor of the building of Eton College. For this he received a salary of $50 a year. In 1452 he was appointed chaplain to the king, and for his service in the building of Eton was granted in the same year two stags annually from Dartmoor. In 1454 he and his brother Thomas received a grant of arms and patent of nobility. Keyes died on 11 November 1477 at Exeter and was buried there. He gave books both to All Souls College and to Exeter College (of which he had been appointed visitor in November 1442), and to All Souls vestments and vessels for use at the principal altar in the chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 15499


Keyl, Frederick William (1823-1871), animal painter, was born at Frankfurt am Main on 17 September 1823, son of a wine merchant, Friedrich Wilhelm Christian Keyl ('c'.1778-1869), and his wife, Henrietta Steinhauser ('b'. 'c'.1791). He grew up with a love of hunting and wildlife, which was later reflected in his art. He studied at the Stadelsches Kunstinstitut at Frankfurt, under Jacob Becker. In May 1846 Keyl left Frankfurt to spend three months in England, before visiting Brussels where he carried out some commissions, studied with the landscape and animal painter Eugene Verboeckhoven, and met Thomas Jones and Louis Gallait. In April 1847 Keyl returned to England, where he spent the rest of his life; he was naturalized in March 1858. 
At the Royal Academy in 1847 Keyl exhibited 'Fidelity' (probably painted in Brussels) and, up to 1872, he showed forty-two pictures there, and, from 1850, thirty-four works at the British Institution. Keyl carried out commissions for patrons around the country, including such groups as 'Edward and Dora Studd at Tedworth' (1861; ex Sothebys, 18 November 1992), but he seems to have been of a sensitive and nervous disposition, and averse to exhibiting his pictures. In the 1860s he was deeply upset when some of his paintings were rejected by the Royal Academy. 
Keyl became the only pupil of Edwin Landseer, and through his introduction the German artist was received at Buckingham Palace, armed with a portfolio of animal studies which the queen liked. Landseer was delighted that some of the royal commissions for animal paintings could be carried out by Keyl: from 1847 the younger artist painted twenty-six oils for Queen Victoria (fifteen of which remain in the Royal Collection) and fifty-four watercolours and sketches. He was also employed to paint photographs, for instance, of the Sardinian ponies given to the queen by King Victor Emmanuel in 1855. His most prestigious commission was to paint Lootie, the Pekinese lion dog, but he also portrayed many other dogs, cows, and the queen's highland pony, Brechin. Despite the extensive patronage of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, Keyl received no wide recognition and few of his oils or watercolours are in public galleries. He also undertook book illustrations, drawings of animals for wood-engravings, plates for the 'Illustrated London News', and illustrations for the cover of the magazine 'Chatterbox'. 
Keyl's many friends in London included Francis Grant, Thomas Landseer, Ernst August Becker, and Prince Albert's riding-master, Wilhelm Meister. He taught drawing to Sara Constance Woodin (1830-1892), a niece of C. R. Leslie, whom he married on 25 August 1852 and with whom he had nine children, three of whom died in infancy. The family lived in St John's Wood. Keyl was paid 3 guineas a day for his work for the queen, but was, for some years in England, still financially dependent on his father. In 1865, apparently on the verge of a breakdown, the artist stayed at Reigate with his friend and patron James Nicolson. On 5 December 1871, at his home at 67 Carlton Hill, St John's Wood, Keyl died of congestion of the lungs, probably consumption, from which he had suffered all his life; his niece wrote from Frankfurt to her cousin, 'He deserves to rest for his whole life consisted of work, toil, and sacrifice from love for his family' (Weber, 109). He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 15500


Keymer, John (fl. 1584-1622), vintner and writer on commerce, is first heard of as a vintner in Cambridge. In 1583 Queen Elizabeth had granted Sir Walter Ralegh the farm of wines, each retailer to pay him $1 annually for a licence, and Keymer was Ralegh's nominee for the town of Cambridge. This immediately brought him into conflict with the university, ancient holder of the rights to sell wine in the town. In June 1584 the vice-chancellor and the heads of colleges wrote to Lord Burghley and to the earl of Leicester seeking to influence Ralegh, while members of the university wreaked havoc on Keymer's shop, tearing down his sign and assaulting his wife. When Keymer persisted in his trade he was prosecuted in the vice-chancellor's court and imprisoned in February 1585. He was released in December 1586 and ordered to desist from selling wine in or around Cambridge, after which no more was heard of him in that respect. 
It seems that Keymer then travelled in Europe, possibly on behalf of Robert Cecil, for in 1598 he wrote to Cecil claiming that among other services he had proposed various actions against the Spaniard in Flanders and at sea. In 1601 he addressed to Queen Elizabeth a pamphlet 'Observations on Dutch fishing', arguing that there was more wealth raised from herrings and other fish in her seas than the king of Spain had from the Indies in four seas, and that many persons in her kingdom were dependent on fishing; accompanying this tract among Cecil's papers is a note that Keymer had 'spent many yeares... in most paynefull and dangerous travell' ('Salisbury MSS', 8.275). 'Observations on Dutch fishing' was translated into German and published in 1666, and was reissued in England in collections published in 1707 and 1751. About 1605 Keymer presented James I with similar observations on the Dutch fishing industry, which, with its associated trades of shipbuilding, cooperage, and salt making, was seen to be prospering on the back of the herring taken in British waters, which were salted and exported into Europe. The expansion of the Dutch fishery was remarked on by many writers on commerce, some of whom, like Keymer, advocated free trade as a means to increase employment and prosperity among Britain's fishing communities. 
Keymer was corresponding with Sir Dudley Carleton in 1619 and on 17 October 1622 he informed Buckingham that he had presented the king with a proposal that would benefit trade and increase revenue. On 20 December 1622 a commission that included Prince Charles, John Williams, bishop of Lincoln, and Buckingham gathered 'to hear the propositions of John Keymer, and consider whether they will tend to the good of the King and the Commonwealth, as is pretended' ('CSP dom.', '1619-23', 469). Nothing further seems to have been done in this matter. The original manuscript of this proposal, signed by Keymer and dated 1620, is in the Public Record Office, but it was not recognized until the twentieth century; other signed copies survive elsewhere. The treatise was published anonymously in 1653 as 'Sir Walter Ralegh's observations touching trade and commerce with the Hollander and other nations as it was presented to King James, wherein is proved that our sea and land commodities serve to inrich and strengthen other countries against our owne'. This anonymity and the existence of a manuscript copy among Ralegh's own papers led to the supposition that Ralegh was the author. A third discourse by Keymer on trades and fishing is among the De La Warr papers. The circumstances of Keymer's death remain obscure. 


@@@@@


doc= 15501


Keynes, George (1628-1658), Jesuit, was born in Somerset, the son of Edward Keynes of Compton Pauncefoot and his wife, Anne Brett, both of old Roman Catholic families resident in Somerset. He studied humanities at the English College, St Omer, between 1644 and 1647 before travelling to Rome. He was admitted to the English College at Rome on 27 October 1647, and entered the Society of Jesus in Rome on 2 January 1649. He was sent to England in 1650 and was ordained in 1654 or 1655. He then set sail for the China mission but died either at sea or at the Philippines on 15 October 1658. He may have been the translator of the second, much enlarged, edition of 'The Roman Martyrology' printed at St Omer in 1667. 


@@@@@


doc= 15502


Keynes, John (1624-1697), Jesuit and religious controversialist, was born at Compton Pauncefoot, Somerset, son of Edward Keynes and Anne Brett. The Keynes family belonged to the Catholic gentry and the name Keynes occurs frequently in accounts of seventeenth-century members of the Society of Jesus. In line with the family tradition John Keynes was sent to the Jesuit school at St Omer. In 1642 he went to St Alban's, the English College at Valladolid, with the intention of becoming a priest. Although he had taken the usual vow to return to England after the completion of his studies in order to work on the mission, the registers at Valladolid state that he was released from his vow and joined the Spanish province of the Society of Jesus. In July 1645 he entered the noviciate at Villagarcia. In the following years he went through the various stages of higher Jesuit studies which he completed by being professed of the four vows on 15 August 1662. Meanwhile he had become a teacher. In 1660 he was professor of theology at the Jesuit College of St Ambrose's in Valladolid, and later taught philosophy and theology at Compostela, Salamanca, and Pamplona. At the end of the 1660s he decided to transfer to the English Jesuit province. He became prefect of studies at the Jesuit college at Liege and in 1670 was at St Omer, where, according to Southwell, he became seriously ill when he attended to the spiritual needs of English and Irish Catholic soldiers during a plague epidemic. 
Keynes was sent to England in order to recover but was soon engaged in a theological controversy with the Anglican theologian Edward Stillingfleet. Stillingfleet's 'Discourse Concerning the Idolatry in the Church of Rome' (1671) provoked a number of replies from Catholic writers, but Keynes was Stillingfleet's most persistent opponent. His contributions to the debate were two pamphlets, 'Doctor Stillingfleet Against Doctor Stillingfleet' (London, 1671), under the pseudonym John Williams, and 'Dr Stillingfleet's Principles of Protestancy' (London?, 1673), and a full-length book, 'Dr Stillingfleet Still Against Dr Stillingfleet' (Paris?, 1675), under the pseudonym J. W. Although there is some confusion about Keynes's authorship of these works, the testimony of Keynes's contemporary Southwell seems decisive (Ribadeneira, 466). Keynes's basic approach as a controversialist is captured in the title of his more general work, 'A rational, compendious way to convince, without any dispute, all persons whatsoever, dissenting from the true religion' (London, 1674; Latin translation, 1684; French, 1688). 
In 1672 Keynes became rector of the London district of the English Jesuits and seven years later his name figures prominently on Titus Oates's lists of accomplices in the Popish Plot (Keynes's uncle, the Jesuit Alexander Keynes, was also named). John Keynes managed to escape to the continent in March 1679 and was appointed rector of the college at Liege in January 1680. During his time as rector he wrote another controversial work answering Bishop William Lloyd's 'Papists No Catholics' (1677) under the title 'No Catholic No Christian'. He was dissuaded from publishing this work by the Jesuit provincial John Warner (Holt, 'Letter book', 465). Together with Thomas Stapleton SJ he wrote 'Florus Anglo-Bavaricus' (Liege, 1685), an account of the college at Liege and of the Jesuit priests who suffered in the Popish Plot. The work was dedicated to the patron of the college, Maximilian, duke of Bavaria. In July 1684 he succeeded John Warner as provincial of the English Jesuits. In the following years he was in London, where he was responsible for the founding of the Catholic schools at the Savoy and Fenchurch Street. These schools, of which James II acted as a patron, provided free education for both Catholic and protestant children and proved to be very popular. Inevitably with the revolution in 1688 this surprisingly modern experiment came to an end and the schools were closed. Keynes returned to the continent, where he remained provincial until July 1689. He died eight years later, on 15 May 1697, at the Jesuit house at Watten, Southern Netherlands. 


@@@@@


doc= 15503


Keys, Lady Mary (1545?-1578), noblewoman, was probably born at Bradgate Hall, Leicestershire, the youngest of the three daughters of Henry Grey, duke of Suffolk (1517-1554), and Frances Grey, duchess of Suffolk (1517-1559), the daughter of Charles Brandon, first duke of Suffolk, and Henry VIII's younger sister Mary. On 21 May 1553 Mary was betrothed to her cousin Arthur, Lord Grey of Wilton, whose father was an ally of the duke of Northumberland. The attainder and execution of Suffolk in February 1554, however, ruined Mary's marital prospects. Not only was the match with Wilton set aside, but she also lost the prospect of a large inheritance. On her mother's death she co-inherited several baronies which gave her an income of $20 a year from estates in Warwickshire, Lincolnshire, and Nottinghamshire, but the remainder of Frances's property went to her second husband, Adrian Stokes, until his death. Lady Mary was made maid of honour to Elizabeth and received a pension of $80 a year from the queen. 
On 10 or 12 August 1565 Mary secretly married Thomas Keys 
(or Keyes; died 1571)
, the queen's sergeant porter. They were an ill-matched pair, for Mary was described as 'little, crook-backed and very ugly' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 468), while her husband was stout and about 6 feet 8 inches tall. He was also more than twice her age and a widower with six or seven children. Finally, he was a minor gentleman from Kent, while she was of royal descent. Her high ancestry made Mary's marriage (like that of her elder sister Lady Katherine Seymour, in 1560) a matter of close interest to the crown. By 19 August the marriage was discovered and the couple were closely interrogated. Keys was sent to the Fleet, while Mary was committed to the care of Mr William Hawtrey. For the next two years Mary stayed at his house, Chequers, in Buckinghamshire, from where she addressed letters to Cecil and Leicester, begging them to intercede with the queen to secure her pardon. Keys meanwhile prepared a petition offering to renounce his wife, but Bishop Grindal of London refused to annul the marriage and referred the matter to the court of arches. In August 1567 Mary was sent to live at the house of her stepgrandmother Katherine Willoughby, dowager duchess of Suffolk. She stayed there until June 1569, when she was removed to the house of Sir Thomas Gresham, who evidently disliked her presence. From 1570 onwards Gresham kept petitioning for her removal 'for the quyetness of my powre wiffe and my howsses' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/85, fol. 1). 
After several years Elizabeth's anger at the marriage was spent. Although she refused to allow the couple to cohabit, she allowed Keys to leave prison in 1568 and eventually to return to Kent, where he died in 1571. Mary asked permission to wear mourning clothes, and used her married name for the first time. In 1572 Elizabeth agreed that Mary was 'att free leberty' to live where she pleased, but Mary had nowhere to go. She complained that she was 'destetud of all friends' and had insufficient income to live independently (TNA: PRO, SP 12/85, fol. 216). She therefore stayed an unwanted guest with Gresham until she went to live with her stepfather in 1573. Some time afterwards she set up her own household in a house near Aldersgate, London, where she died on 20 April 1578. During the last year of her life she occasionally attended court and exchanged new year's gifts with the queen. 
Mary was probably buried in Westminster Abbey alongside her mother. In her will she left her possessions to friends and kinswomen. The lease of her house was to be sold for the benefit of her god-daughter Mary Merrick. An inventory of her books reveals an interest in theology. She possessed not only three bibles (including the Geneva 'Bible') and John Knox's 'Answer to a Great Number of Blasphemous Cavillations' (1560), but also works relating to the Admonition controversy of the early 1570s, concerning the government and further reformation of the Church of England. Less surprisingly, she also owned Foxe's book of martyrs. 


@@@@@


doc= 15504


Keys, Samuel (1771-1850), china painter, is of unknown parentage. He was one of the principal gilders and china painters in the old Derby china factory under William Duesbury the elder, to whom he was articled in 1795. Keys was an excellent workman, and much of the success of the china, especially the figures in the Dresden style, was due to his skill in decoration. On 3 August 1795 he married, at Dronfield, Derbyshire, Hannah Gratton, with whom he had three sons. He left Derby some years before the close of the factory and went to work under Minton at Stoke-on-Trent. Later he returned to Derby, where he died in 1850, in his eightieth year. Keys preserved his delicacy of execution to the last. He collected materials for the history of the Derby china factory, which form the foundation of subsequent accounts, notably that by William Chaffers in 'Marks and Monograms' (1863). 
Keys's three sons were all apprenticed at the Derby factory. 


@@@@@


doc= 15505


Keyse, Thomas (1721-1800), still-life painter and pleasure garden proprietor, was born in Gloucester. He may have been the Thomas Keyse who was baptized at St Mary-le-Crypt, Gloucester, on 30 April 1721, the son of Thomas Keyse and his wife, Mary. A self-taught artist, he was a member of the Free Society of Artists, exhibiting with them from 1761 to 1764 and again in 1773. He specialized in depictions of flowers and fruit, often signed in bold capitals. From 1765 to 1768 he was an occasional exhibitor at the Society of Artists, and he sent two pictures to the Royal Academy in 1799. In 1768 he obtained a premium from the Society of Arts for a new method of setting crayon drawings. 
In the late 1760s Keyse opened a tea-garden in Bermondsey, London, and 'c'.1770, a chalybeate spring was found, known as the Bermondsey Spa. Here, among other attractions, Keyse kept a permanent gallery of his own work, including, most notably, a life-size painting of a butcher's shop. Obtaining a music licence in the 1780s, he made the gardens into a resort like Vauxhall Gardens, open in the evening during the summer months, and provided fireworks and transparencies, including a set piece of the siege of Gibraltar which he constructed and designed himself. These gardens were also the location of the annual commemorative dinner of the Free Society of Artists. Keyse died at his gardens on 8 February 1800, in his seventy-ninth year. His obituarist noted that Keyse was 'remarkable for painting legs of mutton and rumps of beef in the true Dutch style' ('GM', 1st ser., 70/1, 1800, 284). The gardens remained open for about five years longer when they were built over, although their memory is preserved by the Spa Road, Bermondsey. 


@@@@@


doc= 15506


Keyworth, Thomas (1782-1852), Congregational minister, son of Thomas Keyworth, a bookseller of Nottingham, was born in that town. On going to London as a young man, he was converted from Unitarianism by the preaching of Dr Draper, and entered Cheshunt College to prepare himself for the Congregational ministry. Called in the first instance to Sleaford, Lincolnshire, he was afterwards minister successively at Runcorn, Wantage, Faversham, and Nottingham. He also occupied for short periods the pulpits of several London chapels. From 1842 to December 1851 he was in charge of a congregation at Aston Tirrold in Berkshire. He retired at the close of 1851, and died at 8 Hewlett Street, Cheltenham, on 7 November 1852. 
Keyworth was distinguished for his modesty and integrity. He was an active advocate of a scheme for garden allotments to the poor, and while in London was active in his support of missionary work. His knowledge of Hebrew is best exemplified by his 'Principia Hebraica' (1817, written in conjunction with David Jones), while other works, such as his 'Daily Expositor of the New Testament', illustrate the breadth of his learning. 


@@@@@


doc= 15507


Kiallmark, George (1781-1835), violinist and composer, was born in King's Lynn, Norfolk, the son of John Kiallmark, an officer in the Swedish navy, and his wife, Margaret (or Marggrit as it is written in the parish register) Meggitt, a Yorkshire heiress, who lived at Wakefield and was a relation of Sir Joseph Banks. His parents' marriage took place in St Nicholas's Chapel, Lynn, on 4 October 1775. Shortly after George's birth his father, who had run through his property, disappeared and soon died. His widow married her butler, a man named Pottle, and George was adopted by his mother's family. He began his education under the care of a Dr and Mrs Gardiner ('nee' Meggitt). From an early age he enjoyed music, and from 1796 to 1798 he studied with a German music teacher. 
For some time after 1798 Kiallmark maintained himself in London by teaching the violin and piano, and took violin lessons from F. H. Barthelemon and Paolo Spagnoletti, and studied composition with Von Esch and J. B. Logier. He held many important posts, was a member of all the principal concert and theatre orchestras, and leader of the music at Sadler's Wells. In 1803 he married Mary Carmichael, a cousin of the countess of Rothes, and settled in Islington. He then gave up performing and devoted himself to teaching the harp, violin, and piano, and to composition, entering into arrangements with Chappell and D'Almaine to supply them annually with a fixed number of compositions. His works for the piano included 'Introduction and Variations to 'Roy's Wife'', 'Introduction to 'Last Rose of Summer'', 'Variations on 'Home, Sweet Home'', and 'Les fleurs de printemps' in six books. He also wrote a number of songs, among them 'Maid of Athens'. Kiallmark died in Islington in March 1835, leaving a large family. 
His eldest son, 
When in Paris, Kiallmark became a close friend of Sigismond Thalberg, on whose style he based his own playing. He had a delicate touch, and was a superb performer of the works of Chopin. On hearing him play, Mendelssohn said it was 'a fine sketch of what piano playing should be, and what he will one day make it'. 
In 1842 Kiallmark opened an academy for the study of the piano at his home, 29 Percy Street, Tottenham Court Road. During his life he was associated with every great pianist, from Clementi to Rubinstein, and at the age of seventy-eight he studied the sonatas of Niels Gade and Rubinstein. At eighty he was still daily practising Clementi's 'Gradus'. He died on 13 December 1887 at 5 Pembridge Gardens, Bayswater, London, only a week after playing one of Thalberg's transcriptions with much of his old fire and brilliancy. He was a fine extempore player, but his compositions have not survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 15508


George Frederick Kiallmark (1804-1887), pianist, was born on 7 November 1804 at Camden Street, Islington. He was educated in Margate and began his musical career at the age of fourteen, helping his father with his teaching. He was later a pupil of Logier and taught his system. At the age of sixteen he went to Rouen and on to Paris to study with P.-J.-G. Zimmermann and Frederic Kalkbrenner. On his return to England in 1825 he became friendly with Clementi, on whose advice he had lessons from Ignaz Moscheles. In 1829 he married Emma Fripp Bryant, the eldest daughter of Dr Bryant of Edgware Road. He gave his first public concert at the King's Theatre in 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 15509


Kickham, Charles Joseph (1828-1882), Fenian leader, was born in early May 1828 at or near Cashel, co. Tipperary, the eldest of the eight children of John Kickham (died 1861), shopkeeper, of Mullinahone, co. Tipperary, and his wife, Anne Mahony (died 1848). Charles received his formal education in a local pay school. When he was thirteen an accidental explosion of powder from a hunting gun scarred his face and left him with impaired hearing and vision. The repeal campaign of the 1840s awoke his interest in national politics, while the early 'Nation' newspaper (founded 1842) won him over to the romantic nationalism of the Young Irelanders. He rang the chapel bell to summon support when William Smith O'Brien and his entourage arrived in Mullinahone on 25 July 1848 in the course of their fruitless attempt to foment a rising. 
When two curates in nearby Callan began the tenant protection movement in 1849, Kickham became an enthusiastic supporter. And when the independent opposition movement in which the tenant campaign had been absorbed was betrayed, as he saw it, by Sadleir and Keogh in 1852, Kickham had found reason to become permanently disillusioned with parliamentary politics. Admiration for John O'Mahony outweighed doubts about James Stephens when Kickham adhered to the Fenian organization in 1861. In December 1863 he moved to Dublin to join the editorial team of the Fenian weekly the 'Irish People'. Over the next twenty-two months he was a regular contributor of leading articles, and specialized in the rebuttal of clerical attacks on Fenianism. 
Following government suppression of the 'Irish People', Kickham was arrested on 11 November 1865. Subsequently convicted on a charge of treason felony and sentenced to fourteen years of penal servitude, he served in Pentonville, Portland, and Woking prisons until released in March 1869. On returning home he began the writing of 'Knocknagow, or, The Homes of Tipperary' (1873), his most celebrated work. For half a century and more this unwieldily composed evocation of rural life was to be one of the most popular books in Ireland. 
From about 1873 until his death Kickham was president of the supreme council of the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB). He advocated an intransigent 'purist' policy, opposing Fenian participation in the home-rule campaign and the land war. He died at the Blackrock, co. Dublin, family home of James O'Connor, journalist and IRB man, on 22 August 1882 and was buried in Mullinahone. 


@@@@@


doc= 15510


Kidd, James (1761-1834), Church of Scotland minister, born on 6 November 1761, was the youngest son of poor Presbyterian parents residing near Loughbrickland, co. Down. His father, William Kidd, died soon after his birth, and the family moved to Broughshane, co. Antrim. A friendly farmer sent James to a good classical school, and a Cameronian minister taught him Latin. Soon he was able to open a school of his own at Elginy, a neighbouring town. The school flourished and Kidd went to Belfast to study English. He next set up a school at Kildownie, 20 miles from Belfast. He stayed there for about four years, and married Jane (died 4 June 1829), second daughter of Robert Boyd, farmer, of Carnlea, near Ballymena. They had two sons and three daughters. 
Kidd and his wife emigrated to America in April 1784; he soon joined Little, a fellow countryman, in a school at Philadelphia, and next became usher to Pennsylvania College, where he also studied and worked as a proof-reader for the press. Working on Hebrew text encouraged him to learn the language; he bought a Hebrew 'Bible' and, with the help of a Portuguese Jew and by dint of attending the Jewish synagogue in Philadelphia, acquired some fluency in the language. From that time oriental languages became his favourite study. He returned to Britain and settled at Edinburgh, where he became a student at the university, read chemistry and anatomy, and joined the theological classes of the university, supporting himself by offering extra-collegiate classes in oriental languages. In the autumn of 1793 he was appointed professor of oriental languages in Marischal College, Aberdeen. He there completed his theological courses and obtained formal licence as a preacher from the presbytery of Aberdeen on 3 February 1796; he was appointed evening lecturer in Trinity Chapel in the Shiprow. On 18 June 1801 Kidd became minister of the prestigious Gilcomston Chapel of Ease in the suburbs of Aberdeen, where he preached for more than twenty-five years to one of the largest congregations in Scotland. He was at pains to secure variety and freshness in his preaching, constantly looking out for new illustrations and keeping up his student habit of rising at three o'clock every morning. In October 1818 the College of New Jersey conferred on him the honorary degree of DD. 
Kidd's powerful preaching and vigorous character overcame violent opposition, and ultimately gained for him an extraordinary popularity. His use of dialect to attract the poor was deplored by his brother ministers. It became an article of popular belief that no one who ever resisted 'the Doctor' had prospered. Stories of his courage, benevolence, and eccentricity were numerous. On the accession of George IV he prayed in public that he 'might be a better king than he had been a prince regent', and when the local authorities complained, asked, 'And where's the man that can't improve?' Kidd not only advocated vaccination from the pulpit, but employed a medical man to vaccinate his converts, and finally forced hundreds into his own house and vaccinated them himself. He is said to have given a stimulus to the study of Hebrew in the north of Scotland, but was not himself a very profound Hebraist. Kidd was a strenuous supporter of the Anti-Patronage Society, and eagerly advocated the popular election of ministers. He marshalled the forces that, after his death, supported the Disruption (1843) in Aberdeen. He was the author of many volumes of sermons and other works of theology, including 'An Essay on the Doctrine of the Trinity' (1813), 'A Dissertation on the Eternal Sonship of Christ' (1822, new edn by R. Candlish, 1872), and 'Rights and Liberties of the Church Vindicated Against Patronages' (1834). He also wrote the second part of the preface to 'Memoirs, Diary, and other Writings of Alexander Wood' (1818). Kidd died on 24 December 1834. 


@@@@@


doc= 15511


Kidd, John (1775-1851), physician, was born in St James's, Westminster, on 10 September 1775, one of three sons of John Kidd, captain of a merchant ship, the 'Swallow', and his wife, Beatrice, daughter of Samuel Burslem, vicar of Etwall, near Derby. After attending school at Bury St Edmunds, Kidd obtained a king's scholarship at Westminster School in London in 1789. His abilities both attracted the attention of the headmaster, Dr William Vincent, and earned him a place at Oxford upon the 'golden election': he matriculated at Christ Church on 30 May 1793. He graduated BA in 1797 (MA in 1800), and in the same year embarked upon a four-year course of study in medicine at Guy's Hospital, London, as a pupil of Sir Astley Cooper. In 1801 he returned to Oxford and graduated BM, and took up a lectureship in chemistry. He was to remain in Oxford for the rest of his life. 
Kidd's most enduring legacy was his contribution to science education. Appointed first Aldrichian professor of chemistry at Oxford in 1803, he took an active part in defining a role for the natural sciences at a time when they seemed to be further marginalized by the priorities of examination reforms. Convinced that the seventeenth-century 'dawn' of the sciences had returned to Oxford, he vehemently opposed critics who suggested otherwise. When the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' of 1817 suggested that Oxford was deficient in scientific studies, Kidd responded with 'An Answer to a Charge Against English Universities Contained in the Supplement to the Edinburgh Encyclopaedia' (1818). This included the 'syllabus of a course of lectures on chemistry' that he had published ten years earlier. Offering twenty-six to thirty lectures on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday evenings during the Michaelmas and Lent terms, Kidd asserted that his course in chemistry was one of the most comprehensive in the country. Nevertheless, throughout his career he argued for 'no more than an ancillary role for the physical and experimental sciences' (J. Kidd, 'An Answer to a Charge Against English Universities', 1818, 7-8): they were meant to complement divinity, classics, and mathematics within the rubric of a respectable education in the liberal arts. 
Kidd maintained this conciliatory approach to the sciences through an appeal to natural theology. Consequently, when he extended the scope of his chemistry lectures to include mineralogy and geology, he firmly yoked these subjects to theology and history by defining them as the explication of the antediluvian world. His 'Outlines of Mineralogy' (1809) and 'A Geological Essay on the Imperfect Evidence in Support of a Theory of the Earth' (1815) represented the seeds of an Oxford school of geology driven by diluvial theory. A founder member of the Geological Society of London (1807), Kidd lectured on mineralogy and geology to William Buckland, J. J. and W. B. Conybeare, Charles Daubeny, and W. J. Broderip, among others, in the Ashmolean Museum's 'subterranean classroom'. In addition he contributed numerous rocks and minerals to the museum's collections. 
On 13 January 1805 Kidd married Isabella, daughter of the Revd Sewington Savery of St Thomas's, Southwark. They had four 'droll little daughters something like' Kidd (Tuckwell, 61). They settled first in St Michael's Street, Oxford, and later moved to 37 St Giles'. For a brief interval around 1817, Kidd and his family also took up residence in the basement of the Ashmolean Museum. A captain of the Oxford Loyal Volunteers in 1803, Kidd soon became an active member of the community and of the university. He attained his DM on 20 January 1804 and was elected unanimously as physician to the Radcliffe Infirmary in 1808. In 1812 he donated 30 guineas towards the construction of the Radcliffe Lunatic Asylum; and he was present when the foundation stone was laid nine years later. Remembered as a physically small man, he was often spotted about the streets of Oxford wearing a spencer, a tail-less greatcoat. 'Dr Kidd... a man in all things straight-forward and anti-humbug, was the first Medical Doctor in Oxford who rejected the wig and large-brimmed hat, and never, I believe, carried a gold-headed stick' (Cox, 133). 
Enjoying a steady ascent within his chosen career, Kidd was elected Lee's reader of anatomy in 1816. His relatively frequent requests gained him some notoriety within the Lee Trust. At his behest the trustees bought the first two microscopes in the university; and in 1819 he acquired two Florentine wax models for his lectures in human and comparative anatomy. Admitted a candidate on 31 March 1817, he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of London on 16 March 1818. Upon the retirement of Sir Christopher Pegge, Kidd next became regius professor of medicine at the University of Oxford and resigned the Aldrichian professorship of chemistry. The Tomlin's praelectorship in anatomy, the Aldrichian professorship in anatomy and physiology, and the mastership of the Ewe Elm Hospital were all attached to the regius chair. This combination of appointments netted Kidd an annual income of $466 18's'. 10died 
Published as 'An introductory lecture to a course in comparative anatomy, illustrative of Paley's natural theology' (1824), Kidd's inaugural lecture as regius professor continued his campaign to locate science within a liberal education. Ostensibly responding to a request by Charles Lloyd, professor of divinity, Kidd sought to demonstrate that comparative anatomy could be subsumed within religious education. Much of this lecture was recycled when he was asked to be one of the eight authors of the 'Bridgewater Treatises on the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God as Manifested in the Creation' (1833-6). Regarded as perhaps the weakest, his contribution, 'On the Adaptation of External Nature to the Physical Condition of Man' (1833), was characterized as 'but a moderate thousand pounds' worth' ('The Spectator', 6, 1830, 360). Responding to the perceived threat of transmutationist theories Kidd sought to demonstrate the natural superiority of man to all other animals. He did not, however, provide a Paleyite, rational argument. 'Professing to address those only who believe in revealed as well as natural religion' (Kidd, 'On the Adaptation of External Nature', x), he preached to the converted. 
With the added pressures of his multiple appointments Kidd resigned as physician to the Radcliffe Infirmary on 8 March 1826. Nevertheless, he played a leading role in organizing the official response to the visitation of cholera in Oxford in 1832. In June of the same year he played a major role in the meeting at Oxford of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. The following month he attended the inaugural meeting of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association at the Worcester Royal Infirmary. In April 1834 Kidd gave evidence before the parliamentary select committee on medical education. The architect of a new statute for medical degrees at Oxford (passed in 1833), he was a notable proponent of medical reform. As his 'Observations on Medical Reform' (1841) and 'Further Observations on Medical Reform' (1842) demonstrated, however, he espoused a Burkean approach. 'Genuine Reform', he declared, 'is genuine 'Conservatism'' (Kidd, 'Observations on Medical Reform', 3). He suggested that Oxford and Cambridge should relinquish their licensing powers so that they could play an active part in any future national licensing body. Similarly he attempted to build bridges between the Oxford medical faculty and provincial general practitioners to ensure the university a role in the profession at large. He delivered this message as president of the third annual meeting of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association. Held at Oxford in July 1835, the meeting assembled in the Radcliffe Library to which Kidd had been appointed librarian in the previous year. In 1836 he added Harveian orator to his list of distinguished achievements. 
Kidd's reputation as a teacher, however, suffered a serious blow at the hands of Carl Gustav Carus, physician to the court of Saxony. In his 'England und Schottland im Jahre 1844' (1845; translated into English as 'The King of Saxony's Journey through England and Scotland in 1844' in 1846), Carus declared that Kidd had become as antiquated as the objects which surrounded him in his Vesalian anatomy theatre. Kidd resigned the Lee's readership in March 1845. By this time the novelty and vitality of his teaching was waning. But throughout the 1820s his comparative anatomy lectures had consistently attracted audiences of approximately thirty persons. Within the sciences his lectures were second only in popularity to those delivered by William Buckland. Although many of his publications were underpinned by his pedagogical commitment to natural theology, Kidd produced surprisingly secular scientific publications for non-university contexts. His Royal Society paper 'On the anatomy of the mole-cricket' (1825) was almost entirely shorn of any reference to natural theology. A largely descriptive morphological and physiological study of an insect, it represented an early British contribution to a specialist branch of entomology. In addition Kidd produced papers on saltpetre (1814) and naphthalene (1821) for the 'Philosophical Transactions', and a paper on the quantity of blood in animals for the 'Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' (1825). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 28 March 1822, and a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1835. 
Although he no longer taught actively in the University of Oxford after 1845, Kidd continued as regius professor of medicine and as Radcliffe librarian until his death. By the time of the royal commission of 1850, however, he had become much less optimistic about Oxford's ability to be an effective medical school. After a long period suffering from heart disease he died in the wake of several hours of an acute illness on 17 September 1851 at his home, 37 St Giles', Oxford, aged seventy-six. He was buried in St Giles' churchyard. He bequeathed his home to Christ Church as the official residence of Lee's reader of anatomy. 


@@@@@


doc= 15512


Kidd, Joseph Bartholomew (1808-1889), painter, was born in Edinburgh. Little is known of his family background and early life. He was a pupil of the landscape painter John Thomson of Duddingston, and on the foundation of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1826 he was elected as an associate, becoming a full academician in 1829. He exhibited seventy-five works at the academy between 1827 and 1836; he also showed two works in 1826 at the Institution for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts in Scotland and exhibited at the Carlisle Academy from 1826 to 1828. About 1836 he moved to London, later resigning his membership of the Royal Scottish Academy and establishing himself as a teacher of drawing in Greenwich. Kidd painted landscapes (often of his native scenery), genre, and marine subjects, and some of his works were engraved. He illustrated Sir Thomas Dick Lauder's 'The Miscellany of Natural History' (1833-4) and 'West Indian Scenery' (1838-40); some plates by Kidd in the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, appear to derive from the latter publication. Shortly before his death at his home, 24 Egerton Road, Greenwich, London, on 7 May 1889, he painted a portrait of Queen Victoria for the Royal Hospital schools in Greenwich. He was survived by at least one son. He is sometimes confused with his near contemporary, the painter William Kidd (1795/6-1863), and some sources mistakenly refer to him as John rather than Joseph. 


@@@@@


doc= 15513


Kidd, Samuel (1804-1843), missionary in Malacca and Chinese scholar, was born on 22 November 1804 at Welton, near Hull, and was educated at the village school in Welton. In 1818 he was sent to Hull, where his thoughts were directed towards a missionary career, and in 1820 he entered the London Missionary Society's training college at Gosport. In April 1824 he married Hannah, second daughter of William Irving of Hull. At the end of the same month he was sent by the London Missionary Society to Madras, and thence to the college at Malacca, where he arrived in November 1824. David Collie, the principal, taught him Chinese and he soon spoke Hokkien and Mandarin. In the course of 1826 he published several small tracts in Chinese, and in the year following he was appointed professor of Chinese at the college. On Collie's death in 1828 Kidd succeed him as principal. He became involved in a row between the East India Company and the 'Malacca Observer', which was printed on the college's press. 
Exhausted by this and by epileptic fits, to which he had become prone, Kidd returned to Britain in 1832 (his wife Hannah having returned for reasons of health in 1829). His health did not improve and in 1833 he was appointed pastor of a Congregational church at Manningtree in Essex. In 1837 he was appointed professor of Chinese at University College, London, at $60 p.a. for a term of five years. The chair, which was the first professorship of Chinese in Britain, had been founded in 1837 when University College accepted the gift of Robert Morrison's Chinese library, and Kidd was its first holder. He wrote a memoir of Robert Morrison in 1838, published his inaugural lecture (also in 1838) and 'China, or, Illustrations of the Philosophy, Government and Literature of the Chinese' (1841); he also catalogued the Chinese library of the Royal Asiatic Society. It was understood at the time of his nomination to his chair that his appointment would be renewed at the end of that term, and Kidd requested a further five-year term, pointing out that he suffered 'considerable personal expense' in holding the chair (College correspondence, 1843, UCL Archives). Renewal was not immediately granted, and it was while the matter was in debate that Kidd died suddenly on 12 June 1843, at his house in Camden Town, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 15514


Kidd, Thomas (1770-1850), classical scholar and schoolmaster, was the son of Thomas Kidd of Kidd, Yorkshire. He was educated at Giggleswick School under William Paley before being entered on 14 December 1789 as a sizar of Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took the degrees of BA (as fifth junior optime) in 1794 and MA in 1797. He was for some time second master of Merchant Taylors' School, and in 1818 was appointed headmaster of King's Lynn School; he next became master of Wymondham School, and lastly of Norwich School. He was ordained deacon in 1798, priest in 1799, and was instituted successively to: the rectory of St James Garlickhythe, London, in 1802; the rectory of Croxton, Cambridgeshire, in 1813; the vicarage of Eltisley, Cambridgeshire, in 1814; the vicarage of Bedingham, Norfolk, in 1831; and, for a second time, both the vicarage of Eltisley and the rectory of Croxton in 1835. In 1801 he married Miss Smith, of Hoxton Square, London. 
At Cambridge Kidd became acquainted with Richard Porson, who was considerably his senior, and his affection and reverence for him influenced his whole life. He had one of his sons christened Richard Bentley Porson. Though himself a genuine Greek scholar and steeped in Greek literature, he is chiefly remembered for editing the critical works of others. Thus he edited Ruhnken's minor works (1807), Dawes's 'Miscellanea critica' (1817), as well as the very valuable volume of Porson's 'Tracts and Miscellaneous Criticisms' (1815). He took especial interest in collecting lists of the works of several of the chief English and Dutch scholars. In his preface to 'Opuscula Ruhnkeniana' there is a complete list of Thomas Tyrwhitt's works, while his collation of Tyrwhitt's smaller pieces is in the Dyce collection which was bequeathed to the South Kensington (later the Victoria and Albert) Museum. In his review of Sluiter's 'Lectiones andocideae' in the 'British Critick' for October 1805 he catalogues Valckenaer's criticisms and classical editions. It was due to him that the collection of Richard Bentley's books, which had lain neglected at James Lackington's bookshop, was in 1807 rescued and obtained for the British Museum. Most of the printed books were annotated by Bentley, and Kidd also found several unfinished works in manuscript. At one time he contemplated an edition of Homer, and wrote a series of lengthy criticisms on the Grenville edition in the 'Critical Review' for 1803 and 1804. He contributed a variety of essays and reviews to several journals. His 'Imperfect outline of the life of R. P.' was prefixed to Porson's 'Tracts and Miscellaneous Criticisms'. His English style is sometimes confused, and always quaint. Despite his veneration of the scholars whose works he catalogued or edited, his own methods were disorganized and his learning ill-digested. One of his footnotes extends to twenty pages. In 1842 Lord Melbourne gave him a civil-list pension of $100 'in token of his services as a scholar and an instructor of youth for nearly half a century'. He died at Croxton, Cambridgeshire, on 27 August 1850, and was buried in Croxton churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 15515


Kidd, William (c.1645-1701), pirate and privateer, was a Scot, by tradition born in Greenock, Renfrewshire, into the family of a Church of Scotland minister; however, the names of his parents are not known and his date of birth is derived from his age, about fifty-six, when he died. He does not appear in the historical record until 1689 when he was a member of a pirate crew brought into service by Christopher Codrington, governor of the Leeward Islands, as privateers in his struggle against the French in the West Indies during the Williamite wars. Kidd was made captain of the 'Blessed William' and saw action on the island of Marie Galante and in the relief of St Martin. His men disliked such service and stole the ship, leaving for New York city, a known pirate haunt. They had also stolen Kidd's booty, worth $2000, so he determined to follow them -- in the event fruitlessly -- in a ship presented to him by Governor Codrington. 
Kidd arrived in New York in time to join the royal forces sent out to suppress the rebellion of Jacob Leisler. Siding with the forces reimposing authority both brought Kidd into favour with the new regime and into friendship with important politicians in the colony, especially his fellow Scot the merchant and landowner Robert Livingston. He decided to settle in New York, marrying, by licence dated 16 May 1691, the twice widowed Sarah Oort 
(formerly Cox, 'nee' Bradley; died 1744)
, who brought property from her prior marriages and with whom he had two daughters. Until 1695 Kidd remained in New York city, occasionally serving as a privateer while making friends among the merchants and politicians. Eventually he tired of this life and he and Livingston concocted a plot to take advantage of Kidd's special skills. Both men appeared in London in 1695 where Livingston approached Richard Coote, earl of Bellomont, the newly appointed governor of New York and Massachusetts Bay, with a plan. The scheme he presented was that Kidd would sail to the Indian Ocean, where pirates had been wreaking havoc. On arrival he planned to capture the pirates and their treasure and return to Massachusetts Bay or England, where the pirates would be tried, their treasure condemned, and the profits divided among the investors. To obtain the necessary documents and funding Bellomont approached his patrons the whig lords who formed the junto administration in London; after listening to the proposal and meeting Kidd they agreed to fund the scheme and obtain the necessary commissions. Kidd, Livingston, and Bellomont were the openly acknowledged investors and the hidden partners were the earls of Shrewsbury, Orford, and Romney and John Lord Somers. Kidd left England with a more powerful ship, the 'Adventure Galley', with commissions to hunt down pirates, attack French commerce, and keep the cargoes he captured free of interference by the owners, an exceptional combination of privileges made possible only through the intervention of his patrons. By April 1696 he had left London and was preparing to sail to New York to obtain more crewmen and to inform his family of his new venture. 
Once in New York Kidd recruited ninety men, many of whom were experienced pirates. They left on 6 September 1696 and arrived at Tulear, Madagascar, in January 1697. Given that Madagascar was the main base of the pirates in the Indian Ocean Kidd's actions to this point seem normal, but he quickly drew suspicion on his motives when he sailed to the Red Sea, where he attacked the pilgrim fleet. These ships were 'en route' for India loaded with cargo and pilgrims returning from Mecca. The most likely explanation for his action is that he may have believed that he could raid the fleet and sail away without leaving a trace and then return with his booty claiming it was seized from pirate ships. Much to his surprise the East India Company vessel 'The Sceptre' was sailing with the fleet and it aggressively defended the ships. Kidd then sailed for the west coast of India where he unsuccessfully attacked a number of trading vessels. The men, who were on a 'no prey, no pay' contract, were increasingly unhappy and tensions increased until during an altercation Kidd killed his gunner, William Moore, striking his head with a wooden bucket hooped with iron. After this Kidd's luck changed and he captured six ships, of which only two, carrying French passes, could be considered legitimate prey under his commission. Having done enough the 'Adventure Galley', by now in poor condition, sailed for the pirate base of Ste Marie, just off the coast of Madagascar. 
Once there, Kidd openly consorted with the pirates he had been sent out to capture. His ship sank in the harbour at Ste Marie and he proceeded home in one of his captured vessels, the 'Quedah Merchant'. Most of the original crew remained on the island to better their fortunes. Meanwhile the East India Company, punished by the Mughal government for the actions of the pirates, raised a campaign in England against the pirates and against Kidd in particular: so much so that by 1698 he was a marked man and orders were shortly sent to Bellomont to seize Kidd. 
Kidd's first landfall was the Danish island of St Thomas where he discovered that he was an outlaw and that his patrons were out of power. Prior to sailing to New York he stopped on Hispaniola, where he sold much of his cargo to merchants from Curacao and purchased a smaller ship, the 'San Antonio'. Moving toward New York he continued to offload crew and cargo when convenient and acquire intelligence about his status. When near New York he hovered off the coast, meeting his friends such as Livingston, who could provide him with little comfort. The key to his future was Bellomont, who was now in Boston. The two exchanged messages while Kidd disposed of valuables, leaving enough on board to tempt Bellomont to make a deal of some sort to secure his freedom. Bellomont listened to Kidd's entreaties but he could not in the end ignore royal orders; he had Kidd arrested and sent to England along with as much of his cargo and fortune as he could seize. 
In England Kidd was approached by the tories, who were now in power, to testify against his patrons the whig lords. Kidd refused to play their game, perhaps because he felt that only the whigs could save him now. However, the whigs, now facing charges of treason, were happy to let matters proceed against Kidd in order to get him out of the way. His trial conformed to contemporary practice in the high court of Admiralty which offered the defendant little protection. The one unusual feature was that the French passes he seized from two of the vessels he captured and which were returned to England with him could not be found for him to use as evidence. Not until the twentieth century were they discovered in the Public Record Office. Would they have saved him? No, he had undoubtedly committed piracy against other ships. Who would have kept them from him? Many had reasons to keep even this slender hope from him. Kidd was sentenced to death for piracy and for the murder of Moore, his gunner. He was hanged at execution dock, Wapping, on 23 May 1701. Two attempts were necessary, as the first time the rope split and had to be rapidly replaced. 
Kidd's treasure, said to be as much as $400,000, has led to many treasure hunts from Nova Scotia to the South China Sea. Kidd never captured that much: the manifests of his victims were sent to England and their value is nothing of this order. He had ample opportunity to transfer funds to his wife and Livingston while keeping enough to lure Bellomont and the whig lords into obtaining pardons for him. This money was kept by the government and after various levies it amounted to $6472, which in 1706 Queen Anne donated to the Royal Hospital for Seamen at Greenwich, to further its charitable purposes and the construction of the Old Royal Naval College. Kidd was survived by his wife, who remarried after his death, to become Sarah Rousby. 


@@@@@


doc= 15516


Kidd, William (1795/6-1863), painter, was born in Edinburgh. Of his parents, nothing is known. He was first apprenticed to the naive animal painter James Howe and exhibited his first painting 'aged 13' at the Associated Society of Artists, Edinburgh, in 1809. He was an enthusiastic admirer of the works of Alexander Carse and of Sir David Wilkie, and most of his subjects were domestic scenes from Scottish life, particularly in the manner of the latter. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1817 and at the British Institution in 1818, and was from that time a frequent contributor to both exhibitions as well as to the Society of British Artists. Kidd was very successful in depicting the pathos and humour of rustic life, and his pictures long maintained their popularity, particularly through the medium of engraving. In 1829 Kidd was elected an honorary member of the Royal Scottish Academy. Never able to manage his own affairs, Kidd fell at the end of his life into hopeless financial embarrassment, and was ultimately supported by his friends and a pension from the Royal Academy. He died in London on Christmas eve 1863. A version of his 1832 picture 'Indulging', now at the National Gallery of Scotland, shows Kidd at his finest, echoing both the psychological and the technical qualities of early work by Wilkie. A small panel, 'John Toole the Actor in a Character Part', in a private collection in Scotland, also reveals considerable charm and characterization. 


@@@@@


doc= 15517


Kidd, William (1803-1867), publisher and ornithologist, was born on 12 September 1803 in London, where he was baptized at St George, Hanover Square, on 9 November 1803, the son of William Kidd and his wife, Christian. He was apprenticed early in life to Baldwin, Craddock, and Joy, a firm of London booksellers. He afterwards entered business on his own account, and had shops successively in Chandos and Regent streets, London. He married on 3 July 1831 Mary Ann, 'nee' Millham (1801-1867). 
While at Chandos Street Kidd published a 'Guide to Gravesend', 'Popular Little Secrets', and other short essays written by himself. Between May and October 1835 he published twenty-four numbers of a weekly, 'London Journal', dealing with natural history; from 1852 to 1854 he brought out a similar monthly periodical called 'Kidd's Own Journal' (later reissued), and during 1863-4 published ten numbers of 'Essays and Sketches' on miscellaneous subjects. By that date he had sold his business, and devoted himself entirely to his favourite studies. He was always a keen student of nature, and possessed an astonishing gift of endearing himself to animals. In the later years of his life he lived in New Road, Hammersmith, and set up a fine aviary, which was burnt down and never rebuilt. 
Kidd was an independent and eccentric thinker, and talker on religious and social subjects, and delivered many lectures in various parts of the country, under titles such as 'Genial gossip', 'Fashion and its victims', 'The value of little things', and 'Happiness made comparatively easy' ('Liverpool Mercury', 8 March 1856). As a naturalist Kidd's chief works were: 'The Canary' (1854), 'The Aviary and its Occupants' (2 pts, 1856), and a number of small books on the goldfinch, the linnet, and other British song birds. He also wrote an introduction to Westcott's 'Autobiography of a Gossamer Spider' (1857) and, with F. Buckland, several papers in 'Birds and Bird Life' (1863), besides contributing papers on birds and related subjects to the 'Gardeners' Chronicle', and similar periodicals. Between 1854 and 1856 he published many pamphlets on ephemeral subjects, such as 'The Heart's Proper Element' (1854), 'The Strange Spirits of the Day' (1855), and 'The Charmed Ring' (1856). 
Kidd died at his home, 3 Talbot Villas, New Road, Hammersmith, London, on 7 January 1867, his wife surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15518


Kidder, Richard (bap. 1634, d. 1703), bishop of Bath and Wells, was born at East Grinstead, Sussex, where he was baptized on 9 February 1634, the eighth of nine children of William Kidder, an impoverished member of the lesser gentry, and his wife, Elsabeth (died 'c'.1648), remembered by her son as a woman of great puritan piety. 
After receiving a basic early education from a local gentlewoman Kidder went to the local grammar school where he was taught 'without reward' by a Dutchman, a royalist in Anglican orders, Reyner Herman from Nijmegen ('Life', 2). Kidder later claimed that he owed much to the education he had received from Herman in Latin, Greek, religious principles, and generosity to the poor. Though sufficiently prepared for entry to university, Kidder had insufficient means, and initially trained as an apothecary at Sevenoaks. Nevertheless friends raised money for him and he entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, as a sizar in June 1649. Here one of the fellows, Samuel Cradock, a noted presbyterian divine, taught him, encouraged him in the religious life, and supplied him with money to finish the course; Kidder later wrote, ''tis hardly possible that one man can owe to another more than I do to him' ('Life', 4). Kidder graduated BA in 1652, but, still without money, left the university, only to be elected a fellow at Emmanuel three years later. Several men who were fellow bishops with him in the 1690s, including John Tillotson, Thomas Tenison, and Simon Patrick, were then at Cambridge; one, James Gardiner, bishop of Lincoln from 1695 to 1705, was also at Emmanuel. Kidder proceeded MA in 1656. 
Despite his presbyterian ambience, and despite Cradock's profound influence, Kidder made a clear decision to reject presbyterian ordination and seek Anglican orders, despite the risk of personal disadvantage. In November 1658 Ralph Brownrigg, the deprived bishop of Exeter, ordained him both deacon and priest in one day at a private house in Bury St Edmunds. In 1659 Kidder was appointed to the college living of Stanground, Huntingdonshire. Despite his later protestations that as far as possible he used prayers agreeable to Anglicanism, he must also have conformed to the Westminster directory. Though he declared he had good orders and title, had never taken the covenant, and was 'entirely satisfied in episcopacy and with a liturgy' ('Life', 11) he refused to subscribe to the newly amended prayer book of 1662 until he had seen it. It did not appear until three weeks after the date required for his conformity, and he was deprived of his living. 
Nevertheless, Kidder stayed in the parish, attending the church and preaching in London and the countryside. Without a living and with a young family, following his marriage to his wife, Elisabeth, he was indigent. By 1664 he had conformed, and Arthur Capel, earl of Essex, appointed him to the rectory of Rayne, Essex. Whereas the people at Stanground were 'modest and teachable', here they were 'factious to the greatest degree... such despisers they were of the Common Prayer' ('Life' 14). In his sermons twice on each Sunday, later published in 'Convivium coeleste', he encouraged them to attend holy communion frequently. Afterwards he called those years the 'lost part of [his] life' (ibid.). Here he published 'A Young Man's Duty' (1671), so popular that by 1750 it had run to ten editions, and he contributed an appendix of Hebrew proverbs to a collection by his friend John Ray, the botanist (1670). The plague of 1665, bringing many deaths in the village, added to his troubles. Though his own house was infected and isolated and his wife, Elisabeth, smitten, his whole family, including her, survived, and yet all three of his children died soon afterwards from other causes. In 1674 William Sancroft, then dean of St Paul's, offered him the living of St Helen, Bishopsgate, with its huge church and large congregations of well-to-do people. Though he later recorded, 'I would rather have continued minister of St Helen's than gain an archbishopric' (ibid., 19), he served there only briefly. He refused to be instituted, partly for reasons of health, but mainly because, unlike in his other livings, many 'devout and regular' parishioners of puritan persuasion refused to kneel to receive communion, in breach of canon law. Kidder was unwilling to enforce this demand and thus 'send them to the Nonconformists' (Cassan, 2.123). 
In 1674 Kidder was appointed preacher at the Rolls, which gave him an income, and by the patronage of the Merchant Taylors' Company he was instituted to the small, impoverished parish of St Martin Outwich, next door to the lucrative St Helen's. Despite the poor St Martin's stipend he refused dispensation to hold it in plurality with his rectory at Rayne. This he now resigned. Consequently once his Rolls post unexpectedly ended after only four terms he was again in poverty. This, however, was partly relieved by his acting as tutor to Sir William Dawes, later archbishop of York, and George Harbin, the future nonjuror and friend of Thomas Ken, until they went to university. Kidder now joined London's exceptionally gifted clerical circle; the future archbishops Tillotson, Tenison, Wake, and Sharp were fellow incumbents. Many were part of the moderate group connected with Daniel Finch, later second earl of Nottingham. Their spirituality, scholarship, and pastoral care provided 'a luminous interlude', 'a small awakening' in the church (Rupp, 51). The intense spirituality of Kidder's friend Anthony Horneck had a powerful influence on him. It was in this period that gout first struck Kidder; it was to remain his unwelcome companion for life. So painful was it that he soon had to preach kneeling. In 1680 tragedy struck again; another three of his children, including two favourite sons already at Merchant Taylors' School, died, this time from smallpox, a blow which 'laid [Kidder] very low' (Cassan, 2.131). In the parish he catechized zealously to enable parishioners not just to learn but also to understand. He published a little catechism, held frequent communions, and spent much time visiting the poor. Though work was hard it was for him 'the most comfortable and easy part of my life' ('Life', 35). 
Kidder was now a popular preacher, and increasingly his sermons were printed. The governors of Christ's Hospital entrusted him with the task of examining its condition, his report revealing serious shortcomings. Furthermore, Heneage Finch, first earl of Nottingham, the lord chancellor, had presented him to a prebend of Norwich (1681), which alleviated his poverty. Yet in the 1680s he declined other income producing appointments, including a lectureship in Ipswich twice, a lucrative living in Kent offered by Archbishop Sancroft, and one in Barnes by John Tillotson, dean of St Paul's. Meanwhile, his writing continued, initially with works of pastoral concern, 'Charity Directed' (1676), 'Discourse on the Christian Sufferer Supported' (1680), and a second edition of 'Convivium coeleste' with prayers (1684). These were followed by 'A Demonstration of the Messias' (1684), a more academic work aimed at Jews and deists. He also participated in a translation into Latin of the works of John Lightfoot, the great Hebraist, which became 'a long and painful employment' ('Life', 37). 
In James II's reign Kidder entered the controversy provoked by the Catholicizing policies, preaching, for instance, against popery on several occasions before the mayor of London. When he perceived the papist tide seeming to threaten Norwich, Kidder was there working hard distributing his books and leaflets. His writings also reflect the time. In 1687 he contributed 'The Thirteenth Note, on the Confession of Adversaries' in a reply, with others, to Bellarmine's century-old fifteen notes of the true church. This he followed with 'A Second Dialogue between a New Catholic Convert and a Protestant' (1687). His 'Reflections on a French Testament of 1686' was published only in 1690 after the revolution. During the turbulent period after Archbishop Sancroft and six bishops had been imprisoned, tried for seditious libel, acquitted, then released, one of them, William Lloyd of St Asaph, stayed secretly with him for several weeks. 
In 1689, after the accession of William and Mary, Kidder was appointed royal chaplain. As part of Nottingham's group of moderate clergy, he was appointed to the commission set up by William III to review the liturgy and canons for the possible comprehension of dissenters. His particular role was to examine the translation of the 'Psalms'. His meticulous written analysis of the psalter, comparing the original Hebrew with the current version, displayed both his skill as a Hebraist and his natural scholarly qualities. Unfortunately the commission had no time to examine it and it bore no immediate fruit. Nevertheless preferment was once again on the horizon. Even so, again on health grounds he refused a prestigious and wealthy offer, this time of St Paul's, Covent Garden. In 1689, however, when Nottingham recommended him for the deanery of Peterborough, he immediately accepted. Installed in person he clearly found the role rewarding. He was in residence each summer, presiding at chapter meetings; he ordered an annual chapter inspection of the school, and kept good hospitality, living 'in very great peace with the prebendaries' ('Life', 60). In 1690 he was created DD at Cambridge by royal mandate. 
In the following year Tillotson, now archbishop of Canterbury, with considerable lack of sensitivity, recommended Kidder for the see of Peterborough in succession to his own bishop, Thomas White, who had been deprived as a nonjuror. Kidder bluntly refused, and further made it known that he would decline all others, especially Bath and Wells where Thomas Ken had been deprived. Meanwhile, however, William Beveridge had refused that see, and in a confusion of messages, Kidder found it offered to himself by royal command. After a few days' delay he accepted and was appointed, but soon regretted it. 'I should not have done it were it to do again. I did not consult my ease' ('Life', 63). He knew he had a hard act to follow, for the saintly Ken was popular in the diocese and turned out to be resentful of Kidder's intrusion. Tillotson consecrated Kidder as bishop in St Mary-le-Bow Church on 30 August 1691. He was enthroned in person at Wells in September, but returned to Westminster to take the oaths in the Lords on 31 October. 
Kidder entered his episcopate with the best of intentions. Despite his poor health he was stubbornly conscientious, rejected the quiet life, and, in common with other new bishops of the 1690s, set about the reform of the diocese. He returned to Wells in May 1692 for his first ordination, only to be so gout stricken that he had to be carried into the palace chapel. He recovered enough to start his primary visitation at Axbridge on 2 June, but in his charge he was characteristically brusque. He threatened suspension to clergy who failed to fulfil the marriage regulations; he further demanded an end to non-residence. 'An oath', he declared, 'is not to be trifled with' ('Charge', 28-31). By the end of his visitation his gout struck again, 'so violent that there was little hope of my life' ('Life', 65). In July he began his visitation of the cathedral and the college of vicars-choral, where he was immediately in conflict over non-residence. 
Kidder ordained regularly. After his first ordination at Trinity 1692 he conferred orders at least twice a year, usually at Trinity and Michaelmas, sometimes in Advent. All ordinations except one, at St Alfege, London, were held within the diocese, usually in the palace chapel, occasionally in the cathedral or at Bath. Twice, in 1692 and 1693, much to the cathedral chapter's disgust, he conferred Anglican orders 'extra tempora' (i.e. outside the traditional ember seasons), but after strict examination, on the talented former dissenters John Gardiner and Nicholas Malarre. If this appeared lax to some he was, however, ruthless with forged orders, even chasing culprits into northern dioceses. He carried out regular triennial visitations of the diocese and cathedral. On his one recorded confirmation tour (1693) in which he congratulated incumbents for conscientious preparation, there were crowds at Bridgwater. He later joyfully recorded, 'I thought I had never done in my whole life a better day's work; I am sure a more painful and wearisome day I never spent' ('Life', 82). 
Despite these positive aspects Kidder's episcopate is sadly remembered more for his running battles with the clergy, especially the cathedral chapter who were supporters of Ken. The Creightons were dominant. Robert (the elder) had been dean and then bishop. His son, also Robert, was precentor, and indeed the whole body was little more than the Creighton family's 'genteel mafiosi' (Rupp, 501). Kidder immediately set to work. 'Corruptions', he warned, 'do not come in all at once and 'tis time to put a stop to them when they are grown to the height that now they are' ('Life', 124). But in his honest, vigorous confrontation over chapter elections he misjudged the situation. The cathedral clergy, already hostile to him as Ken's usurper, were increasingly antagonized and unco-operative. 
Hence Kidder's ordination of the two former dissenters caused major convulsions. In one case two canons, Robert Creighton, the precentor, and Thomas Cheney, once Ken's chaplain, at first positively refused to assist, one initially threatening to leave the diocese rather than participate. Kidder was also at odds with Edwin Sandys, archdeacon of Wells, still one of Ken's close friends. Kidder even initially suspended him for not attending an ordination in 1697, a suspension Kidder had to lift on appeal. He had further trouble with other clergy, and also with laymen such as Harry Bridges, the Jacobite supporter of Ken. The Bridges affair ended in court at London Guildhall, where Kidder had to appear in person to wring an apology from him. Another antagonist was the local doctor, Claver Morris, who tried to court his daughter. Despite all this, as bishop Kidder continued to write, publishing 'A Commentary upon the Five Books of Moses' (1694), designed for families, the brief 'Life' (1697) of his friend Anthony Horneck the divine, and his 'Messias Part II' (1699). He was Boyle lecturer in 1693. A pamphlet 'On the Sins of Infirmity' went to the printers just before his death and was published posthumously (1704). 
Not a political bishop, Kidder nevertheless regularly attended the Lords until April 1695, after which, as gout took its hold, his attendances grew increasingly spasmodic. Nevertheless, when the attainder of the Jacobite Sir John Fenwick was debated in the Lords in December 1696 Kidder attended the house. Along with eight other prelates, but unlike Archbishop Tenison, he voted against the attainder, and in January he registered his official protest against the proceedings. He attended frequently in the first year of Anne's reign, 1702, but only occasionally in 1703. 
Since the late 1670s Kidder had been wracked by ill health. His gout, first appearing at St Martin's, gradually dominated his activities, especially as bishop. He was carried not only to his first ordination in 1692, but also to the Fenwick debates in the Lords in 1696. Increasingly from 1695 he had to winter in Wells, and in 1698 he was ill for twenty-five weeks. Yet he still continued to write in his clear meticulous hand helpful letters to friends outside the diocese. Despite complaints of mounting weakness in August 1702 it was not gout but the great storm of 26-7 November 1703 that killed him. That night Kidder and his wife, Elisabeth, were tragically crushed to death by a chimney stack collapsing through the roof of the bishop's palace. They were buried in Wells Cathedral on 14 December. His wife, with whom Kidder had spent most of his adult life, and who had survived both plague in 1665 and smallpox in 1680, remains a shadowy figure. Two daughters survived them, one of whom, Anne, through her will of 1728, paid for his monument in the cathedral. 
A noted Hebraist and 'Old Testament' scholar, vigorously publishing and preaching in the 1670s and 1680s, Kidder was also a fine, dedicated, and caring parish priest in Essex and London. He was also friendly with future nonjurors, including William Sancroft, Robert Nelson, and George Harbin. Once bishop, however, his fortune waned. Plagued by persistent ill health he had the misfortune of following Thomas Ken, the most saintly of the nonjurors, whose aura was still all pervasive. Indeed, living nearby, Ken was himself uncharacteristically bitter, dubbing Kidder 'latitudinarian traditour' and after Kidder's death accusing him of not 'keeping the flock within the fold' but even of encouraging them 'to stray' (Plumptre, 2.138). Furthermore, Ken's supporters permeated the diocese, none more intractable than the corrupt cathedral chapter and the archdeacon of Wells. Kidder himself was well aware of his sticky wicket. Taunted during Lords debates for not toeing the government line with 'Don't you know whose bread you are eating?' he retorted briskly, 'I eat no bread but poor Dr. Ken's' (Noble, 2.101n.). When in 1702 Queen Anne offered Kidder translation to Carlisle to facilitate Ken's return, Kidder readily agreed, only to find that Ken rejected the scheme. 
Despite this Kidder lacked the sensitivity, perhaps even the sense of humour, to cope with this unenviable situation. Even if he had been in good health he was perhaps temperamentally unsuited to any bishopric, let alone Ken's. Kidder's autobiographical work, verging on the paranoid in places, obsessively refers to the enemies ranged against him and wearily insists on the blamelessness of his own conduct. It is hard to conceive of either Ken or Kidder's successor, George Hooper, writing as he did. His earlier refusals of prestigious livings reveal perhaps that Kidder tended to shy away from heavier burdens, and that he may have been temperamentally unsuited for them. He clearly felt at ease with the Peterborough deanery with its quieter, more scholarly life. As intruder in Ken's see he faced an impossible situation, but his stubborn conscientiousness, his determination to root out corruption, and his confrontational style lacked the skilled diplomacy Hooper later successfully used to loosen the Creighton grip on the cathedral. Nonjurors might rejoice at Kidder's tragic death, but for him also it was perhaps a merciful release. 'A sad, scholarly man' (Rupp, 39), a tragic figure, having lost six children, dogged for years with agonizing ill health, now embattled and alienated in his diocese, he led a life that was far from happy. The traditional cry 'nolo episcopari' ('I do not wish to be made a bishop') was perhaps never more honestly and appropriately made. 


@@@@@


doc= 15519


Kidgell, John (bap. 1722, d. c.1780), Church of England clergyman and political writer, was baptized on 28 April 1722 at St Mary Woolnoth, London, the son of John Kidgell of St Mary Woolchurch. He was admitted to Winchester College in 1733, and matriculated at Hertford College, Oxford, on 21 March 1741, graduating BA in 1744 and MA in 1747. He was briefly a fellow of Hertford. 
Kidgell was ordained a priest, but paid little attention to his duties. He was chaplain to a fellow Wykehamist, William Douglas, third earl of March and from 1778 fourth duke of Queensberry (1725-1810), a man whose dissoluteness matched his own. He stayed in London with Lord March, living as a man about town. Horace Walpole describes him as a 'dainty, priggish parson, much in vogue among the old ladies for his gossiping and quaint sermons' (Walpole, 'Last Journals', 1.247). Preferment gradually accumulated. In 1756 he was assistant preacher to the bishop of Bangor, in December 1758 he became rector of Woolverston, Suffolk, and by 1761 he was morning preacher at the Berkeley Chapel, London. On 7 May 1762 he was instituted to the rectory of Godstone, Surrey (in the gift of John Garth, esquire, of Devizes, Wiltshire), and on 8 June following to that of Horne in the same county by Sir Kendrick Clayton. 
Kidgell's embroilment in the Wilkes affair wrecked his career in the Church of England. How far he acted on his own initiative and how far at March's behest remains hard to determine, for his chronic indebtedness had rendered him financially dependent on the peer, his principal patron. In June 1763 Kidgell obtained proofs of the notorious 'Essay on Woman' from one of Wilkes's printers (Michael Curry) and money changed hands. Kidgell insisted to the printers that his plan was merely to answer the 'Essay' by a series of letters in the press, but it was at this point that March stepped in, he having been in secret consultation with John Montagu, fourth earl of Sandwich, and probably with other members of the administration. Kidgell was ordered to 'endeavour to discover how much of the work was printed off, and to obtain if possible a copy thereof' (Guildhall Library, MS 214, vol. 2, fol. 104) so that the government could build a watertight case against Wilkes for obscene libel. Sandwich duly moved in the Lords that Wilkes be voted the author of the 'Essay', and Kidgell found himself damned as a sordid informer on all sides. 
Ignoring the advice of the Treasury solicitor, Philip Carteret Webb, Kidgell then attempted to justify his conduct (and that of the government) with 'A genuine and succinct narrative of a scandalous, obscene, and exceedingly profane libel, entitled 'An essay on woman', etc.' (1763). He told Richard Phelps that, in so doing, he had 'the approbation, directions, & corrections of the Earl of Sandwich' (NMM, SAN v/14 No. 73, 23 Dec 1763). This text, with its show of righteous indignation, ended any chance he had of securing the wealthy rectory of St James's, Piccadilly, through the good offices of Sandwich, who had swiftly and entirely disassociated himself from Kidgell. His pleas of innocence were received incredulously. Many pamphlets abused and condemned him as a hypocrite priest and prostitute writer, who had publicly offended 'the cause of Decency' by his conduct ('An Expostulatory Letter', 9). Walpole, who called him 'that dirty dog' (to Hertford, 22 Jan 1764, Walpole, 'Corr.', 38.294), noted how 'He has been pelted in every newspaper, while the work itself ['An Essay on Woman'] was forgot' (to Sir Horace Mann, 8 Jan 1764, Walpole, 'Corr.', 22.195). John Almon put the case succinctly: 'Can the people of England behold such an act, and however they may detest the 'Essay on Woman', not detest and abhor the means by which it was procured?' (Almon, 14). 
Kidgell fled the country, carrying with him the funds of the Godstone turnpike (which he tried subsequently to explain) some time after being publicly abused during the trial of Wilkes for seditious libel. He lived initially in the United Provinces, and kept a school in Utrecht to support his family. Between 1766 and 1768 he was writing regularly to Lord March, adamant that he had crossed the channel to avoid the earl's reputation being ruined and hinting strongly at court action unless March paid off his debts. Kidgell was racked by guilt and anger, talked of a forgery introduced into Wilkes's papers, and even wanted to obtain forgiveness from Wilkes personally. March would not be browbeaten and Kidgell was obliged to entreat his pardon for any intemperate words, and his 'making intercession for the most contemptible of men' (6 May 1768, Guildhall Library, MS 214, vol. 3, fol. 43). Meanwhile, in June 1766 the churchwarden of Horne, spurred on by Sir Kendrick Clayton, unsuccessfully instituted proceedings against him in the court of arches for non-residence. Kidgell died 'c'.1780 in poverty, his successor as incumbent at Godstone being presented in May that year. His letter of 3 August 1766 to March explains that he is married and has dependants but nothing more is known about his wife and family. 
Kidgell published (anonymously) 'The Card' (2 vols., 1755), a series of tales partly in epistolary form, and 'Original Fables' (1763), in English and French, both for private circulation. In the 'Oxford Sausage' (1764, 119-24) there are some amusing lines by him called 'Table Talk', written in 1745. But Kidgell will always be remembered for his conduct over Wilkes and 'An Essay on Woman'. Charles Churchill placed him high among the infamous in his gallery of satiric portraits, assailing Kidgell with deep irony in 'The Author' (391-8): '
Are these the arts which policy supplies? 

Are these the steps by which grave churchmen rise? 

Forbid it, Heaven; or, should it turn out so, 

Let me and mine continue mean and low. 

Such be their arts whom interest controls; 

Kidgell and I have free and modest souls: 

We scorn preferment which is gain'd by sin, 

And will, though poor without, have peace within. 
(Churchill, 'Poems')' Kidgell was essentially a weak man who was, nevertheless, honest enough to admit that want of 'experience and discretion' (to March, n.d., Guildhall Library, MS 214, vol. 3, fol. 11) had been his undoing. 


@@@@@


doc= 15520


Kidley, William (b. 1605), poet, was the son of John Kidley of Dartmouth, Devon, and Margery Archer. He matriculated at Oxford, where he gave his name as Kidley, alias Pointer; he entered Exeter College on 16 July 1624, and graduated BA on 12 November 1627. In 1624 he composed, in his leisure, 'Kidley's Hawkins, or, A poetical relation of the voyage of Sir Richard Hawkins, knight, unto Mare del Zur' and 'History of the year 1588, with other historical passages of these tymes'. Hawkins's account of his pioneering voyage to the south sea in 1593 had been published in 1622. Kidley's panegyrical poem, which is now among the manuscripts at the British Library, has not been printed. It was designed to be in eight books but only six were completed. The text was classically inspired and several marginal notes reveal slight biographical information, which confirms Dartmouth as Kidley's birthplace and refers both to earlier poetic endeavours and to his intended return to Exeter College in 1639. 


@@@@@


doc= 15521


Kiffin, William (1616-1701), Particular Baptist minister and author, was born in London of unknown parents, both of whom died in 1625 during an outbreak of plague. His surname is Welsh, an indication that his ancestors originally hailed from Wales. David Honeyman claims the family came from Conwy and that Kiffin was 'certainly' a cousin of the Quaker Ellis Hookes (Honeyman, 46). Four years after the death of his parents Kiffin was apprenticed, probably to a glover. There seems to be no truth in the common assertion that he served as an apprentice to John Lilburne, later an agitator for radical Leveller concerns, though Kiffin and Lilburne were friends in later years. In 1631, depressed about his future prospects as a glover, Kiffin decided to run away from his master. He happened by St Antholin's Church, where the puritan Thomas Foxley was preaching that day on 'the duty of servants to masters'. Seeing a crowd of people going into the church, Kiffin decided to join them and became convinced that Foxley's sermon was intentionally aimed at him. He decided to go back to his master with the resolve to hear regularly 'some of them they called Puritan Ministers' (Orme, 3). 
Over the next couple of years Kiffin heard a number of well-known preachers of the day, including John Davenport, Lewis Du Moulin, and the Arminian puritan John Goodwin. Their preaching not only gave him a firm grounding in the central themes of puritan theology and spirituality, but also helped him realize that 'God has not tied himself to any one way of converting a sinner' (Orme, 11). This later freed him from being tied to one particular method of evangelistic preaching. 
Towards the end of 1631 Kiffin joined a small group of fellow apprentices, who were in the habit of meeting together in the early morning for prayer, scripture reading, and mutual encouragement. This experience helped in the preparation of Kiffin as the theological and spiritual guide of a Particular Baptist conventicle. Like most of the early Particular Baptist leaders, Kiffin had no formal theological education. He became skilled in the knowledge and use of the scriptures as he first listened regularly to various preachers, then shared with others its impact on his life, and finally preached himself. In 1638 he married Hanna (1615-1682), with whom he had a number of children. 
By 1638 Kiffin had come to reject Anglican arguments for the idea of a state church and had joined what he termed an 'Independent congregation' in London (Orme, 14). When Kiffin joined this congregation, later known as Devonshire Square Baptist Church, it was without a pastor. At one time it had been led by a Samuel Eaton, who was now in prison, where he died the following year. Kiffin accepted an invitation to preach to the congregation, and at some point over the course of the next three or four years was chosen as their pastor. The preface of the second edition of John Lilburne's 'The Christian Mans Triall' (1641), signed W. K., has been attributed to Kiffin. 
During this entire period Kiffin continued to study the 'Bible' for direction with regard to the constitution and form of a local church. When, over forty years later, he recalled this period of his life, what stuck out in his memory was his diligent examination of the 'Bible' to find the 'right way of worship' (Kiffin, 'Sober Discourse', 2). By the autumn of 1642 he, as well as the congregation, had come to a decidedly Baptist position. As he wrote, 'After some time [I] concluded that the safest way was to follow the footsteps of the flock (namely that order laid down by Christ and His Apostles, and practised by the primitive Christians in their times) which I found to be that after conversion they were baptised, added to the church, and continued in the apostles' doctrine, fellowship, breaking of bread, and prayer; according to which I thought myself bound to be conformable. (ibid.)' His commitment to the Particular Baptist cause appears to have been sealed by a public debate with the Anglican apologist Daniel Featley held in Southwark on 17 October 1642. 
Two years later Kiffin was a signatory for his church, along with the leadership of six other London congregations, of the first London confession of faith. This confession sought to demonstrate the solidarity of the Particular Baptists with the Calvinistic community throughout western and parts of central Europe. In addition, the first London confession spelt out in some detail a Baptist ecclesiology. Kiffin also appears to have played a significant role in drafting the document. The confession would serve as the theological basis for the Particular Baptists during their rapid advance in the late 1640s and the 1650s -- it was reprinted a number of times during this period -- and then throughout the years of persecution in the 1660s and 1670s after the Restoration. It was replaced only towards the end of the 1670s, by the second London confession of faith, adopted in 1689. 
During the late 1640s and 1650s Kiffin emerged as a skilled spokesman for the fledgeling Baptist movement. A number of texts record public debates, either proposed or actual, with a variety of figures. On 3 December 1645 Kiffin, along with his co-religionists Benjamin Cox and Hanserd Knollys, was supposed to have debated with the London presbyterian Edmund Calamy the elder at his Aldermanbury home on the nature and subjects of baptism. The debate was, however, cancelled by the lord mayor, Thomas Adams, owing to rumours that the Baptists were intending to bring 'Swords, Clubs, and Staves' with them in order to slay Calamy (Coxe, Knollys, and Kiffin, 4-6). The previous year, the Dutch Calvinist minister Cesar Calandrini had debated with Kiffin in an attempt to prevent members of his Dutch congregation, then meeting in Austin Friars, London, from joining the Baptists. In 1646 Kiffin and Knollys were involved in a public debate in Coventry with two paedobaptists, John Bryan and Obadiah Grew. Kiffin was a signatory to the dedication in 'Walwins Wiles' (1649), an attack on the Levellers usually attributed to John Price. Another debate was in 1654 with the celebrated court physician Peter Chamberlen, a Seventh Day Baptist, over an aspect of church life ('Discourse between Cap. Kiffin, and Dr Chamberlain, about Imposition of Hands'). Hostile witnesses from this period also point to Kiffin's leadership among the Baptists. The presbyterian merchant Joshua Ricraft attacked him as 'the grand ringleader' of the Baptists, while an anonymous publication in 1659 described him as the 'ordained Mufty of all Hereticks and Sectaries' ('The Life and Approaching Death of William Kiffin', 2). 
Kiffin also played a prominent role in the expansion of the movement beyond London. Extant documents from places as far afield as Wales and Northumberland, Ireland and the Midlands reveal Kiffin's involvement in planning the establishment of new churches and associations, then in giving them advice and counsel, and generally in providing stability to the Baptist cause during these early days of the movement. One critical moment came in May 1658, when, at the meeting of the western association of Baptist churches in Dorchester, some individuals who were sympathetic to the potentially subversive politics of the Fifth Monarchy movement sought to convince the representatives of the churches in the association to espouse publicly the ideals and goals of this party. Kiffin, who was present with other representatives from the churches in London, successfully persuaded the western association not to commit itself in this direction. While some of the Fifth Monarchy movement appear to have been relatively harmless students of the 'Bible', others had definite revolutionary tendencies and were convinced that they should take an active, even violent, role in the fulfilment of the prophecies of 'Daniel' 2. Open and widespread adherence to these views by the Particular Baptists would have had harmful and serious repercussions for the Baptist movement. 
During these years, which also witnessed the upheaval of the English civil war and the establishment of the Commonwealth, Kiffin was extensively engaged as a merchant. He had in 1638 become a freeman of the Leathersellers' Company of London, which enjoyed a monopoly on the leather trade in the capital. His decision about 1645 to take a member of his church as a partner for a trading venture in the Netherlands turned out to be the launching of an enormously successful business. In Kiffin's own words: 'it pleased God so to bless our endeavours, that, from scores of pounds, he brought it to many hundreds and thousands of pounds: giving me more of this world than ever I could have thought to have enjoyed' (Orme, 23). In his later years it appears that the focus of Kiffin's ventures was the cloth trade. 
Kiffin's business ventures also led to his involvement in the civic and political affairs of the capital. In 1642, along with other individual Londoners, Kiffin contributed horse and riders for the parliamentary cause. Documents from the late 1650s speak of Kiffin as a 'captain' ('Discourse between Cap. Kiffin, and Dr Chamberlain') and 'lieutenant-colonel' ('Life and Approaching Death of William Kiffin', 5) in the London militia. In Oliver Cromwell's last parliament of 1656-8 Kiffin sat as a member for Middlesex and was on good terms with Cromwell. After the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, however, his involvement in political and civic matters was understandably curtailed. 
In February 1660, shortly before the Restoration, Kiffin's house, along with those of several others, was raided by order of General George Monck. Kiffin was arrested and some arms -- '2 Drums... 5 Old Pikes, and 6 Swords' -- seized (Kiffin and others). Though he was soon released -- as a result of a letter he wrote to the lord mayor -- he had experienced a foretaste of what the next twenty-eight years were to bring for dissenters in general. Over the next three years he was re-arrested three times, though his stays in prison were brief. 
On a number of occasions Kiffin used his position and wealth to intervene on behalf of fellow dissenters. In 1664 he was able to rescue twelve General Baptists from Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, who had been sentenced to death under an Elizabethan law for participation in an illegal conventicle; he went directly to Charles II and obtained a reprieve for them all. In the following decade Kiffin also used his influence at court to clear some New England Baptists from the false charge of murdering a Boston minister. 
A quaint account of Kiffin's influential relationship with the king is found in a story related by the eighteenth-century Baptist historian Thomas Crosby. The king had supposedly asked Kiffin for a loan of $40,000. Kiffin was aware that if he gave the king such a loan there was every likelihood that it would never be repaid, and thus offered to make the king a gift of $10,000, which the king gladly accepted. Afterwards, according to Crosby, Kiffin jocosely remarked that he had thereby saved himself $30,000. This story may well be a recollection of an incident in the summer of 1670, when a financially burdened monarch approached the magistracy of London for a loan of $60,000. The response on the part of the aldermen was half-hearted, raising only a third of the needed loan. Seeing an opportunity to drive a wedge between the king and parliament, London dissenters organized the raising of the remaining two-thirds of the requested loan; Kiffin, who subscribed $3600, was the largest of the contributors. 
In 1670 Kiffin was elected sheriff of London and Middlesex, though he was subsequently rejected because of his nonconformity. In recognition of this, in the following year he was elected master of the leathersellers, though he was only a liveryman of the company at this time. 
When a declaration of indulgence was issued on 15 March 1672, Kiffin secured a licence for himself to preach. Although this declaration was withdrawn the following March, there seems to have been liberty enough in London in the years immediately following for Kiffin to participate in major public debates with the Quakers regarding the divinity of Christ, on 28 August and 9 October 1674 at the Barbican meeting-house, and on 16 October at the Quakers' meeting-house in Spitalfields. The second meeting lasted until dark, while so many attended the final meeting that there were fears that the gallery would collapse. 
In October 1676 Kiffin and four other London Baptist leaders travelled to the west country to confront the Baptist evangelist Thomas Collier. Originally a member of Kiffin's church in London, Collier became the leading Particular Baptist evangelist in south-west England during the 1650s. In 1674, however, Collier published 'A Body of Divinity', in which he denied original sin, argued that Christ died for all men, and maintained that Christ's humanity was eternal. Collier's important standing within the Particular Baptist community made it imperative that his views be dealt with. A meeting was accordingly arranged between Collier and Kiffin and the other Baptist pastors from London. At the meeting Kiffin took the lead in urging Collier to renounce views the Baptist leader clearly regarded as heretical. Collier refused to do so, and Kiffin and the London Baptist leadership subsequently refused all association with him. When Nehemiah Cox published his rebuttal of Collier, 'Vindicia veritatis', in the following year, Kiffin signed a brief explanatory statement as to why the work was necessary. 
During these years Kiffin was also embroiled in another controversy, this time with the quintessential puritan John Bunyan, over the necessity of believer's baptism. Bunyan's 'A Confession of my Faith, and a Reason of my Practice' (1672) and 'Differences in Judgment about Water-Baptism, No Bar to Communion' (1673) had rejected the standard Particular Baptist argument that believer's baptism must precede membership in the local church or any of the privileges of that membership: in particular, participation in the Lord's supper. While there were other written responses to Bunyan, Kiffin's 'A Sober Discourse of Right to Church-Communion' (1681) was the most noteworthy advocacy of the closed membership position in this controversy. Kiffin built his case on the regulative principle of scripture, various key scripture texts, examples from the patristic era, and logical reasoning. 
The years following the publication of this major work by Kiffin were difficult ones for him personally. His wife, Hanna, died on 6 October 1682. Their two eldest living sons had predeceased her: William, the eldest, had died on 31 August 1669, aged twenty; the other son had died in Venice, Kiffin believing he had been poisoned by a Roman Catholic priest. A daughter, Priscilla, died on 15 March 1679, aged twenty-four. In October 1684 Kiffin was again arrested, this time in the aftermath of the Rye House plot when various London radicals were incarcerated. One of his sons-in-law, Joseph Hayes, a banker, narrowly escaped being executed after being wrongly implicated in this plot. One of the sharpest blows was yet to come, though, what Kiffin called 'no small affliction' (Orme, 54). Two of his grandsons, William and Benjamin Hewling, were executed in September 1685 for their part in the rebellion of the duke of Monmouth -- William at Lyme on 12 September and Benjamin at Taunton on 30 September. Kiffin unsuccessfully sought to obtain their freedom by offering $3000 for their acquittal. In his words, 'We missed the right door; for the Lord Chief Justice [George Jeffreys] finding agreements were made with others and so little to himself, was the more provoked to use all manner of cruelty to the poor prisoners: so that few escaped' (ibid., 54). At the sentencing of William, Jeffreys told him that 'his grandfather did as well deserve that death, which he was likely to suffer, as he did' (ibid., 82). 
Two years later, in August 1687, James II, as part of an attempt to undermine the power base of the Anglican establishment, informed Kiffin of his intention that Kiffin serve as an alderman of the City of London. Kiffin sought to avoid this appointment, pleading his age, his retirement from active involvement in business and politics, and the deaths of his grandsons: 'a wound to my heart', Kiffin told the king, 'which is still bleeding, and never will close, but in the grave' (Orme, 159). But at length Kiffin had no choice but to serve as an alderman from October 1687 to October of the following year. By the conclusion of his time in office, though, James's regime had but a few weeks left to run before it crumbled in the revolution of 1688 and a new era dawned for all dissenters like Kiffin. 
William III's authorization of the 'Act of Toleration' in 1689 provided Kiffin, along with other Baptist leaders in London, with the opportunity to issue a call in July 1689 for a national assembly of Particular Baptists, the first of its kind. Representatives from over one hundred churches gathered. Among other things, they approved the adoption of the second London confession of faith, originally drawn up in 1677 by William Collins and Nehemiah Cox, co-pastors of the Petty France Church in London. The unity experienced at this assembly was short-lived. In the 1690s the London Baptist community was rent by controversy over the singing of hymns. Kiffin, ever the debater, found himself drawn into the controversy, in which he opposed the singing of hymns in favour of singing psalms only. 
Kiffin continued to be active in his pastorate at Devonshire Square during his final years, though he had the help of assistants. Thomas Patient had been his first co-elder. Three years after Patient's death in 1666, Daniel Dyke had been appointed. He served until his death in 1688, when Richard Adams, who succeeded Kiffin as pastor when the latter died in 1701, was ordained co-elder. 
By the 1690s Kiffin had remarried. His second wife, Sarah, ran foul of the Devonshire Square Church; on 2 March 1698 she was charged with a number of misdeeds by the church. Upon examination she was found guilty of, among other things, defrauding her husband of $200 and making false accusations about him. When she refused to appear before the church, Sarah was suspended from communion on 24 April. To add sorrow upon sorrow, a third son, Harry, passed away on 8 December 1698. Although these events must have caused Kiffin deep anguish, he does not appear to have wavered in his commitment to the Christian faith. As he had written in 1693 at the conclusion of his autobiography: 'God is, by his providence, shaking the earth under our feet. There is no sure foundation of rest and peace but only in Jesus Christ' (Orme, 90). He died in London on 29 December 1701 and was buried in Bunhill Fields. In his will, dated 23 March 1700, he asked to be buried alongside his first wife and children. He also noted that he had previously paid an annuity to his second wife but this was now the responsibility of his grandson William Kiffin. He named another grandson, Joseph Kiffin, as executor, but evidently the will was contested, as it was not proved until 14 March 1716. 
Since the 1640s Kiffin had been a source of strength and stability to the Particular Baptist movement, and played a vital role in its growth and advance. It was during his years of leadership of the movement that those positions distinctive of the Particular Baptists were hammered out, and Kiffin played no small part in the determination of the future identity of this Christian tradition. 


@@@@@


doc= 15522


Kilburn, William (1745-1818), artist and calico printer, was born on 1 November 1745, at Capel Street, Dublin, the only son of Samuel Kilburn, architect of that city. He showed an early talent for drawing, and was apprenticed to John Lisson, an English calico printer with a large works at Leixlip, near Dublin. The family was in financial difficulties at the father's death, and in 1777 Kilburn moved to London, where he obtained a ready sale for his calico designs. He also became acquainted with William Curtis the botanist, and executed the exquisite plates of flowers, drawn and engraved from nature, for Curtis's celebrated 'Flora Londinensis' (1777), during which time he lived with his mother and sister in Bermondsey. 
Soon afterwards, in 1779, Kilburn accepted the management of a calico-printing factory at Wallington, Surrey, that had been expanded to a leading position by Ansell, Burton, and Bull in the early 1770s, but which was now owned by Newton of nearby Merton Abbey Works. After seven years he was able to purchase Newton's share of the enterprise, and ran it profitably for the rest of his life, though in later years he was threatened with the piracy of his designs by Lancashire printers. 
According to an enthusiastic memoir in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', after the acquisition Kilburn rose rapidly in wealth, and was soon the most eminent calico printer in England, having 'brought the art to a pitch of perfection never since equalled' ('GM', 223). One of his employees, C. O'Brien, wrote the earliest British text on calico printing, and more than a hundred of Kilburn's chintz designs survive to demonstrate the excellence of his floral prints, but in this 'golden age' of English calico printing the claim that his work was unequalled must be recognized as plausible rather than proven. Kilburn's marriage to the eldest daughter of Thomas Brown, a director of the East India Company, gives substance to the claim of economic success, while his leadership of the parliamentary campaign (1787) to secure copyright of design to calico printers confirms his eminence in this lucrative fashion trade. Most probably Kilburn was a unique instance in the London textile trade of the eighteenth century of an artist and designer becoming a successful entrepreneur. 
Kilburn never returned to Ireland, though any Irishman who visited him was assured of a hospitable reception. He was known as a generous employer and a man of the highest moral and Christian principles. He was over 6 feet tall, upright and slender in build. Kilburn enjoyed excellent health until a few months before his death when, feeling indisposed, he went to Brighton, but, failing to improve, returned to Wallington, where he died on 23 December 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 15523


Kilburne, Richard (1605-1678), lawyer and topographer, was baptized at St Mary Woolchurch, London, on 6 October 1605, the fifth and youngest son of Isaac Kilburne and his wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Clarke of Saffron Walden, Essex. His father's family originated from Kilburne, Yorkshire, later moving to Cambridgeshire and to Essex. Kilburne entered Staple's Inn, became an eminent chancery lawyer, and on five occasions was chosen to be principal of his inn. Writing in 1798 Edward Hasted described Kilburne as 'a man of some eminence... as a lawyer, being as worthy a character, both as a magistrate and an historian' (Hasted, 7.148). 
Success in his legal career brought Kilburne into contact with Kent and Sussex. During the later 1620s he inherited Fowlers, an estate in the parish of Hawkhurst, Kent. Along with his neighbour William Boys he served as a Kentish magistrate and both men were asked during the Commonwealth to marry couples without sacred rites; but whereas Boys married sixty couples, Kilburne married only two. In his legal work he became a steward of two Sussex manors, Brede and Bodiam, from 1639 onwards. During the 1660s he was writing from Fowlers about land in Peasmarsh and 26 acres overlooking Rye, the latter owned by John Halsey of Lincoln's Inn. In one letter, dated 27 December 1669, he asks 'his much respected Freind, Mr Samuell Jeake, at Rye' (Smart, 303), to investigate that these acres were being well used, before replying to their owner. Kilburne's first marriage, to Elizabeth, daughter of William Davy of Beckley, Sussex, produced a family of six sons and three daughters. After Elizabeth's death he married on 24 January 1653 a widow, Sarah Burchet, formerly Short, who brought several children of her previous marriage. 
Kilburne's career was similar to that of William Lambarde (1536-1601), whom he much admired; both men were authors of topographical and legal works. Kilburne's first, 'A brief survey of the county of Kent, viz. the names of the parishes in the same, in what bailiwick... and division... every of the said parishes is;... the day on which any market or faire is kept therein; the ancient names of the parish churches, etc' (1657), was followed by 'A topographie, or survey of the county of Kent, with some chronological, historicall, and other matters touching the same' (1659), that presented, as his 'Epistle Dedicatory' outlined, 'the Kent of his own day', and depicted 'the county as it was before the Civil War'. Hasted, in 1797, was rather dismissive of this work as being 'little more than a Directory' (Hasted, 1.iii). Kent was not well served by early topographers, and Kilburne's small survey was extensively quoted on sixteen occasions by Robert Furley and, over the years in 'Archaeologia Cantiana', as a first source of reference, and not without some praise. The 'Topographie' devoted disproportionate attention to Hawkhurst: 10 pages out of 422, or, in the words of one writer, 'as much space to it as to twenty other average parishes' ('Archaeologia Cantiana', 5, 1863, 59). Kilburne justified this, however: 'In respect I finde not any description of this Parish... it having been the place of my habitation for above twenty eight years last past (God's Providence having also there lent me an inheritance), I thought fit to enlarge my selfe upon this place. (Kilburne, 126)' Kilburne's legal notes were published only after his death, as 'Choice presidents upon all acts of parliament, relating to the office and duty of a justice of the peace' (1680). It ran through a series of expanded editions, the eighth and last appearing in 1715. 
Kilburne died on 15 November 1678 and was buried in the north chancel of Hawkhurst church. He was generous to his sons, William, Isaac, and Thomas, and to his stepchildren, but Fowlers passed to Anne (Mrs Brewer) his only surviving daughter. Regarding his association with Kent, his 'Topographie' records 'my Obligation of Gratitude to that County (wherein I have had a comfortable subsistence for above Thirty five years... and for some of them had the Honour to serve the same)' (Kilburne, 'Epistle Dedicatory'). 


@@@@@


doc= 15524


Kilbye, Richard (1560/61-1620), Hebraist, was born at Redcliffe in Leicestershire; the identities of his parents are unknown. He matriculated from Lincoln College, Oxford, on 20 December 1577, aged sixteen, and was elected to a fellowship of the college on 18 January in the following year. He took his BA degree on 9 December 1578 and his MA on 2 July 1582. On 10 December 1590 he was appointed to the rectorship of Lincoln College. He took the degrees of bachelor and doctor of theology on 7 July 1596, and on 28 September 1601 was installed as prebendary of Lincoln Cathedral. He took part in the translation of the 'Bible' commissioned by King James I in 1604. From 1610 until his death in 1620 he held the regius professorship of Hebrew in the University of Oxford. Although he acquired a considerable scholarly reputation (his acquaintance Isaac Casaubon described him as 'a man of some reading beyond the common'; Feingold, 455), Kilbye's sole publication was a funeral sermon preached in 1612 for Thomas Holland, the university's regius professor of divinity. His intention to publish a continuation of Jean Mercier's commentary on the book of 'Genesis' remained unfulfilled, although a surviving manuscript commentary on 'Exodus' (in Lincoln College Library) indicates the extent of his learning, employing almost 100 Hebrew sources, many of them rare. Upon his death, probably in Oxford, in 1620, Kilbye bequeathed to Lincoln College a large and valuable collection of Hebrew volumes including dictionaries, 'Bibles', and commentaries on the 'Pentateuch'. He was buried in the chancel of All Saints' Church, Oxford, on 7 November 1620. 


@@@@@


doc= 15525


Kilham, Alexander (1762-1798), a founder of the Methodist New Connexion, was born at Epworth, Lincolnshire, on 10 July 1762, the third son of Simon Kilham (died 1801/2) and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1785). His father was a linen weaver who later extended his business to include the making of sacking. His parents were zealous Methodists, but the young Alexander left his parents' faith and was careless for a time until, at the age of eighteen, when working at Owston Ferry, not far from his home, he was converted during a revival at Epworth and joined the local Methodist society, where he helped in prayer meetings and other work, until he became a local preacher in 1782, preaching his first sermon at Luddington, Lincolnshire. He came to the notice of the squire of Raithby, Robert Carr Brackenbury, who had just been accepted by Wesley as one of his travelling preachers. After travelling for a short time in Lincolnshire, he accompanied Brackenbury to Jersey, where they were successful in establishing the first Methodist society in spite of much local opposition. They returned to the mainland in the summer of 1784. 
In spite of a natural reluctance to lose his son from the family business, Alexander's father raised no objections to his offering his services to Wesley, whom Alexander had met at Nottingham in 1783. Two years later he was received into full connection and was appointed to Horncastle (1785) and Gainsborough (1786) in Lincolnshire. Then followed some years in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and periods in Scarborough (1787-8), Pocklington (1789), and Whitby (1790). He married Sarah Grey (died 1797) of Pickering at Easter 1788; they had one daughter, Sarah, who survived to adulthood, and two sons who died in infancy. 
Kilham had early shown his independent mind when in Grimsby he had registered as a dissenter under the 'Toleration Act' in order to obtain a preaching licence to protect himself against the opposition of the vicar of Skendleby, Edward Brackenbury, his patron's brother. With the death of Wesley his mind found further scope for expression. 
Stationed at Newcastle upon Tyne in 1791, Kilham's superintendent was Joseph Cownley, a supporter of greater freedom for Methodist preachers, who had administered the sacrament of the Lord's supper to his congregation. This had hitherto been forbidden to travelling preachers who had not been ordained, in the interest of the established church. Other calls for greater freedom were made after Wesley's death. In May 1791 the Hull circuit published a circular advising Methodists not to rank themselves as dissenters, to meet only out of church hours, and to receive the sacrament only in the parish church. Cownley had opposed this plea, for which he was strongly criticized. Kilham rushed to his defence in a pamphlet published under the pseudonym Truman and Freeman, which drew on him the censure of the conference in 1792. He was appointed to the Aberdeen circuit, presumably to remove him from the mainstream of Methodist life, but it only served to strengthen his convictions, for the life of the surrounding presbyterian churches was strongly anti-episcopal and anti-Church of England. From the conference point of view, it could hardly have been a more unfortunate appointment. Henceforth a steady stream of 'reform' pamphlets issued from his pen under pseudonyms such as Aquila and Priscilla and Martin Luther. 
Kilham remained in Aberdeen for three years, during which time he clarified his dissenting principles and called for complete separation from the Church of England if Methodists were to gain their 'Gospel privileges'. In his pamphlets he argued not only for the right of Methodists to receive the sacrament at the hands of their own preachers, in their own chapels, but for the right of lay members to have a share in the running of the circuits, and that lay delegates should represent their circuits in conference. Furthermore, he utterly rejected the idea of making some preachers into Methodist bishops. 
The turmoil throughout the connexion was such that in 1795 conference agreed to the 'plan of pacification', which granted some of Kilham's requests, though not those relating to the place of laymen in the life of the church. The plan was accepted by all preachers present except Kilham and four or five others, who saw it as only a temporary remedy, arguing for further reforms. At the end of the year Kilham issued another pamphlet, this time under his own name, 'The Progress of Liberty amongst the People called Methodists'. In this he elaborated his proposals for the participation of laymen in the governing of the church, especially in the appointment of preachers, both local and travelling. This gave rise to such hostility that Kilham, now stationed at Alnwick, was arraigned first before the district meeting and then before the conference, which dismissed him as a preacher on 28 July 1796. 
Kilham now felt free to act. In that year he started the issue of a magazine, the 'Methodist Monitor', in which he set forth the need for a root and branch reform of Methodism. At the following conference of 1797 at Leeds a 'people's delegation' met, asking for the reforms Kilham had proposed; conference made some minor concessions, but would not move on the subject of nominations of membership or the possibility of meetings taking place without a travelling preacher. The reformers could not accept this, and at that conference three other preachers seceded or were expelled, and these with others met in the Baptist Ebenezer Chapel, Leeds, which they bought as the first chapel of the 'new itinerancy', or the Methodist New Connexion, as it was soon called. William Thom became its first president and the ever indefatigable Kilham its secretary, this of course in addition to circuit duties in Sheffield, to which circuit he had been appointed by the first Methodist New Connexion conference in that year. The organization of the new connexion, which gained 5000 members in the first year, was completed at the conference of 1798. Kilham was sent to the Nottingham circuit, the connexion's largest. 
Immediately Kilham set about seeking to extend and build up the new church, which was particularly strong in south and west Yorkshire, north-east Cheshire, and Tyneside. On 12 April 1798 he married his second wife, Hannah Spurr (1774-1832) of Sheffield, who as Mrs Hannah Kilham worked as a missionary and scholar of unwritten African languages; they had one daughter, Mary, who died in 1802. Travelling both as reformer and evangelist clearly took up much of Kilham's time, and contributed to his ill health. In the autumn of 1798 he set out, in spite of sickness, on a visit to Wales, but caught a severe chill and returned home to Nottingham. He tried to struggle on with his circuit and other engagements, but his heavy work load had completely exhausted him. He died in Nottingham on 20 December 1798, after expressing his zeal for evangelism in his deathbed plea, 'Tell all the world that Jesus is precious.' He was buried in Hockley chapel, Nottingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 15526


Kilham, Hannah (1774-1832), missionary and student of African languages, born at Sheffield on 12 August 1774, was the seventh child of Peter and Hannah Spurr. Her father, a cutler by trade, was a strict Anglican, but her mother let her attend Wesley's services. After her parents' deaths she spent two years at a boarding-school in Chesterfield, where the schoolmaster felt she overstepped the bounds of the 'female province' by her serious study of grammar. Back in Sheffield in 1790 she broke with the Church of England, and in 1794 she joined the Methodist society. When Alexander Kilham (1762-1798) founded the Methodist New Connexion in Sheffield she joined his congregation; they were married on 12 April 1798 and moved to Nottingham. He died after eight months, on 20 December 1798, and she opened a school to support herself and her stepdaughter, Sarah (later her biographer). Increasingly dissatisfied with the rigidity of Methodism, she joined the Society of Friends in 1803, returned to Sheffield, and opened a girls' boarding-school. 
Deeply concerned about the plight of the poor in Sheffield, Hannah Kilham founded the Society for the Bettering of the Condition of the Poor and published religious tracts as teaching aids. She also grew interested in the anti-slavery cause, and became convinced that she should go to Africa as a 'school-missionary'. After discussions with missionaries she decided on the experiment of teaching African children in their own languages, not in English, using images and ideas already familiar to them. She learned Wolof from two African sailors in London, published some lessons in Wolof and English, and persuaded the Society of Friends to found a mission in the Gambia. Meanwhile she visited Ireland to investigate and publicize the appalling condition of the rural poor. 
The Gambia mission started in 1823 and Kilham opened a school, and taught in Wolof. But with the death of her colleagues in 1824 the mission ended. Meanwhile she had visited Sierra Leone where the large population of liberated Africans, or 'recaptives' freed from the slave ships and speaking numerous languages, offered her far more scope to put her ideas into practice. After three years in London working among the poor in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, she paid another brief visit to Sierra Leone in 1827 and collected specimens of thirty African languages. They included not only languages spoken in Sierra Leone, such as Temne, Susu, and Mende, but Fante (in what became Ghana) Hausa, Yoruba, Igbo, and Urhobo (in Nigeria), and Kongo, witness to the wide catchment area of the Atlantic slave trade. Kilham's 'Specimens of African Languages Spoken in the Colony of Sierra Leone', published on her return to England in 1828, anticipated Sigismund Koelle's great 'Polyglotta Africana' (1854), which was to be based, as hers was, on language specimens collected in Sierra Leone. Kilham also published 'African School Tracts', illustrating her methods, beginning with words in the relevant African language, and then going on to sentences, 'Bible' passages, stories, arithmetic, and grammar. 
In 1830 Kilham returned to Sierra Leone to put theory into practice. She was given charge of a school for recaptive girls (some of them were brought, at her particular request, straight from the slave ship), in Charlotte village in the mountains above Freetown, where she taught in Mende and Yoruba. She opened a village bookshop and sold her textbooks, and considered drawing up simplified English vocabularies for children to learn English. But she was always restless: sometimes she would reflect in her journal on whether she should not really leave, to work for the Chinese. In 1832 she paid a brief visit to Liberia to see what progress the schools were making there. On the way back the ship was struck by lightning and put back to Liberia. Hannah Kilham suddenly fell unexpectedly ill, became unconscious, and died on 31 March 1832. Her body was committed to the sea, off the coast of Liberia. 


@@@@@


doc= 15527


Kilkenny, William of (d. 1256), administrator and bishop of Ely, may have been identical with the Master William of Kilkenny who, as chancellor of the church of Kilkenny, was elected bishop of Ossory in 1231, but resigned the office in 1232 before his consecration. It is certain, however, that by mid-1234 Kilkenny was a king's clerk, receiving a yearly fee of 60 marks at the exchequer until at least 1237. Drawing on his knowledge of canon and civil law, Kilkenny served Henry III during these years in a variety of ecclesiastical causes. He went twice to the papal court on royal business, in 1234-5 and again in 1237. He acted as the king's proctor in several disputed elections, most famously in the case involving Simon of Elmham's contested election to the bishopric of Norwich between 1236 and 1239. He also represented the king in negotiations with Bishop Robert Grosseteste of Lincoln (died 1253) arising out of a dispute in 1236 between the town and university of Oxford. In return the king presented him to the churches of Powerstock, Dorset, in 1235, and Worfield, Shropshire, in 1236. 
Between 1238 and 1247 Kilkenny disappears from royal records. During these years he served in the household of Nicholas of Farnham (died 1257), bishop of Durham from 1241 to 1249, although his connections with Durham began under Bishop Richard Poore (died 1235). In May 1247 he went abroad on royal service, and by November had become archdeacon of Coventry. Not until the autumn of 1249, however, is there clear evidence that Kilkenny had rejoined the king's household. From 30 September 1249 until at least 27 October 1252 he served as controller of the royal wardrobe; and from 28 May 1250 until 5 January 1255 he was keeper of the great seal in England, exercising the responsibilities of the chancellor, and being sometimes accorded the title, but never receiving the emoluments of the office. Together with Richard, earl of Cornwall (died 1272), Kilkenny played a key role in governing England during the king's expedition to Gascony in 1253-4, his modesty, fidelity, and learning winning the praise of Matthew Paris and the gratitude of the king. 
During these years Kilkenny received a variety of ecclesiastical appointments. In 1251 he was appointed to the prebend of Ipthorne in Chichester Cathedral, and the church of Dungervan in the Irish diocese of Lismore. In 1252 he acquired the church of Walton, Lancashire. By the end of 1253 he had also become rector of St Peter's, Northampton, treasurer of Exeter Cathedral, a prebendary of Dublin, and keeper of the royal hospitals at Ospringe, Kent, and Oxford. Although his appointment in 1253 to the St Paul's prebend of Caddington was annulled by the pope, he was successfully preferred to the next available prebend, Consumpta-per-Mare, between January and September 1254. Finally, in late September or October 1254, he was elected bishop of Ely. Kilkenny received the temporalities of his new see on 25 December, and resigned the seal on 5 January 1255. His consecration as bishop was delayed, however, until 15 August 1255, when he was consecrated at Bellay in Savoy by Archbishop Boniface of Canterbury (died 1270). 
Kilkenny's episcopate lasted only a year. In July 1256 he undertook another embassy on the king's behalf, this time to Spain, where he died on 21 September. His heart was returned for burial at Ely. As bishop, Kilkenny resolved a long-standing dispute with Ramsey Abbey over land boundaries in the fens. He also established a chantry to support two university scholars at Cambridge. It is possible that he issued statutes for his diocese. By his will he appointed two additional chaplains to pray for his soul at Ely, leaving 200 marks for their support. 
Master William had some connection, perhaps a familial one, with Master Odo of Kilkenny, one of the king's canon lawyers, and with Master Henry of Kilkenny, canon of Chichester. His only certain relative, however, was his nephew Richard son of Robert, a landowner in Waterford, who in 1254 was knighted, in company with the Lord Edward, by the king of Castile. 


@@@@@


doc= 15528


Killen, John (d. 1803), Irish nationalist, is of unknown origins and family. During the early 1800s he kept an unlicensed Thomas Street pub in Dublin's plebeian manufacturing quarter. Aided by his wife, who was known as the 'Dirty Cook', Killen's fare was sufficiently well regarded to provide an income in a built-up and populous part of the south city. Killen belonged to the illegal society of United Irishmen, an oath-bound organization committed to establishing an independent Irish republic with French military assistance. They fomented the bloody rising of 1798 in which Killen's role, if any, has not been documented. Killen reputedly played an active part on 23 July 1803 when revolutionaries under the overall direction of Robert Emmet attempted to seize Dublin city. Two witnesses of dubious reliability alleged that Killen was in company with the rebel leader Felix Rourke on Bridgefoot Street when the rising of 1803 commenced. Friends and patrons of the Killen family, however, insisted that he had remained indoors that evening and prevented others from venturing out. Contrary to such claims, evidence was presented implicating Killen in the shooting of a dispatch rider of the sixteenth light dragoons near the Thomas Street Cornmarket. Killen was arrested in the aftermath of the failed insurrection and brought to trial with John McCann at Green Street courthouse on 7 September. Both men were capitally convicted, and were executed on Thomas Street on 12 September 1803. Killen was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 15529


Killen, Thomas Young (1826-1886), minister of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, son of Edward Killen, a merchant in Ballymena, co. Antrim, was born at Ballymena on 30 October 1826. His boyhood was spent at Glenwherry, to which his father moved in 1832. He was educated initially by a private tutor, and in 1842 entered the Belfast Academical Institution, where he took several prizes. In 1846 he began his theological studies under the theological faculty of the Irish Presbyterian church. In 1847, during his studies, he spent his summer vacation as a missionary in Camlin, co. Roscommon, despite the prevalence of famine fever. 
On 19 May 1848 Killen was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Carrickfergus, and returned to the west of Ireland until 25 September 1850, when he was ordained by the presbytery of Letterkenny as minister of Ramelton Third Presbyterian, co. Donegal, where his pastorate proved very successful. During his ministry there, in 1854 he married Elizabeth, daughter of William Wilson of Raphoe, whose brother, Charles, was MP for Donegal in 1876-9. In 1857 Killen received a call from the congregation of Ballykelly, co. Londonderry, and was installed there on 31 March. He took a leading part in the Ulster revival of 1859. Among the new Presbyterian congregations formed in the wake of the revival was Duncairn in Belfast and Killen was called as its first minister in December 1861. It grew rapidly under his ministry and its church building was enlarged twice. He became one of the leading figures in the Irish general assembly, of which in 1882 he was elected moderator. In 1883 the degree of DD was conferred on him by the Presbyterian Theological Faculty, Ireland. He died suddenly of a heart attack on 21 October 1886, at the Duncairn manse, Belfast, leaving a widow and seven children. He was buried on 25 October in Balmoral cemetery, Belfast. 
Killen was the author of 'A Sacramental Catechism' (1874), which ran through several editions, and was republished in America. For four years (1869-73), he edited a monthly magazine, the 'Evangelical Witness', and on the establishment of the 'Witness' newspaper in Belfast in 1874 he wrote much in its columns. He also published several sermons and tracts. 


@@@@@


doc= 15530


Killigrew, Anne (1660-1685), poet and painter, was born in St Martin's Lane, London, the daughter of Dr Henry Killigrew (1613-1700), chaplain and almoner to the duke of York, master of the Savoy, and prebendary of Westminster, and his wife, Judith (died 1683). Her uncles Thomas Killigrew (1612-1683) and Sir William Killigrew (1606-1695) were prominent figures in the Restoration theatre. Her brothers Admiral Henry Killigrew (d. 1712) and Captain James Killigrew (c.1664-1695) were both naval officers. Her sister Elizabeth (died 1701) was married to Dr John Lambe, a clergyman. Anne was born shortly before the Restoration 'and christened in a private chamber, when the offices in the common-prayer were not publicly allowed' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.623). She was 'tenderly educated' and soon 'became most admirable in the arts of poetry and painting' (ibid.). 
In 1683 Anne is listed as one of the six maids of honour to Mary of Modena. She never married. Her beauty, piety, and exemplary virtue are stressed in all the early records. In 1685 she succumbed to smallpox 'to the unspeakable reluctancy of her relations, and all others who were acquainted with her great virtues' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.623). The date of her death (which occurred in her father's lodgings in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey) is given as 16 June in Henry Killigrew's epitaph, but according to the Savoy chapel register she was buried there on 15 June. Her monument was destroyed by fire in 1864. 

'Poems by Mrs Anne Killigrew', a collection of twenty-nine items, with three further poems 'found among Mrs Killigrews Papers... though none of hers' ('Poems', 84), was licensed on 30 September 1685 (title-page dated 1686). The volume encompasses a variety of genres and metres: pastoral, epigram, an unfinished epic, occasional verse, and poetry of general (and often austerely moral) reflection on the joys and pains of human life. The collection is prefaced by three commendatory poems, most notably John Dryden's celebrated pindaric ode 'To the Pious Memory of the Accomplisht Young Lady, Mrs Anne Killigrew, Excellent in the Two Sister-arts of Poesie and Painting', which affirms Anne Killigrew's saintly character and displays substantial first-hand knowledge of her achievements in both poetry and painting. 
Only a handful of Anne Killigrew's paintings (which included portraits, biblical and historical paintings, mythological scenes, and landscapes) appears to have survived. A full-length self-portrait, in an allegorical setting, is housed at Berkeley Castle, Gloucestershire. A smaller self-portrait survives in several engraved copies, one forming the frontispiece to her 'Poems'. A portrait of James II (formerly attributed to Lely) is in the Royal Collection at Windsor. In 1915-16 a 'Venus Attired by the Graces' was reproduced in the 'Burlington Magazine' from an original then in private hands. Titles of further paintings are known from Anne Killigrew's poems and from the notebooks of George Vertue. The archives of the National Portrait Gallery contain a photograph of what is possibly the painting of Mary of Modena referred to in lines 134-41 of Dryden's 'To the Pious Memory of... Anne Killigrew'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15531


Killigrew, Katherine (c.1542-1583), gentlewoman and scholar, was the fifth daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke (1505/6-1576), Edward VI's tutor, of Gidea Hall in Essex, and Anne (died 1553), daughter of Sir William Fitzwilliam, and widow of Sir John Hawes. Like her sisters Elizabeth, Anne Bacon, and Mildred Cecil, Katherine was educated in the classics by her father. She became famous for her knowledge of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and for her ability to write poetry, although she left little evidence in writing. There is no confirmation of her skill in Hebrew. Katherine was left her choice of books in her father's will of 1575; two in Latin and one in Greek. She married Henry Killigrew of Cornwall (d. 1603) on 4 November 1565. Henry was often abroad on diplomatic missions, mainly in France and Scotland, and was knighted in 1591 for his services to his country. Katherine remained in England, using her family connections to the Cecils to make requests on behalf of her husband. She wrote verse in Latin to her sister Mildred, asking her to use her influence with her husband William Cecil to excuse Henry from overseas service. In 1582, shortly before her death, Katherine wrote to Cecil on her husband's behalf asking his aid in obtaining lands for him. Henry Killigrew's concern for his wife can be seen in his purchase of an annuity for her from the crown, and his attempts to return to England for the birth of their children. 
Katherine Killigrew was a committed puritan, maintaining a friendship with the preacher Edward Dering; she offered him hospitality even when he was in disgrace with the queen. Some clues to her adult life can be learned from Dering's correspondence. Several letters dating from 1575, which he wrote to her at Hendon where she lived with her three daughters, Nan, Bess, and Mary, were printed in his 'Godly Letters' (1614). A fourth daughter, Dorothy, is not mentioned in the Dering letters. Katherine suffered from frequent bouts of ill health. In his writing Dering refers to her physical sufferings, and offers her spiritual support and comfort while telling her of his own illness and his problems with his lungs; he died in 1576 of tuberculosis. 
Katherine herself died on 27 December 1583 after having given birth to a stillborn child. She left her own epitaph, a verse mainly in Latin demonstrating her certainty of the resurrection. She was buried in the church of St Thomas the Apostle, London, which was burnt down in the 1666 great fire. Her memorial contained four inscriptions which were printed by Stow: one of these, in both Greek and Latin, was composed by her sister Elizabeth Russell. The verse laments the untimely loss of a virtuous sister, commending her wit, learning and grace, and it looks forward to their reunion in heaven. The three other tributes were written by well-known puritan divines, and commented on her learning, modesty, purity, and religious zeal. Camden also praised her knowledge of Greek and Latin in an epitaph. 


