@@@@@


doc= 15532


Killigrew, Charles (1655-1724/5), theatre manager and master of the revels, was born at Maestricht on 29 December 1655. He was the first son of Thomas Killigrew (1612-1683), dramatist, groom of the bedchamber (1661-83), and master of the revels (1673-7), and Charlotte (died 1716), his second wife, the daughter of Johan van Hesse of Holland, and keeper of the sweet coffers to Catherine of Braganza. Charles Killigrew's elder half-brother, Henry, was a notorious rake and groom of the bedchamber to Charles II; his younger brother by Thomas's second marriage, Robert Killigrew, was a brigadier-general, killed at Almanza in 1707. Charles and his brothers by this marriage were naturalized by act of parliament in 1662. 
Charles Killigrew received a grant of the reversion to the mastership of the revels, after Sir Henry Herbert and his father, Thomas, in 1668. In 1670 Thomas Killigrew set up a trust by which Charles would, at his father's death, receive a double share in the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane and, upon his majority, its government. Throughout this period, the theatre experienced recurrent financial difficulties and labour disputes. Early in 1676 Thomas Killigrew persuaded Charles to act as a mediator with the actors in return for the former's patent and interest in the theatre. After the elder Killigrew failed to relinquish these, Charles sued in chancery. The verdict returned on 22 February 1677 forced Thomas Killigrew to turn the company over to his son. Two days later Charles Killigrew was appointed master of the revels, in which post he served until his death. Since the position paid but $10 per annum, his main source of income from it came from the exclusive right to license stage plays, rope-dancers, ballad singers, and other public shows. He triumphed in a dispute with the comptroller of the revels over this right in 1688, but eventually lost the power to license plays in the grant to Sir Richard Steele of 1715. As master of the revels, Killigrew infuriated Colley Cibber by his overly enthusiastic embrace of Jeremy Collier's view of theatrical reform: [He] 'assisted this Reformation with a more zealous Severity than ever. He would strike out whole Scenes of a vicious or immoral Character, tho' it were visibly shewn to be reform'd or punish'd', most notably deleting the entire first act of Cibber's 'Richard the Third' on the grounds that its melancholy portrait of Henry VI 'would put weak People too much in mind of King James then living in France' (Cibber, 1.275, 276). 
According to his father's biographer, Charles Killigrew 'became a courtier, a man-about-town, a friend of Dryden, and, in spite of apparent literary interests, a very unsuccessful theatre manager' (Harbage, 124-5). This last was despite his capacity for sharp practice towards both fellow shareholders and actors. Partly as a result of their complaints and his lack of financial success, he was by the mid-1690s less active in management. Though he assisted Christopher Rich's rise to power over the united companies, he eventually became an opponent, trying unsuccessfully to have him removed from control of Drury Lane in 1701-2. Given his apparent capacity to offend, it is perhaps not surprising to learn from Luttrell of a duel in January 1693 between 'one Mr. Chamberlain and Mr. Killigrew of the playhouse' (N. Luttrell, 'A Brief Historical Relation of State Affairs', 6 vols., 1857, 3.25). 
Killigrew was named a gentleman of the privy chamber in October 1670, a gentleman usher of the privy chamber to Catherine of Braganza on 22 November 1682, a commissioner of prizes in 1707, and comptroller of the receipts and payments of the receiver general of customs in 1716. His political sympathies seem to have been whiggish: this would explain the timing of several of the above appointments; his dismissal from the queen dowager's household by the earl of Feversham in August 1697 for 'show[ing] a zeal for this government' ('CSP dom.', '1697', 287); and his failed contest of the parliamentary representation of Orford against two tories in 1701. 
Killigrew married Jemima, niece of Richard Bokenham, mercer, of London. She survived her husband who was buried in the Savoy on 8 January 1725. They had three sons: the eldest, Guildford, was a lieutenant in Lord Mark Kerr's regiment of dragoons during the War of Spanish Succession and a page of honour to the king from 1714 to 1727. He died childless in 1751. Their second son was the playwright Thomas Killigrew (bap. 1694, d. 1719). A third son, Charles, inherited the estate at Thornham Hall and his father's interest in the playhouse at Drury Lane and died childless on 9 March 1756. 


@@@@@


doc= 15533


Killigrew, Sir Henry (1525x8-1603), diplomat, was the fourth son of John Killigrew (died 1568), landowner of Arwennack, Cornwall, and his wife, Elizabeth, second daughter of James Trewennard. His brothers included the MPs John Killigrew (died 1584) and Sir William Killigrew (d. 1622). Based in Cornwall since the mid-thirteenth century the Killigrews owned land in the parish of St Erme near Truro, although the family seat at Arwennack, where Henry Killigrew was most likely born, was not established until 1385. By the reign of Henry VIII the Killigrews were well placed among the west country gentry, John Killigrew being entrusted by the king with the sensitive office of captain of Pendennis Castle. Henry Killigrew may well have attended Cambridge University, although there is no evidence that he ever obtained a degree. Nevertheless he was certainly educated to a high standard. In addition to a thorough grounding in classical languages and literature and a keen interest in music and painting, he possessed a strong grasp of both Italian and French. 
Killigrew's career as a public servant began in 1552 with his appointment as harbourmaster for the duchy of Cornwall, the same year that he received the office of collector of rents for the manor of Helston, Cornwall. On 18 February 1553 he was returned as MP for Launceston. No doubt in part this small but useful collection of offices reflected the natural expectations that even a younger son born to a well connected landowning family might reasonably have. It also demonstrated the value of holding the correct religious sympathies under a particular regime. He was already known to John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, for his service to him as a gentleman usher in the mid-1540s, and the strong protestant faith evinced by Killigrew and his family did much to bolster their popularity with the government. 
Killigrew's Dudley association did not extend to support for Northumberland's efforts to alter the succession. Killigrew and his family made no effort to oppose Mary's accession. Only when it became clear that a corner-stone of the Counter-Reformation in England would be the queen's marriage to Philip of Spain did Killigrew and his brothers repudiate their allegiance. By December 1553 Killigrew had travelled to the French court to seek the support of Henri II for a planned rising. When this rising failed the French king swiftly distanced himself from the affair, leaving Killigrew and his co-conspirators adrift and exiled. Killigrew remained in Europe until Elizabeth I's accession. By mid-1554 he had joined the household of the protestant Francois de Vendome, vidame de Chartres. It was in this capacity that Killigrew gained his first military experience, fighting with the vidame in Italy, experience that was augmented when he once again fought for the French at St Quentin in August 1557. Ironically, another facet of Killigrew's development largely formed during his exile was a strong distrust of the French. For all that he and his fellow exiles were welcomed into the French army, once their usefulness as rebels was exhausted Henri and his advisers treated them with thinly veiled contempt. This poor treatment cemented in Killigrew an enduring dislike of the French that coloured his attitude towards them during his time as a leading Elizabethan diplomat. Most important, it was during this period that he gained invaluable experience of European courts. In addition to the many contacts he made in France he spent time in Italy, not only as part of the vidame's forces, but also in 1556 on a sensitive mission to Edward Courteney, earl of Devonshire, seeking to gain his commitment to lead yet another rebellion against Mary. When this proved unsuccessful, and no doubt heartily disillusioned with his French hosts, Killigrew travelled to Germany and took up residence in Strasbourg. It was there in November 1557 that Thomas Randolph found him, and on Mary's behalf requested that he perform a reconnaissance mission in France. It was significant that this request was apparently made with the full knowledge of Princess Elizabeth. Having completed the mission Killigrew returned to Strasbourg, where he remained until Mary's death. The earlier suggestion that Elizabeth was aware of both Killigrew and his suitability for diplomatic work was confirmed when shortly after her accession the young queen summoned him back to London as a prelude to dispatching him as her envoy to the protestant princes of Germany. 
Throughout the thirty-five years that Killigrew served Elizabeth as agent and ambassador the focus of his work was to protect England from the encroachment of Catholic Spain and France. By turns ordered to sow dissent among Catholics and forge consensus between protestants, Killigrew's abiding inspiration and succour was his profound protestant faith. Within months of his return to England he was sent on a low-key mission to Otto-Heinrich, the elector palatine, and Christoph, duke of Wurttemberg, with the aim of re-establishing friendly relations between Germany's protestant princes and England. When he arrived in Heidelberg in December 1558 Killigrew's enthusiasm was such that he may have given the mistaken impression that Elizabeth was actually seeking an alliance with the princes, much to the queen's irritation. Even so, the mission was not entirely fruitless. In addition to signalling England's readiness to reopen communications with Germany's protestant princes, Killigrew also held useful discussions with the new elector palatine, Friedrich III, and his son John Casimir, about the possibility of supplying Elizabeth with mercenaries. 
From Germany Killigrew travelled to France to meet his old master, the vidame, now the governor of Calais. His objective was to discuss with him the possibility of the French reinstating Calais to English rule. Killigrew was gulled by the vidames into believing that Henri might entertain such a proposal. He duly forwarded this misinformation both to Elizabeth at court and to her commissioners at Cateau-Cambresis before arriving at Cateau-Cambresis himself. There he was promptly detained by the leader of the French negotiators, Anne de Montmorency, constable of France, who took a decidedly dim view of his interference. Killigrew contributed nothing more to the peace talks. He remained in detention until peace was signed after which the constable, no doubt confident that his charge could do no more damage, released him, allowing Killigrew to return home by late March 1559. 
Killigrew's homecoming was brief. In May he was dispatched to Paris to serve as secretary to Elizabeth's resident ambassador in France, Sir Nicholas Throckmorton. After Henri died on 10 July 1559 as a result of a jousting accident, leaving the ultra-Catholic Guise faction in control of the French crown, the central aim of the English ambassador and his attache was to minimize the ability of France to threaten England through her support of Scotland. To this end they gave what tacit support they could to the Huguenot leaders with the hope of further destabilizing France. Additionally they sought, through the dispatch of reports detailing the dangers of further French involvement in Scotland, to persuade the queen and her advisers of the necessity of lending tangible aid to the lords of the congregation. Given the continued presence of French troops in Scotland and the ongoing efforts to increase their numbers, the reports of Throckmorton and Killigrew were sufficient to convince Elizabeth of the need for action. In March 1560 she ordered William Grey, thirteenth Baron Grey of Wilton, to lead an army to Berwick where it would ready itself to aid the lords of the congregation in their siege of the French garrison in Leith. Ever cautious, however, Elizabeth also attempted to secure a peaceful resolution, acquiescing to the dispatch of a French envoy, Jean de Monluc, bishop of Valence, to Scotland in the hope that he might yet broker an agreement between the regent, Mary de Guise, and the rebels. Both to act as escort, and to ensure that Monluc did not stray from his remit, Killigrew was appointed to accompany him. The two men arrived in Scotland in April, but due largely to the intransigence of both parties the talks came to nothing. In consequence the Anglo-Scottish force assaulted Leith and was duly repulsed with heavy losses. Arriving in London on the same day as the unfortunate news, Killigrew was one of those to bear the queen's wrath. However, his fall from grace was brief. The treaty of Edinburgh and the withdrawal of French troops from Scotland vindicated the hardline policy that Killigrew had so energetically urged upon Elizabeth and the zealous diplomat was once more restored to favour. 
For two years Killigrew remained in England, with Sir Robert Dudley acting as his patron. Then in August 1562 he was once again called upon to travel to France. In the aftermath of Henri's death and with the support of the dowager queen, Catherine de' Medici, the Guise opposition to the Huguenot cause was proving implacable. By autumn 1562 the Huguenots had been confined to a handful of strongholds to which their enemies were consistently and successfully laying siege. In sending Killigrew to Normandy, Elizabeth sought to discover the strength of the Huguenot forces and fortifications, and whether, in return for her military and financial support, their leaders would be prepared to cede Calais to the English. With extreme reluctance the French rebels agreed that, in return for an army of 6000 men and a gift of a million crowns, they would permit the English to garrison Newhaven (Le Havre) and Dieppe until such time as they were in a position to restore Calais. At the beginning of October Sir Adrian Poynings sailed with the 1500 strong vanguard of the expeditionary force to Le Havre, where Killigrew awaited him. Without official sanction, but quite possibly with the tacit approval of the queen, Killigrew, in company with Thomas Leighton, immediately set out from Le Havre at the head of a 400 strong Anglo-French force intent upon bringing aid to the Huguenots besieged at Rouen. Their effort proved to be too little too late. Having gained entry to the city Killigrew and Leighton's force could do nothing but forestall the inevitable. Rouen fell on 26 October, and Killigrew was one of the few Englishmen captured who was not subsequently hanged. He became the captive of Henri d'Anville de Montmorency, son of the constable. After the payment of a considerable ransom, Killigrew returned home in May 1563. 
In recognition of Killigrew's work in Scotland he was appointed in June 1561 to the lucrative office of teller of the exchequer. In addition to the salary of $33 6's'. 8died Killigrew and his three colleagues were responsible for the receipt and dispersal of nearly all the exchequer's revenue, providing them with the opportunity to make considerable profits from short-term speculation. It was another sixteen years before Killigrew received his next appointment, when, in 1577, he was made receiver of piracy fines. Finally, in 1580 Elizabeth appointed him surveyor of the royal armoury. Undoubtedly these offices provided Killigrew with a healthy income, much needed to subsidize the relatively poor diets he received as an ambassador -- on average $2 per day; they did not, however, make him an influential figure within the government. He was MP for Saltash in Cornwall in 1563 but did little in parliament. Throughout Elizabeth's reign Killigrew's best hope of exercising influence rested in his relationships with the queen's great favourites, his long time patron, Dudley (now earl of Leicester), and from the later 1560s Killigrew's brother-in-law, Sir William Cecil (1520/21-1598). On 4 November 1565 Killigrew married Katherine ['see 'Killigrew, Katherine (c.1542-1583)], fifth daughter of gentleman and scholar Sir Anthony Cooke (1505/6-1576), royal tutor, of Gidea Hall, Essex, and his wife, Anne. The marriage, for all the advantages it conveyed to the young diplomat, was apparently one of love. The couple had four daughters. Sir Nicholas Bacon (1510-1579), lord keeper, was an influential brother-in-law, but the most important connection was with Cecil. The link to Cecil, originally little to the principal secretary's liking, ultimately secured for Killigrew the support of the most influential man in England. 
Barring two brief missions to Scotland in 1566 and 1567 Killigrew remained in England for more than six years after his ill-starred military escapades in France. His next diplomatic mission, begun in February 1569, took him once again to Heidelberg. In response to an overture made by Friedrich III, Killigrew travelled to Germany to explore the possibility of a defensive alliance and discuss conditions under which the queen might grant a loan of 100,000 crowns in order to finance a protestant military expedition against the Low Countries and France. The mission, to which Killigrew was strongly committed, foundered on the reluctance of Friedrich's German allies to form a confederation with a foreign power, and Elizabeth's fear that too close an association with the protestant princes might well serve simply to draw the wrath of the Catholic powers directly upon her. Killigrew was returned as MP for Truro in 1571 and 1572 and was more active on committees than in previous parliaments, including sitting on one concerned with Mary, queen of Scots (12 May 1572). 
On 24 August 1572 thousands of Huguenots were killed in the St Bartholomew's day massacre. This did much to convince Elizabeth and her privy councillors that once free of civil war France might well make a determined effort to restore Catholicism to England, as ever using Scotland to facilitate its efforts. To avoid this it would be vital to ensure that Scotland was united under a strong protestant government. To this end Killigrew, recently returned from France, where for the previous three years he had been serving as secretary to the resident ambassador, Sir Francis Walsingham, was dispatched to Edinburgh. His instructions were to broker a peace between the regency government of James VI, headed by John Erskine, first earl of Mar, and James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton, and the supporters of Mary, Sir William Kirkcaldy of Grange and William Maitland of Lethington. He was instructed to persuade the regency government to take custody of Mary, who was then a prisoner in England, and then arrange her execution as expeditiously as possible, thus relieving Elizabeth of the unwholesome task. 
The mission, probably the most challenging of Killigrew's career, also witnessed his greatest success. The ambassador could only get Mar and Morton to connive at the judicial murder of Mary if Elizabeth openly supported them in the act. However, Killigrew was considerably more successful in other respects. Mar died on 29 October 1572, leaving a power vacuum in the regency government. His natural successor, Morton, was disinclined to accept the role without financial and, preferably also, military support from England. Killigrew tried to convince Morton in mid-December that the demands the latter had made were about to be met by Elizabeth. However, Morton was dubious and refused to give way to Killigrew's persuasions that he declare himself governor without firm support in money and military aid from England, which he got. On 31 December the ten-month truce between the two Scottish factions expired and the possibility of renewed conflict seemed great. The leaders of the Scottish queen's party, Kirkcaldy and Maitland, from their position of relative strength in Edinburgh Castle, resisted all Killigrew's attempts to make peace. However, the ambassador had considerably more success with their allies beyond the city. In February 1573 he met the leaders of the two parties, excluding Kirkcaldy and Maitland, at Leith and successfully negotiated an agreement by which the Marians accepted the rule of the regency government in return for liberal concessions on the part of the king. Having helped both to secure the appointment of Morton as governor and to isolate the opposition leaders it only remained for Killigrew to secure the English military support necessary to reduce Edinburgh Castle. This he finally gained in April when Sir William Drury, captain of Berwick, led a force of 1500 men and thirty-three pieces of artillery to Edinburgh. Finally, on 26 May the garrison surrendered. Maitland died in prison on 9 June and Kirkcaldy was executed on 3 August. Due in no small part to the unrelenting efforts of Killigrew, opponents of the regency were either broken or won over, and the danger of a Franco-Scottish alliance eliminated. Over the next two years Killigrew performed two further embassies to Scotland in which he made every effort to nurture Anglo-Scottish relations and support Morton's regency. Elizabeth recalled him in September 1575, bringing to an end the most productive period of his diplomatic career. 
Aside from his lucrative work as teller of the exchequer, Killigrew was also called upon to offer advice on diplomatic affairs and to act as interpreter and companion to high-ranking foreign guests. His long service to Elizabeth did not go unrewarded. In recognition of his work in Scotland he was granted the manor of Lanreath, Cornwall, in May 1573. The following year Killigrew added to his Cornish holdings with the purchase of the manor of Bottlet from Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon, for $3600. Additionally, he owned an estate in Hendon in Middlesex and a house next to St Paul's churchyard. His position as a significant landowner was reflected in his involvement in local government. In addition to serving as MP for Truro (elected in 1571 and 1572), between about 1579 and 1587 he served on the quorum of the peace for Cornwall. Much of his personal life seems to have been devoted to the management of his estates and correspondence with his puritan friends such as Elizabeth's resident ambassador to the Netherlands, William Davison, and his patrons Burghley and Leicester. In December 1584 his daughter Anne (died 1632) married Henry Neville (1561/2-1615) of Wargrave in Berkshire. He was the first of several sons-in-law with whom Killigrew got on well. 
In November 1585 Killigrew was summoned to perform his penultimate foreign mission, as one of Leicester's key advisers in the Netherlands. For all that the earl commanded an English relief force that represented one of the best hopes of the states general to defeat the Spanish, his high-handed manner and divisive policies made bitter opponents of the Dutch leaders. As one of Leicester's most senior advisers Killigrew shared in this odium. His situation became still less comfortable when Leicester appointed him joint head of the new chamber of finance in July 1586. Killigrew's main responsibilities were to investigate corruption among the Dutch leadership and to impede commercial activities between the Provinces and their Spanish enemies. Relief came when in November he followed Leicester back to England. In June 1587 he returned to the Low Countries, but unlike Leicester, who received his final recall in November, Killigrew remained with the Dutch for another year. With Leicester's departure he became the most senior civilian English representative in the Netherlands. This was a somewhat empty honour given the distrust and resentment with which the English were regarded by the Dutch leaders, in particular Paul Buys and Johan Oldenbarnevelt. Much of Killigrew's remaining time in the Netherlands was devoted to undoing Leicester's work and seeking to make peace between the states general and those towns that had rejected its authority. Killigrew's long-sought recall finally came in January 1589, largely the result of his continuing unpopularity with the Dutch leaders; it was also an acknowledgement that one of Elizabeth's longest serving diplomats was now both old and tired. 
Killigrew's final foreign mission, begun in July 1591, as part of an English expeditionary force sent to assist Henri of Navarre in his siege of Rouen, saw him serving as adviser to Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, and in company with his old comrade, Leighton, attempting to restrain the incautious young general. He was also responsible for much of the logistical organization of the 3400 strong army. Despite his age and growing infirmity Killigrew seems to have performed this latter duty with considerable competence. He went to great lengths to ensure that the army was fed and discipline maintained, as well as expending much effort and money in arranging for the sick to be transported home. Neither he nor Leighton were able to stop Essex treating the campaign as something of an adventure, nevertheless, the general made clear his gratitude for Killigrew's efforts when he knighted the old diplomat on 20 November, a week before his return to England. 
Killigrew largely retired from public service. He retained the tellership of the exchequer until March 1599, and occasionally returned to court to participate in diplomatic negotiations. Katherine Killigrew died on 27 December 1583, and her widower married a Frenchwoman, Jael de Peigne (died 1617x34), on 7 November 1590. The couple had three sons, Joseph, Henry, and Robert, and one daughter. Killigrew intervened on behalf of Neville in early 1601, who had become embroiled in Essex's revolt. Killigrew died on 2 March 1603 and was buried in London at St Margaret, Lothbury. His will, proved on 16 April, provided annuities for his wife and two younger sons totalling $140, as well as further bequests to them with a value of $1700. 


@@@@@


doc= 15534


Killigrew, Henry (1613-1700), Church of England clergyman, was born on 11 February 1613 at the manor of Hanworth, near Hampton Court, the fifth son of Sir Robert Killigrew (1579/80-1633), vice-chamberlain to Queen Henrietta Maria, and Mary, daughter of Sir Henry Woodhouse of Kimberley, Norfolk. The brother of Sir William Killigrew (bap. 1606, d. 1695) and Thomas Killigrew (1612-1683), both dramatists, Killigrew was educated at Thomas Farnaby's Grammar School in the parish of Cripplegate, presumably from about 1620. He is first mentioned in the will of his grandmother Margaret Killigrew, dated 22 May 1623: to Henry and his brothers Charles, Robert, and Thomas she left the sum of $5, 'to be paid within three months after my decease' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/146/71). Killigrew entered Christ Church, Oxford, as a commoner in 1628, and soon afterwards became a student. While at Oxford he contributed Latin poems to several collections of occasional verse, including 'Britanniae natalis' (1630), celebrating the birth of Prince Charles. After having obtained his BA degree on 5 July 1632, Killigrew became one of the quadragesimal collectors, involved in the determination exercises in Lent. Sir Robert, in his will dated 12 September 1632, bequeathed to him 'the market and fairs within the manor and lordship of Crediton, co. Devons.', with all the rents, issues and profits from the same, for a period of seventy years (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/164/69). 
Killigrew's literary talent soon manifested itself in 'The Conspiracy', a tragedy intended to be produced at the wedding, on 8 January 1635, of Charles Herbert, son of the earl of Pembroke, and Mary Villiers, daughter of the duke of Buckingham. The play was surreptitiously published in 1638, its text having been printed, as the corrected 1653 edition entitled 'Pallantus and Eudora' explained, 'from a false and imperfect transcript, the original copy being then (together with the writer of it) in Italy' ('The publisher to the reader'). In July 1638 Killigrew was created MA, travelled abroad, and, 'entering afterwards into the sacred function', towards the beginning of the civil war became a chaplain in the king's army (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.622). Immediately after the battle of Edgehill, in November 1642, he was created doctor of divinity and in the same year he became a chaplain to James, duke of York, and prebendary of Westminster. He was a member of the duke's cabinet council, accompanying him to Paris and Brussels in September 1650. With his wife, Judith (died 1683), a lady-in-waiting to Queen Catharine of Braganza, Killigrew had four children, only two of whom, Elizabeth ('b'. 1650?, died 28 Oct 1701) and Henry Killigrew (died 9 Nov 1712), an admiral, were to survive their father. James, a captain in the navy, was killed in action in January 1695. Anne Killigrew, born in 1660, was a poet and painter, whose untimely death of smallpox in June 1685 was commemorated in Dryden's famous ode, prefixed to her posthumously published 'Poems' (1686). 
After the Restoration, Killigrew appears to have been actively engaged amassing a variety of appointments and offices. In 1660 he was made almoner to the duke of York, with a salary of $100 per annum, superintendent of the affairs of his chapel, and rector of Wheathamsted in Hertfordshire (a post which in 1673 he resigned in favour of Dr John Lambe, husband of his daughter Elizabeth). After the resignation of Gilbert Sheldon, bishop of London, in early July 1663, the king recommended him for the post of master of the Savoy Hospital. He was elected by the clerks and chaplains on 10 July. Killigrew's petition for the government of St John the Baptist and St John the Evangelist's Hospital in Sherborne, Dorset, was referred to the attorney-general on 10 August 1667. He was granted the mastership, 'with power to recover any lands lately belonging to the hospital', in late 1668 or 1669 ('CSP dom.', 'October 1668-December 1669', 653). 
During the Anglo-Dutch War, in August 1673, Killigrew was ordered to deliver up parts of the Savoy Hospital to the 'Commissioners for the sick and wounded, there being a present necessity of providing conveniences for their reception' ('CSP dom.', '1 March-31 Oct 1673', 514). As the chaplains later observed, this arrangement had been detrimental to the master and poorer persons in the hospital. Killigrew, after vainly trying to recover the confiscated premises, 'compensated some of the sufferers by pensions and doles' ('DNB'). The eventual ruin of the Savoy Hospital, dissolved in 1702, has nevertheless been generally blamed on Killigrew's mismanagement. In the course of those years, Killigrew distinguished himself as a preacher, author of 'Sermons Preached at Whitehall' (1685), and as the (anonymous) translator of Martial's 'Epigrams' (1695). His wife, Judith, reputed an accomplished musician, had been buried at the Savoy on 2 February 1683. It was in response to Anthony Wood's enquiries in late 1691 that Killigrew, then living at Westminster Abbey, provided some of the biographical information contained in the present notice. He died on 14 March 1700. 


@@@@@


doc= 15535


Killigrew, Henry (c.1652-1712), naval officer, son of Henry Killigrew (1613-1700), clergyman, and his wife, Judith (died 1683), and brother of James Killigrew (c.1664-1695), served as a volunteer before becoming lieutenant of the 'Cambridge' in July 1666. From her he moved to the 'Sapphire', and in 1669 to the 'Constant Warwick'. In January 1672 he became captain of the 'Forester', from which he was moved to the 'Bonadventure' (June 1672 to August 1673), and afterwards to the 'Monck'. He fought in the battles of Schooneveld and the Texel in 1673. After the peace he was almost continuously employed in the Mediterranean, where he successively commanded the 'Swan' prize in 1675, the 'Harwich' and the 'Henrietta' in 1675-6, the 'Bristol' and the 'Royal Oak' in 1678, and the 'Mary' in 1679, returning to England in her in June 1679. He commanded the 'Leopard' briefly in 1680 and the 'Foresight' between 1680 and 1682; in 1683-4 he was captain of the 'Montagu' in Lord Dartmouth's expedition to Tangier, and in 1684-5 of the 'Mordaunt' for a voyage to the Gambia. Pepys, serving as Dartmouth's secretary on the Tangier expedition, found Killigrew to be hard-drinking, keen to make as much money as possible from shipping merchants' goods, and owing his great influence with Dartmouth to the fact that he was sleeping with the king's former mistress, the duchess of Cleveland. Even so, Pepys also found 'his manner of living the neatest, and most like a gentleman that I ever saw of any man, and his civility to me extraordinary' ('Tangier Papers', 46). In 1686 Killigrew went out to the Mediterranean in the 'Dragon' as commodore of a small squadron to suppress the Sale corsairs. A detailed account of this voyage was written by G. Wood, Killigrew's clerk in the 'Dragon' (BL, Add. MS 19302). 
Killigrew returned to England in May 1689, was promoted to vice-admiral of the blue through the influence of Daniel Finch, earl of Nottingham, and during the summer flew his flag in the 'Kent' in the channel. In December he was appointed to command a squadron which sailed for the Mediterranean in the following March to prevent the Toulon fleet sailing to Brest. On 9 May 1690 he was refitting at Cadiz when he learned that Admiral Chateau-Renault was at sea with ten ships of the line. On the 10th Killigrew, having been joined by some of his ships from Gibraltar, was able to pursue with fifteen ships. However, they were foul and sailed badly, allowing Chateau-Renault easily to sail away from them. Killigrew returned to Cadiz before sailing for home, but bad weather still opposed him. He took thirty-five days to reach Plymouth, and when he arrived the battle of Beachy Head had been fought, leaving the French masters of the channel. Although Killigrew's failure to catch Chateau-Renault and alleged dilatoriness in returning home attracted much criticism, and rumours of Jacobitism were already attached to his name, he was appointed one of the joint commanders-in-chief (along with Sir Richard Haddock and Sir John Ashby) to succeed the disgraced earl of Torrington, serving until December 1690 when they were replaced by Edward Russell. Killigrew served under Russell as admiral of the blue in 1691, but their relationship was increasingly strained, and Killigrew had no command in 1692. When Russell's fleet won its great victories at Barfleur and La Hogue, he complained that: 'a blessing of so large a spread should import evil to no one of the winning side but to me alone. I see myself rendered by it not only useless at present but perhaps for my whole life... I see my adversary raised to a capacity to insult over me and to cross all my pretences, whose malice will let no opportunity slip by which it can express itself. (Killigrew to Nottingham, 28 May 1692, 'Finch MSS', 4.192)' Killigrew declined the command of the winter squadron in the Mediterranean, regarding it as inferior to the posts he had held, but in 1693 he was again one of the joint admirals, with Sir Cloudesley Shovell and Sir Ralph Delaval, and was appointed a lord commissioner of the Admiralty on 15 April 1693. After the disaster which befell the Smyrna fleet in June 1693 Killigrew, together with Delaval, was dismissed from command and had to face a hostile inquiry by parliament from November to January. Although the admirals were censured for mismanagement, a charge of high breach of trust was defeated by ten votes. Nevertheless, Killigrew lost his colonelcy of the 2nd marine regiment and governorship of Landguard Fort, and was removed from the Admiralty by a warrant dated 24 April 1694. Killigrew and Delaval were widely suspected of Jacobite sympathies and of planning to keep the fleet out of the way to allow James II to invade; indeed, the earl of Ailesbury had held negotiations to this effect with Killigrew early in 1693. Killigrew never commanded again, and spent his later years unsuccessfully attempting to get full and half pay backdated to 1693, although in 1702 he was granted a pension of $700 per annum. He served as MP for Stockbridge, a seat controlled by his brother-in-law, from 1702 to 1705, and for St Albans from 1705 to 1708. In February 1692 he married Lucy, daughter of Thomas Jervoise, of Herriard, Hampshire, and sister of Thomas Jervoise (1667-1743), MP for Hampshire (1698-1702, 1705-10); the couple had one son and three daughters. Killigrew died at St Julians, his seat near St Albans, on 9 November 1712, and was survived by his wife, whose will was on proved 21 November 1729. 


@@@@@


doc= 15536


Killigrew, James (c.1664-1695), naval officer, was the second son of Henry Killigrew (1613-1700), dramatist and master of the Savoy Hospital, and his wife, Judith (died 1683), and was brother of Admiral Henry Killigrew. He went to sea with his brother, serving as a captain's servant and then as a midshipman in the 'Mordaunt' and the 'Dragon', both commanded by his brother, between 1684 and 1688. He was appointed lieutenant successively of the 'Garland' (July 1688), the 'Portsmouth' (5 September 1688), and the 'St Albans' (October 1688), one of the ships which accompanied Arthur Herbert, earl of Torrington to Holland in February 1689 to bring Queen Mary to England. In August 1689 he was appointed second lieutenant of the 'Duke', the flagship of Edward Russell, admiral of the blue. On Russell's recommendation he was promoted captain on 11 April 1690 and appointed to the 'Sapphire'. He did not take part in the battle of Beachy Head but was one of the captains who sat on Torrington's courts martial on 10 December 1690, and who acquitted him. Russell described him in his private list of captains as 'a good man, but young' (Folger Shakespeare Library, MS xd. 451 (98) ). A lieutenant in the first regiment of marines commanded by Henry Killigrew in 1691, in 1693 he was a captain in Danby's marine regiment. 
In 1691 Killigrew served in the Irish seas and in the English Channel, and in July captured a large French privateer from St Malo, originally an English merchant ship. From 1692 to March 1693 he was cruising off the Channel Islands, taking a French merchant ship near Jersey in January 1692, and then in the Baltic. While at sea on 23 March 1693 he exchanged commands with the captain of the 'Crown', moved to the 'York' three months later, and spent June and July cruising in the Mediterranean before moving to the 'Plymouth'. He was highly thought of by Russell, who recognized his potential by appointing him to command a small detached force of five ships in December 1694. He drew up his will on 5 December and, not having married, left his pay from the marine regiment to Thomas Balderstone and his pay as captain of the 'York' to Kenrick Edisbury, a member of the Navy Board, with his brother Henry as executor. On 18 January 1695 he was cruising to the southward of Sardinia when two French men-of-war were sighted, the 60-gun 'Content' and 52-gun 'Trident'. About 3 p.m. the 'Plymouth', which was ahead of her consorts, engaged the 'Content' and at 3.30 Killigrew, 'after he had been in all places... giving necessary instructions and orders to his lieutenants' and encouraging the seamen, was 'wounded mortally in the pit of his stomach by a short bar of Iron about 6 inches long it lodging in his body' (TNA: PRO, ADM 51/3935/1; TNA: PRO, SP 42/5, fol. 1). The 'Plymouth' suffered severely, having been dismasted as well as having the sails and rigging torn to shreds, but the French ships had been delayed until the other English ships came up and, being unable to escape, were both captured, taken into Messina, and afterwards added to the navy. At Messina on 22 January 1695 the 'Plymouth''s chaplain John Percival preached a funeral sermon over Killigrew, and as his coffin was carried on shore in the 'Plymouth''s barge, 'the ship fired 20 guns by the half minute glass'. Killigrew was buried in a 'very pleasant garden on the north side of Messina' (TNA: PRO, ADM 51/3935/1). After his death his brother Henry asked whether his estate was not entitled to a share of the prize money, but Russell advised that the money was payable only to the captains whose vessels actually took the ships. Killigrew was a popular captain who encouraged and inspired his crew and showed 'as much courage, bravery and resolution as could be expected from man' (TNA: PRO, SP 42/5, fol. 1). 


@@@@@


doc= 15537


Killigrew, Sir Robert (1579/80-1633), courtier, was born in Lothbury, London, the son of 
Robert Killigrew matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, in January 1591, aged eleven, but took no degree. He entered politics as MP for St Mawes in the 1601 parliament, was knighted by James I in July 1603, and represented Newport in 1604. About this time he married Sir Francis Bacon's niece, Mary Woodhouse ('fl'. 1590-1650), daughter of Sir Henry Woodhouse of Kimberley, Norfolk, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Sir Nicholas Bacon. Their eldest child, William, was baptized in May 1606. They had twelve children in all; nine (five sons and four daughters) lived to maturity. 
By 1606 Killigrew was at court and he eventually entered the circle of the royal favourite Robert Carr and his friend Sir Thomas Overbury. In June 1612 John Chamberlain noted that Killigrew was one of Carr's 'next favorites', after Overbury himself ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.358). Early in May 1613, a few days after Overbury was imprisoned in the Tower, Killigrew was committed to the Fleet for talking with Overbury at his prison window. Killigrew was quickly released, however, and in July was one of two friends permitted to speak with the ailing Overbury. Still a prisoner in the Tower, Overbury died two months later. 
As MP for Helston in 1614 Killigrew was involved in a serious altercation in the Commons' committee investigating 'undertaking'. On 12 May, Sir William Herbert accused the committee's chairman, Sir Roger Owen, of partiality, and Killigrew, demanding that Owen 'should put no more tricks upon the House', grabbed the chairman and threatened to pull him out of his seat (Jansson, 228-9). The next day the Commons forced Killigrew to make a formal apology. His motives remain mysterious, but his friendships with Overbury and Sir Henry Neville, both of whom were rumoured to have devised schemes to manage parliament, suggest that he had some personal stake in the 'undertaking' investigation. 
In July 1614 Killigrew was appointed keeper for life of Pendennis Castle in Cornwall but in the early autumn of 1615 his fortunes at court were jeopardized by the arrest of Carr, now earl of Somerset, his wife, and several accomplices on suspicion of poisoning Overbury. Killigrew himself became entangled in the ensuing investigation. One of Somerset's servants testified that shortly after Overbury's imprisonment the former had obtained from Killigrew a potent emetic. Unbeknown to Killigrew, who thought the powder was for Carr, Carr and Overbury planned to use it to fake an illness they hoped would win royal mercy for Overbury. Though never under direct suspicion Killigrew was questioned by the commissioners investigating Overbury's death, and he spoke at Somerset's trial to counter the favourite's assertion that it was one of his powders that had sickened the imprisoned knight. 
Despite Somerset's fall Killigrew had little difficulty maintaining his fortunes. Although he failed to secure a patent for the enrolment of apprentices in 1616 and risked royal wrath by duelling with a Captain Burton early in 1618, Killigrew steadily accumulated the fruits of court favour. In October 1618 he was granted the office of protonotary of chancery for life and in December 1619 the favourite, Buckingham, wrote on his behalf about a suit for 'certain concealed lands', stressing that Killigrew was a 'gentleman whom I love and wish very well unto' (Spedding, 7.69-70). 
During the 1620s Killigrew sat in the Commons for Newport (1621), Penryn (1624), the county of Cornwall (1625), Tregony (1626), and Bodmin (1628), and he played an occasional but by no means a major role in the contentious sessions of the decade. He was, however, an active patron on Buckingham's behalf in borough elections across Cornwall, where he had been appointed JP in 1617 and deputy lieutenant in 1623. As early as 1614 Killigrew used his family influence to secure for Sir James Whitelocke control of a seat at Helston, and in 1625 and 1626 he secured a seat at Penryn for Buckingham's client Sir Edwin Sandys. 
In September 1625 it was reported that Killigrew was to become resident ambassador to the United Provinces; his appointment was confirmed that December, but he never took up residence, probably because his duties at Pendennis kept him in England during the military mobilization of the mid- and late-1620s. He proved an energetic keeper, constantly petitioning the privy council for more money, men, and ordnance, and was appointed to various commissions concerned with the local war effort, including the 1627 commission for the forced loan. He also continued to accumulate court favour and office. In March 1627 he began farming the fees for sealing writs in king's bench and common pleas, and early in 1630 he became vice-chamberlain to Queen Henrietta Maria. In his last years, he renegotiated the lease on his estates at Hanworth and Kempton, continued his Cornish responsibilities, and embarked on controversial fen drainage schemes in Lincolnshire. His entrepreneurial endeavours in the fens were the last of a string of business activities which included investments in the Virginia and New River Companies. Killigrew died at Hanworth in the spring of 1633 and his will was proved on 12 May 1633. 
Killigrew was a cosmopolitan and cultured man. When the Dutch diplomat and poet Constantijn Huygens stayed with Killigrew in 1622 he was introduced by his host to many of London's cultural elite, including John Donne, Sir Francis Bacon, the musician and painter Nicholas Lanier, the lutenist Jacques Gaultier, and the lens-grinder Cornelius Drebbel. Killigrew himself dabbled in lens-grinding and in medicine. His skill with medical concoctions had dragged him into the Overbury plot in 1613, and a manuscript of his 'Experimenta' survives in a contemporary compendium of medical and scientific writings. Evidence of his cultural patronage is scarce, but two works -- Thomas Farnaby's 1615 edition of Martial's epigrams and a 1613 religious treatise by Thomas Broad -- were dedicated to him. Killigrew's personal religious sympathies are unclear. His uncle Henry had been an early and militant protestant, but it has been suggested, solely on the circumstantial evidence of his friendship with the Arminian Richard Thomson, that Killigrew himself had anti-Calvinist leanings. 
His widow married Sir Thomas Stafford, gentleman-usher to Henrietta Maria, and a number of his children enjoyed lengthy court careers. Perhaps nurtured by the intellectual atmosphere of the Killigrew home, Killigrew's sons William and Thomas Killigrew became playwrights, and his son Henry a noted divine. His daughter Elizabeth was an early mistress of Charles II, with whom she had an illegitimate daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 15538


Killigrew, Thomas (1612-1683), playwright and theatre manager, was born on 7 February 1612 at Lothbury, London, and baptized on 20 February at St Margaret, Lothbury, the fourth son of Sir Robert Killigrew (1579/80-1633) and Mary Woodhouse; he was brother of Sir William Killigrew and Henry Killigrew. 
Although the seat of the family estate was at Hanworth, near Hampton Court, Killigrew was probably raised in London. His interest in the drama may have been aroused at an early age: in October 1662 Pepys reported the story of how Killigrew as a boy would go to the Red Bull playhouse at Clerkenwell, 'and when the man cried to the boys, 'Who will go and be a divell, and he shall see the play for nothing?' -- then would he go in and be a devil upon the stage' (Pepys, 3.243-4). The earliest mention of Thomas occurs in his grandmother Margerie Killigrew's will, dated 22 May 1623: to him and his brothers Charles (1609-1629), Robert (1611-1635), and Henry (1613-1700), she bequeathed the sum of $5 (Margerie Killigrew's will). 
Unlike that of his brothers William (1606-1695) and Henry, who both studied at Oxford, Thomas's formal education appears to have been rather incidental. Correct spelling was an achievement that, even in later life, he never quite attained. As his brother Henry, in a letter to Anthony Wood, testified in November 1691, Thomas 'wanted some learning to poise his excellent natural wit' (Pritchard, 288). What education he had he obtained at court, to which his father, the queen's vice-chamberlain, must have introduced him. Contrary to what has been maintained, however, Thomas did not become a page at court as early as 1625 but some time later. Of his career at court until 1635 or 1636, not much is known. It has been (somewhat implausibly) suggested, on the authority of William Coventry's story as reported by Pepys in July 1665, that Thomas entered the service of Francis, Lord Cottington, when the latter became ambassador to Spain in the autumn of 1629 (Pepys, 9.256). 
By July 1632 at the latest Killigrew was serving as a page of honour to Charles I, and over the next few years he tried to supplement his annual salary of $100 with the proceeds from confiscated properties. In his will, dated 12 September 1632, Sir Robert bequeathed to his sons Thomas and Robert his part and portion of all his real estate in the county of Cornwall and 'the yearlie sum of fiftie pounds apeece... to be issuing and going out of all my Manors, lands, tenements and hereditaments' in the same county (Sir Robert Killigrew's will). To Thomas and his heirs he also left 100 acres of fenland in Lincolnshire. But Sir Robert's heavily encumbered bequest was probably an insufficient financial basis for a young courtier to build a career on. In the scramble for money and favour characteristic of one in his position, Thomas managed to ingratiate himself with Queen Henrietta Maria herself. His first play, 'The Prisoners', a romantic tragicomedy composed in 1635 and performed at the Phoenix, Drury Lane, by Her Majesty's Servants in 1636, may have been a successful bid for royal favour. In October 1635 he was given the opportunity to accompany Walter Montague, the queen's favourite, on his travels to the continent. Montague and his attendants stayed at Calais, Paris, Tours, Orleans, and Loudun, where Killigrew recorded his experiences at the convent of the possessed Ursuline nuns. Before 17 January 1636 they arrived at Vercelli in Italy, then continued south to Rome and Naples, where Killigrew's next two tragicomedies, 'Claricilla' and 'The Princess', were composed, in whole or in part. 'Claricilla' was performed at the Phoenix before 1641; 'The Princess' was probably acted at Blackfriars by the King's Men. 
In the spring Killigrew returned to England and on 29 June he married Cecilia Crofts, a maid of honour to the queen. Thomas Carew, a friend of the Crofts family, celebrated the bride's beauty and the groom's happiness in a poem 'On the Marriage of T. K. and C. C. the Morning Stormie'. Henry, the single son from this wedding, was born on Easter day, 9 April 1637. Cecilia died on 1 January 1638 and was buried in Westminster Abbey. In Van Dyck's famous double portrait of 'Killigrew and an Unknown Man', painted in 1638, Killigrew is shown in mourning for Cecilia, wearing her wedding-ring and a small cross with her intertwined initials. The evidence shows that her memory stayed with him throughout the years of his second marriage. 
In the course of 1639 Killigrew set off on his travels again. The sons of the earl of Cork, Francis (who married Thomas's sister Elizabeth in October 1639) and Robert Boyle, recorded meeting him in Paris in November. From their correspondence, Killigrew's itinerary can be accurately reconstructed: in March 1640 he joined them in Geneva and left for Basel three weeks later, intending to cross the Alps. He visited the English College of the Jesuits at Rome twice in March 1641 and on his way back to England stopped at Geneva again in April. The title-page of the 1664 folio edition of Killigrew's best-known play, 'The Parson's Wedding', probably written in 1640-41, describes it as having been composed at Basel. Characterized by the Boyles' tutor as one that loved 'profaine and irreligious discourses' (Stoye, 247), Killigrew had somehow acquired the ill fame that was to haunt him ever after. 
Like most of his relatives, Killigrew joined the royalist side at the outbreak of the civil war. Already in November 1641 he had been employed as a messenger by both the king and the queen. He was summoned to appear before the Commons in February 1642 on suspicion of treason, but not until several months later was he taken into custody and probably placed under house arrest. He continued to occupy his lodgings at The Piazza, Covent Garden, until July 1643, when he was given a pass to join the royalist forces at Oxford. Soon afterwards he may have left England. By April 1647 he had become admitted to the circle of the exiled Prince Charles and was sent to Italy to borrow money for the support of his young master's cause, a mission that proved a moderate success. Killigrew's romantic tragedy 'The Pilgrim' may have been written for the Prince of Wales's Company in Paris in 1646. When James, duke of York, established himself at The Hague in May 1648, Killigrew entered his service as groom of the bedchamber. Shortly after the execution of Charles I in 1649, he transferred his services again to the household of Prince Charles in Paris. As the new king's special envoy, he was entrusted with the task of seeking the recognition of Venice and the northern states of Italy. In November 1649 he scored some success at Turin, then travelled on to Genoa, Leghorn, Pisa, and Florence, where the reception given him was much cooler and the authorities' attitude to the king's cause noncommittal. 
Killigrew reached Venice on 14 February 1650 and remained there as Charles's resident for more than two years. During his Italian stay, he found the time to write two lengthy dramatic romances, 'Cecilia and Clorinda', its first part composed in Turin, its second in Florence, and 'Bellamira her Dream', entirely written in Venice. As of June 1651 Killigrew began to experience difficulties in his relationship with the Venetian senate over his alleged involvement in illegal slaughtering and smuggling practices. The senate's request in June 1652 that the English resident be dismissed was largely inspired by political expediency, as the Venetian republic did not wish to antagonize Cromwell's government. 
After leaving Venice, Killigrew stayed briefly at The Hague in attendance on the duke of Gloucester. When the duke removed his household to Paris in May 1653, to join his mother and King Charles, Killigrew accompanied him there. Whether 'Thomaso, or, The Wanderer', probably completed in 1654, was written in Madrid, as the title-page of the 1664 edition indicates, has never been ascertained. Largely autobiographical, Killigrew's two-part comedy is a verbose but often sparkling account of the exiled cavaliers' experiences in Spain, France, and the Low Countries. Soon after the court had departed from Paris in June 1654, Killigrew returned to The Hague, home to a large English community. At The Hague, he enjoyed the protection of Elizabeth, queen of Bohemia, who had been in exile there since 1621. To her intercession with Charles II, her nephew, and to the latter's mediation with Willem Frederik of Nassau-Dietz (1613-1664), stadholder of Friesland, Killigrew owed his appointment, in 1655, as a captain in the service of the states general. 
It was possibly on the occasion of his first visit to The Hague in summer 1652 that Killigrew had made the acquaintance of Charlotte van Hesse-Piershil (1629-1715), the eldest and well-to-do daughter of Johan van Hesse (died 1638), gentleman of the prince of Orange. The couple were married in the church of the Walloon Reformed Community, on 28 January 1655. As early as October 1655 the newly-weds contemplated leaving the city, signalling their intention to move to Maastricht, where Killigrew's company was garrisoned. On 29 December 1655, their first son, Charles Killigrew, the future theatre manager, was born there; and on 19 February 1657 a second son, Thomas (died 3 June 1674), was added to the family. In the meantime, Killigrew had himself assigned to a different company, no doubt within the same city. On 1 May 1656, the council of state, in view of Killigrew's reputation as someone having 'courage and experience in matters of war' (Vander Motten, 'Lost Years', 321), appointed him to replace one John More, who had deserted his company. 
While in the pay of the states of Friesland, Killigrew also acted as a kind of liaison officer for Charles II. In a letter from Maastricht (intercepted by the intelligence services of John Thurloe, Cromwell's secretary of state), he provided an astute summary of the doings of the major European powers in spring 1657. The English government went on to monitor closely his movements in Charles's service. On 5 April 1658 Sir George Downing informed Thurloe of Killigrew's intention to seek the appointment to a vacant post of regimental major. The prospect of such promotion may have necessitated the family's temporary return to The Hague, for on 28 March 1658 the church register of the Walloon Reformed Community there recorded the christening of a daughter, Charlotte-Marguerite (who may have died in infancy, before the end of 1660). 
As groom of the bedchamber, Killigrew accompanied Charles on his semi-secret tour of the United Provinces in early September 1658, a tour which probably took the king as far north as Friesland, where he visited the Frisian stadholder. On 18 October Downing reported to Thurloe that he had 'had an accompt from one Killigrew of his bed-chamber' (Vander Motten, 'Lost Years', 324) of Charles's complete itinerary and the company he kept. It is not clear whether such information, if indeed supplied by Killigrew, amounted to a form of treason or was merely an apology for the king's presence on Dutch soil. From the five letters which Charles wrote to Willem Frederik between March 1659 and April 1662, it is evident that even after 1658 Killigrew continued to enjoy the protection and friendship of the monarch and the stadholder. Both men evidently co-operated in protecting Killigrew's interests, as on the occasion of the request which John Milton, Latin secretary to Cromwell, sent to Killigrew's Frisian paymasters on 27 January 1659, pleading that he be not allowed to escape an outstanding English debt. In the final months of the exile, Killigrew was not exclusively involved in state matters. In a letter from Maastricht dated 11 February 1659 and sent to an unknown friend, he declined the latter's offer to become a Catholic, criticizing at length the idolatrous practices of the church of Rome and its position on transubstantiation (Durham University Library, Cosin MS BI 13). 
Although Pepys on 24 May 1660 recorded meeting Killigrew, 'a gentleman of great esteem with the King' (Pepys, 1.157), on board the 'Charles', the dramatist's wife, pregnant again, and the three children presumably prolonged their stay in Maastricht. Not until after the birth of Robert (baptized on 4 July 1660) did Charlotte move to London. Before the end of the year, she and her three sons were included in an act of naturalization, which in due course was ratified by the king. In May 1662 Charlotte became keeper of the sweet coffer for the queen, and in June she was made first lady of the privy chamber. Despite his recent re-establishment in London, Killigrew on 12 September 1660 acquired the rights of citizenship of Maastricht. His motives for doing so almost five years after settling down at Maastricht are a matter for speculation. As late as 30 November 1660, the king intervened on his behalf with the Frisian stadholder, asking that Killigrew be allowed to retain his military appointment, which he risked losing as a result of the council of state's plans to cut the expenditure for defence. In the course of 1660 Killigrew petitioned the king for a variety of offices and commodities, including the keepership of the armory at Greenwich, 'in consideration of his expense in attendance on His Majesty abroad' ('CSP dom.', '1660-61', 101), and a parcel of white plate worth $1200 that had belonged to Cromwell. But the financial compensations which Charles must have promised him during the exile had by the end of 1660 not yet materialized -- hence perhaps the dramatist's request to retain his Dutch commandership. Not until November 1661 was he granted an annual pension of $500 as a groom of the bedchamber. By then he had completely changed his mind about his overseas obligations, for on 31 October 1661 the king once again intervened with the stadholder, asking him to allow Killigrew to transfer his company, supposedly for health reasons. The favour was granted and in January 1662 Killigrew's company was sold to one Jeremy Roper for 14,000 guilders. 
The most singular mark of the king's esteem was of course the licence which in July 1660 he gave to Killigrew and Sir William Davenant 'to erect two playhouses... to control the charges to be demanded, and the payments to actors... and absolutely suppressing all other playhouses' ('CSP dom.', '1660-61', 124). Both men thus obtained a virtual monopoly to form two companies of players, produce all and any dramatic entertainments, and license all plays submitted to them. Killigrew's company, known as the King's Men, began acting at the Red Bull on 5 November 1660; they moved to Gibbons's Tennis Court, Vere Street, on 8 November. Davenant's company, under the patronage of the duke of York, possibly started their operations at Salisbury Court by 15 November; they moved to their Lincoln's Inn Fields theatre, fully equipped with movable scenery, in June 1661. When 'Claricilla' was revived at Vere Street, on 4 July 1661, Pepys remarked on how empty Killigrew's theatre was 'since the opera begun' (Pepys, 2.132). 
On 7 May 1663 the King's Company began acting at the new Theatre Royal, Bridges Street, Killigrew holding both acting and building shares in the company. Killigrew boasted a group of experienced actors and actresses drawn from various earlier troupes, including Michael Mohun, Nicholas Burt, Charles Hart, John Lacy, Anne Marshall, and Elizabeth Weaver. Davenant had to compete with a less seasoned troupe but managed to secure the services of Thomas Betterton, who had briefly been a member of the King's Company. Killigrew also had the exclusive rights to a large repertory of pre-Restoration plays, which included nearly all of Ben Jonson's works and many of Shakespeare's. Despite the heavy preponderance of old plays in the repertory of the Theatre Royal in the 1660s, there were few practising playwrights from the earlier period, but several new gentlemen dramatists attached themselves to Killigrew's company. Sir Robert Howard, holder of one quarter of the shares at Bridges Street, and James and Edward Howard wrote for his company in the early 1660s; so did Roger Boyle, earl of Orrery, and possibly Sir George Etherege. Of the professional playwrights Killigrew went on to recruit, none was more important that John Dryden. After negotiations with both companies, he became in April 1668 a playwright-sharer with the King's Company, agreeing to provide them with three plays annually in return for one and one-quarter shares. (Dryden broke the agreement in 1678.) Apparently Nathaniel Lee had a similar agreement, and so did Thomas D'Urfey during part of his career. Elkanah Settle also allied himself with the company in 1673. 
As Killigrew's annotated copy of his 'Comedies and Tragedies' (1664) preserved in the library of Worcester College, Oxford, demonstrates, he was ambitious enough to prepare his own plays for production on the new, scenic stage. 'The Princess' was revived at Vere Street on 29 November 1661, 'the first time... since before the troubles' in Pepys's words (Pepys, 2.223). 'Claricilla' and 'The Parson's Wedding' proved the most successful of Killigrew's plays. Clandestinely performed at Gibbons's Tennis Court in 1653, 'Claricilla' (one of the stock plays of Mohun's troupe at the Red Bull in 1660) was successively revived at Vere Street on 1 December 1660 and 4 July 1661, at court in January 1663, and at Bridges Street in March 1669. A performance of 'The Parson's Wedding', 'acted all by women' according to Pepys (ibid., 5.289), was scheduled at Bridges Street on 5 or 6 October 1664; it was given again at Lincoln's Inn Fields in June 1672. Much more popular, however, than any of his plays was Aphra Behn's 'The Rover', a lively adaptation of 'Thomaso', first produced at Dorset Gardens in March 1677. (As groom of the bedchamber, Killigrew had probably introduced Behn to Charles's intelligence service in 1666.) Despite the manifest advantages Killigrew enjoyed as the manager of the King's Company, he appears to have had insufficient practical sense of the theatre to compete successfully with Davenant, a professional playwright and theatrical innovator. Nevertheless, his theatrical initiatives were by no means despicable. Before the end of 1660, Killigrew beat Davenant in the race to introduce actresses on the stage, a novelty made official in the April 1662 patent issued to him, decreeing that all female parts were to be played by women. On 2 August 1664 he told Pepys of his plans to set up a nursery theatre at Moorfields, 'were we shall have the best Scenes and Machines, the best Musique... and to that end hath sent for voices and painters and other persons from Italy' (Pepys, 5.230). And in February and September 1667 he boasted to the same interlocutor of the many improvements at his theatre, including the importation of distinguished Italian musicians. 
Killigrew's company shared of course in the misfortunes that befell the London stage. In June 1665 the theatres were closed down on account of the plague and on 25 January 1672 a fire destroyed the Theatre Royal, forcing Killigrew's company to move to the playhouse at Lincoln's Inn Fields, recently vacated by the Duke's Men. It is undeniable, however, that the King's Company's problems must be attributed to Killigrew's dubious handling of his theatrical holdings, resulting in conflicts with the disgruntled sharing actors, and, indeed, his own son Charles. As early as 1663, Killigrew had made over his building shares to his brother-in-law Sir John Sayers, to be held in trust for him; he also temporarily delegated the direction of the company to Hart, Mohun, and Lacy. After the death of Sir Henry Herbert, who in 1661-2 had sued the patent-holders for usurping some of his powers, Killigrew was appointed master of the revels on 1 May 1673 but in February 1677 he resigned the post to his son Charles. Only three weeks later, he was forced by law to turn over to Charles his patent and governorship of the company (in 1682 it was discovered that his theatrical property had not been his to control). 
Trying to cope with his expensive habits of getting and spending, including his theatrical investments, Killigrew had to borrow money from his wife, whose interests in the Piershil inheritance had been safeguarded by a 1655 contract. Throughout his term as a patentee he petitioned the king for diverse gifts and licences. In December 1663 he requested the grant of a lease of nineteen messuages 'in Collier Row, Stepney, and Shoreditch, the manor of Puriton-cum-Crandon, and a house in Bridgewater', worth $88 a year ('CSP dom.', '1660-70', 686). In March 1670, in consideration of his 'long and faithful services' (ibid., '1670', 133), he was given the benefit of a bond worth $500, due to the king from one Thomas Pritchard. And the state papers for the years 1671 to 1676 show that he obtained a patent to license 'pedlars and petty chapmen' (ibid., '1671', 216) and claimed the right to grant licences for lotteries. After 1676 his interest in the theatre business gradually dwindled. 
According to Pepys, writing on 13 February 1668, Killigrew had been given the title of 'King's fool or jester... and may with privilege revile or jeere any body... without offence' (Pepys, 9.66-7). Countless anecdotes survive to prove that it was during his years at Charles's court that Killigrew established his reputation as a flippant conversationalist endowed with a caustic wit. Whether or not this is indicative of a fundamental change of mind, in his declining years he took a fancy to having himself portrayed in a very different guise, first, in the 1670s, as a pilgrim of St James, and after 1680, bearded as St Paul, carrying a sword, the emblem of martyrdom. Financial worries, however, must have weighed the family down, as is suggested by his petition, dated 16 January 1680, for payment of arrears on his pension in the amount of $850. 
In 1683 Pier Maria Mazzantini, an Italian physician, asked the king for leave to practise the antidote Orvietan, claiming that it had saved Killigrew's life. 'Weak and indisposed in body', on 15 March 1683 the dramatist drew up his will. He requested to be buried at Westminster Abbey, together with his first wife and his sister Elizabeth (died 1681). The largest part of his estate, both 'real and personal', and the arrears on his pension went to his son Henry, who was also made the sole executor. Charlotte and her children were left unmentioned. Killigrew died at Whitehall on 19 March 1683. Within days after her husband's death Charlotte petitioned the king for relief, arguing that she had brought 'a considerable fortune to her husband... though of late by the insinuation of ill people his affections were withdrawn from her so that he has left her and her two youngest sons in a very necessitous condition' ('CSP dom.', '1683', 220). The king obliged by granting her an annual pension of $200; he also contributed $50 to the funeral. Charlotte was buried on 22 April 1715, having survived her children by several years. Roger, born on 17 September 1663, had died prior to July 1694; Robert, a brigadier-general, was killed at the battle of Almanzor on 14 April 1707; and Elizabeth, born on 3 July 1666, may have been buried at St Martin's on 21 April 1690. 


@@@@@


doc= 15539


Killigrew, Thomas (bap. 1694, d. 1719), playwright, was baptized on 23 February 1694, the second son of Charles Killigrew (1655-1724/5), theatre manager, and Jemima, niece of Richard Bokenham, mercer, of London, and the grandson of Thomas Killigrew the elder (1612-1683), with whose son Thomas (1657-1674) he has sometimes been confused. He was probably the author of 'Chit-Chat', a comedy, first performed at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, on 14 February 1719, and published in two separate editions in the same year. Its strong cast included Barton Booth as Worthy, Robert Wilks as Bellamar, Colley Cibber as Alamode, and Anne Oldfield as Florinda. Described in the prologue as the author's 'first Coup d'Essay', 'Chit-Chat' proved one of the most popular plays of the 1718-19 season. It was given eleven performances at Drury Lane between its premiere and 19 March, and another two at Richmond on 6 and 20 June, the former, 'by his Royal Highness's Command' (Avery, 542), celebrating the opening of William Pinkethman's new theatre. 'Chit-Chat' was also a financial success: in addition to two author benefits and a sum of 150 guineas presented him by the prince and the princess of Wales, Killigrew secured the patronage of John Campbell, second duke of Argyll, 'whose interest was so powerfully supported, that it was said the profits of his play amounted to above a thousand pounds', according to Thomas Whincop (Nicoll, 18). In letters addressed to Booth and Steele, the critic John Dennis expressed his indignation at the success of such trivia as 'Chit-Chat' and other comedies, when his own tragedy 'The Invader of his Country' had never even reached the stage. Killigrew contributed 'The Fable of Aumilius and the Statue of Venus' to 'Miscellanea aurea, or, The Golden Medley', a collection of 'epistolary essays in prose and verse' (1720). He was buried at Kensington on 21 July 1719. 


@@@@@


doc= 15540


Sir William Killigrew (d. 1622), courtier, and his wife, Margaret (died in or after 1623), daughter of Thomas Saunders of Uxbridge, Middlesex, and grandson of John Killigrew of Arwennack, Cornwall, and his wife, Elizabeth Trewennard. William Killigrew and his brother, Henry Killigrew, made their fortunes at Elizabeth I's court. William, though less influential than Henry, acted as a diplomatic courier, became a groom of the privy chamber by 1576, farmed the fees from sealing writs in queen's bench and common pleas (from 1578), and was treasurer of the chamber in 1595. He held various offices in Cornwall and Devon, and sat in parliament for Grantham (1571), Helston (1572), Penryn (1584), Fowey (1593), and the county of Cornwall (1597). Knighted by James I at Theobalds on 7 May 1603, he was MP for Liskeard in 1604 and Penryn in 1614 and chamberlain of the exchequer in 1605-8. In 1594 he was granted an eighty-year lease by the crown for the manors of Hanworth and Kempton in Middlesex. He died at his town house in Lothbury, London, on 23 November 1622, and was buried at St Margaret, Lothbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 15541


Killigrew, Sir William (bap. 1606, d. 1695), courtier and playwright, was baptized on 28 May 1606 at Hanworth, near Hampton Court, Middlesex, the eldest child of Sir Robert Killigrew (1579/80-1633) and Mary, daughter of Sir Henry Woodhouse of Kimberley, Norfolk; he was brother to Henry Killigrew (1613-1700) and Thomas Killigrew (1612-1683). 
Killigrew was probably educated, from about 1616, at the grammar school in Cripplegate, London, of Thomas Farnaby, the classical scholar, who enjoyed Sir Robert's patronage. About 1619 he may have been sent to the continent to serve as a page at the court of the princes of Orange. As the eldest son, in 1623 William inherited from his paternal grandmother Margerie Killigrew 'tenn pounds of lawfull englishe moneye' (Margerie Killigrew's will), twice the amount left to his brothers Charles (1609-1629), Robert (1611-1635), Thomas, and Henry but substantially less than the enamelled chain plus $50 left to his eldest sister Anne (1607-1641). 
On 4 July 1623 Killigrew entered St John's College, Oxford, as a gentleman commoner, taking up the study of civil law. While at Oxford he contributed a poem to 'Carolus redux' (1623), a collection celebrating Prince Charles's return from Spain after his wooing of the Infanta. It is doubtful whether William completed the full course of his studies, for on 9 April 1624 the privy council issued a pass for William Killigrew and Maurice Berkeley, a cousin, 'esquires, to travell into the partes beyond the seas for the terme of three yeares and to take with them three servantes, their trunks, and other necessary provisions' ('APC', 202). Within one or two years at most, William must have been back in England. In 1625 or 1626 he married Mary Hill, daughter of John Hill of Honiley, Warwickshire; and in May 1626 he was knighted. They had seven children, only two of whom, Captain William and Sir Robert (both living in 1701), were to survive their father. Shortly after his return from his travels, Killigrew obtained a 'firm foothold' at Whitehall (Dasent, 128), being appointed gentleman usher of the privy chamber to Charles I. From now on, he was to hold several major offices of a very diverse character. On 3 March 1628 he was elected by double returns to Charles's third parliament as a member for Newport and Penryn, Cornwall, but he sat only for the latter; and on 21 March following he and his father were jointly granted the governorship, for life, of Pendennis Castle, in the same county. 
Entrusted with the task of guarding the safety of the south-west coast of England, Killigrew was faced at Pendennis with a twofold problem: the poor condition of the stronghold, inadequately garrisoned and in need of urgent repairs; and the quarrels with the fort of St Mawes, trying to usurp the prerogatives of Pendennis with respect to ships entering Falmouth Bay. Killigrew showed himself tenacious of his privileges as governor. As one captain testified in November 1631, Killigrew 'is at peace with neither King's ships nor others; both the Admiral and the writer have been twice shot at by him, going in and coming out'. Sir William was reprimanded by the admiralty and instructed 'never more to offend in that kind' (Vander Motten, 'Killigrew', 40-41). In the course of 1632 and 1633, there were new charges of mismanagement. A Dutch vessel, after causing $2000 worth of damage to an English ship, had been allowed to escape the harbour. Sir William, held personally responsible, was ordered to find compensation for the English captain's losses, all to no avail. This incident may have precipitated his resignation of the governorship, which he surrendered to Sir Nicholas Slanning in April 1635. 
Even before his father's death on 22 November 1633, Killigrew had launched out on an adventure that was to preoccupy him in decades to come, the draining of the fenlands in Lincolnshire. On 30 April 1633 Killigrew, his father (involved in draining activities since 1629), and other 'adventurers' were appointed as drainers of the Eight Hundred Fen in Lincolnshire. As stipulated in the various grants, the drainers were to be repaid for their expenses with portions of the drained lands: in 1635, the earl of Lindsey, the main undertaker, Sir William, and others were given 24,000 acres to be divided into 20 lots. A major shareholder, Killigrew from 1634 onwards found it increasingly difficult to keep up with the huge expenses, as is perhaps suggested by his continuous sale of property in Devon bequeathed him by his father. There was also fierce opposition from the commoners, who complained of the drainers' high-handed policy, aimed at the enclosing and dividing of their lands. Riots intensified between 1630 and 1640, the fen people playing havoc with the drainers' possessions, their crops, drains, and fences. He also sold, to Sir Nicholas Slunning, the royalist army officer and governor of Pendennis Castle, Cornwall, large tracts of land adjacent to the castle, including the area that subsequently became Trebah Gardens. 
Despite such pressing problems, Killigrew never abandoned his belief in the 'family grandeur' (Harbage, 26). Like his sister Anne in 1636-7 and his brother Thomas in 1636 and again in 1638, Killigrew in 1638 had his portrait painted by Anthony Van Dyck, who in the same year also painted a companion portrait of his wife Mary. In early 1642 Killigrew figured prominently in the events leading up to King Charles's attempt to arrest the five MPs. He was sent to the inns of court to publicize the accusations and seek support for the king, thus making himself guilty of a 'high breach of privilege of Parliament' (Vander Motten, 'Killigrew', 60). The heavy fine he incurred always remained unpaid. 
At the outbreak of the civil war, Sir William was given the command, under Lord Bernard Stuart, of a troop of horse, the members of which by all accounts distinguished themselves in battle. As a reward for Killigrew's good services at the battle of Edgehill, where he led the charge on 23 October 1642, King Charles created him doctor of civil law at Oxford on 1 or 2 November. That Killigrew enjoyed the king's confidence is also suggested by the various missions with which he was entrusted, including that of a go-between in the peace negotiations of March 1643. In the eyes of many parliamentarian MPs, he had become identified as 'a great and principall Factor for the Cavaliers in this Rebellion and Designe' (Vander Motten, 'Killigrew', 67). Contributions to the war effort, in Cornwall and elsewhere, would have constituted a heavy drain on Sir William's dwindling means. Writing from Exeter on 17 March 1644, he asked Edward Seymour, governor of Dartmouth, to provide him with 'pistolls and carrabins', ensuring him that he would be paid 'soe soone as my purse is a little replenished' (Devon RO 1392M/L16/44/19). His precarious financial situation impelled him to consider seeking a foreign appointment, for in May 1645 he applied for the position of English ambassador in Turkey, a post eventually given to Sir Thomas Bendish. In accordance with the Oxford articles signed by the royalists after the taking of the city on 20 June 1646, Killigrew on 5 November 1646 requested permission to compound for his estate (the practice by which royalists were fined for their 'delinquency'). The investigation of his guilt was dragged out until 4 March 1651, when Killigrew's fine was set at one-sixth part of $20. 
Between 1647 and the Restoration, Killigrew in a series of 'fen pamphlets', all controversial in tone, gave expression to the drainers' viewpoints and called for a confirmation by law of their interests, meanwhile calling attention to what in 1648 he described as 'the poor estate of himself, his wife, and family, who do beg their bread' (Vander Motten, 'Killigrew', 75). Unhampered by ethical principles, Killigrew was evidently prepared to resort to any means in order to remedy this situation, as appears from the testimony left by Richard Lygon, in a pamphlet dated 18 March 1654. At some time between 1647 and 1652, Sir William had connived with his cousin Jane Berkeley to defraud Lygon of an estate left him by their great-uncle Henry Killigrew (died 1646) for the payment of his debts. From Lygon's meticulous (but presumably biased) account of the cousins' machinations, Sir William emerges as a smooth-talking and cunning schemer, whose prodigality may at least partly account for his family's destitution. 
The most touching testimony as to the Killigrews' impoverished condition during the years of the Commonwealth is provided by the thirteen letters Killigrew addressed to Captain Adam Baynes (1622-1670) between 19 April 1653 and 1 November 1659. A commissioner for the excise, the customs, and sequestered estates, Baynes was a parliamentarian sympathetic to the draining projects. Using Baynes as an intermediary, Killigrew petitioned the council of state on many occasions. His petition of 24 January 1654 was presented to the committee for the fens by Major-General Lambert himself. On 27 July 1654, the council ordered that the drainers be put in possession of the 24,000 acres allotted to them by the commissioners of sewers many years before. This ordinance was never enacted. Finding himself devoid of all manner of subsistence, Killigrew in his letter of 29 March 1655 contemplated leaving 'this Towne' and seeking 'some remote place for a service where I am unknowne, and maye pass by a wronge Name' (Vander Motten, 'Killigrew', 337). In so doing, he may have wanted to follow the example of those of his children who had already left the country. His eldest daughter, Mary ('b'. 1627?) had become a maid of honour to the princess royal in Holland in 1644 and married Baron Frederik van Nassau-Zuylestein in October 1648; Susan ('bap'. 1 April 1629) had joined Queen Henrietta Maria on the continent towards 1649; his sons Sir Robert and Captain William both served as soldiers of fortune in the Low Countries, the former from about 1650 until 1659, the latter some time before May 1660, when he married Helena Van der Maa, daughter of a prosperous citizen of The Hague. Judging from Sir William's letter of 15 November 1655, his wife too was living separated from him, the precariousness of their situation accentuated by the latent fear of anti-royalist persecution. 
Even before the king's official Restoration in May 1660, Killigrew sent him a long letter of diplomatic advice, urging the monarch to accept the conditions on which his return was assumed to depend. As too many of the old royalists and the suffering clergy would expect compensation for their losses, he argued that it would be better for the king not to have the entire revenue at his disposal. Reminding Charles how at Oxford he had used to entertain the king his father with such considerations, Killigrew offered these reflections 'without any designe for myself' (Vander Motten, 'Killigrew', 244). The letter served its purpose, for by July or August 1660 Killigrew was again appointed gentleman usher of the privy chamber and took up lodgings at Whitehall. Shortly afterwards, by February 1664 at the latest, he was made the queen's vice-chamberlain, a position worth $500 a year. 
Killigrew evidently used his position at court to acquire various grants and offices for himself and his family. Together with Dorothy Spencer, countess of Sunderland, he was granted parts of 'the profits of certain concealed waste lands in several counties' in June 1661; and in February 1662, both he and Thomas Chiffinch, keeper of the king's jewels, were granted a share of 'certain bonds for sequestration moneys in Lancashire', in the amount of $786. (Vander Motten, 'Killigrew', 106). In January 1664, Killigrew was involved in the contract made by the king with the Company of Pinmakers. His role as an intermediary in raising $5000 for the purchase of wire for the company's use was to have yielded him $100. (As late as 10 March 1676, the pinmakers' plan to reinvigorate their trade was again submitted to the king in a petition signed by Killigrew.) Before 1665, his wife Mary became a dresser to the queen, with an annual pension of $300. In the same year, Killigrew and some co-petitioners requested a grant of the forfeited houses in the town of New Ross, co. Wexford, Ireland. 
Killigrew also remained active in the political arena. On 9 April 1664, he was returned to parliament for Richmond, to succeed Sir John Yorke, deceased. He served on several committees in this Long Parliament, which sat from 8 May 1661 until 24 January 1679. And he distinguished himself, as John Milward noted in his parliamentary diary for the years 1666 to 1668, for his unflagging zeal as a defender of the works of draining in Lindsey Level, 'stoutly maintaining... the ancient bill' brought in twice in November 1667 (Vander Motten, 'Killigrew', 120). When this issue had been brought up for discussion in 1660 and 1661, the drainers and the landowners in the fens had angrily exchanged pamphlets that recapitulated the arguments formulated throughout the 1640s and 1650s. In the debates surrounding the 'Test Act' of 1673, stipulating that all persons holding office in the service of the king or the duke of York were to take an oath of allegiance, Killigrew on 21 March spoke in favour of the amendment excusing the queen's servants from the oath. His loyalty, however, was never a matter of doubt: from 1669 until 1678, his name occurs in several lists of members of the court party, one of these drawn up by the lord treasurer, the earl of Danby, himself. 
From letters sent to Danby in 1674, it appears that Killigrew had been closely involved in the king's financial policy. Charles had promised him a pension of $2000 if he were able to increase the two main branches of the revenue, the customs and the excise, both collected by means of the farming system. But Killigrew's proposals had been largely neglected and the pension which he had obtained towards the end of 1665 had amounted to only $500. He now submitted new proposals to the treasurer designed to secure a larger return from the excise. Although his views largely coincided with Danby's own policy, Killigrew's attempts to obtain a (profitable) lease of the excise farm remained unsuccessful. Plans to raise the 'Hearth money', a taxation on fireplaces, which he broached in a letter dated 16 December 1675, went unnoticed as well. Sir William and his wife probably lived in straitened circumstances, as is suggested by the monthly advances made on their pensions from July 1676 on. Sir William continued at Whitehall as vice-chamberlain to the queen until 27 July 1682, when he transferred his office to George Sawyer. But he held on to the annual profits of $516 and was allowed to move his lodgings to Hampton Court. 
That Sir William's spiritual retirement from the world commenced even before he relinquished his office at court is amply illustrated by the various collections of pious cogitations which he brought out in late 1681. The tone was set by 'Midnight Thoughts' (1681), with its lengthy subtitle hinting at the author's lifelong exertions in the fens as well as his new found confidence in the grace of God. 'Artless Mid-Night Thoughts' (dated 1684 but probably published in 1690) was partly a reissue of the 1681 collection. While most of the reflections on the frailty of human nature and the idea of imminent death were biblically inspired, Killigrew's self-examinations were indebted to contemporary meditative practices, Jesuit and Quaker as well as puritan and Anglican. The tranquillity of mind that professedly came with the search for a religious anchorage could not shield the old courtier from all worldly anxieties. Late in 1691 he brought an action of covenant against George Sawyer, requesting six years' arrears of salary, dating from 1682. By October 1691, he was living at Westminster Abbey, with his brother Henry. In response to Anthony Wood's enquiries about the Killigrew brothers, Sir William on 28 October and 4 November 1691 provided the biographical information that served as a basis for the account in 'Athenae Oxonienses'. On 3 October 1695 he drafted his last will. To his sons Sir Robert and Captain William he bequeathed 2000 acres of fenland; 2500 acres more were to be used for repaying his creditors. Sir William Killigrew died a few days later and was buried in the Savoy chapel on 17 October. Mary, his wife, left unmentioned in the will, may have predeceased him a few years earlier. 
Like many other gentleman amateurs, Sir William after 1660 had provided the recently re-opened theatres with a number of moderately successful plays. The first three of these, the tragicomedies 'Selindra' and 'Ormasdes' and the comedy 'Pandora', were published in 'Three Playes' (1664). Together with another tragicomedy, 'The Siege of Urbin', they were reissued in 1666 as 'Four New Playes'. 'Selindra', performed by the King's Company at Gibbons's Tennis Court, Vere Street, on 3 March 1662, was one of the first new plays to be given after the Restoration. According to the prompter John Downes, it was revived at the Theatre Royal, Bridges Street, some time between 1663 and 1682 (Downes, 15). 'Ormasdes' was Killigrew's attempt to join the short-lived post-Restoration vogue for plays in decasyllabic couplets initiated by Roger Boyle's 'The Generall'. Whether it was ever performed remains uncertain. Entered in the Stationers' register as a comedy in May 1664, 'Pandora' had apparently failed on the stage as a tragedy. John Downes included it in a list of plays 'both Old and Modern' staged at the Duke's Theatre, Lincoln's Inn Fields, between 1662 and May 1664 (ibid., 26). Designed for the new, scenic stage, 'The Siege of Urbin', Killigrew's best play, was probably performed in 1665, at the Theatre Royal, as is suggested by the cast of actors contained in the manuscript copy of the play preserved in the Bodleian Library. 'The Imperial Tragedy', an adaptation from 'Zeno, sive, Ambitio infelix', a Latin blood-and-horror play by the English Jesuit Joseph Simons (1593-1671), was Killigrew's last play. Published in 1669, it may have been acted at the Barbican Nursery after 1671 (Langbaine, 535). 
Apart from their exploration of the conflicting claims of love, honour, and friendship, 'Selindra', 'Ormasdes' (renamed 'Love and Friendship' in the 1666 edition) and 'The Siege of Urbin', no less than Killigrew's only tragedy, share with Restoration tragicomedy a marked concern with political issues of current interest, focusing as they do on matters of succession, usurpation, and royal and paternal authority. In its confrontation of old-fashioned Platonic ideals and modern libertine views, 'Pandora' reflects the author's commonsensical approach to such issues as love, marriage, and the battle of the sexes. Although of limited literary value, Killigrew's plays are of historical importance for the evidence of authorial revisions some of the printed editions contain, shedding light on a Restoration dramatist's efforts in bringing his plays to final form. 


@@@@@


doc= 15542


Killingworth, Grantham (bap. 1698, d. 1778), religious controversialist, was born in Norwich and baptized on 17 August 1698 at St Gregory's Church there, the son of Daniel Killingworth and his wife, whose father was the General Baptist preacher Thomas Grantham (1633/4-1692). Killingworth married Elizabeth Cox at All Hallows, London Wall, on 13 October 1730. A layman, Killingworth published widely on behalf of the General Baptists and entered into the controversies over popery and infant baptism. He argued against Thomas Emlyn, John Taylor, Michajah Towgood, James Foster, John Wiche, and Charles Bulkley on baptism, grace, and communion. Killingworth also defended women's right to receive communion. He was a personal friend of William Whiston, to whom he addressed 'A Letter... being a Full Answer to his Friendly Address to the Baptists' of 1757. In this work he offered evidence of the cures effected through 'prayer, fasting, and annointing with oyl' by the antitrinitarian Baptist minister William Barron (1679/80-1731). 
Killingworth died in 1778, leaving a considerable endowment to the Priory Yard General Baptist Chapel, in Norwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 15543


Kilmaine, Charles Edward Saul Jennings de (1751-1799), army officer in the French service, the son of Theobald Edward Jennings, styled baron of Kilmaine, a physician, and his wife, Eleanor Saul, the daughter of Laurence Saul of Dublin, a distiller, was born on 19 October 1751 in Dublin. Ten years later he went with his family to France. After seven years' service as a junior officer in Austria, he entered the French army in 1774 and in September 1778 became adjutant in a legion owned and commanded by the duc de Lauzun. He served with this unit in Senegal in 1779 and in America under Rochambeau (1780-83), and remained after it was reorganized as a hussar regiment; he attained the grade of captain on 24 May 1788. 
With the outbreak of war in April 1792 came rapid promotion. While serving with distinction in the armies of the north and the Ardennes, Kilmaine was named lieutenant-colonel on 1 October 1792, colonel on 9 November 1792, general of brigade on 8 March 1793, and general of division on 15 May 1793. But with the Jacobin government came growing suspicion of the political reliability of 'ancien regime' officers. Despite his exemplary service, Kilmaine was suspended on 4 August 1793 and imprisoned on 29 December 1793; his wife, Susanne Kirchmeyer ('b'. 1764/5), was also imprisoned. After his release fifteen months later he participated in the repression of the insurrection of Prairial (20 May 1795) against the Convention. He was restored to his rank on 13 June 1795 and given a command in the army of Italy under Napoleon. During 1796 and 1797 he served in various capacities and participated in numerous engagements: the passage of the Mincio, Castiglione, Mantua, Valeggio, and Verona; he even served as the army's interim commander between 17 November and 21 December 1797. He was then recalled to Paris, where his Irish background, which had been a serious disadvantage during the xenophobia of 1793-4 now made him a valued adviser in French plans for a descent on Ireland. In the spring of 1798 he was briefly appointed commander-in-chief of the so-called army of England. Declining health forced him to resign from the service on 30 December 1798. Kilmaine, who was divorced from his wife, died of chronic dysentery at Paris a year later, on 11 December 1799. 


@@@@@


doc= 15544


Kilvert, Francis (1793-1863), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born at 7 Caroline Buildings, Westgate Street, Bath, on 29 March 1793. He was the eldest of the seven sons and one daughter of Francis Kilvert (1757-1817), a coach builder, and his wife, Anna Falkner (1764-1817/18). His uncle the Revd Richard Kilvert was examining chaplain to Bishop Richard Hurd. His grandfather Robert Kilvert, yeoman, of Candover, Shropshire, was first cousin to the bishop; the Kilverts had lived in Shropshire since the twelfth century. 
Around 1802 Kilvert's father and grandmother Elizabeth lost money in a bank failure which blighted the family fortunes. He received, however, a good education: he was tutored by Dr Rowlandson at Hungerford, and then attended King Edward's Grammar School, Bath, where he became an assistant master before leaving in 1816. He entered Worcester College, Oxford, on 6 November 1811, graduated BA in 1819, and proceeded MA in 1824. He was ordained deacon by Bishop Richard Beadon in 1816 and priest in 1817. From 1816 until his death Kilvert tutored students, initially in 5 Caroline Buildings, the home of Elizabeth Kilvert, his grandmother, to whom he was much attached and for whom he later composed a long memorial. His father died in 1817, followed by his uncle the Revd Robert Kilvert, then by his mother, and in 1821 by his grandmother. Francis Kilvert, according to his brother Robert, 'well discharged a parent's duty, and was the mainstay of us all' (R. Kilvert, 44). 
In 1817 Kilvert became curate at Claverton, near which his cousins William and Frederick Falkner were farmers. He also became minister of St Mary Magdalen's Chapel, Bath, chaplain of Bath Hospital, and evening lecturer at St Mary's, Bathwick. His students -- 'a sacred trust' (F. Kilvert, xix) -- followed him to Claverton; in the mid-1850s these included his nephew (Robert) Francis Kilvert (1840-1879), whose diary was to become a classic a century later. Initially shy and sensitive, the boy flourished under his uncle's kind and learned guidance. In 1822 Francis Kilvert married Eleonora Adelaide Sophia Leopoldina de Chievre ('c'.1791-1870). Serious-minded and well-read, she was French and noble by birth; as a child she had escaped to Britain from the revolution, and had lived with a Quaker family. The couple had three daughters: Anna Sophia ('b'. 1828), Elizabeth Frances Maria ('b'. 1829), and Adelaide Mary ('b'. 1830). In 1842 Mrs Kilvert published a book, 'Home Discipline', which she dedicated to her husband and children, 'the chief joy and happiness of my life'. Kilvert himself had several publications to his name by this date: sermons preached at Christ Church before the national schools had appeared in 1827, and his sermons at St Mary's Church were published in 1837, in which year he became rector of Claverton. 
Also in 1837 Kilvert moved into Claverton Lodge, an old and commodious house, with a library lined with glass-fronted bookcases, and with distant views across the hills. His life was filled by tutorial work, clerical duties, his family, and frequent attendances at the Bath Literary Club. Nothing ever tempted him to leave Bath. He wrote and lectured on its history, and after the publication of his 'Ralph Allen and Prior Park' (1857), Joseph Hunter of the Record Office described him as 'the Bath biographer' (F. Kilvert, 179). His biography of 'Richard Graves of Claverton' followed in 1858. Kilvert's local histories were pleasantly nostalgic descriptions of late eighteenth-century Bath of no lasting value. His literary and learned interests ranged widely. A lover of Latin poetry, especially that of Horace, in 1848 he published 'Pinacothecae historicae specimen', sprightly Latin verses on famous people, starting with the patriarch Abraham and ending with the hymn writer Isaac Watts; he included, among others, Salome, Lord Byron, Joan of Arc, and Horace Walpole. His 'Selections from Unpublished Papers of Bishop Warburton' (1841) and 'Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Bishop Hurd' (1860) reflected his fascination with eighteenth-century scholarly bishops; Hurd had died in 1808, and Kilvert's book was the first to commemorate him. From time to time Kilvert's literary queries appeared in 'Notes and Queries'. After the posthumous publication in 1866 of his 'Remains in Verse and Prose', he was recalled in that journal as 'an accomplished scholar and pious and enlightened clergyman' (Markland, 188). Kilvert died at Claverton Lodge on 16 September 1863 and was buried in the old Widcombe churchyard, Bath. His widow moved to Bath, where she died on 10 January 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 15545


Kilvert, Richard (c.1588-1650), lawyer, was the brother of Roger Kilvert, a wine-importing Spanish merchant, but their parents are unknown. Kilvert married Margaret Duppa on 20 February 1614 at St Christopher-le-Stocks, London. They had a son, Robert Richard Kilvert, who was born in 1615. In 1639 Kilvert was said to be living in his brother's house in St Martin's Lane, London. 
Kilvert's education is unknown, but by the 1630s he was a lawyer soliciting cases in the Star Chamber and the court of high commission. Throughout his career Kilvert was exposed to attempted bribery and was confronted with allegations of corruption. In the eyes of contemporaries he was bold and without scruples. With reference to his past role in the court of high commission a pamphlet of 1642 claimed: 'Yet even in that Court he was found too corrupt, too libidinous, too treacherous; many Articles were exhibited against him and at last he was reiected as a person infamous and scandalous to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction' ('The Vintners Answer to some Scandalous Pamphlets Published (as is Supposed) by Richard Kilvert', 1642). On the other hand Kilvert enjoyed the trust of those in power. He was in contact with the secretary of state, Sir Francis Windebank, the lawyer Sir John Lambe, and James Hamilton, third marquess of Hamilton. Among his closest acquaintances was Archbishop Laud. 
Kilvert was involved in several significant cases. In April 1621 he informed the House of Lords of the 'many corruptions' of Sir John Bennet, MP for Oxford University, and promised further evidence (TNA: PRO, SP 16/120.107). The Lord Chancellor, who was accused along with Bennet, made large offers to Kilvert to desist from his charges, but Kilvert informed the House of Lords about the attempted bribery. In the proceedings against John Williams, bishop of Lincoln, in 1636 Kilvert played an important role as informer. He petitioned the king to impose a great fine on the bishop on the grounds of evidence brought against him in the court of Star Chamber and collected evidence which aimed at casting doubt on the bishop's religious and political loyalty, and his personal integrity with allegations of fraud and corruption (ibid., 16/362.11). Williams counter-attacked resurrecting an old accusation of perjury against Kilvert and accusing him of living in adultery. In an earlier letter to Secretary Sir John Coke he had voiced his distrust of Kilvert, who 'appears' to have drawn 'the petition and manageth all this business against me, which I pray God may receive such a determination as that his Majesty's service in these parts do not suffer by the favour this felon hath found' ('Cowper MSS', 2.153). In 1638 Charles I employed Kilvert as solicitor in endeavouring to levy a fine of $10,000 on the bishop, with $1500 of the fine to go to Kilvert, and Williams was further accused of having tried to corrupt Kilvert and procuring several witnesses to swear falsely in depositions against him. 
In 1637, at a time when the vintners were under increasing pressure from the crown for a new imposition of duty on imported wine, Kilvert and the marquess of Hamilton contacted William Abell, alderman and master of the Vintners' Company. Threatening legal action against the vintners, Kilvert and Hamilton pressured Abell into persuading the company to agree to the new tax in return for the farm of the issuing of wine licences for taverns throughout England and Wales at $7000 a year, which increased its obligations to the crown to $37,000 a year. Kilvert received $1000 for his services and a grant of $500 a year out of the farm. Part of the arrangement with the Vintners' Company was the so called 'medium', which obliged the vintners to take from the merchants a set quantity of wines at set prices. Kilvert, however, obtained an order from the king to discharge the vintners from the medium for the future. He also accompanied those company members who rode about to settle the imposition in the country. According to one account he 'as from the King's mouth took the Boldnesse to treat with all men, and in very imperious terms'. When 'all his intimation from the King' failed he threatened Star Chamber action ('Vintners Answer'). 
When the wine project began to fail, as many would not pay the new duties, recriminations were voiced from many sides. Parliament, hostile to monopolies, resolved in March 1641 that the new duty was illegal and that Abell and Kilvert were responsible both for its creation and execution. In September 1641 Kilvert was bailed. A number of pamphlets gave derisive accounts of Abell and Kilvert plotting to obtain the monopoly for their own benefit. In 1641 Kilvert defended his role in a pamphlet entitled 'A reply to a most untrue relation made and set forth in print by certaine vintners in excuse of their wine project'. His key argument was that the vintners had contrived the wine project out of a desire to enrich themselves and that he was not present when they agreed the project in November 1637. Responding to the testimonies of those involved in the wine project before a committee for the House of Commons, which were printed in 'Die Mercurii' on 21 July 1641, Kilvert wrote, 'So that now this whole business being found to be the work of the Company, both in the creation and execution, Master Kilvert is most confident of the justice of the Honorable House of Commons that they will not punish him for the Vintners offence, there being no Petitioner or complaint against him, other then the recrimination of the Counsell of Alderman, Abell, and the Vintners. (Kilvert, 'Reply')' In the end the main punishment fell on Abell, and Kilvert managed to escape scot-free. He was at liberty in December 1643 and seems to have lived comfortably in his house in St Martin's Lane until his death on 3 July 1650. 


@@@@@


doc= 15546


Kilwardby, Robert (c.1215-1279), Dominican philosopher, theologian, and archbishop of Canterbury, is of unknown origins. Study of his writings has allowed approximate dates to be attached to the earlier stages of his career. He studied arts at the University of Paris after the resumption of normal teaching there in 1231 and graduated MA 'c'.1237. Bonaventure may have been among his students. He taught in the arts faculty until 'c'.1245, then joined the Dominicans, probably in England. At his superiors' request he composed a general introduction to philosophy, 'De ortu scientiarum', 'c'.1250. In the early 1250s he lectured on the 'Sentences' and the 'Bible' as BTh in Oxford, and became DTh 'c'.1256. His 'Quaestiones' on the four books of the 'Sentences', written while he was regent master in Oxford, were probably not completed until about 1260, and 'De tempore' and 'De spiritu phantastico' seem to have been composed even later. 
Kilwardby's writings show that he was well acquainted with the corpus of Aristotelian writings, including, in his Oxford works, all ten books of the 'Nicomachean Ethics', most of which had only recently become available in Latin. His lectures on logic, grammar, and ethics form the most complete collection of works to have survived from the faculty of arts in Paris in the first half of the thirteenth century, but his own main interest and most important influence was in logic and philosophical grammar. Both Roger Bacon (died 1294) and Albertus Magnus, for instance, were much indebted to him in these fields, and some of his logical works circulated for centuries. His commentary on the 'Prior Analytics' ran to seven printed editions between 1499 and 1598, though it was ascribed to Giles of Rome. 'De ortu scientiarum' also circulated widely; it was used by Remigio de' Girolami in Florence, for instance, in his 'Divisio scientiae', and as late as 1531 a copy of it was acquired in Valladolid by Christopher Columbus's son, Don Fernando Colon. 
In Oxford Kilwardby turned his mind more to theology and especially to the 'Bible' and the fathers, though he did not entirely abandon his earlier philosophical concerns. He applied himself to a study of 'original texts' of the fathers, that is, complete texts rather than florilegia. In his 'Quaestiones' on the 'Sentences' he shows an awareness of Bonaventure's Parisian commentary and that of his Dominican forerunner in Oxford, Richard Fishacre (died 1248). In this and other works produced in this period he shows a sometimes quite explicit concern to harmonize traditional Augustinian theology with modern Aristotelian philosophy. 
As an aid to his own study and that of his students Kilwardby compiled elaborate indices and guides to a considerable number of texts. These include detailed summaries of at least thirty-five works by or ascribed to Augustine, Peter Lombard's 'Sentences', and one work by John Chrysostom; each text is broken down into small sections and a resume given of each section. He also prepared alphabetical subject indices of individual treatises by Augustine and Anselm, Damascene's 'De fide orthodoxa', and the 'Sentences', and a comprehensive single concordance of Augustine, Ambrose, Boethius, Isidore, and Anselm, together with the 'Sentences' and Comestor's 'Historia scholastica'. All these works of reference attest both the conscientiousness and the competence of their author. Possibly more of them remain to be discovered or identified. 
The liveliness of Kilwardby's mind and his readiness to take an interest in other people's ideas is shown by the only scholarly writing known to come from the period of his provincialate. In 1271 he, like Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas, was asked by the master of the Dominican order, Giovanni of Vercelli, to comment on forty-three rather odd questions arising from the teaching of some lector whose views had been found disturbing. Aquinas complained politely about the interruption to his own work, but replied concisely and benignly. Albertus wrote at greater length and much less benignly; most of the questions struck him as idiotic, if not completely insane. Kilwardby, by contrast, shows evident interest in some of the questions: in one reply he offers a detailed interpretation of a passage from Aristotle, which he insists must be taken in context; elsewhere he provides short treatises on the nature of infinity and the way to calculate the distance from the surface of the earth to its centre. 
In 1261 Simon of Hinton was dismissed as provincial of England by the Dominican general chapter; Kilwardby was elected to succeed him. In 1272, for unknown reasons, he and several other priors and provincials were absolved by the general chapter, with the rider that they were not to be immediately re-elected to the same positions. Since the chapter of 1272 was particularly concerned with improving discipline in the order, it is likely that the absolved superiors were considered to have failed in some way in this domain. However, the English provincial chapter disregarded the general chapter's ban and re-elected Kilwardby, though he was appointed archbishop of Canterbury soon afterwards. As provincial, one of Kilwardby's first tasks was to implement the decree of the general chapter of 1261, that Oxford should be a 'studium generale' for the whole order, in spite of the province's long-standing refusal to co-operate. It may be significant that the Dominican church in Oxford was finally consecrated in 1262, and Lambrick has suggested that the royal alms of $50 per annum, instituted by Henry III, may have been granted at this time to help meet the financial burden of a 'studium generale'. 
Assuming he attended all the chapters he should have done, Kilwardby had more than his fair share. Normally provincials went to one general chapter in three, but they also had to attend both those that occurred in their own province and those which coincided with the election of a master of the order. So Kilwardby in principle should have been at Bologna (1262), London (1263), Paris (1264, when Giovanni of Vercelli was elected master), Montpellier (1265), Viterbo (1268), and Montpellier again (1271). In addition, he would have presided annually over the provincial chapter, but no trace of the provincial 'acta' has survived and even the location of most of the chapters is unknown. The English province at this time still included Scotland and Ireland as well as England and Wales, but there is no way of knowing how actively Kilwardby interested himself in the remoter parts of his territory. 
The general chapters while Kilwardby was provincial give the impression that the province was pursuing an unusually enthusiastic policy of expansion: permission was granted for thirteen new foundations, two of them to be in Ireland; no such permissions are recorded between 1250 and 1261, only seven between 1273 and 1282, and then none until 1320. But this evidence must be interpreted with caution. In fact thirteen houses appear to have been founded in England and Wales in the decade before Kilwardby's provincialate and four in Ireland, and other foundations were made between 1282 and 1320. The general chapters of 1262-82 certainly show that the province intended to expand, but chiefly they indicate that Kilwardby and his two immediate successors followed proper constitutional procedures, unlike his two predecessors and William of Hotham (elected 1282) and his successors. Perhaps the absence of permissions between 1250 and 1261, when the province was actually rich in new foundations, indicates pique that the general chapter, meeting in London in 1250, should have imposed a penance on the provincial and told him to be less interested in building. Remarkable too is the almost exact tally between the number of foundations for which the province asked permission during Kilwardby's provincialate and the number of houses founded; he evidently had a taste for realism as well as legal propriety. There is evidence of his personal involvement in the development of the priories in Ilchester and Ipswich. As provincial, Kilwardby commissioned the Dominican Ralph Bocking to compose the life of St Richard of Wyche after the latter's canonization. 
During the early years of Kilwardby's provincialate the dispute between Henry III and the barons came to its climax, but it is not known what role, if any, he played in these affairs. Some Dominicans perhaps sympathized with Simon de Montfort, whose father had been a friend and benefactor of Dominic, but there is no evidence of Dominican complicity in Montfort's moves against the king. One of the king's most trusted councillors was his Dominican confessor, John of Darlington (died 1284); after the battle of Evesham Henry wrote an impassioned letter to Kilwardby asking for John to be returned to his service, as being one of the few people trusted by both sides. 
There is an equal lack of information about contacts between Kilwardby and Cardinal Ottobuono Fieschi during the latter's important legation in England (1265-8), or with Tedaldo Visconti, who was in his entourage and later, as Gregory X ('r'. 1271-6), appointed Kilwardby archbishop of Canterbury. In his personal letter Gregory X shows no sign of having been acquainted with his nominee, but Kilwardby must have had some dealings with the legate. The Dominican and Franciscan provincials were responsible for collecting the crusade tax in this period, and members of both orders were active as crusade preachers. The legate had authority to compel friars of either order to assist him in any way he wanted, which he can hardly have used without any reference to the two provincials. At least it must be presumed that Kilwardby assisted at the legate's final and most solemn council, held at St Paul's, London, in April 1268. 
Further hints of Kilwardby's involvement in public affairs are furnished by later letters which reveal a warm friendship with Walter of Merton (died 1277), whose origins must antedate Kilwardby's elevation to Canterbury; his letters to Edward I also suggest previous friendly contacts. Two letters written to support a Jewish leader, Master Elias, who was being calumniated by a fellow Jew whom he had tried to excommunicate, show both Kilwardby's intimacy with Edward's protege, Robert Burnell (died 1292), and his involvement with the Jewish community. He claims to have known Elias for a long time, even before becoming archbishop, and has found in him 'more signs of truth and goodness' than in any other Jew. Scattered evidence suggests that Dominicans in England had long been concerned not just with the mission to Jews, but also with protecting them from injustice in an increasingly hostile and paranoid world, in line with papal policy (in 1272 Gregory X announced extra measures to protect Jews from false accusation). Kilwardby had presumably played some part in all this and thereby won the confidence of Master Elias. 
One dispute which Kilwardby was not able to escape was that between the Dominicans and the Franciscans. The basic problem was that, by now, both orders were trying to fill the same slot and there was not room for both of them; they were, not least, trying to attract the same recruits and in 1267-8 Clement IV intervened to try to stop them stealing each other's members. In Oxford a major row broke out in 1269. As the Dominicans saw it, the poverty on which the Franciscans based their claim to superiority was a mere legal fiction. The Dominican Solomon of Ingham precipitated the crisis by telling the Franciscans they would all be damned because they owned things contrary to their profession. Kilwardby was drawn in, as provincial; he refused to move Solomon from Oxford, as the Franciscans wanted, and he admitted that he too was unconvinced that the rival order really owned nothing. The arguments reveal the two orders' different outlooks: the Dominicans took a realistic line (if you have something, you have it), whereas the Franciscans insisted on their claim to own nothing in law. After the intervention of the university a compromise formula was found, allowing the Franciscans to claim that they owned nothing, as their profession required, and the Dominicans to believe in 'de facto' Franciscan ownership. 
Soon afterwards Kilwardby composed a letter to stop Dominican novices being seduced by Franciscan claims to a higher state of perfection, arguing that the Dominicans' more realistic poverty was better and that their usefulness as preachers was particularly meritorious. John Pecham (died 1292), on his return to Oxford 'c'.1271, recognized the anti-Franciscan import of the letter (in which Franciscans are never named) and wrote a vicious reply, in which he argued, 'inter alia', that the Dominicans had no right to be preachers at all. Kilwardby's letter still rankled with him in 1280. 
On 18 July 1270 Archbishop Boniface of Canterbury died. The monks of Christ Church elected their prior, Adam Chillenden, to succeed him, in spite of pressure from Prince Edward to elect Robert Burnell. Chillenden set off to secure confirmation of his election by the Holy See; but the papacy was still vacant and the cardinals at odds with one another. Only on 1 September 1271 was Gregory X elected. On the grounds of royal opposition to his candidacy he persuaded Chillenden to renounce his claim, on condition, apparently, that all the expenses of his trip would be refunded by the new archbishop, a condition that later led to temporary unpleasantness between Kilwardby and the monks. On 11 October 1272 the pope nominated Kilwardby to the see, sending him a personal letter as well as the official appointment. Nicholas Trevet (died in or after 1334) ascribes to Kilwardby a primary role in the steps taken to ensure an orderly succession after Henry III's death on 16 November 1272, but this is not supported by other chroniclers and is probably untrue, as he had not yet taken possession of his see, whose spiritualities he received on 12 December and the temporalities two days later. He was consecrated by Bishop William Button of Bath and Wells on 26 February 1273, received the pallium on 8 May, and was enthroned in September (17 September according to the Osney chronicle). 
On 16 September 1274 Kilwardby presided at the coronation of Edward I. The archbishop seems to have enjoyed generally cordial relations with the new king, but did not play a major role in the public affairs of the realm. He was a solid upholder of royal authority and in 1276 he tried to mediate between Edward and the prince of Wales, Llywelyn, who apparently trusted Kilwardby's impartiality; but his efforts came to nothing and he finally supported military action against Llywelyn. He became involved again at the pope's behest after Llywelyn's defeat in 1277. The prince's intended bride, Simon de Montfort's daughter, Eleanor, had been captured while trying to join him; in January 1277 the pope asked the king to free her. At the same time he ordered Kilwardby and his suffragans to try to get her brother, Amaury, a papal chaplain, who had been captured with her, transferred to Kilwardby's custody. Kilwardby's personal contribution to the outcome is not known, but early in 1278 Amaury de Montfort was handed over to him and later in the year Eleanor was married to Llywelyn in the king's presence. 
As archbishop, Kilwardby clearly took his responsibilities seriously. He conducted visitations of his province, as he was required to do; apart from a complaint about the cost of his stay at Osney in 1276, the chronicles give the impression that his visits were conducted with tact and discretion. He also held a number of provincial councils. He was regarded as a strict enforcer of church discipline; until he was told to desist by the pope, he even tried to impose ordination and residence on a nephew of Cardinal Ottobuono, who held a benefice in Kent. It appears to have been his mediation that defused and eventually resolved a dispute between the bishop and citizens of Norwich, and in other cases too, as far as one can judge, he acted firmly and fairly. When the need arose he defended the rights of the church even against royal agents. 
In his new office Kilwardby did not forget the Dominicans. From 1275 onwards he played a key role in the acquisition and exploitation of a new site for them in London; even after his removal to the papal curia he took an active interest in the progress of the new building. He was also probably involved in the founding of a priory in Salisbury. 
Kilwardby also maintained his interest in the University of Oxford. In June 1273 he presided over the inception of his friend Thomas of Hereford (died 1282) as DTh, at the latter's request; later in the year he supported the king's ban on the bearing of arms by students, expressing the hope that it would secure a better and more attractive environment for the pursuit of learning. He was particularly involved in the college founded by his friend Walter of Merton, who transferred its visitorship from Winchester to Canterbury. Thus it was Kilwardby who confirmed the Merton statutes in 1275 and, during his visitation in 1276, with the support of the founder, he issued some supplementary regulations; after the founder's death, he intervened to protect the college's property. On 18 March 1277, in union with the regent and non-regent masters of the university, he banned the teaching of a series of propositions in grammar, logic, and natural philosophy, on pain of forfeiture of academic position. Since the Oxford condemnation occurred only eleven days after Bishop Tempier's condemnation of 219 propositions current in the arts faculty in Paris, there was presumably some connection between them, though the two lists have little in common; at least they reflect a shared worry over recent developments in philosophy. It is not clear where the initiative came from for the Oxford censure, but it bears the stamp of Kilwardby's own interests. The biggest storm was caused by the censure of propositions related to the doctrine of unicity of form espoused by Thomas Aquinas. The Oxford Dominicans clearly concurred in Kilwardby's censure; in response the general chapter of 1278 sent special visitators to England with authority to punish anyone found guilty of 'scandalizing the whole order' by disrespect towards Aquinas's writings. Kilwardby himself received a stern letter from the Dominican archbishop of Corinth, Pierre de Conflans, to which he replied with a lengthy justification of his hostility to unicity of form. 
A persistently troublesome issue was the collection of crusade taxes from the clergy. Kilwardby recognized the pope's right to levy such taxes, and he is reported to have said as much at the Second Council of Lyons in 1274, where he was head of the English delegation. At the same time he was certainly aware that the clergy found them an intolerable financial burden, and he was willing to take action against unfair collecting practices. One of his last major acts as archbishop was to hold a provincial council in January 1278 to arrange a petition against infringements of the local church's rights by one of the pope's local agents. 
On 12 March Nicholas III ('r'. 1277-1280) created Kilwardby cardinal-bishop of Porto, issuing the formal bill of nomination on 4 April. The news was well known in England some time before the official letter arrived, leaving his successor, John Pecham, in doubt about the validity of Kilwardby's episcopal acts in the interim. Towards the end of July Kilwardby took solemn leave of his suffragans and soon afterwards set off for Italy. He took with him a large sum of money and other valuables belonging to the diocese, as well as his official registers, possibly because he was hoping to pursue the interests of Canterbury in the curia. Pecham, who was uncertain whether Kilwardby had intended to return the diocese's property or not, was subsequently unable to recover it. 
It has been suggested that Kilwardby's elevation to the cardinalate implies some kind of dissatisfaction with his performance as archbishop. The truth is probably simpler. After the election of Nicholas III there were only six cardinals left, and all seven suburbicarian sees were vacant; the pope was surely just trying to restock the Sacred College with experienced churchmen. Portugal as well as England lost its primate and the Franciscans lost their minister-general, Girolamo da Ascoli, already a seasoned papal diplomat. 
It is not known when Kilwardby reached the curia, but he no doubt spent the winter in Rome, where the curia stayed until early July 1279. The pope then went to Monterosi and Soriano, only reaching Viterbo in mid-September, but Kilwardby went straight to Viterbo, from where he wrote to the king on 11 July. He died there on 11 September and was buried in the Dominican church of Santa Maria in Gradi. The date ('III id. Sept.', that is, 11 September, not 10 or 12 as found in many modern works) is given in the Canterbury obits and also in the Osney annals (printed wrongly in the 'Rolls Series' edition). The Dominicans of the Roman province liked to recall the old man's humility in walking around in his plain Dominican mantle ('cappa') and travelling with only a small retinue of two servants and two friars. His contemporary, the southern French Dominican historian Etienne Salanhac, who probably met Kilwardby during an official visit to Britain in 1261, and perhaps also at the Council of Lyons in 1274, summed him up as 'scientia perfectus, moribus ornatus' ('perfect in knowledge, excellent in character'; Salanhac, 186). 


@@@@@


doc= 15547


Kimber, Edward (1719-1769), journal editor and writer, was the son of Isaac Kimber (1692-1755), a General Baptist minister. There is no evidence that Kimber had any formal education. However, it is likely that he gained editorial experience and training as a youth after his father took up the editorship of the 'London Magazine' in 1732 (Hayes, 11). In September 1742 Kimber left England for the American colonies, where he spent two years travelling. He recorded his observations on his travels in America, which were later published and would be reflected in his novels. Kimber returned to England in July 1744 and shortly thereafter married Susanna Anne Lunn, of East Kiel, with whom he had two sons, Edward and Richard, and one daughter, Margaretta Maria, who died in infancy. 
Kimber worked on a wide range of literary projects and was extremely prolific. He began contributing poetry to the 'London Magazine' in 1734, ultimately taking over its editorship in 1755. A significant portion of his travel writing was also printed in the 'London Magazine'. Much of his work, however, was published anonymously or pseudonymously. Kimber later explicitly identified himself as the author of numerous poems and essays in his 'General Index to... the 'London Magazine'' (1760). He also compiled an index for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1754) and contributed to the 'Universal Magazine' (1750) and to the 'Westminster Journal' (1751). 
Kimber's seven novels, all anonymously published, enjoyed considerable success in the eighteenth century. Almost all of them went through two editions. His most famous novel, 'The Life and Adventures of Joe Thompson' (1750), went through six editions, was translated into French (1762) and German (1765), and was abridged for children by Richard Johnson, with whom he revised Thomas Wotton's 'Baronetage', in 1788. In 1759 he published a translation of C. P. J. de Crebillon's novel, 'Heureux orphelins'. Kimber also made indexes for law books and histories, wrote manuals, and compiled several peerages. He has also been credited with 'The Ladies Complete Letter-Writer' (1763). He died in 1769, 'a victim, in the Meridian of his Life, to his indefatigable Toils in the Republic of Letters' (Johnson, viii). 


@@@@@


doc= 15548


Kimber, Isaac (1692-1755), General Baptist minister and historian, was born at Wantage, Berkshire, on 1 December 1692, the son of Isaac and Mary Kimber. He attended the private grammar school in Wantage run by the Revd Mr Slopes and then continued his classical studies under John Ward at Gresham College. Believing his vocation to be in the ministry he undertook a course of training for the nonconformist ministry under John Eames at Moorfields Academy. Shortly after he had completed his course Kimber married Anna Roberts, on 28 March 1717 in Westminster, and a son, Edward Kimber, was born in 1719. He was a non-subscriber at the Salters' Hall debate in 1719. 
Isaac Kimber received his first ministerial appointment in 1722, as assistant to Joseph Burroughs at the chapel in Paul's Alley, Barbican, London. As a preacher, however, he proved uninspiring and unpopular and was replaced by James Foster in June 1724, whereupon he accepted the invitation of Samuel Acton to become his assistant at Baker Street Chapel in Nantwich, Cheshire. There he is reputed to have preached in 1727 the funeral sermon for John Milton's third wife, Elizabeth, but there is some doubt over the validity of this claim. Kimber proved a disappointment to many of the members of his congregation, who had looked upon him as Acton's successor, but when this seemed unlikely they resented the additional subscription for his salary and Kimber was obliged to resign at the end of 1727. He returned to London, where for a short time he was assistant to John Kinch at the chapel in Old Artillery Lane, but when the congregation amalgamated with a neighbouring one his services were no longer required and he left the active ministry. Henceforth, apart from a two-year period (1734-6) when he helped to run John Ward's grammar school in Moorfields, he devoted most of his time to writing and working in various capacities for printers and publishers in London. 
Kimber is probably more renowned for his literary efforts, and especially his historical works, than he is for his ministerial labours. For some years after being admitted into the ministry, and having a wife and child to support, he found it necessary to supplement his meagre stipend by writing. One of his first publications was 'The Life of Oliver Cromwell' (1724), which ran to six editions and a French translation. He also collaborated on writing a four-volume 'History of England', which he later abridged. His account of the reign of George II was added to the 1740 edition of William Howell's 'Medulla historiae Anglicanae'. In addition to his historical publications he compiled a periodical pamphlet, the 'Morning Chronicle', which appeared regularly between January 1728 and May 1732. 
Kimber suffered a number of personal misfortunes in his life; he lost the sight of one eye and for over twenty years his wife was afflicted with mental illness. He died, in London, as a result of a stroke in January 1755 and his funeral sermon was preached by his former colleague Joseph Burroughs at Paul's Alley on 9 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 15549


Livingston, Jean (1579-1600), murderer, was the daughter of John Livingston, laird of Dunipace, a man of good family and fortune, and a favourite of James VI. She was married young to John Kincaid of Warriston, lands then to the north of Edinburgh. Whether or not he did, as some suggested, treat her cruelly, she came to hate him, and began to listen to Janet Murdo, her old nurse, who suggested murder as a means of revenge and escape from her marriage. Robert Weir, a young servant to Livingston, who was then in attendance on the king at Holyrood, was proposed as the man to effect it. He proved willing, and came to Warriston's house on 1 July 1600 to discuss the plan. 
No time was wasted; that evening Warriston was induced to exceed his usual measure of wine and went off to bed. After midnight, Weir, who had been secreted in the house, went into Warriston's chamber, knocked him out of bed, kicked him, then strangled him as he lay on the floor. Hearing the cries, Jean Livingston leapt from her bed and with her nurse went to the hall, where Weir came to tell them that Warriston was dead. It is not known how the news reached Edinburgh, but the officers of justice came to the house next morning, found the body, and arrested Jean, her nurse, and two other women. Weir, meanwhile, had fled. The trial took place before the Edinburgh magistrates on 3 July. Jean showed no grief or remorse, was found guilty, and condemned to death by strangulation followed by burning at the stake, the nurse also to be burnt. Livingston made no effort to save his daughter's life, and the family, resenting the disgrace her deed had brought on them, urged a quick end to the matter. 
While held in the Tolbooth, Jean Livingston had been visited by a Presbyterian minister whom she had treated in a very offhand fashion; after sentence was passed she summoned the minister, who now found her truly penitent and resigned to her fate. This conversion was described in a small pamphlet of the day, entitled 'Memorial of the conversion of Jean Livingston (Lady Warriston), with an account of her carriage at her execution', republished in 1827. They spent most of the day in prayer together; Jean dictated her will to the minister, and he left, to return early on the morning of 5 July 1600, the execution now changed to one of beheading by the guillotine known as 'the Maiden'. Her family wished this to take place early when few people would be about the streets, and they arranged that the nurse should be burnt at the stake on Castle Hill at four in the morning, thus attracting the attention of anyone on the streets, while Jean was taken down Canongate to the Girth Cross, the ancient boundary of the abbey sanctuary. Warriston's brother, who was present, showed sufficient humanity to kiss Jean and forgive her. The eyewitness author of the 'Memorial' stated that she went as cheerfully as if to her wedding rather than her death, and that she read an address to the many spectators and continued to utter devotions until silenced by the fall of the blade. 
Weir was arrested four years later, tried on 26 June 1604, and condemned to be taken to the Edinburgh scaffold and there broken on the wheel, a most unusual punishment in Scotland at that time. The cold-blooded nature of the crime was commemorated in songs variously ascribing blame to the husband, the wife, or the devil. 


@@@@@


doc= 15550


Kincaid, Sir John (1787-1862), army officer, was born at Dalheath House, near Falkirk, Stirlingshire, in January 1787, the second son of John Kincaid of Dalheath and his wife, daughter of John Gaff. Kincaid's father, a 'small lowland Scotch laird... was unfortunately cut off in early life', leaving a 'young family' (Kincaid, 'Random Shots', 3). Having been educated at Polmont School, Polmont, Stirlingshire, John Kincaid grew into 'a lean lank fellow' over 6 feet tall (Kincaid, 'Adventures', 9) and served as a lieutenant in the North York militia. On 27 April 1809, with a draft of volunteers from this militia, he joined the 95th foot (which was to be restyled the Rifle brigade on 16 February 1816) at Hythe, Kent, as a second lieutenant, in time to sail for Walcheren 'where we remained about three weeks, playing at soldiers, smoking 'mynheer's' long clay pipes, and drinking his 'vrow's' butter-milk, for which I paid liberally with my precious blood to their infernal musquittos ['sic']' (ibid., 2). 
Kincaid was weakened by 'a horrible ague', but after convalescing in Scotland he returned to Hythe in spring 1810 and went with the 95th's 1st battalion to reinforce Wellington in Spain following the battle of Busaco as his allied troops retreated towards the lines of Torres Vedras, the Anglo-Portuguese fortification defending Lisbon. With the 95th 'Johnny' Kincaid pursued the French when they withdrew from outside the lines in March 1811; he took part in actions at Santarem, Pombal, Redinha, Casal Nova, Foz d'Arouce (where he was concussed and believed dead), Sabugal, Fuentes d'Onnoro, Fuente Guinaldo, and Aldea de Ponte. After promotion to first lieutenant on 23 May 1811 Kincaid commanded the battalion's highland company and led a detachment of the storming party at the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo in January 1812; at Badajoz he was adjutant of four companies, 'who were to line the crest of the glacis, and to fire at the ramparts and the top of the left breach' (Kincaid, 'Adventures', 130). He fought at Salamanca and entered Madrid with Wellington in August. 
During the withdrawal to winter quarters near Ciudad Rodrigo after three months, Kincaid acted as brigade major to the 1st brigade of the light division, taking part in the skirmish at Sanmunoz. When Wellington launched another offensive into Spain in 1813, Kincaid was in action at Munos and San Milan, Vitoria, in the Pyrenees, on the Nivelle and Nive rivers, near Bayonne in December 1813, and at the final battle of Toulouse (April 1814). On 21 July 1814 he became adjutant of the 1st battalion, and was recalled from a shooting leave in Scotland to fight at Quatre Bras and Waterloo, where his horse was killed under him. Of Waterloo he wrote: 'The smoke hung so thick about us that, although not more than eighty yards asunder, we could only distinguish each other by the flashes of the pieces... [we were] so many hours enveloped in darkness' (Kincaid, 'Adventures', 254, 256). Having been posted with the 95th immediately east of the Brussels-Charleroi Road, Kincaid became heavily involved in fighting for the knoll and sand-pit opposite La Haye-Sainte. 
Kincaid, who was promoted captain in the rifle brigade on 25 November 1826, sold out and retired in June 1831. He was appointed exon of the yeomen of the guard on 25 October 1844, and was knighted on 30 June 1852 on becoming senior exon. In 1847 he was appointed inspector of prisons for Scotland and in 1850 also inspector of factories for Scotland and the north of England. He resigned both appointments through ill health shortly before his death. 
In 1830 Kincaid published 'Adventures in the Rifle Brigade', an account of his military life, 1809-15, dedicated to Major-General Sir Andrew Barnard KCB. The book has been reprinted frequently, and in the introduction to the 1929 edition Sir John Fortescue praised Kincaid's descriptions of individuals and 'the daily routine of the campaign, which are of real historical value'. He concluded: 'so long as the Rifle Brigade lasts his 'Adventures' will be a text-book for all good riflemen' (Kincaid, 'Adventures', v). Fortescue was, however, led to condemn 'a certain flippancy and Jacosity in his narrative' of the war (ibid.): 'we found their whole army drawn out on the plain, near Redhina, and instantly quarreled with them on a large scale'; the French General Loison's captured Portuguese aide-de-camp 'looked very like a man who would be hanged', his 'handsome' Spanish wife 'very like a woman who would get married again' (ibid., 35, 46). But descriptions of camp life were vivid: lying at night with only a coat or blanket as inadequate protection against the dew and 'a green sod or a smooth stone for a pillow' (ibid., 34). And Kincaid graphically illustrated other privations, such as lack of money through arrears of pay, hunger on the march, and the need to cut the boots off his swollen feet after six days in action. Kincaid's second book, 'Random Shots of a Rifleman' (1835), essentially a collection of anecdotes, dedicated to Major-General Lord Fitzroy Somerset KCB, was in Fortescue's estimation 'of not quite equal merit' (ibid., v). 
Kincaid was awarded the military general service medal (or Peninsular silver medal) with nine clasps and the Waterloo medal. Curiously, entries in editions of the 'Army List', 1810-17, name him 'Kincaird'. Kincaid died of liver disease on 22 April 1862 at 7 Cambridge Terrace, Hastings, Sussex, survived by his wife, Louisa. 


@@@@@


doc= 15551


Kindersley, Sir Richard Torin (1792-1879), judge, eldest son of Nathaniel Edward Kindersley of Sunninghill, Berkshire, was born on 5 October 1792 at Madras, where his father was in the civil service of the East India Company. He was educated first at the East India College, Haileybury, with the intention of entering the Indian Civil Service, but afterwards went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was fourth wrangler, graduating BA in January 1814. In October 1815 he was elected a fellow of his college, and proceeded MA in July 1817. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 10 February 1818, and had a considerable junior practice. In 1824 he married Mary Anne, only daughter of the Revd James Leigh Bennett of Thorpe Place, Surrey; they had four children. 
Appointed king's counsel in January 1835, Kindersley took a leading position in the rolls court. In 1847 he became chancellor of the county palatine of Durham, and in March 1848 a master in chancery. On 20 October 1851 he was appointed a vice-chancellor and knighted. His judgments are mainly reported in Drewry's 'Reports', Drewry and Smale's 'Reports', and the 'Law Reports' ('Equity Series', 1 and 2). He retired from the bench in 1866, when he became a member of the privy council, and received a pension of $3500 a year. He died at his residence, Clyffe, near Dorchester, Dorset, on 22 October 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 15552


King, Charles (fl. 1713-1721), merchant and writer on economics, was a significant contributor to the 'British Merchant', a periodical which appeared twice weekly during the hotly debated negotiations towards a commercial treaty with France following the close of the War of the Spanish Succession in summer 1713. The details of his background, family life, and later career are unknown, and nor is it known if he married or had children. 
The 'British Merchant' was one of a number of periodicals and a rash of pamphlets that followed news of the eighth and ninth, commercial, articles of the treaty of Utrecht, which opened the possibility of a new, less restrictive, trading agreement with France. A consequence of the treaty, if passed by parliament, would be the repeal of a number of laws laying high duties on French imports. Tory sentiment in favour of the eighth and ninth articles was effectively propagandized by the 'Mercator', a paper funded by Viscount Bolingbroke and largely written by Daniel Defoe. It argued that a ready market existed for British goods in France, despite legal prohibitions on trade that had been established in wartime, and that Britain would be a net gainer from any trade with France. The Dutch and Italians, it was argued, imported British goods, then re-exported these to France at a considerable gain, and a net loss to British producers and shipping. 
The opponents of the commercial articles of the treaty, drawn mainly from the ranks of the whigs, were convinced that a more open trade with France would be fatal for some infant industries, such as silk manufacturing, and detrimental to Britain's comparative advantage in general. The 'British Merchant' concocted statistics to show the treaty would result in an adverse trading balance of $1.4 million. Woollen and linen makers were to the fore in the campaign against the treaty. It was also felt that the new treaty would endanger the Portugal trade established by the Methuen treaty (1703). The earl of Halifax was the major supporter of the 'British Merchant', and King was taken on, alongside Joshua Gee, Henry Martyn, and other leading figures of the merchant community, to rally opposition. The paper ceased publication after parliament voted down the disputed articles, prompting the collapse of that part of the treaty. Some of the most important numbers, however, had a prolonged life and influence, being collected by King in three volumes as 'The British Merchant, or, Commerce Preserv'd' in 1721. By this date King had been appointed as chamber-keeper to the Treasury, and the exchequer provided funds for the printing and circulation of the work to each of the corporate towns and boroughs of the nation. The collection enjoyed an authoritative status lasting until mid-century; the last edition was published in 1743. Rather than containing any advances in the theory of trade, the work represented a compilation of contemporary merchant opinion. The writers, King included, had been especially concerned to refute what they saw as the fallacious doctrine of reciprocity as advocated by Bolingbroke and Defoe. Most held fast to mercantilist nostrums of maximizing exports of manufactured goods and minimizing the import of foreign wares. An unregulated overseas trade was held to be an unreliable basis for national prosperity. King sought to preserve the home market for British-made goods, and argued that the 'first and best market of England are the natives and inhabitants of England' (King, 1.165-6). Such ideas would prevail in commercial policy debates until the later part of the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 15553


King, Charles (1687-1748), organist and composer, the son of Charles and Mary King, was born at Bury St Edmunds in 1687; since the boy was not baptized until 5 June 1693 it may perhaps be assumed that his parents were nonconformists. If so, the baptism probably took place simply to secure his admission, as a treble, to the choir of St Paul's Cathedral, London, where he would have been trained initially by John Blow and later by Jeremiah Clarke, to whom he was subsequently apprenticed. When his voice broke King evidently stayed on as a supernumerary singer, at a salary of $14 per annum. On 12 July 1707 he took the degree of BMus at Oxford, and three months later (on 14 October) he married Clarke's sister, Ann, in the cathedral, the service being taken by the Revd Sampson Estwick, one of the minor canons and himself a very respectable musician. On 1 December his brother-in-law put a pistol to his head, and very shortly afterwards King succeeded him as almoner and master of the choristers, but not as organist. Curiously, however, he was not formally admitted a vicar-choral until 1730. Meanwhile he had also (in 1715) become organist of St Benet Fink, which post he continued to hold until 1747 when he was dismissed (for dereliction of duties, it may be supposed). When Clarke died it fell to King to see his book of 'Choice Lessons for the Harpsichord or Spinett' (1711) through the press. 
King himself produced almost no instrumental music, but he was a considerable composer of services and anthems; indeed, he wrote more service settings than any other composer of the period, which fact apparently gave rise to his colleague Maurice Greene's witty description of him as 'a very serviceable man' (Bumpus, 'Organists', 81). Autograph copies of most of these, many of them dated, are now in the library of the Royal Academy of Music, London. But 'featureless competence', as Ian Spink nicely puts it, 'is the level of King's achievement' (Spink, 302). As almoner and master of the choristers of St Paul's, he had many promising chorister pupils, the most distinguished of whom were Maurice Greene, John Alcock, and William Boyce. Why then he should have wished to become music master of Christ's Hospital in 1720 is something of a mystery. In 1725 King served as master of a short-lived lodge of freemasons which met at the Ship without Temple Bar; in January of the following year he was (with Estwick) one of the thirteen original members of the Academy of Vocal (later Ancient) Music, and it may possibly have been for this body that his two surviving secular vocal works were written. One is a setting of part of Dryden's ode for St Cecilia's day (''Twas at the royal feast') first set by Jeremiah Clarke in 1697, the other a 'Dialogue between Oliver Cromwell and Charon' dated 1731. 
It is not known when his wife died, but King later contracted a second marriage which is said (by Bumpus) to have brought him a fortune of $7000 and a villa at Hampton Court later owned by David Garrick. His second wife predeceased him. King died in London on 17 March 1748 and was buried in the church of St Benet Paul's Wharf on the 25th (and not in Hampton parish church as Bumpus, in his book on the organists of St Paul's, earlier maintained). 


@@@@@


doc= 15554


King, Charles William (1818-1888), writer on gemstones, was born on 5 September 1818 at Newport, Monmouthshire, the son of Charles King, a shipping agent in the iron trade, and his wife, Anne. He was educated at a private school in Bristol and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a sizar, in October 1836; he became a scholar of the college in 1839, and graduated in 1840 as sixth in the first class of the classical tripos. He was elected a fellow in 1842 and ordained deacon in 1845. In May of that year he was granted permission by the master of the college to travel abroad and went to Italy, where he resided at Rome and Florence (1845-50). He studied Italian language and literature, and collected antique gems, which he purchased at moderate prices. King later increased his collection by buying gems from Eastwood, a London dealer, and also at auction in London, where several important collections, including the Mertens-Schaafhausen (Praun), the Hertz, and the Uzielli were put on the market. By 1877 he owned 331 engraved stones, more than two-thirds of which were Greek and Roman; the remainder consisted of Sasanian and oriental gems and magical ('gnostic') amulets. In 1878, when his eyesight was seriously failing, King sold his collection to John Taylor Johnston, president of the Metropolitan Museum of Art at New York, who gave it to that institution in October 1881. A catalogue was printed in 1890, without alterations, from King's own manuscript of 28 February 1878, with the title 'The Johnston Collection of Engraved Gems' (Metropolitan Museum, New York, handbook no. 9), which was replaced in the twentieth century by Gisela Richter's more scholarly work. 
After his return from Italy, King's life was chiefly spent at Trinity College, Cambridge, where from 1857 he was senior fellow. He was in holy orders, but had no cure. At Cambridge, King took no part in the educational life of the college, but devoted himself to writing books about glyptics, the most widely valued at the time being his two-volume 'Antique Gems and Rings' (1872) and a shorter 'Handbook of Engraved Gems' (1866; 2nd edn, 1885). He also produced a study of Graeco-Egyptian amulets in 'The Gnostics and their Remains, Ancient and Medieval' (1864; 2nd edn, 1887). However, despite his sensitivity to the art of gem-engraving, all his work is marred by a dilettante approach, more typical of the neo-classical age than of later nineteenth-century scholarship. W. Aldis Wright wrote that his works 'may appear to be wanting in familiarity with what is called the literature of the subjects of which they treat' ('The Athenaeum', 7 April 1888, 441); indeed, he knew little of archaeology in general, although he was widely consulted by contemporaries about ancient gemstones. In the words of a commemorative brass in Trinity College chapel, his friends and colleagues thought him 'a straightforward, witty and eloquent man in his conversation, his writing, and his behaviour' ('Simplex lepidus facundus sermone scriptis moribus'), but he was capable of ungenerous remarks about fellow collectors such as Bram Hertz, whose collection surpassed his own in size and quality ('Antique Gems and Rings', 282-3, 461). His writings stimulated an interest in glyptics at the time and until the second half of the twentieth century remained the only works in English on a subject in which considerable advances were made abroad, especially by Adolph Furtwangler in Germany, whose 'Die antiken Gemmen' (Leipzig, 1900), with its critical scholarship and fine photographs, eclipsed the style of writing exemplified by King. King died, apparently unmarried, at 6 Stratford Place, near Camden Square, Kentish Town, London, after a brief illness, of a bronchial cold, on 25 March 1888, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 15555


King, Daniel (c.1616-c.1661), engraver, the son of William King, a baker of Chester, was apprenticed to Randle Holme in September 1630 and admitted to the Painters' Company in Chester in August 1639. He made an annual payment to the company from 1639 to 1642, during which years he employed a number of journeymen. But thereafter he ceased to make payments and evidently left the city, although he remained a member of the company. 
Nothing is known about King's movements during the civil war, and he next appears in London in the 1650s, when he was closely associated with the antiquary Sir William Dugdale in making etchings for the first volume of the latter's 'Monasticon Anglicanum' in 1665. King's etchings reappeared the following year without any letterpress text and with extra plates under a new title-plate, 'The Cathedrall and Conventuall Churches of England and Wales'. This publication bears King's name and has no mention of Dugdale. The 1666 series is known in different forms and with variant title-plates; the plates come in different states, some of which precede those found in some copies of the 'Monasticon' -- so the two publications must have proceeded in parallel. King evidently kept control of the plates, for the bookseller George Thomason entered the work in the Stationers' register on 14 February 1657, listing fifty-seven plates and stating that they had been drawn 'at the great charge of Daniel King' (Eyre). In 1658 Dugdale prepared a long denunciation should King publish any part of his proposed translation of the 'Monasticon'. 
In 1656 King published in London 'The Vale-Royall of England, or, The County Palatine of Chester Illustrated', for which he wrote the preface. In it he printed for the first time two essays on Chester written by William Smith and William Webb more than forty years earlier, as well as an essay on the Isle of Man by James Chaloner. This book was illustrated with etchings mostly by Wenceslaus Hollar, which were unsigned and for this reason have often been attributed to King himself; the same is true of the one-sheet etching 'An Orthographical Designe of Severall Viewes upon the Road in England and Wales' ('c'.1660), which, although published by King, is also by Hollar. This mistake has led to a gross overestimation of King's abilities as an etcher, which were decidedly modest. King also wrote a manuscript, 'Miniatura, or, The art of limning' (BL, Add. MS 12461), and translated Gerard Desargues's 'Universal Way of Dyaling', published in 1659. 
King reappears in the books of the Chester company in 1659-60, but is there recorded as dead in 1661. Anthony Wood recorded Dugdale's opinion that King was 'a most ignorant silly fellow' who 'was not able to write one line of true English' (Wood, 3.503), and that after King had been robbed and deserted by his wife he had died heart-broken near York House in the Strand about 1664. His plates passed into the stock of John Overton. 


@@@@@


doc= 15556


King, David (1806-1883), minister of the United Presbyterian church, was born on 20 May 1806 in Montrose, Forfarshire, the second son of John King (1762-1827), minister of Second United Secession church, Montrose, and his wife, Eliza Young, daughter of a Montrose merchant. 
King received his early education at primary and high schools in Montrose and entered Aberdeen University in 1820. After one year there, he transferred to the University of Edinburgh where he completed his arts course, displaying distinction in the classics and science. Preparing for the ministry of the United Secession church, he studied theology in Glasgow under Professor John Dick. On 10 February 1829, he was licensed by the presbytery of Forfar and ordained as minister of First United Secession Church, Dalkeith, on 13 January 1830. In the late summer of 1833 he was called to the large and influential congregation of Greyfriars Secession Church, Glasgow, in succession to Dick, his former tutor, and inducted on 15 October 1833. It was here, over a period of more than twenty years, that King exercised his most distinguished and effective ministry as a preacher and church leader in Glasgow. He married, on 27 December 1842, Elizabeth (1818-1896), elder daughter of James Thomson (1786-1849) and Margaret (died 1830), daughter of William Gardner of Glasgow. They had at least two sons and two daughters. 
King was renowned as one of the most outstanding church orators in Scotland during the middle years of the century, both in the pulpit and on the public platform. A biographer asserted that he inaugurated a new era in the preaching of seceders: 'He was eloquent, imaginative, polished, classic in style, and beyond all question intense. He was among the first of our preachers of any note who had the modern attraction of shortness' (Joseph Leckie, 'Life of Dr. King', 45, cited in Woodside, 155). His preaching drew people from all over the city, including university students of all denominations, to fill his 1500-seat sanctuary. Under his dynamic ministry, Greyfriars established numerous mission and educational projects in the city and beyond. It financed a missionary station in Oban; began the first foreign mission to Trinidad of the Secession church; set up educational classes for young people in both religious and secular subjects, and was the first church in Glasgow to establish homes for poor boys. 
In these years the great public platform in Scotland for the advocacy of political and social reforms was the city hall of Glasgow. King, along with other leading dissenting ministers of the time, was a popular speaker at public rallies in support of movements for progressive change. He was a strong supporter of the 'Reform Bill' of 1832 and the anti-corn law agitation (Woodside, 217). He was a national leader in the anti-slavery movement, and was accepted as the representative speaker from Scotland at a meeting in Exeter Hall, London, in March 1838, held to press for the abolition of 'negro apprenticeship', a covert form of slavery (Woodside, 216). In recognition of his great services to his church, the city, and the nation, the University of Glasgow awarded him the LLD in 1841. 
The demands of ministering to a large congregation eventually undermined King's health, which was never robust. Suffering from nervous strain, he resigned from Greyfriars in March 1855, and went into semi-retirement in Kilcreggan, Dunbartonshire, a resort on the Firth of Clyde. However, his occasional preaching there soon resulted in the establishment of a new preaching point for his denomination. To accommodate the large numbers of summer visitors who flocked to hear him, a church sanctuary was erected in 1858, seating 440. Towards the end of 1861, King left this charge to lay the foundations of a new Presbyterian congregation in London in Westbourne Grove, Bayswater. On 26 January 1862 a new building with accommodation for 1000 worshippers was opened. At the 1863 synod of the United Presbyterian church he was chosen as moderator, and he spoke in favour of the union of English and Scottish presbyterian churches: he was a co-founder of the Evangelical Alliance. Once again, the heavy responsibility of ministering to a growing congregation took its toll on his health, and in April 1869 he returned to Scotland to take on the small charge of Morningside, then a quiet suburb of Edinburgh. It was hoped that with few duties beyond preaching, he could continue to exercise his still considerable gifts. But even with the assistance of many minister colleagues who often supplied the pulpit for him, his strength was unequal to the task. In February 1873 he resigned his charge and ceased all ministerial activity. After extensive travels in search of renewed health, chiefly in Italy, King returned to London, where he died on 20 December 1883. 
King wrote several books, among them 'The Ruling Eldership' (1845), 'The Lord's Supper' (1846), 'Geology and Religion' (1849), and the 'State and Prospects of Jamaica' (1850), which he had visited in 1848-9; he went to the United States and Canada in the same trip. However, his great gifts as a preacher overshadowed his reputation as an author: a volume of his sermons was published posthumously in 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 15557


King, Sir Edmund (bap. 1630, d. 1709), physician and surgeon, the eldest son of the five sons and four daughters of Edmond King (died 1651) of Northampton, physician, and Alice, was baptized as Edmond on 22 August 1630 in All Saints' Church, Northampton. As Edmund Freeman, alias Kinge, his father received on 9 May 1612 an archbishop's licence to practise medicine and surgery in the dioceses of Peterborough, Lincoln, Norwich, Coventry, and Oxford. His mother was named as the wife of Edmond King in the baptisms of three children at All Saints, Northampton, but no marriage of Edmond and Alice was recorded in Northampton, nor is there an extant licence. 
King went to London after his father's death in July 1651 and practised surgery; it is not known if he underwent any apprenticeship. He attended the surgeons at St Bartholomew's Hospital between 1651 and 1660, and as Edmund Freeman, alias King, he received a licence on 1 June 1663 from Archbishop Juxon to practise medicine in England, with the exception of London and 5 miles around. On 12 May 1663 he was given a Lambeth degree of MB, as Edmund Freeman, alias King. He was incorporated MD at Cambridge on 5 October 1671 on his Lambeth degree. Initially King lived in Little Britain, London, in a house which had a museum of anatomical specimens, such as a dried ileocaecal valve pressed in a large paper book. In 1665 he moved to a house in Hatton Garden, where he remained for the rest of his life. On 20 December 1666 he married Rebecca Polsted ('b'. 1631/2), the widow of John Polsted and third daughter of Sir Nicholas Crisp (c.1599-1666), and his wife, Anne Prescott. On 23 February 1666 King witnessed the will of Crisp, who died three days later, at which time King performed an autopsy on him. Rebecca was buried on 27 October 1698 at St Mildred's Church, Bread Street, in her father's vault, where her child, Martha, had been buried on 27 February 1684. 
In addition to cultivating an extensive surgical practice King was active as an experimental anatomist of humans and other animals. On 11 July 1666 John Wilkins, the mathematician and Anglican divine who sponsored an experimental club in natural philosophy while warden of Wadham College, Oxford, proposed King as a member of the Royal Society, and he was admitted as Mr Edmond King on 25 July 1666. On 28 November 1666 he presented a dissected foetus at a meeting. King's notable society activities included his participation in early blood transfusion experiments. Following a protocol for animal-to-animal blood transfusions developed by physician and anatomist Richard Lower, with the assistance of Christopher Wren and others, in Oxford during late 1665 and early 1666, on 14 November 1666 King led in London a group that duplicated Lower's experiment. On 5 December 1666 King collaborated with Lower on bleeding a sheep into a dog at a society meeting. In 1667 he published in the society's 'Philosophical Transactions' a detailed account of an experiment that used an apparatus of pipes and quills to transfuse the blood of a calf into a sheep. Samuel Pepys, an onlooker, reflected in his diary that a discussion with friends about the experiment 'did give occasion to many pretty wishes, as of the blood of a Quaker to be let into an Archbishop, and such like' (Pepys, 370-71). King's most notable transfusion work occurred on 23 November 1667, when he undertook a private trial with Lower, who then lived in London, to transfuse blood from a sheep into an Oxford student, Arthur Coga, who was paid 20's'. The three participated in a public demonstration before members and guests of the Royal Society a few weeks later, and results were soon published in 'Philosophical Transactions'. King and Lower stopped transfusion experiments after a human participant in a French trial died from the effects in February 1668. 
From 1666 until 1668 King used his surgical skills in a number of collaborative experiments on respiration with Robert Hooke and Peter Balle. At issue was whether respiration depended on a chemical component in the air entering the blood as it circulated through the lungs (Hooke's, Lower's, and Robert Boyle's position), or a mechanical mixing of blood and air dependent on pulmonary motion (Walter Needham's argument). King also studied insects, primarily ants, and published papers in 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1667 and 1670 on ants and leaf-cutter bees. His case notes on post-mortem examinations of patients, as well as his published microscopic researches on reproductive glands in men, guinea pigs, and bulls ('Philosophical Transactions', 1668), recorded his belief that animal tissues, including human, are primarily composed of fibres, tubes, and liquors. 
King's surgical practice expanded greatly in the late 1660s and early 1670s, when he became the preferred surgeon for Thomas Willis, then London's leading physician, and Richard Lower, another collaborator of Willis. King also worked with Willis on autopsies of their patients and in the preparation of part one of Willis's 'De anima brutorum' (1672) and 'Pharmaceutice rationalis' (1674). Unlike Willis, however, King eschewed making broad hypotheses based on anatomical findings. In addition to referring patients to him, Willis may have facilitated King's professional success through introducing him to his patron, Gilbert Sheldon, archbishop of Canterbury, and a powerful figure at court. By the mid-1670s King was attending Charles II, who knighted him in 1676, and in a letter of 20 January 1677 recommended him to the Royal College of Physicians for admission as an honorary fellow. The college refused; however, he was admitted as a fellow on 12 April 1687 by the renewed college charter of James II. King attended Charles II during his final illness, which involved seizures. The king's initial revival from a fit after a bleeding administered by King caused the privy council to recommend a fee of $1000, but Charles II's death soon after caused the matter to drop. 
In 1693 King was the subject of a complaint made by a Mr Lynn, an apothecary, who stated that King had turned himself and a Dr Biggs out from attending Sir John Heron, claiming that if he (King) had been called in earlier he could have done more, thereby implying that Biggs was less than competent. King asserted his innocence and the charge was dropped. 
King retired from practice at the age of seventy-two and died in Hatton Garden on 29 May 1709; he was buried with his wife at St Mildred's, Bread Street, on 3 June. King's will, dated 24 March 1709, refers to portraits of himself by Godfrey Kneller and Peter Lely. The latter work was bequeathed to the Royal College of Physicians while the Kneller seems lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 15558


King, Edward (1611/12-1637), friend of John Milton, was born at Boyle Abbey, Boyle, in Connaught, Ireland. His date of birth is not known, but the fact that he was fourteen when he entered Cambridge in June 1626 and twenty-five when he died in August 1637 means that he must have been born in 1611 or 1612. Edward King was one of the nine children of Sir John King (d. 1637), a Yorkshireman who had served in Ireland in various administrative capacities since 1585, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Drury (died 1617), whose father, Robert, was the nephew of Sir William Drury, lord deputy of Ireland. Edward's godfather was his uncle (and namesake) Edward King, bishop of Elphin. Of his brothers and sisters the most prominent were Robert King (who became a member of Cromwell's council of state), John (who became clerk of the hanaper), Mary (later Lady Charlemont), Margaret (later wife of Sir Gerald Lowther, chief justice of common pleas in Ireland), and Dorothy Durie (whose second husband was the protestant divine John Durie, a friend of Milton). 
Edward was educated at Thomas Farnaby's school in Goldsmiths' Alley, Cripplegate, London; Farnaby was later to contribute a Latin poem to the memorial collection for King. On 9 June 1626 Edward and his brother Roger were admitted as lesser pensioners to Christ's College, Cambridge, and were assigned to William Chappell, who had recently rusticated Milton. Edward proceeded BA in 1630 and MA in 1633. Soon after his MA he would have taken holy orders. 
King's final term as an undergraduate began on 7 April 1630 but teaching was soon discontinued because of plague. As the fellows and undergraduates were preparing to leave it became known that Andrew Sandelands intended to resign his fellowship. On 10 June, while most of the fellows were still absent, the vacant fellowship was filled by royal mandate; King Charles appointed King to replace Sandelands. The myth that Milton had hoped to secure the fellowship was first recorded in 1736 and has often been repeated. In fact Milton was not eligible for election, because the statutes of the college prohibited the election of more than one fellow from any county. As long as Michael Honywood (who came from London) remained in post, Milton remained ineligible for election. King was also ineligible, because he was deemed, despite his Irish birth, to be a Yorkshireman, on the grounds that the family seat was Feathercock Hall, near Northallerton, and the college already had a Yorkshireman in the fellowship (William Power). The royal mandate, however, stipulated that King should be appointed 'notwithstanding any statute'. He was appointed to the fellowship as an act of royal patronage, which he enjoyed simply because his family was of the requisite social standing; Milton's was not. The disputes that arose out of King's appointment were not resolved until 1696, when it was decided that eligibility must depend on actual place of birth. 
King held his fellowship for the remaining seven years of his life. During that period he took only thirteen undergraduates because he was not dependent on undergraduate fees for his income. Of these, four were pupils of Thomas Whitehead (at Repton), who had taught Edward's younger brothers; two were pupils of Thomas Lovering at the Perse School in Cambridge; one was the son of the antiquary Roger Dodsworth; one was Edward's nephew Toby Caulfeild (later third Baron Caulfeild of Charlemont), the son of his sister Mary. Of the thirteen, one died as an undergraduate and only six went on to take degrees. As a fellow King was obliged to take his turn at college duties. He was appointed praelector in 1633, and in the academic year 1633/4 the entries in the college admissions book are written in his small and elegant hand; in 1636 he was appointed 'Graecus lector'. Fellows were obliged to preach in chapel in vacations as well as in term-time, and the master of Christ's, Thomas Bainbrigg, deducted up to 16's'. from the quarterly stipends ($1) of fellows who failed to fulfil this obligation; in 1634 King was fined for this offence. 
Sir John King died in Lichfield on 4 January 1637 and was buried at Boyle Abbey on 30 March. King decided to travel to Ireland that summer with a view to seeing his relatives (his brother Robert, his sisters Mary and Margaret, and his uncle Bishop King) and his former tutor William Chappell, who was provost of Trinity College, Dublin; he may also have intended to visit his father's grave in Roscommon. Piracy and the threat of storms made travelling across the Irish Sea a perilous undertaking so King drew up a will (dated 30 July, with a codicil dated two days later) before he left for Chester, where his ship sailed on the spring tide of 10 August. The ship struck a rock off the coast of Anglesey and quickly sank. King was drowned, and his body was carried out to sea and never recovered. 
King's friends and colleagues commemorated him in a small volume of poetry which was published in Cambridge in 1638. This slim quarto, of which some thirty-three copies survive (including Izaak Walton's) consists of two parts: the first part, which is entitled 'Justa Edovardo King naufrago', contains twenty poems in Latin and three in Greek; the second part, entitled 'Obsequies to the Memory of Mr Edward King', contains thirteen poems in English, of which the last is Milton's 'Lycidas'. A draft of this poem survives in Milton's poetical notebook, now in Trinity College, Cambridge, and at least two copies of the printed volume (one in the British Library and one in Cambridge University Library) contain corrections to the text of 'Lycidas' in a hand that seems to be Milton's. The contributors to the memorial volume included Edward's brother Henry King (who is often confused with his namesake, the bishop of Chichester), Joseph Beaumont, John Cleveland, Michael Honywood, Henry More, Thomas Farnaby, and Ralph Widdrington. In addition to the thirty-six poems published in 'Justa' there are at least four surviving unpublished memorial poems, including two by Clement Paman. 
Commemorative poetry accommodates a measure of exaggeration in the praise of the deceased but the repeated and extravagant praise of King's knowledge of Greek and Latin suggests that his learning was exceptional, even by the high standards of that learned age. John Pullen of Magdalene College, for example, describes King (in Latin) as the great glory of Cambridge's men of letters, and Henry More eulogizes him (in Greek) as the light of the lamp of Athens. Such assertions help to explain why the erudite young Milton would describe King as 'a learned friend' in the headnote to 'Lycidas'. 
King was the author of ten published Latin poems, seven of which were written to mark the birth of royal children; of the other three, one celebrates the recovery of King Charles from smallpox in the winter of 1632 and another gives thanks for Charles's safe return from his coronation in Scotland in 1633. King's only poem to be free of the constraints of royal encomium was written to welcome the publication of Peter Hausted's comedy 'Odium senile'. These ten occasional poems may not achieve the greatness of Milton's best Latin poetry but they are none the less wholly competent and they display a marked independence of expression as well as a firm grasp of the classical tradition. The fact that the poems are largely devoted to the praise of royalty does not point to a partisan political position because King's life ended just as England was beginning to divide into rival supporters of king and parliament; nevertheless the supportive reference to the royal fleet in a poem published in 1637, the year in which John Hampden was tried for refusing to pay ship-money, could not have been politically neutral. Similarly the assertion in a poem written in 1636 that 'sancta maiestas Cathedrae / Dat placidam Italiae quietem' ('the holy sovereignty of the church grants Italy its calm serenity') may have been appropriate in a poem addressed to a Catholic queen but it is indicative of an unusual degree of tolerance for Roman Catholicism. 
Apart from the poems written by King and the poems written in his memory the only other documents that give any hint of his personality and circumstances are his will and the probate inventory of his rooms in Christ's College. In his will he left his books (which were valued at $90) to his colleague John Alsop and his sizar John Potts, and he requested Alsop to burn his papers without reading them or allowing them to be read by anyone else. The inventory is unremarkable, save that $512 (out of a total valuation of nearly $642) consists of 'debts owing unto him by bonds in his book'; these debts, which are described as 'sperate et desperate' ('hopeful and hopeless'), imply that King enjoyed considerable wealth during his brief life. Milton does not name King in 'Lycidas' but the fact that he is remembered in one of the greatest poems in the English language confers on him a degree of immortality that he would not have enjoyed had he not been the learned friend of Milton. 


@@@@@


doc= 15559


King, Edward (1734/5-1807), writer and antiquary, was baptized at St Peter Mancroft, Norwich, on 22 January 1735, the only son of Edward King (died 1775) of Norwich, and his wife, Sarah. He was educated at Harrow School and at Clare College, Cambridge, where he graduated in 1752. He was admitted a member of Lincoln's Inn on 18 September 1758 and was called to the bar in 1763. His uncle, a linen draper of Exeter, left him an ample fortune; nevertheless he practised for a number of years on the Norwich circuit before becoming recorder at Kings Lynn. In the course of his duties he 'defended a lady from a faithless lover' and afterwards married her; all that is known of her is that her name was Susanna. He was elected FRS on 14 May 1767 and FSA on 3 May 1770, and became a member of the council of the Society of Antiquaries in 1774. 
King's first publication was 'An Essay on the English Constitution' (1767), a highly derivative piece of political journalism drawing heavily on Dalrymple and Hume. A number of his papers were published in 'Archaeologia' during the 1770s, including 'Remarks on the abbey church of Bury St Edmunds in Suffolk' and two papers on ancient castles. The director of the Society of Antiquaries, Richard Gough, who was responsible for the publication of 'Archaeologia', complained to Jeremiah Milles, the society's president, of King's vanity in insisting on seeing his own papers published. Following the death of Milles in February 1784, King was elected his successor as president of the society on the understanding that Lord De Ferrars (afterwards earl of Leicester) would assume office the following 23 April. During his short presidency King drew up a set of regulations for meetings and initiated a number of administrative reforms, including the appointment of two regular secretaries and a draughtsman, as well as making efforts to increase the revenues of the society by enforcing the collection of membership fees. When April came he sought re-election; he was, however, defeated by an overwhelming majority and was accused of underhand methods in attempting to secure his own election. His speech on quitting the society was printed in 1784, as was his letter vindicating his own conduct. His actions aroused little sympathy within the society (most of whom could see the advantage of having a peer of the realm as president) and prompted Samuel Pegge to comment that 'Edwd. King is a troublesome man, & the Society will do full as well without his Company at their meetings as with it' (letter, 16 Aug 1784, minute books of the Society of Antiquaries). Although he did not contribute any further papers to 'Archaeologia' his name appears in the record of council meetings during 1785-6. 
This rift with the society did not herald the end of King's antiquarian interests. A paper, 'Vestiges of Oxford Castle', was published in 1796, anticipating the publication of his much larger study on the same subject: 'Munimenta antiqua, or, Observations on ancient castles, including remarks on the... progress of architecture... in Great Britain, and on the... change in... laws and customs', 4 vols. (1799-1806). The book is typical of King's somewhat idiosyncratic approach to antiquarian studies but nevertheless makes a strong case for architectural history and the close analysis of form and style (if less successfully effected). King argued that antiquarianism was a science and that antiquarian research should therefore be conducted in accordance with scientific models of measurement and comparison rather than being concerned with picturesque views. Though many of his contemporaries were contemptuous of his 'foolish theories' (the 'Monthly Review' was particularly critical of his obsession with concealed entrances and secret passages) his work was widely cited, and influenced, for example, George Chalmer's 'Caledonia' (1810); the plans and plates are generally recognized to have had some lasting value. Louis Dutens disputed King's theories on the invention of the arch, and King responded in a typically vigorous fashion in the final volume of 'Munimenta antiqua', in 1806. The controversy was not ended until King's death, in the following year. King also displayed his scientific learning in the pamphlet 'Remarks concerning stones said to have fallen from the clouds, both in these days and in antient times' (1796), which was prompted by a shower of stones that had supposedly fallen in Tuscany in the previous year and been investigated by Abbate Soldani, professor of mathematics at the University of Siena. 
King's interests had always been eclectic and he published on a number of other subjects in addition to that of antiquity. In 1785 he circulated anonymously 'Proposals for Establishing at Sea a Marine School, or Seminary for Seamen', which pointed out objections to Jonas Hanway's proposals for a large marine school on land and suggested fitting up a man-of-war instead. Hanway responded with 'Observations on a Proposal' (1785). King's 'Considerations on the utility of the national debt: and on the present alarming crisis; with a short plan of a mode or relief' was published in 1793; he challenged the widespread anxiety surrounding the inexorable increase of the national debt and argued that rather than being a cause for concern its size should be positively welcomed as an indication of the country's prosperity; furthermore he suggested that the debt should be increased to maximize the amount of wealth in circulation. His pamphlet drew only one response, from Joseph Acland. 
King's antiquarian publications had always had a strong providentialist streak but towards the end of his life his theological and mystical interests became increasingly prominent. His theology represents an interesting mixture of eschatology, virulent anti-Catholicism, and a vigorous assertion of the compatibility of scientific truth with revealed religion. In 1788 his 'Morsels of Criticism' attempted to show that John the Baptist was an angel from heaven who had formerly appeared in the person of Elijah, and that there would be a second appearance of Christ upon earth. In the same publication he also argued that the earth was a kind of comet on a trajectory towards the sun, by which it would eventually be ignited, while at its centre the earth consisted of a bottomless pit in which the wicked were punished. Though King received sixty copies for personal distribution there was little demand for the remaining texts; a few years later it was mentioned in Mathias's 'The Pursuits of Literature' and as a result was reissued, in 1800, with 'a supplemental part designed to show, still more fully, the perfect consistency of philosophical discoveries, and of historical facts, with the revealed Will of God'. 
The popular success of 'Morsels of Criticism' did nothing to enhance King's reputation as a philosophical commentator on the scriptures, however. In 1793 he had published 'An imitation of the prayer of Abel'; a rather more extraordinary pamphlet, 'Remarks on the Signs of the Times', was published in 1798, in which he claimed that the second coming was imminent, in fulfilment of the prophecy of the second book of 'Esdras', whose questionable authenticity he vigorously upheld. He also tried to trace the history and progress of the French Revolution to the scriptures. Irritated by Richard Gough's critique in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' ('GM', 68/2, 591-3), he wrote a violent letter to the printer, John Nichols. King added a 'Supplement' in 1799 but this was demolished by Bishop Horsley in the same periodical in his 'Critical disquisitions on the eighteenth chapter of Isaiah, in a letter to E. King'. King's next (anonymous) publication was 'Honest Apprehensions, or, The Unbiassed... Confession of Faith of Plain Honest Lay-Man', which contained an orthodox statement of Trinitarian theology. 
King prided himself on the breadth of his reading and his learning, was exceedingly tenacious of his opinions, impervious to criticism, and very defensive of his views. His obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' described him as a considerable eccentric, but pious and well-meaning. Little is known of his wife, Susanna; her niece Miss Ann Copson, described as 'an accomplished young lady with a large fortune', completed a number of the drawings for 'Munimenta antiqua' and married Henry Windsor, younger brother to the earl of Plymouth, from King's house in Beckenham, Kent ('GM', 71/1, 390). 
King died at his home in Mansfield Street, London, on 16 April 1807, aged seventy-two, and was buried in the churchyard at Beckenham, near to his country seat, The Oakery, on Clay Hill. He was survived by his wife. His extensive collection of prints and drawings was sold by auction in 1808. 


@@@@@


doc= 15560


King, Edward, Viscount Kingsborough (1795-1837), antiquary, born on 16 November 1795, was the eldest son of the family of three sons and two daughters of George King, third earl of Kingston in the peerage of Ireland (1771-1839), and Lady Helena Moore (1773-1847), only daughter of Stephen Moore, first Earl Mountcashell. After his father succeeded to the earldom in 1799 he was known by the courtesy title of Viscount Kingsborough. He matriculated at Oxford from Exeter College on 25 June 1814, and in Michaelmas term 1818 gained a second class in classics, but did not graduate. In 1818 and again in 1820 he was elected MP for Cork county, but resigned his seat in 1826 in favour of his younger brother Robert. 
Kingsborough was introduced by the bibliophile Sir Thomas Phillipps to Bodley's librarian Bulkeley Bandinel, who showed him the great Mexican manuscript the 'Codex Mendoza' in the Bodleian Library. This determined Kingsborough to devote his life to the study of the antiquities of Mexico. Again with Phillipps's encouragement, Kingsborough promoted and edited, with copious notes, a magnificent work entitled 'Antiquities of Mexico, Comprising Facsimiles of Ancient Mexican Paintings and Hieroglyphics' (9 vols., 1830-48). Seven volumes were published during his lifetime. Four copies were printed on vellum, with the plates coloured. The drift of Kingsborough's speculations is to establish the colonization of Mexico by the Israelites. The enterprise cost him more than $32,000. He incurred heavy debts in the preparation of his book, to paper makers and others. He was arrested, apparently in connection with having stood security for a debt of his father's, and was lodged in the sheriff's prison, Dublin, where he caught typhus fever and died within a few days, on 27 February 1837. Kingsborough, who was unmarried, was buried at Mitchelstown. Had he lived, he would have succeeded to the earldom of Kingston and to a substantial income. 
Sales of Kingsborough's manuscripts and of the remaining stock of the 'Antiquities' were conducted by Charles Sharpe in Dublin on 1 November 1842 and 14 March 1843. On 24 May 1854 further manuscripts were included in a mixed sale in Dublin. Sir Thomas Phillipps was a substantial purchaser at the sales. 


@@@@@


doc= 15561


King, Frances Elizabeth (1757-1821), philanthropist and author, was born on 25 July 1757 at Lincoln, the third daughter and eighth child of Sir Francis Bernard, baronet (1712-1779), provincial lawyer and later governor of New Jersey and Massachusetts, and Amelia, 'nee' Offley ('c'.1719-1778), daughter of Stephen Offley of Norton Hall, Derbyshire. Her nine brothers and sisters included the philanthropist Sir Thomas Bernard, founder of the Society for Bettering the Condition and Improving the Comforts of the Poor. 
In 1758 Francis Bernard was appointed governor of the colony of New Jersey in North America, and departed with his wife and four of their children. Frances, described by her great-niece Sophia Higgins, the family biographer, as 'unusually delicate' (Higgins, 1.221), was left under the care of Mrs Beresford, a near relative of her father's, who lived at the Manor House, Nether Winchendon, Buckinghamshire. Sophia Higgins described Frances's education, conducted by her elder sister Jane ('b'. 1748) and Mrs Beresford, as consisting of solid reading, French, music, and needlework, as well as household duties. According to her anonymous memoirist, who may have been her future son-in-law, John Collinson ('c'.1791-1857): 'Here those good principles of religion and active and succouring charity were instilled, which influenced her future life and led her to co-operate with her family in assisting the poor' ('Female Scripture Characters', v). King later acknowledged her debt to Jane, dedicating her 'Female Scripture Characters' 'To a beloved sister, as a grateful memorial of the early instruction and pious example from whence her best blessings have sprung'. 
On Sir Francis's return from America in 1769 Frances Elizabeth joined her family, first in Lincoln and subsequently at Nether Winchendon (from May 1772) and Aylesbury (from September of the same year). In her study of the family, Sophia Higgins argues that Frances, known as Fanny to her friends, aged seventeen, was a 'remarkable' and 'self-reliant' girl, due to her almost total separation from her near relatives for her first eleven years (Higgins, 2.274). Her first literary work, 'The Rector's Memorandum Book, being Memoirs of a Family in the North', was written in 1774, the year of her sister Jane's marriage to Charles White, although the text was not published until 1814 and 1819. Her exemplary Christian heroine was represented as educating all the children in the village and nursing the sick. Forced to make an unhappy marriage, she nevertheless demonstrated her spiritual superiority over her unkind husband by her Christian submissiveness, and died a pious and early death. 
After her mother's death in May 1778 King often stayed with friends and relatives, for example, in Wendover and Yorkshire. She may also have continued a school superintended by her mother in Nether Winchendon. Family letters cited by Higgins suggest she became engaged to the Revd Richard King (1748-1810), a friend of her brother Scrope, at Nether Winchendon about 1780. According to Higgins this was against the wishes of her brothers, due to King's lack of income, offhand manner, and political views. Nevertheless, Frances affirmed that 'It must rest solely within myself to guide my own conduct' (Higgins, 3.36, citing a letter then at Nether Winchendon). On 17 August 1782 they were married in London. The couple resided at King's livings of Steeple Morden, Cambridgeshire, and at Worthin, Shropshire, which he was granted about 1782, finally settling at Steeple Morden in 1809. The marriage was described as very happy, as the dedication to 'The Beneficial Effects of the Christian Temper on Domestic Happiness' (2nd edn, 1807) suggests. 
In 1783 Frances Elizabeth King gave birth to twins, Henry and Amelia. Henry died, aged one. Julia Priscilla was born in 1786, and Elizabeth in 1792. King frequently cared for children besides her own offspring, for example fostering her orphaned nephew between 1791 and 1793, and later looking after her grandchildren. Several young girls came to live with King, including the daughters of Lady Ingilby (and at one time Ingilby's son) and a Miss Richardson about 1794. In April 1802 her elder daughter, Amelia, married John Collinson, and in 1808 Julia married her cousin, Thomas Baker. 
The Kings' daughter Elizabeth died in 1801, after which Frances's health, already affected by rheumatism, deteriorated. Following the peace of Amiens, Richard and Frances King stayed in Paris for eight months in 1802, after which Mrs King published 'A Tour in France' (1803), based on her journal. This describes philanthropic institutions, the dress and customs of the peasantry, and the author's being shocked by French Sunday rituals. 
On their return the Kings stayed in Phillimore Place, Kensington, London. Mrs King supported her brother Thomas in establishing the work of the Society for Bettering the Condition and Improving the Comforts of the Poor (SBCP) in Clapham, particularly among women. The area was divided into districts, each with a female sub-treasurer, in which women established and supervised numerous schools. Higgins cites the manuscript SBCP minutes of the ladies' committee meetings which show Mrs King's involvement: for example, on 17 December 1802 at the second meeting, held at her house in Kensington, money was collected to relieve a poor woman. Further activity included a circular, the result of Thomas and Frances's consultations, which was printed in 1803 as the appendix to the fourth volume of the reports of the SBCP, and a copy of the address sent to female subscribers which, though unsigned, is attributed to King by Higgins. 
Frances King was also active in her husband's parishes in the establishment of schools for children of the poor and in other philanthropic societies. Her conduct of the parish library which she founded at Steeple Morden -- reading aloud to parents and children, then discussing the books and lending them to children -- was described by her sister-in-law in the third volume of the 'Reports of the Society for Bettering the Condition and Improving the Comforts of the Poor' (cited in Higgins, 3.291). Her comments on the work of other teachers appear in an article in the fortieth report of the SBCP (1817) in which King wrote approvingly of Mrs Gray's reading, writing, and needlework school in Bishopwearmouth, drawing particular attention to the way the girls were taught and the strict segregation of the sexes. Two surviving letters indicate that King knew Hannah More, and was still subscribing to More's Shipham sickness club in 1810. 
On her husband's death in 1810 King went to live near her two married daughters, whose husbands -- John Collinson and Thomas Baker -- held livings at Gateshead and at Whitburn, co. Durham, respectively. Her memoirist claimed that 'for a period of more than ten years [she] was there also a mother to the poor, a 'Dorcas full of good works and almsdeeds which she did'. She not only established a large Sunday school, a Sick Fund and Clothing Society, but was constant in her superintendance of these institutions, and in visiting the poor at their own houses. ('Female Scripture Characters', vii)' All this, it was claimed, was without losing the retiring aspect of the female character.In her published work Mrs King made clear her intention to remedy important omissions made by divines. In 'The Beneficial Effects of the Christian Temper on Domestic Happiness', King lamented how Bishop Beilby Porteous's treatise 'The Beneficial Effects of Christianity on the Temporal Concerns of Mankind' had noted only its public benefits, and had not carried the precepts of Christianity into domestic life. As support for her argument she cited William Paley's 'Evidences of Christianity'. In her 'Female Scripture Characters', first published in 1811, she points out that the Revd Thomas Robinson, author of 'Scripture Characters' (1793), had omitted all but two female figures. King's 'characters' included both 'good' and 'bad' women from the 'Old' and 'New Testament': Eve, Jezebel, Susanna, Martha and Mary, and Dorcas. Her description of Dorcas, for example, was followed by a homily about the value of learning to nurse the sick, instruct the ignorant, and teach the young. King recommended that a day a week should be set aside (including for children and servants) for work for the poor, but did not regard visiting prisoners as part of female charity. Another recommendation was that women should take the lead in family prayers for the entire household. King's study 'Martha and Mary' included her views on female education, with a description of Andrew Bell's monitorial system and a critique of a model of education based on 'accomplishments' for middle-class girls which neglected the mind. Higgins claimed that this book was intended for middle- or upper-class girls; her memoirist, that it was widely used in schools. 
King's writings illustrate the contrasting 'feminist' elements in the writings of early nineteenth-century evangelical philanthropic women, including Hannah More. On the one hand, King insisted on the absolute differences between the functions and capabilities of the sexes. Thus, the proper place of women was within the home, subordinate to their husbands in everything not inconsistent with their duty to God. However, she unequivocally asserted that men were far more likely to be deficient in their domestic duties than women, and that men often treated women as if they existed only for their convenience. She argued that there was no reason to suppose that 'Religion is of any sex' (King, 'Beneficial Effects', 36), and urged men to appreciate their wives and to be mindful of their domestic duties. King's memoirist also points out the contrasting aspects of her personality: 'affectionate and indulgent, she could be strict upon occasion, and know how to enforce authority: possessing a disinterested and almost romantic generosity, she managed with cleverness and scrupulous accuracy all details of business' ('Female Scripture Characters', vii). An engraving by Edward Scriven after a portrait by Edward Hastings, which shows King wearing a widow's veil, suggests she was a formidable character. 
Frances King died at Gateshead on 23 December 1821. She left $1018, which included legacies of $50 each to her sisters Mrs White and Mrs Smith and the three other single women, and the residue of $768 to her grandson, the naval officer and explorer Richard Collinson; her other grandchildren were General Thomas Bernard Collinson and Julia Stretton, author of 'Margaret and her Bridesmaids' and other popular novels. 
King represents the exemplar of the godly parson's wife, a vocation she advised her female readers to recommend to their daughters and which she saw as mirroring that of the ministry for men. Her life story illustrates how early nineteenth-century women could hold what are now regarded as conservative views on the position of women in society, yet exercise considerable power within their own communities through their interpretation of the proper sphere of female responsibility, while commanding respect from the wider audience who read her books. She received a glowing obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1822) and occupies a place among the pantheon of 'exemplary' religious and philanthropic women of the 1770s-1820s, which includes Sarah Trimmer, Hannah More, and Mary Bosanquet. 


@@@@@


doc= 15562


Sir George St Vincent Duckworth King, fourth baronet (1809-1891), naval officer, was born at Stonehouse, Devon, on 15 July 1809, entered the Royal Naval College in February 1822, served in the Mediterranean, East Indies, and West Indies, and was promoted captain in 1841. He married on 16 December 1847 Lady Caroline Mary Dawson-Damer (died 5 December 1851), sister of the third earl of Portarlington; they had a son and a daughter. He was captain of the 'Leander', and afterwards of the 'Rodney', in the Black Sea during the Crimean War in 1854-5, and was second in command of the naval brigade at the siege of Sevastopol. He became rear-admiral in 1863, was commander-in-chief in China from 1863 to 1867, and was made vice-admiral in 1867, KCB in May 1873, and admiral in 1875. He succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his elder brother on 2 November 1887. He died at Wear House, Exeter, on 18 August 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 15563


King, Gregory (1648-1712), herald and political economist, was born at Lichfield, Staffordshire, on 15 December 1648, the eldest son of Gregory King ('fl'. 1648-1668), who was originally from Leicester, and his first wife, Elizabeth Andrews (died 1668) of Sandwich in Kent. King's later criticisms of his father, who was a mathematician and surveyor, might cast doubt on the statement that 'he was packt away to school at two years of age' (King, 'Miscellaneous notes', xxvi) but certainly he was a student at Lichfield Free School (the grammar school) between the ages of five and fourteen, though in his last two years there he began to help his father with work. At school King excelled, becoming skilled in Greek, Hebrew, and Latin, and he was about to go to university when his father agreed to a suggestion that he become a clerk to the herald William Dugdale. 
What might be called King's apprenticeship decisively influenced his life's course. On Dugdale's visitations to scrutinize pedigrees of the elite he acquired a detailed knowledge of local and family circumstances, of the nature of communities, and of the increasingly uncertain interplay of wealth and status. He spent five years criss-crossing the northern counties of England, finding the time to learn French and develop some skills as an artist. In 1667, with Dugdale's visitations complete, King was recommended to Lord Hatton, whom for two years he helped with his antiquarian interests. Between 1669 and 1670 King was back in Lichfield, doing odd jobs, before he secured a position as steward, auditor, and secretary to Dowager Lady Gerard at Sandon in Staffordshire. 
In 1672 King left provincial England and the service of the well-to-do for London. There he renewed his acquaintances among the heralds, securing a recommendation to John Ogilby, the printer and cartographer. For Ogilby he initially undertook some minor engravings, including for Sir Peter Leycester's 'Historical Antiquities' (1673). But Ogilby, who in 1671 had obtained a royal warrant for a survey of Britain with a view to publishing a book of maps, soon came to make much greater use of King. King helped to map Essex, digested the notes of the other surveyors, and, critically, in 1672 and 1673 joined Christopher Wren, John Aubrey, and Robert Hooke on a small committee with links to the Royal Society to draw up a questionnaire to be circulated to elicit information for Ogilby's planned 'Britannia'. Though shelved, the twenty-two queries were used later in structuring King's exercises in political arithmetic. Indeed, cartography played as important a role in forming King's view of English society as his interest in heraldry. Detailed maps he produced of London and Westminster at this time added considerably to his knowledge of town life (the capital then accounted for about ten per cent of England's population) and he was involved in much other map making besides. He also worked with John Adams, whose 'Index villaris', first published in 1680, listed villages, towns, and cities as well as country seats, and depended in part upon an analysis of hearth tax materials. 
Between 1675 and 1680 King spent much of his time as an engraver, often of maps, and was involved in a major survey of the new development of Soho in London -- Soho Square initially took his name as King Square. But he remained in touch with his connections at the heralds' office. In ill health Francis Sandford, Rouge Dragon pursuivant, often turned to King for help, notably for his 'Genealogical history of the kings of England, and monarchs of Great Britain, &c. from the conquest to the year 1677' (1677). And Thomas Lee, Chester herald, began to make use of King. Through Lee's patronage in May 1677 King took over Sandford's office when Sandford became Lancaster herald, and until 1694 was very active in heraldic matters, becoming registrar of the College of Arms in 1684 and Lancaster herald himself when Sandford resigned, unable to accept the accession of William and Mary in 1689. Consequently King went on further visitations to the midland counties and to London, helped organize the coronations of James II and William III and Mary II, and produced with Sandford the luxurious 'History of the Coronation of... James II' (1687). He also undertook three trips to Europe, taking part in the investitures of the Garter of the elector of Brandenburg in 1689, the duke of Celle in 1691, and the elector of Saxony in 1692-3. 
In 1694 King was a leading keeper of the flame of ceremony, hierarchy, and of form, but a dispute with the earl marshal over arrangements for Queen Mary's lavish funeral in 1695 put a stop to his heraldic career. It was also at this point that his autobiography ends (it was perhaps written then). It is a sad irony that from then until his death, a period when he produced the works for which he is now best-known, his pioneering exercises in political arithmetic, details of his life are scanty and highly fragmentary. What is clear is that between 1694 and his death in 1712 King was much involved in producing and analysing statistics for various areas of central government. Along with Blathwayt, Lowndes, and Davenant, King was one of a small band of dedicated public servants at the forefront of expanding and overhauling the institutions of the state as it waged two terrible wars against France, the greatest European power of the period. King's contribution, however, was wholly distinctive, for he developed political arithmetic, 'the art of reasoning by figures, upon things relating to government', in important new ways (C. Davenant, 'The Political and Commercial Works of that Celebrated Writer Charles D'Avenant', ed. C. Whitworth, 5 vols., 1771, 1.128). 
King's political arithmetic was notably wide-ranging. For the newly formed Board of Trade he produced an analysis of the population of Gloucester in 1696 and in the following year a valuable survey of almshouses and 'hospitals' that contributed to their analysis of poor relief; in 1697 he compiled an account 'Of the naval trade of England' for 1688; he was secretary to the commissioners for public accounts, probably in 1702-6 and 1708-12; in 1705-6 and 1710 he was secretary to the comptroller of the army accounts (with an annual salary of $300); in 1708 he became a commissioner to state William III's debts; and in 1710 he produced a paper detailing income inequality among the clergy for the governors for Queen Anne's Bounty. Whatever the many merits of these efforts King is undoubtedly best known for his 'Natural and political observations upon the state and condition of England, 1696', probably produced for Robert Harley, then a leading figure in the country 'party' that was so critical of William III's financial administration. This is an invaluable document, mainly an exercise in demography, that attempted to estimate population size, its distribution between town and countryside, household size, age distribution, marriage patterns, and birth and death rates. Further guesses are provided of the housing stock, agricultural land use, livestock, and output, various tax revenues, and wealth. 
At the heart of the 'Observations' is King's famous social table, 'A scheme of the income and expense of the several families of England calculated for the year 1688'. Here he estimated patterns of household size and income and expenses per head for twenty-six social groups, from temporal peers to vagrants. Historians have long valued the picture this provides of late seventeenth-century society, even though it has obvious inaccuracies (despite being rooted in tax data derived from poll taxes and assessments of marriages, births, and burials). It shows one well-informed view of hierarchy, of the relationship between income and status, and of the extraordinary degree of inequality which then existed. It also betrays a number of common assumptions of the propertied. The poor are judged to be decreasing the wealth of the nation, eminent merchants are placed lower in the pecking order than less prosperous gentlemen, poor clergy are superior to richer freeholders, and, most notably, the poorer half of society is encapsulated in only five categories: common seamen, labouring people and outservants, cottagers and paupers, common soldiers, and vagrants. 
King's political arithmetic was highly original and he had no peer until the flowering of the nineteenth-century statistical movement. In the first place he was distinguished by tying his calculations closely to detailed available evidence, often by imaginative use of tax records, though his earlier work as a herald and cartographer was also vital. If King's political arithmetic was more ambitious than that of any other contemporary it was also more securely based and, in that sense, he is better seen as a successor to John Graunt than to Sir William Petty, aspiring to work within the methodological framework championed in the early seventeenth century by Francis Bacon. Second, if he frequently sought to depict the nation as a whole, and sought after generalizations, he well knew that a country was but a collection of individuals, families, and parishes -- he made detailed studies of his own family and over a dozen particular communities, including London, a point often overlooked because of the innovative modes of categorization King developed in order to produce generalizations. Third, the breadth of his estimates, and a sense of the interrelationships within society, was distinctive; he attempted to see the nation as an integrated whole and worked hard, if not always successfully, to ensure the internal consistency of his estimates. One particular aspect of this which has proved particularly durable was the so-called 'King-Davenant law of demand', which related grain prices to harvest yields. Finally, he was notable for considering how populations changed over time and attempting crude comparisons between the fortunes of England, France, and Holland. Despite his ambitions there is little doubt that King appreciated the limitations of his approach. His meticulous notebooks show a high degree of speculation and a search for the credible. His close, neat hand suggests to those of a graphological bent a precise, fastidious, not to say obsessive man. Yet his final calculations are often heavily rounded, for anything more detailed would be illusory. 
Assessing the importance of King's political arithmetic to contemporaries is very difficult, not least because of the suspicion that only a fraction of his calculations has survived. Moreover, if Harley and Sir Stephen Fox at the Treasury saw some of these, his calculations were very largely unpublished at the time, save some extracts in Davenant's 'Essay upon the Probable Methods of Making a People Gainers in the Ballance of Trade' (1699). Rather, King's influence is glimpsed by the various offices he held, by the stimulating effect he clearly had upon the likes of Davenant, through odd references of esteem such as that by Leibniz, and his salary. Consequently, with his death and the passing of the generation of politicians he had worked for his name rapidly faded. It was rediscovered at the end of the eighteenth century when political arithmetic was once again consciously and enthusiastically championed. In 1793 James Dallaway's survey of the history of heraldry in England printed King's autobiography and nine years later George Chalmers first published King's 'Natural and political observations'. Since then King's importance as an acute observer of England has been widely acknowledged, though modern research has sometimes revised his estimates. 
As a person King is largely anonymous (very little private correspondence survives) though his public work suggests much about the private man: careful, painstaking, cautious, conservative. In religion he was for the Church of England and, though against James II's religious policies, was, because of his 'great respect to the succession of the Crown by legal descent' (King, 'Miscellaneous notes', xxxviii), unenthusiastic about the succession of William III and Mary II in 1689 -- it is notable that he held office mostly during the years of tory supremacy under Queen Anne. He was a man of some substance, a property owner, stockholder in the East India Company, and governor of St Bartholomew's Hospital. He was twice married, first on 20 July 1674 to Anne, daughter of John Powel of Tirley in Gloucestershire, and then in 1701 to Frances Grattam, with whom he had three children who all died young. King died in London on 29 December 1712 and was buried in the chancel of St Benet Paul's Wharf, London, the parish where he had lived for some years. An epitaph there by his second wife justly celebrated him as 'a skilful herald, a good accomptant, surveyor, and mathematician, a curious penman, and well versed in political arithmetic' (ibid., xlviii). 


@@@@@


doc= 15564


King, Henry (1592-1669), poet and bishop of Chichester, was the eldest of the five sons and four daughters of John King (d. 1621), archdeacon of Nottingham and later bishop of London, and his wife, Joan, daughter of Henry Freeman of Henley, Buckinghamshire. He was baptized on 16 January 1592 at Worminghall, near Oxford, home of his grandfather Philip. He was educated as founder's kin at Lord Williams' School, Thame, then from about 1600 at Westminster School with his next brother, John (1595-1639), who shared all his subsequent education. They both matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford (of which their father had become dean in 1605), on 20 January 1609, were tutored by Samuel Fell, and were admitted BA and MA on 19 June 1611, the year their father was made bishop of London. Both contributed to university collections of Latin epitaphs and congratulatory poems from 1612 to 1625. 
King left Oxford on 10 July 1616, probably because he married Anne Berkeley ('c'.1600-1624), eldest daughter and heir of Sir Robert Berkeley of Boycourt in Kent, who had died in 1614. She then lived in Oxford with her great-aunt Lloyd, widow of the second principal of Jesus College (her family evidently fought for a better marriage). In 1619 the Kings leased part of Vicaridge House at the west end of St Paul's in London. Of their seven children two, John and Henry, survived infancy. Anne herself died in 1624, aged only twenty-four, and was buried in Bishop John King's tomb in St Paul's on 24 January. Her husband's moving 'Exequy' on her death is the poem by which he is chiefly remembered. 
King must have been ordained by 24 January 1616, when he was collated to the prebend of St Pancras in St Paul's Cathedral, which carried with it the office of confessor, and was given the rectory and patronage of Chigwell, Essex. He was made archdeacon of Colchester on 10 April 1617, sinecure rector of Fulham on 18 November 1618, and soon after became an honorary member of Lincoln's Inn and a royal chaplain-in-ordinary. He preached his first public sermon at Paul's Cross on 5 November 1617, criticized by John Chamberlain as overbold, being 'so young man in such a place and at such a time' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.44). 
King's first printed sermon, preached at James I's request at Paul's Cross on 25 November 1621, was a vindication of his father's loyalty to the English church 'Upon Occasion of that False and Scandalous Report' that he had converted to Roman Catholicism before his death. It sets the tone of Henry King's wry, often humorous and temperate comments (unusual at that time) on extremes in religion. That same year John Donne was appointed dean of St Paul's: he and King remained close friends until Donne's death in 1631, and several of King's sermons show his familiarity with Donne's sermons, then still in manuscript. As an executor, Henry commissioned the statue of Donne in St Paul's which survived the great fire, and probably, to judge by the idiosyncratic rhetorical punctuation, he was the careful editor of his 'Poems' (1633). 
King became canon of Christ Church by proxy on 3 March 1624, his only preferment for fifteen years. He and his brother John, made canon in August, were admitted BD and DD on 19 May 1625, and on 10 July, Act Sunday, preached at St Mary's: Henry in the morning and John in the afternoon, the sermons being printed together. Henry's sermon closely resembles Donne's on the same text, 'Psalm 32': 5, not through plagiarism, but by way of answer to Donne; other implicit dialogues with Donne occur in King's 1626 Lent sermon and in the third section of 'An Exposition upon the Lord's Prayer'. 
Most of King's lyrics belong to the early 1620s; another group can be dated 1630 to 1633; he also wrote satires and elegies on friends and public figures. All the early lyrics were set to music by John Wilson and are included in his song manuscript (Bodl. Oxf., MS Mus.b.1). King was a keen musician, bequeathing a 'cabinett organ made by Craddocke' in his will. Until the interregnum the poems circulated in carefully copied quarto manuscript volumes commissioned by King (apparently a unique situation); one of his scribes can be identified as Thomas Manne, student of Christ Church and later rector of St Olave, Silver Street, London. King revised and augmented the collections regularly so that wrong attributions of his poems can be dismissed. 
As a royal chaplain King preached at Whitehall, delivering the prestigious Lent sermons. King's most lyrical of these, for 1626 and 1627, were printed, as was his Easter Spittle sermon before the lord mayor of London and the common councillors in 1626, with descriptions of the recent devastating plague visitation. His 'Exposition upon the Lord's Prayer' (1628) is based on afternoon sermons at St Paul's. They begin about 1623 (as a reference to Prince Charles's recently abandoned Spanish marriage shows); the 1625 plague evidently caused a gap in the series, and each section looks gracefully towards James I's own commentary on the prayer. King's moderate Calvinist theology, his dislike of extremes, his keen sense of loss after his young wife's death, his firmly expressed pastoral teaching, his learning, and views on his times and life in general are best seen in these eleven sermons. 
There are no lyric poems or printed sermons from the period subsequent to 1634 which coincides with Laud's archbishopric. In 1633, after eight years' service, King ceased to sit on the court of high commission. On 6 February 1639, however, King was installed as dean of Rochester, where in 1640 he built a new deanery. That same year he preached a significant Accession day sermon at Paul's Cross on 27 March emphasizing the importance of obedience to Charles I's sacred authority in language which anticipated parts of the ecclesiastical canons passed by convocation in the following weeks. 
King was appointed bishop of Chichester on 12 October 1641, and consecrated on 6 February 1642, the day after parliament passed a bill excluding bishops from the Lords. Like his two predecessors he held the rectory of Petworth to compensate for the poverty of the bishopric. He lived in the palace at Chichester until the siege of December 1642, when he fled (not, as reported, taken prisoner) first to Petworth, then to Albury. He lived with his widowed sister, Elizabeth Holt, and her family, presumably in the house he had rented from George Aungier since 1634, close to his second cousin George Duncombe, with whom he was frequently involved in financial transactions (he also held bonds with the earls of Northumberland and Arundel). 
In 1643 King was harshly sequestered, but managed to transfer the St Paul's Churchyard house to his son Henry. William Oughtred, at Shere, near Albury, coached King's son John, who seduced his daughter. After this difficult episode King moved, in 1645, to live with his nephew, John King's son, at Blakesware, Hertfordshire, and by 1647 was at Richings, near Slough, home of Lady Salter, niece of Brian Duppa, where he set up a small praying community with family, including his sister Anne King, and friends. On 11 March 1649 he wrote an elegy 'from my sad retirement' on Charles I, buried at nearby Windsor. That year John Hales, on losing his Eton fellowship, became their chaplain until 1655. In 1651 King published 'The Psalmes of David... to be Sung after the Old Tunes used in the Churches' (some were later set to music by Playford in 'Psalms and Hymns', 1671); King's letter to Bishop Ussher in October with a presentation copy explains his reasons. About this time King also wrote to Izaak Walton, an old friend through John Donne, although later omitted from King's will. 
Thereafter King stayed sometimes with his sister, Dorothy Hubert, and her husband, Sir Richard, at Langley, or with his brother Philip at Hitcham. King drew up his will in 1653 when he was engaged with Duppa in travelling the country ordaining men according to the rite of the forbidden 'Book of Common Prayer'. About 1655, when few bishops remained alive, it was proposed that he should cross with one other to the continent for fresh consecrations, but none would accompany him. His 'Poems, Elegies and Paradoxes' was first printed by Richard Marriott and Henry Herringman in 1657 from authoritative manuscripts, ostensibly without his permission; a second edition, published in 1664, was augmented by the elegy on Charles I and four others. 
Named for the archbishopric of York at the Restoration (as his disgruntled prospective successor at Chichester, Edward Burton, reported), King lost it by going down to settle affairs in his diocese. His visitation sermon, 8 October 1662, shows how sensitively he dealt with the jarring factions among his clergy, 'laying controversies asleep and silencing disputes' (Hobbs, 'Sermons', 37). He was active in the House of Lords. 
Two of King's Whitehall sermons were published, that for Charles II's Accession day anniversary in 1661, first of the new reign (reprinted 1713, when another civil war seemed to threaten), and that for Charles I's execution, published in January 1665. 'A good and eloquent' sermon heard on 8 March 1663 by Samuel Pepys, one listed for Lent 1666, and one heard by John Evelyn on 28 February 1669 have not survived, nor has a visitation sermon reported by Giles Moore, rector of Horsted Keynes, on 8 September 1669 ('The Journal of Giles Moore', ed. R. Bird, Sussex RS, 68, 1971, 232). King's preaching was much esteemed and imitated in his own day. Bishop Brian Duppa's funeral sermon, preached in Westminster Abbey on 24 April 1662, is an excellent example of his style, and a valuable source for Duppa's life and the interregnum. It reveals that King had also preached the Garter day sermon at Windsor in 1661. 
King died on 30 September 1669 at the bishop's palace, and was buried on 8 October in the south choir aisle of Chichester Cathedral. As his will requested he received a simple ledger stone like his father's, with the words 'Deposita redditurae animae', but the family then ordered the ornate memorial later placed in the north transept. His second son, Henry, a gentleman of the royal chamber, had predeceased him on 21 February, and his heir, John, died on 10 March 1671, leaving his father's books, described in Henry's will as 'a small remainder of a large Library taken from me at Chichester contrary to the condicon and contracte of the Generall and Counsell of Warre' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/133, sig. 136, 16 Nov 1669), to recreate the cathedral library. About 300 of 2000 books survive there, among them some twenty titles from John Donne's library. The York gospels, lost during the civil wars, were also mysteriously returned by King's executors. 


@@@@@


doc= 15565


King, Humphrey (fl. 1595-1613), poet, was the author of 'An halfe-penny-worth of wit, in a pennyworth of paper, or, The hermites tale, the third impression' (1613). No earlier edition is known but it must have been printed some years previously. 'Robin the Devil his two penniworth of wit in half a penniworth of paper, by Robert Lee, a famous fencer of London, alias Robin the Devil' (1607) is mentioned in West's sale catalogue of 1773 and may have been an earlier edition but it is not now known to be extant. A jocular, mock dedicatory epistle to the countess of Sussex is prefixed to King's poem. He acknowledges that his work is 'a course homespun linsey woolsey webbe of wit' but, seeing his 'inferiours in the gifts of learning, wisedome, and understanding, torment the Print daily', he is 'the bolder to shoulder in amongst them' (King). This is followed by an address to the reader, three short copies of verses, and three anonymous sonnets; the second of which Thomas Corser cautiously attributed to either Thomas Nashe or Robert Greene. 'The Hermites Tale' takes the form of a dialogue between a disillusioned hermit and a young man, concerning the vices and follies of the age, the growth of luxury, and the decay of hospitality. Puritan sensibilities are attacked in one part, and allusions are made to the legend of Robin Hood, to the works of Skelton, and to the activities of Richard Tarton (sigs. D2'v', E'r'). 
King was the dedicatee of Anthony Chute's panegyrical tract 'Tabacco', printed posthumously in 1595. The author was a friend of Gabriel Harvey and this text, the first English work on the subject, testifies to King's exalted reputation among London smokers: 'What your experience is in this divine hearbe, al men do know, and acknowledge you to bee The Sovereigne of Tabacco' (Nicholl, 227). 
Four years later Thomas Nashe dedicated his 'Lenten Stuffe' to 'his worthie good patron, Lustie Humfrey, according as the townsmen doo christen him, little Numps as the Nobilitie and Courtiers do name him, and Honest Humfrey, as all his friendes and acquaintance esteeme him, king of the Tobacconists 'hic & ubique', and a singular Mecaenas to the Pipe and the Tabour.' At the end of the dedicatory epistle Nashe refers to the forthcoming 'sacred Poeme of the Hermites Tale, that will restore the golden age amongst us'. This address reveals a burlesque and boisterous relationship between the two men -- 'A King thou art by name and a King of good fellowshippe' ('Nashes Lenten Stuff', sig. A3'r') -- and emphasizes that although King himself was a poet he was an 'unlearned lover of poetry' (ibid., sig. A2'r'). In 1600 Nicholas Breton, under the guise of the imperfect anagram Salohein Treboun, dedicated his rare 'Pasquils Mistresse, or, The Worthie and Unworthie Woman' to 'Lustie Humfrey, honest wagge' (Breton, sig. A2'r'), having been motivated by the desire to advise his good friend, who was evidently at that time considering the prospect of marriage. 
Little is known of King's biographical details but it is possible that he could claim kinship with the King family of Halstead, Essex. Lusty Humfrey recurs as a frequent form of address, and several colleagues, as well as King himself, make reference to his uneducated state. His circle appears to have favoured punning uses of the poet's surname, a tendency adopted by King in an unpublished plea for unity to James I, entitled 'H. King to a King' (Corser, 339). 


@@@@@


doc= 15566


King, James, Lord Eythin (1589-1652), royalist army officer, was the son of David King of Warbester in Orkney and his wife, Mary, daughter of Adam Stewart, Carthusian prior of Perth and illegitimate son of James V. 
King entered Swedish service at the age of twenty, and was eventually joined by his brothers David (who rose to the rank of major) and John King of Warbester and his cousin James King of the Barra family, who became a colonel. Little is known of the first ten years of his service; by 1619 he was serving in the Smaland regiment commanded by his fellow Scot Alexander Leslie. King was eventually promoted and in 1622 served as a captain in the Scottish regiment of Patrick Ruthven, the future earl of Forth and of Brentford and lord general of Charles I's armies during the early years of the civil war. About 1623 King had his portrait painted directly onto the wall of Skokloster Castle, where it survives. 
In 1624 King became a major in Otto von Scheiding's regiment. From 1626 to 1630 he was back with the Scottish regiments, where he served as lieutenant-colonel to David Drummond and Patrick Ruthven, but he did not stay with his countrymen for long. The Scottish military diarist Robert Monro listed King as general-major and colonel of the Dutch cavalry and infantry in service by 1632. Following the death of Gustavus Adolphus in November, King departed from purely military affairs when he was appointed governor of Vlotho, a garrison town on the banks of the Weser. The following year, while stationed as a colonel in the city of Thuw in the bishopric of Bremen, he joined the German political and literary society 'Fruchtbringende Gesellschaft' (the Fruitful Society) under the name of 'Der Verbleibende' (the one who remains). King had married a Pomeranian woman, Dilliana Van der Borchens. She probably died in 1634; her will was proved on 10 November of that year. 
King continued as a prominent field commander. In 1636 he was lieutenant-general in Leslie's army in Westphalia. The following year he joined forces with the landgrave of Hesse in his attempts to push the imperial forces out of his territories; initial success turned into a forced retreat into Westphalia, and when the landgrave broke up his army King was forced to withdraw his small command into garrisons. In 1638 he was ordered by Marshal Johan Baner to join his army, then at Munster, with that of Charles Lewis, the elector palatine, and his brother Prince Rupert, the nephews of Charles I. The combined forces were decisively defeated at the battle of Lemgo (also known as the battle of Vlotho), near Minden in October; Rupert was captured. King was credited with orchestrating the orderly withdrawal of the only part of the army not to be routed. He managed to evade both capture and serious injury, and received a Swedish knighthood for his services. Recriminations over Lemgo were to poison relations between King and Prince Rupert at a crucial juncture for the royalist cause six years later. 
News of the troubled situation in Scotland led King to retire from Swedish service. He explained to the Swedish Riksrad that he did not wish to serve in the Swedish army without his former field commander, Alexander Leslie, who had returned to Scotland to uphold the covenant. King sought, as did many Scottish officers, compensation for the wage arrears due to him. The Riksrad agreed that in view of his twenty-six years' service to the Swedish crown he should receive the outstanding money and a pension of 1200 riksdaler. They also argued that this gesture would ensure the continued support of the Scots for Sweden and its designs against Denmark-Norway and the Habsburg empire -- suggesting that they saw King as sympathetic to his native country at this time of conflict between Scotland and its king. After all, the Scottish covenanters were pressing a protestant ideal far closer to King's heart than the ecclesiastical reforms pressed by Charles I. 
On leaving Sweden King took up residence in Hamburg, choosing to sit out the war there rather than return to Britain to fight against his old commander Leslie. He certainly helped the king's cause there, even if the degree to which he wished for a Scottish defeat is uncertain. On 28 June 1639 he signed a testimonial with his kinsman Colonel James King confirming that arms bought by Sir Thomas Roe were serviceable and fit for the king's service: in fact they were found to be in such poor condition that they had to be returned to Hamburg. 
King returned briefly to Britain and was awarded a pension of $1000 per annum by Charles I. He was soon dispatched back to Hamburg with orders to build up an army of trained officers and soldiers that he was expected to lead home against the covenanters. Rumours circulated that the English lord treasurer had been instructed to issue King with $50,000 to purchase arms from Christian IV of Denmark-Norway, but apparently no merchant could be found to make up this money. Undaunted by his lack of funds, King pressured Christian to provide 3000 Danish cavalry for use against the covenanters: his attempts were ultimately unavailing, though Christian did order that horses intended for Spanish service be diverted to England. 
Christian declared his willingness to help Charles but asked for a written proposal for the transfer of the Orkney and Shetland islands to the Danish crown as the price of his assistance to the Stuart crown. King demurred: putting the business in writing would threaten its secrecy. In truth it is difficult to see King, as the son of an Orkneyman and a member of the Swedish nobility, being happy about seeing his family's home islands given away to the enemy of the country he had served most of his life. King's father had been sheriff depute for his wife's cousin, Patrick Stewart, earl of Orkney, who had conducted what amounted to a private war against Christian IV over Danish attacks on Orcadian shipping. The plan fell through when Christian rejected Charles's offer to pawn the islands for 50,000 gold guilders, a sum which in his opinion overvalued them. Meanwhile King successfully wooed Sir John Cochrane, the Scottish emissary to Denmark and Hamburg, and played an important part in detaching him for the covenanting cause. 
On his return to Scotland in 1641 King faced charges concerning his alleged unpatriotic behaviour in Denmark during the bishops' wars. However, in November the Scottish parliament dismissed the charges as groundless and declared that King had been a good patriot. While in Scotland, King maintained his Scandinavian connections, writing to the Swedish chancellor, Axel Oxenstierna, expressing his hope of continued good relations between the Swedish and British monarchies. He also published a declaration about Danish negotiations with the empire which were suspected by both the Swedish and Scottish governments. 
After his short spell at home King returned to Hamburg to raise money for Charles I in preparation for the approaching war in England. On 28 March 1642 he was created by the king at York Lord Eythin, the title taken from the River Ythan in Aberdeenshire, where King had property at Birness and Dudwick. When he attended Henrietta Maria at The Hague in mid-November, there were those who doubted whether King would accept the command in England that she was urging him to take on; he had already responded to a previous request by demanding from Secretary Vane a recognized position and the regular payment of his pension. It was only on 18 December (NS) that the queen could write to her husband that King was willing to accept a command, though she did emphasize that it was advisable 'not to employ him under any one whom he might command'. However, he had made clear that he would have no problems serving under the king's commander in the north: 'he has testified to me that whoever submits to serve under my lord Newcastle has simply to obey, and also that he has a particular esteem for my lord Newcastle' ('Letters of Queen Henrietta Maria', 150). 
Eythin landed in Yorkshire in January or February 1643, and 'en route' to the king's northern army mauled a force of Sir Hugh Cholmley's. He joined the marquess of Newcastle at York, where he was appointed lieutenant-general and commander of the infantry in the king's northern army and became Newcastle's principal military adviser in the campaigns of 1643 in Yorkshire and the east midlands and in the north the following year. According to Clarendon, Eythin, 'notwithstanding the unavoidable prejudice of being a Scotchman, ordered his foot with great wisdom and dexterity' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.466). The alliance between Scotland and the English parliament in September 1643 inevitably put Eythin in an invidious position: he faced an invasion by his fellow countrymen commanded by his old chief Alexander Leslie, now earl of Leven. In February 1644 King held Newcastle upon Tyne against Leven's forces; the Scottish soldier of fortune James Turner, who had served under King in Germany, later recorded that: 'I admired then nor could I wonder enough since, that he never endeavourd to give his countrymen a visite. He was a person of great honor; bot what he had savd of it at Vlotho in Germanie, where he made shipwracke of much of it, he losd in England. (Turner, 31)' Turner may also have been reflecting on the fact that Newcastle's experienced army let Leven's raw troops outmanoeuvre them and march south. Suspicions about Eythin's reliability were evident in the English camp. Late in 1643 a packet of letters washed up at Scarborough included a letter from King to his agent at Hamburg, asking him to send him his horses with all speed, 'and in caise hee could not gett saife passage to England, hee should send them to Scottland, where Generall Leshley would give them a saife conduct'. Newcastle had dismissed the suspicions of (the now royalist) Cholmley: 'hee had soe great assurance of Generall Kings fidelity that hee interpreted the great acquaintance and friendshipp formerly between Leshley and King might give him confidence to write such a letter' ('Memoirs and Memorials', 147). Nevertheless such suspicions continued and led King to threaten to throw up his command and return to Germany. On 5 April the queen wrote to Newcastle urging him to appeal to his lieutenant's loyalty and silence those who spoke against him. 
From 22 April Newcastle's army was besieged in York by the combined forces of Leven's Scots and the northern army led by the Fairfaxes, later reinforced by the army of the eastern association. Even Sir Philip Warwick, who in his memoirs regarded Eythin as no better than a traitor who had deliberately misadvised Newcastle to leave the north exposed to the Scottish invasion at the beginning of the year, grudgingly conceded that at York 'in this compact place Lieutenant-General King so demeaned himself, that as he shewed eminency in soldiery and personal stoutness, so there appeared no want of loyalty, for now he fought not singly against his own nation' (Warwick, 308). 
On 30 June the Scottish and parliamentarian army withdrew at the approach of the royalist relieving force under Prince Rupert, who, believing in Charles's positive command to attack the larger enemy army ordered Newcastle to draw his army out of York on 2 July. Eythin was opposed to the move and advised against Newcastle committing all his forces in such a risky business, but he was left to bring up the infantry. The foot, which had orders to march out of York at 4 a.m., did not reach Marston Moor until between two and four in the afternoon. Various reasons were given for this delay: that part of the infantry was too busy looting the abandoned enemy trenches, that it was pay day and the men would not march until they had been paid and -- according to the hostile Cholmley -- that Eythin had given an order for them to stand down. Modern historians of the battle, while acquitting Eythin of disloyalty, have concluded that he did indeed drag his feet in bringing the northern infantry to the battlefield and then only brought 3000 out of the 4000 foot in the city, perhaps in hope of preventing a risky battle that day. When he reached the field he was relentlessly negative when he spoke with the prince. According to Cholmley: 'The Prince demanded of King how hee liked the marshelling of his army, whoe replide hee did not approve of itt being drawne too neare the enemy, and in a place of disadvantage. Then said the Prince, 'They may be drawne a further disstance.' 'Noe sir,' said King, 'it is too laite.' It is s[ai]d King dissuaded the Prince from fighting, saying, 'Sir, your forwardness lost us the day in Germany, where yourself was taken prisoner'. Upon the disswasions of the Marquess and King, and that it was so neare night, The Prince was resolved not to ioyne battle that day. ('Memoirs and Memorials', 136)' The delay in King's infantry coming onto the field, with men still filing into position and the army relaxing from the preparedness of the day, gave the advantage and initiative to the enemy. In the ensuing battle Eythin commanded the second line of the royalist infantry, with about 1500 of the York foot in their allotted position and the rest strung out across the moor. The battle shattered the northern army. The following day Eythin's advice, that Newcastle should go into exile, 'conceiving the Kings affairs absolutely destroyed by loss of this battle', overbore that of the marquess's other advisers to head north to raise more troops ('Memoirs and Memorials', 139). Newcastle, Eythin, and their party went to Scarborough and from there sailed to Hamburg where they arrived on 8 July. Eythin later learnt that a furious Rupert had considered recalling him and charging him with treason; in January 1645 he wrote to the prince protesting his innocence. In July 1644 the Scottish parliament forfaulted King for his service at Marston Moor. 
In 1645 Eythin returned to Sweden where he was created Baron Sandshult in Kalmar, with a pension of 1800 riksdaler per annum. When the moderate engager party gained control of the Scottish government in 1647 his forfaulture was rescinded, and the Scottish parliament sent letters in his favour to both Queen Christina and the city of Hamburg. 
In 1649 the new king, Charles II, sent orders to Eythin and Patrick Ruthven, to petition Queen Christina for military aid in support of the campaign being prepared by the marquess of Montrose. Eythin was commissioned lieutenant-general under Montrose in 1650 and was expected to command the major force destined for Scotland from Scandinavia; it was hoped that the two men would use their family connections in the Orkneys to raise support there. Only a small advance party ever sailed, and Eythin never left Sweden, as the king struck a deal with the new hardline regime in Scotland which left Montrose as the sacrificial lamb to be slaughtered as the price of Charles II's kingdom. Although alienated from the king by the betrayal of Montrose, Eythin did undertake negotiations to bring Charles to Sweden, but in the event the king did not come. In 1651 the Scottish parliament passed an act in favour of Eythin. He died a few months later in Stockholm on 9 June 1652 and was publicly buried on 18 June in Stockholm's Riddarholm Church, burial place of the Swedish kings. With his first wife Eythin had no children; with his second, whose name is unknown, he had a daughter who predeceased him. 
Eythin's nephews, the sons of John King, both remained in Swedish service. James served as a page to King Charles X and he and his brother became naturalized Swedish noblemen in 1672. In his will, made in 1646, Eythin had earmarked his estates for his brother John and his family. However, his heavy investment in Montrose's campaign left him penniless. Over the years he had paid for royalist weapons out of his own pocket and lent the crown $40,000. Neither this money nor his $1000 pension was ever paid him. In Scotland a creditor took over the administration of his estate. In Sweden his property had to be sold to the Scottish commander Field Marshal Robert Douglas to pay some of his debts; the family never recovered from this burden. In 1684 Henry King and his mother received money from Charles XI to relieve their destitution: a Swedish king was left compensating for debts that should have been repaid by an ungrateful house of Stuart. 


@@@@@


doc= 15567


King, James (bap. 1750, d. 1784), naval officer, was baptized on 13 July 1750, at Clitheroe, Lancashire, the second son of James King (1714-1795), curate of Clitheroe (afterwards dean of Raphoe), and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Walker (1713-1794). Walker King, bishop of Rochester, was his younger brother. At an early age he entered Clitheroe grammar school where he remained until he was twelve years old; and on 19 November 1762 he entered the navy under the patronage of his kinsman, Captain William Norton, brother of the first Lord Grantley, serving under him in the 'Assistance'. He afterwards served in the 'Guernsey' (Captain James Chads) under Commodore Hugh Palliser on the Newfoundland station. 
King was promoted lieutenant on 10 January 1771, and appointed to the 'Cambridge' followed by several other ships before being placed on half pay in May 1773. He was then granted leave to go abroad and spent some time in Paris, devoting himself principally to scientific study; on his return he settled at Oxford with his brother Walker, then a fellow of Corpus Christi College, where James may have studied. Here he made the acquaintance of Thomas Hornsby who in 1776 recommended him as a competent astronomer to accompany James Cook's third voyage. He was accordingly appointed to the 'Resolution' as second-lieutenant. At the time of Cook's death at Hawaii (14 February 1779) King was on shore in charge of the observatory. He had with him only a few men, but was reinforced by some of a boat's crew who had been rowing off the mouth of the bay before the disturbance with the Hawaiians began. This brought the number of the party up to twenty-four, and fortifying themselves in a neighbouring 'heiau', or open-air temple, they succeeded in repelling the attack of the Hawaiians until they were relieved, two hours later, by the ships' boats. On the death of Captain Charles Clerke (22 August 1779) King succeeded to the command of the 'Discovery', and on arriving in England he was advanced to post rank (3 October 1780). 
In 1781 King was appointed to the frigate 'Crocodile', attached to the Channel Fleet, and towards the end of the year he was moved to the 'Resistance' (40 guns), in which he went out to the West Indies in charge of a convoy of 500 merchant ships; these he succeeded in conducting safely to their destination, but the intense anxiety of the duty is said to have turned his hair grey. King's constitution was never strong, and he came back to England with his health impaired. It was under this disadvantage, while living with his brother Thomas, rector of St Mary Magdalene, Woodstock, near Oxford, that he assisted in preparing Cook's journal of the third voyage for the press, and wrote the narrative of the final part of the voyage, which formed the third volume. King's astronomical observations, together with those of Cook and William Bayly, were published by order of the commissioners of longitude in 1782; for this work he was elected FRS. In January 1780 he was granted the degree of LLD by diploma at Trinity College, Dublin, possibly in recognition of a gift of 'curiosities' gathered during Cook's third voyage. In 1783 the state of his health compelled him to go to Nice, where he died, unmarried, of tuberculosis on 16 November 1784. He was buried at Nice, but there is a memorial tablet to him and his parents in St Mary Magdalene Church, Woodstock. The narrative of Cook's third voyage was issued in 1784. 


@@@@@


doc= 15568


King, John (d. 1621), bishop of London, was one of twelve children of Philip King (died 1592) and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Edmund Conquest. According to Thomas Fuller his birth took place in the ancestral home at Worminghall, Buckinghamshire, in the same chamber as his father had been born. A brass erected in Worminghall church by Elizabeth King records that her husband was educated at the expense of his uncle Robert King (d. 1557), abbot of Oseney and Thame and first bishop of Oxford, and of his kinsman John Williams, Lord Williams of Thame ('c'.1500-1559). John King was sent to Westminster School, whence in 1577 he was elected a student of Christ Church, Oxford. He graduated BA on 26 January 1580, at which time he was presented to the London parish of St Anne and St Agnes, and to a prebend at Windsor. He proceeded MA on 15 February 1583. 
King served as domestic chaplain to John Piers, a former dean of Christ Church and now bishop of Salisbury, and followed his household north upon his translation to York in 1588. In that year King became preacher to the city of York. Piers preferred him to the archdeaconry of Nottingham in 1590 and on 2 July 1591 he proceeded BD. King established a reputation as a powerful evangelical preacher, and delivered Piers's funeral sermon at York on 17 November 1594 (printed in 1597). Probably during his time in York, King married Joan, daughter of Henry Freeman of Staffordshire; their eldest son, Henry King (1592-1669), was born at Worminghall in January 1592, and their second, John King ['see below'] at York in 1595. 
Shortly afterwards King joined the household of the newly appointed lord keeper Thomas Egerton, a noted patron of evangelical clergy, as his domestic chaplain. Another appointee in Egerton's household was John Donne, who was to remain intimate with the King family. In May 1597 King was instituted rector of St Andrew's, Holborn, London, and in October 1599 prebend of Sneating in St Paul's, both by royal prerogative following the consecrations of Richard Bancroft to London and William Cotton to Exeter respectively. From these pulpits King established himself as one of London's foremost preachers, noted for Calvinist orthodoxy, moral rectitude, and strident anti-Catholicism. In December 1601 he was created DD at Oxford. It has often been stated that King was a chaplain to Elizabeth but at the accession of James in 1603 Archbishop John Whitgift listed him among nineteen prominent preachers who were 'no chapleins' yet 'fitt to preach' before the new sovereign (Westminster Abbey muniment book 15, fol. 6). King's eminence and reliability in the pulpit received official endorsement when Whitgift appointed him to deliver the first Sunday sermon at court after Elizabeth's death, and it would seem that Whitgift's faith in him was not misplaced. King's discourse evidently made a deep impression on John Manningham, who transcribed his notes from the sermon at unprecedented length. Deftly but forcefully addressing concerns about Roman Catholic agitation at the succession, King warned against 'intestine discord', eulogizing Elizabeth, and welcoming James as a new Solomon ('Diary of John Manningham', 211-17). 
Upon his arrival in London, James made King one of his chaplains in ordinary. He was to remain one of the most popular court preachers of the reign, praised by James in one of his predictable puns as 'the king of preachers' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.295). He was also held in particular regard by Queen Anne. With the enthusiastic endorsement by petition of thirty-two students (that is, fellows) of the college, James appointed King dean of Christ Church in August 1605. Thus King became the latest of the college's unbroken succession of evangelical Calvinist heads, who had dominated theology and churchmanship in Oxford since the beginning of Elizabeth's reign. He served as vice-chancellor of Oxford University from 1607 until 1610. 
In September 1605 King was one of four chaplains selected by James to instruct leaders of Scottish presbyterianism in sermons at Hampton Court (an appointment which led to the later assumption that he was chosen to preach at the Hampton Court Conference in 1604, which King did not in fact attend). King's contribution, printed by royal command, asserted the royal prerogative over ecclesiastical causes, as well as episcopacy instituted by divine right. Although he accepted the possibility of other forms of church government as legitimate abroad, he held presbyterianism to be inherently anti-monarchical and therefore illegitimate in the kingdoms of England and Scotland. The sermon's prime target, James Melvill, called the performance 'a most violent invective againes the Presbyteries' ('Autobiography and Diary', 667). 
In December 1610 King was collated to the prebend of Milton Manor in Lincoln Cathedral but he resigned this and all his other preferments after his consecration at Lambeth as bishop of London on 8 September 1611. Fuller praised him as 'full fraught with episcopal qualities' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1.138). Like his friend and most recent patron, George Abbot -- his predecessor in London and now promoted archbishop of Canterbury -- King exemplified the evangelical Calvinistic model of the preaching chief pastor, in contrast to the disciplinarian and ceremonialist style emerging among proto-Arminians such as Lancelot Andrewes and Richard Neile. Distinctive was King's commitment to continuing to preach himself, and not only in elite pulpits such as the court and Paul's Cross; King took pride in preaching a parochial sermon somewhere in his diocese every Sunday during his episcopate. He also assiduously appointed like-minded men to livings in his diocese, and the huge number of dedications to him of sermons printed by aspiring young evangelicals attests to his position as an evangelical patron, perhaps second only to Abbot. King and Abbot, sometimes with the dean of the Chapel Royal, James Montagu, formed the nexus of evangelical interests at court, as they also did on the court of high commission. King's visitation articles (in 1612 and 1615) show similar evangelical priorities in their insistence on catechizing, and their comparative lack of concern for strict ceremonial conformity. In 1613 King and Abbot were joint dedicatees of the fourth edition of Andrew Willet's seminal statement of English Calvinistic church polity, 'Synopsis papismi', where both were praised for standing firm against the encroachment of the 'semi-popish errors' encouraged by Richard Hooker's anti-puritanism (Milton, 22). King figured prominently in the protestant triumphalism surrounding the marriage of Princess Elizabeth to the elector palatine on 14 February 1613. On the Tuesday after the wedding, King preached at court on a text chosen by James I ('Thy wife shall be as the fruitfull vine' ('Psalm 28': 3), a sermon notable not only for King's trademark anti-Catholicism, but also for its celebration of women and the equality between partners in marriage. This may inform an understanding of the bishop's own conjugal and domestic happiness, remarked upon by Donne and others. Describing his participation in a sociable family dinner that year in their house at St Paul's, Donne referred jocularly to the couple as 'the King' and 'the Queen' (Bald, 282). Later in 1613 King and Abbot led the godly opposition on the commission hearing the divorce suit brought against the earl of Essex by his countess, Frances Howard. 
In his last years as bishop King presided over a campaign for the restoration of St Paul's Cathedral, marked by James's only visit there on 26 March 1620 to hear King preach from Paul's Cross. Also in 1620 King presided at the festival consecration of the earl of Bridgewater's private chapel at Bridgewater House in the Barbican. King's appeal for the cathedral epitomizes the lesser-known fact that concern for the maintenance and beautification of church fabrics throughout his diocese was a particular achievement of his episcopate. Upon his elevation to the see, King commissioned Anthony Munday to compile a parish-by-parish survey of church refurbishments in the City of London; although Munday did not complete his task until the 1630s, King received the dedication of Munday's 1618 edition of his expansion of Stow's 'Survey of London'. 
King's health failed within a year of James's visit to St Paul's. Suffering from gall and bladder stones, on 4 March 1621 he wrote his will 'weake in body and full of payne', and six days later John Chamberlain reported that his family hoped only 'to kepe him alive... till our Lady day [25 March] be past, for the goode of his children' (who would benefit from the episcopal revenues due then), after which time he would consent to surgical removal of the stones ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.352). He died on 30 March 1621. King's will directed that he be buried 'in the Cathedrall church of St Paule without any pompe or solempnities onlie with a Tombestone with this Inscription ('Resurgam')' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/137, fols. 285'r'-286'r'). Accordingly the day after his death 'at night he was buried privatly in Paules' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.360). Fuller transcribes the fine elegy on the humility of King and the modesty of his burial that was inscribed on a brass plaque placed on the wall adjacent to the tomb. King was survived by his wife, five sons -- Henry King, John, Philip, William, and Robert -- and four unmarried daughters, Elizabeth, Mary, Dorothy, and Anne King. All received significant cash bequests from an estate Chamberlain estimated at more than $12,000 in value. Dorothy and Anne were bequeathed King's gifts of plate from Queen Anne; Henry was given the first choice of forty books from his father's library, with the remainder to be divided between the younger sons. King appointed as overseers Archbishop Abbot and Sir Henry Martin, chancellor of London diocese. False rumours of a deathbed conversion to Roman Catholicism by King were fully exploited by Catholic presses at home and abroad; these claims were sharply refuted by his eldest son, Henry, residentiary canon of St Paul's, in a sermon at Paul's Cross on 25 November, printed immediately. 
King's second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 15569


King, Sir John (d. 1637), politician and landowner, was born of a Yorkshire family, although the name of his parents and details of his early years remain unknown. He is first recorded in Ireland in July 1585 as secretary to Richard Bingham, governor of Connaught. By early 1601 he was deputy vice-treasurer of Ireland, a post of considerable practical importance, and went on to become clerk of the crown in chancery and clerk of the hanaper (12 July 1603), muster-master-general and clerk of the cheque (11 May 1609), and a member of both the Irish privy council (June 1609) and the council of Munster (20 May 1615). He was knighted on 7 July 1610. At an unknown date he married Catherine, daughter of Robert Drury, nephew to Sir William Drury, lord deputy of Ireland. They had six sons and three daughters, including Dorothy Dury. 
Following the completion of the conquest of Ireland in 1603 King was able to use his government connections to benefit massively. A poor system of record keeping and ignorance of geography allowed well-placed officials to use royal grants to claim lands far in excess of what was intended. Between 1603 and 1607 he received lands in twenty-one different counties. He probably sold most of this and concentrated his holdings in co. Roscommon, having a residence at Boyle. He invested heavily in developing Boyle and appears as constable of Boyle Castle from September 1606. In 1613-15 he sat as MP for Roscommon county but only after Oliver St John, governor of Connaught, had manipulated electoral proceedings. He was joint caretaker governor of Connaught in 1615. 
Despite his land interests in co. Roscommon, King continued to pursue an administrative career and based himself in Dublin, living at Baggotrath. With his vast experience, particularly in financial affairs, he would have exerted considerable influence behind the scenes, being a regular attender of council meetings and a member of many government land commissions. He was also commissioner for the plantations of Wexford (1614) and Leitrim and Ely O'Carroll (1619). For obscure reasons in June 1615 he insinuated that Lord Deputy Chichester was mismanaging royal finances, thereby precipitating the governor's removal from office. Political motives aside he always showed great concern for the health of the Irish exchequer. He died on 4 January 1637 at Lichfield, Staffordshire, and was buried in Boyle on 30 March. He was succeeded by his second son, Sir Robert King. His eldest son, Edward King, drowned in 1637; an early John Milton poem, 'Lycidas' (1638), lamented his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 15570


John King (1595-1639), Church of England clergyman, was born in York and educated with his elder brother Henry at Westminster School, London. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 20 January 1609, aged fourteen, and graduated BA on 19 June 1611; he proceeded MA on 7 July 1614, and published poems in the university collections of 1613 and 1619. He became a prebendary of St Paul's in 1616. Rector of Remenham, Berkshire, and (for three years) public orator to Oxford University from 1622, he became a canon of Christ Church in 1624 and proceeded BD and DD on 19 May 1625. That year he became a canon of Windsor and published a sermon preached at Oxford. He died on 3 January 1639 and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 15571


King, John, first Baron Kingston (c.1620-1676), army officer, was the eldest son of Sir Robert King (d. 1657) and his first wife, Frances (died 1638), daughter of Sir Henry Folliott, first baron of Ballyshannon, and his wife, Anne Strode. When Sir Robert went to England in 1642 after the outbreak of the Irish rising he left John in command of Boyle Castle, co. Roscommon. In the late 1640s King joined his father in London, where he sought to recruit a regiment, but it was as major in Richard Coote's horse regiment that he was active in the last years of the war in Ireland. He gained fame for his capture of the general of the Ormondist army, Heber Macmahon, the Roman Catholic bishop of Clogher, after its defeat at Scarrifhollis on 21 June 1650; he was present at the siege of Charlemont two months later, and served as parliamentary commissioner in the conclusion of both the articles of Galway on 5 April 1652 and the articles with Clanricarde on 28 June 1652. After the war he served as commissioner for setting out lands to the soldiers in Sligo. During the 1650s King and his father bought a large number of transplantation certificates and soldiers' debentures. King himself purchased substantial estates in co. Dublin from the adventurer John Blackwell, while his marriage, in 1657, to Catherine (died 1669), daughter of Sir William Fenton, brought him the Munster lands of the white knights, including Mitchelstown Castle, to which she was heir. Henry Cromwell knighted him on 7 June 1658 and two days later recommended that he be appointed to succeed his father as muster-master general, observing that 'he is a person of no less meritt than his father, being grown a very serious, and, I hope, religious man' (Thurloe, 7.162). 
After the fall of the protectorate King became deeply involved in the moves towards the restoration of Charles II. He had taken up a regimental command in the remodelled Irish army by February 1660, represented Boyle in the general convention which assembled in March, and was one of the four men in Ireland to be favoured with a personal letter of encouragement from Charles. He was chosen to present General Monck with the humble address of 8 May in which the army in Ireland welcomed the Restoration and was appointed one of the convention's commissioners to attend King Charles. He was knighted on 5 June 1660 and on 4 September both ennobled as Baron Kingston and sworn of the Irish privy council. He was appointed a member of the presidency council of Connaught on 17 March 1661 and nominated two days later to the commission which was intended to execute the provisions of the king's 'gracious declaration' of November 1660. Though the commission proved abortive, Kingston's interests were carefully protected in the parliamentary arrangements which replaced it. He benefited from a proviso in the 'Act of Settlement' in 1662, was one of twenty-two individuals who were declared exempt from the obligation to retrench a third of their estates in the 'Act of Explanation' in 1665, and secured recognition of his claim as a '49 officer (one owed payment for services prior to 1649). He was appointed commissary-general on 11 May 1661, given the captaincy of a troop on 15 November, and made colonel of a horse regiment on 20 April 1667. On 2 April 1666, on Ormond's urging, he was joined with John, Lord Berkeley, as president of Connaught, an arrangement which lasted until the abolition of the office in 1672 when both men were allowed to retain the fees and profits of the post and Berkeley was granted a pension with reversion to Kingston. 
Kingston's last years were occupied in securing ratification of the complex arrangements he had made to acquire reprisal lands (property surrendered to compensate other claimants) to make up his full entitlement under the settlement. A favourable recommendation by arbiters was approved by Ormond and accepted by Kingston, and on 9 March 1676 the king ordered that he should be excepted from the stop recently placed on the disposal of reprisal lands and that the transaction should be completed. Kingston died within days, in March 1676, and the instruction was renewed for his heir, Robert King, second Baron Kingston (c.1660-1693), on 10 April. Kingston's younger son John succeeded as third baron in 1693. 


@@@@@


doc= 15572


King, Sir John (1639-1677), lawyer, was born at St Albans, Hertfordshire, on 5 February 1639, the eldest son of John King (1604-1681), physician, of Aldersgate Street, London, and his second wife, Elizabeth (1611-1661/2), youngest daughter of Barne Roberts of Willesden, Middlesex. His grandfather, John Le Roy, had moved to England from France in 1572, and then changed his name to King. King was educated at St Albans Free School and Eton College ('c'.1652-1655) before matriculating in 1655 at Queens' College, Cambridge. Although originally intended for the church, King chose the law instead. In November 1660 he entered the Inner Temple, being called to the bar on 9 February 1668. By this date he had married, on 20 February 1666 or 1667, Joyce (died 1688), daughter and heir of William Bennett of High Rothing, Essex. They had two sons and five daughters (four of whom died young). 
King made his initial impact as a lawyer in the fire court set up following the fire of London, but soon progressed to chancery cases. He was knighted on 10 December 1674 and became a king's counsel on 23 January 1675, saving for his office as solicitor-general of the duke of York. In 1676 he was the top practiser in chancery, earning $4700, 'for he was cut out by nature and formed by education for that business. He had the most of an orator and was withal the most polite and affable gentleman that I ever knew wear a gown. His principal care was to be instructed and then his performance was easy. (North, 1.380)' North felt that King was overworked, and that an unhappy marriage kept him out late in the taverns of the town. Burnet hinted at other pressures, believing that King was being groomed by the court as a successor to Sir William Jones, the attorney-general. At any event King died relatively young. 
King made his will on 27 June 1677, 'sick in body', and died on the 29th at his house in Salisbury Court, London. He was buried on 4 July 1677 at the Temple Church, Inner Temple, where there is an inscription in the triforium and a stone in the churchyard to his memory. His wife, in her will of 1 July 1684, remembered her husband as 'the most tenderly affectionate husband that ever woman was blessed withal', and following her death was buried on 20 April 1688, also in the Inner Temple. 


@@@@@


doc= 15573


King, John (d. 1679), covenanter field preacher and martyr, of whose early life nothing is known, first appears among that group of ministers who refused to acquiesce in the re-establishment of the prelacy in the Scottish church after 1662. Unable to secure the tenure of a parish, he was protected from the authorities by his patron Henry Erskine, third Lord Cardross, whom he served as chaplain. He married, and had at least one child. 
King's wider preaching commitments to the lowland congregations driven out of doors by the legislation of 1661-2 did not go unnoticed by central government. In 1674 he was arrested for leading the worship at local conventicles and was brought before the Scottish privy council. Lord Cardross was fined heavily for allowing him to minister to his family, while King was released from custody pending further questioning only upon the payment of a bond of 5000 merks. However, King continued his activities and ignored all subsequent summonses to the courts in Edinburgh. In May 1675 a party of soldiers commanded by Sir Mungo Murray took the law into their own hands and raided Cardross's home during his absence. Under the cover of darkness they dragged King's pregnant wife from her bed, rifled through his personal papers, and placed King under close arrest. Before they could spirit their prisoner away, a mob of 'country people who had profited by Mr. King's ministry assembled together' on the road out of Cardross, surrounded the soldiers, and prised the minister away from their grasp (Crookshank, 1.373). 
On 12 June 1675 Charles II ordered an investigation into the circumstances of King's escape and on 6 August King was pronounced an outlaw by the Scottish privy council. Over the next four years he criss-crossed the lowland shires, preaching to congregations in the fields and to individuals in their private houses. He was reported as active in Fife, Perth, Stirling, and in the city of Glasgow, in summer 1677, solemnizing weddings and baptisms and preaching before crowds which included many affluent tradesmen. His luck ran out on 31 May 1679, when he and fourteen companions were taken on the road from Falkirk to Rutherglen by government troops commanded by John Graham of Claverhouse. However, the tables were turned the next day at Drumclog when Claverhouse encountered unexpected resistance from those attending a great conventicle, strengthened by several of King's friends who had eluded capture. The covenanter host surged forward, scattering the government troopers and liberating the prisoners, and as Claverhouse rode headlong in flight past King, the preacher called after his persecutor, inviting him to stay behind and benefit from hearing the sermon which he would now be able to preach in the afternoon. 
The victory at Drumclog bought King three more precious weeks of freedom, which he spent with the rebel army. Although he afterwards denied that he had been present at the covenanters' abortive assault upon Glasgow and had worn a sword only in order 'to disguise himself from being took for a preacher', it seems likely that he was influential in the army's councils and fought at the battle of Bothwell Bridge on 22 June 1679 (Crookshank, 2.58). Following the rout of the covenanter forces he fled to Dalry parish, seeking sanctuary with the laird of Blair. However, he was surprised 'en route' by a party of Chrichton's dragoons, captured, and promptly escorted to Edinburgh, where the accidental death of one of his guards, who had boasted that he was carrying 'King to Hell', was attributed by successive generations of presbyterian hagiographers to an act of divine providence. 
Faced with the prospect of torture, King confessed that he had been in arms with the rebels, and on 22 July was indicted for high treason. At his trial on 28 July he argued that he had been forced against his will to join the rebel host after the battle of Drumclog, but in view of his earlier confession this counted for little with the judge and verdicts of guilty were duly brought in against him and his co-accused, John Kid. Well-meaning attempts by a fellow prisoner at the Edinburgh Tolbooth, Robert Fleming, to persuade King and Kid to accept the duke of Lauderdale's new offer of indulgences and thereby save their lives, were briskly rejected. The two ministers went to the scaffold together at the Mercat Cross on 14 August 1679, and in his final speech King launched a fresh attack upon the errors of popery, episcopacy, and Erastianism, before taking leave of his 'poor wife and child' (Tutchin, 178-82) and looking forward to an 'everlasting life [and] glory' (Crookshank, 2.64-5). After his body was cut down from the gibbet, it was dismembered on an adjacent scaffold in full view of the crowd. His head and right hand were subsequently displayed on the Netherbow gate of Edinburgh, while his corpse was thrown into an unmarked grave within the precincts of Greyfriars churchyard. Although he was undoubtedly an accomplished preacher, only one of King's sermons -- delivered at Kilmarnock on 22 August 1678 -- survives (collected by John Howie). In it King laments the sorrows heaped upon the Scottish nation by the 'dreadful formality of many' in their daily religious practices and by the 'breach and violation of the covenants' by people from all social ranks. He chooses, however, to return to his biblical text in order to appeal to God to 'remember mercy' even in the midst of his wrath, and to deliver his chosen people from the clutches of their enemies (Howie, 'Faithful Contendings', 30-44). 


@@@@@


doc= 15574


King, John (1696-1728), classical scholar and physician, was born at Adstone, Northamptonshire, on 5 August 1696, the eldest son of John King (1652-1732), Church of England clergyman, and his second wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Aris (1665/6-1727), widow of the Revd John Eston. He was educated at Eton College and King's College, Cambridge, where he was elected a fellow, graduating BA (1719) and MA (1722). Although he did not take a medical degree, King established himself as a physician in St George's parish, Stamford, Lincolnshire. He soon acquired a great reputation and on 12 August 1724 he was elected to the scholarly and conversational Spalding Gentlemen's Society. Three years later he married Lucy, daughter of Thomas Morice, paymaster of the British forces at Lisbon, his intention then being to settle in London under the direction of his brother-in-law, the physician John Freind. 
In 1722 King published an 'Epistola ad Johannem Freind', an attack on the remarks of Daniel Wilhelm Triller on Hippocrates' treatises on epidemics. King's edition of 'Euripidis Hecuba, Orestes et Phoenissae' in the original Greek with Latin translation appeared in 1726, the product of nearly five years' work. In 1748 Thomas Morrell published for use at Eton the same three plays, together with 'Alcestis', in which he gave nearly the whole of King's translation and notes. Morrell's contemporary, the antiquary Roger Gale, took a less generous view of King's ability which he thought more that 'of a trader than a scholar' (Gale, 3.80). King intended to move to London but before this could be accomplished he died at Stamford from fever on 12 October 1728. He was buried at Pertenhall, Bedfordshire, his father's former living. He was survived by his wife and their only son, also John, who became rector of Pertenhall (1752-1800) and a fellow of King's College, Cambridge, before his death, aged eighty-five, on 6 October 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 15575


King, John (1652-1732), Church of England clergyman, was born at St Columb, Cornwall, on 1 May 1652, the son of John King of Manaccan, Cornwall. He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, as a poor scholar on 7 July 1674. He graduated BA in 1678 and proceeded MA in 1681; in 1698, when his friend Sir William Dawes was master of St Catharine's College, Cambridge, he was created DD there. 
King's first position after ordination was as curate of Bray, Berkshire, when he evidently met Ann, youngest daughter of William Durham, whom he married on 9 September 1685. They had no children and Ann died within five years of their wedding. On 3 June 1690 King married, as his second wife, Elizabeth (1665/6-1727), daughter of Joseph Aris of Adstone, Northamptonshire; the couple had three daughters and three sons, including the classical scholar and physician John King. Elizabeth was the widow of the Revd John Eston, through whom he acquired the living of Pertenhall, Bedfordshire, to which he was immediately instituted on 7 June 1690. He vacated this benefice for institution by exchange to Chelsea on 22 November 1694, the two preferments being worth about $150 a year each, but the stipend of the new living was greatly increased by letting the glebe for building in consequence of Chelsea's growing population. King stated in 1717 that the parish contained about 350 houses and that fifty years before there had been fewer than 40. The gravel soil, elevated position, and clear air of the place were thought particularly healthy, and many people, including Jonathan Swift in 1711, went there to benefit. King wrote, 'No village in the vicinity of London contributes more to the ease and recovery of asthmatical and consumptive persons' (Beaver, 49). King inherited the rectory in such a ruinous state that he had to buy a house in Church Lane (now Old Church Street). He may also have held the livings of West Wycombe (between 1684 and 1695) and of Harrold, Bedfordshire, from 1697 to at least 1710. He was collated to the prebendal stall of Weighton in York Minster by Dawes, now archbishop of York. 
King was one of the earliest subscribers to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. As well as two sermons, King published anonymously against the nonconformist Increase Mather ('Animadversions on a Pamphlet Intituled a Letter of Advice to the Nonconformists', which appeared in a second edition under his own name the following year) and the deist John Toland ('Tolando-pseudologo-mastix', 1721). In 1710 he published 'The Case of John Atherton', a defence of the bishop of Waterford executed for buggery in 1640, which sought to clear his name and align his cause with that of other clerical victims of charges trumped up by enemies of the church. King's antiquarian interests were reflected in his manuscript account of Chelsea, from which extracts were drawn by later antiquarians, and the notes he prepared for Thomas Hearne on Sir Thomas More's house there. 
King died at Church Lane, Chelsea, on 30 May 1732, and was buried in the chancel of Pertenhall church on 13 June; a large mural monument was erected to his memory. His wife died at Chelsea on 22 June 1727, aged sixty-one, and was also buried at Pertenhall. King was survived by five of his children, his son John having predeceased him in October 1728. 


@@@@@


doc= 15576


King, John (1788-1847), history and portrait painter, was born in Dartmouth, Devon, and at twenty entered the Royal Academy Schools. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1814 and from 1817 showed there almost annually until 1845. The majority of his subjects were drawn from the 'Bible' or from Shakespeare. From 1821 he was also a fairly regular exhibitor at the British Institution, but from 1824 at least half the works he showed there were portraits. King had moved to Bristol by early 1824, for in June a local newspaper reported that his painting of Jeremiah, for whom he had used a Bristol sitter, had sold on the opening day of the British Institution exhibition to Earl Fitzwilliam. 
In October 1825 King lectured at the Bristol Institution on his recollections of the fine arts of Flanders, implying an earlier visit to the continent. There is, however, little evidence of King entering into the social life of the Bristol artists ['see 'Bristol school of artists]. He has been confused with the Bristol surgeon and friend of so many Bristol artists, Dr John King (born Johann Koenig, (1766-1846)). Dr King was to review King's work, finding it singularly unoriginal and conventional. King may have moved back to London as early as 1826, but he maintained close contacts with Bristol and exhibited there until at least 1839. He completed an enormous and now lost painting, 'The Incredulity of St Thomas', for St Thomas's Church in Bristol in 1828 and in 1830 his altarpiece for St Mark's Chapel on College Green, Bristol, was installed (later high in the north transept). In 1828 King exhibited a portrait of the Plymouth-born artist James Northcote RA whose grandiose Shakespearian subjects King may well have striven to emulate, and in the following year he exhibited a portrait of Francis Danby ARA (City Museum and Art Gallery, Bristol), whom King claimed as a friend. He died, presumably unmarried, of apoplexy at Dartmouth on 12 July 1847. Samuel Redgrave noted that his paintings, 'most of which remained on his hands, were sold by auction the same year, and produced only small sums' (Redgrave, 'Artists', 251). King bequeathed all his estate to his niece Sarah Elizabeth King of Brixham, Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 15577


King, John Duncan (1788-1863), army officer and landscape painter, was born in the city of Waterford, Ireland, on 4 November 1788 and entered the army as an ensign in the 71st regiment in August 1806. He purchased a lieutenancy on 18 February 1808, before exchanging into the 3rd battalion, 1st (or Royal) regiment, with which he saw active service from July 1809 in the Walcheren expedition, and later that year in the Peninsular War. He was present at the battle of Busaco on 27 September 1810. On 13 June 1811 he transferred to the 7th Royal Fusiliers, engaging in various skirmishes that autumn. In 1813 he fought at the battles of Vitoria and the Pyrenees, receiving a severe wound in the right shoulder on 28 July 1813. For this he received additional pay and an eighteen-month pension. On 18 January 1815 he married Sally Tindal, with whom he had four sons, and who predeceased him. He returned to overseas duty in May 1815, was present at the capture of Paris, and remained with the army of occupation until 1818. On 20 April 1820 he exchanged to the 8th foot on half pay. Influenced by Claude Lorrain, he pursued his interest in landscape painting, exhibiting views of Spain and Portugal at the Royal Academy in 1824. He studied under Horace Vernet in Paris in 1825. On 14 May 1829 he returned briefly to regimental duty with the 75th foot, purchasing a captaincy on 16 March 1830. However, he soon retired, going on half pay on 28 December 1830; he then travelled, painting views of India, Tahiti, France, Ireland, and England. Between 1824 and 1858 he exhibited eighteen paintings at the Royal Academy, thirty-nine at the British Institution, and two at the Society of British Artists, Suffolk Street. In March 1851 King was made a military knight of Windsor, and he lived at 17 Lower Ward, Windsor Castle, until his death there on 21 August 1863. Since then his work has been largely forgotten and he is not represented in any major British collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 15578


King, John Glen (1731/2-1787), Church of England clergyman, was born in Stowmarket, in Suffolk, the son of George King (died 1756), rector of Nowton, Suffolk. Having attended a school at Swaffham he matriculated at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 9 October 1747, at the age of fifteen; he graduated BA in 1752 and MA in 1763. He was ordained deacon at Norwich on 22 December 1754 and priest at Ely on 19 September 1756. In 1760 he was presented by the crown to the vicarage of Berwick Parva, Norfolk. 
In July 1763 King was appointed chaplain to the English factory in St Petersburg. Though he was appointed medallist to Catherine II he failed to enter court circles and consequently left no impression of himself in Russia. This was due partly to the dislike conceived of him by Princess Dashkova, one of the most influential society ladies of the time, but primarily to his lack of social graces. King devoted much of his time to the study of the history and liturgical rites of the Orthodox church. He was encouraged to write a book about this by Sir George Macartney, English ambassador to the court of Catherine II, whom King met in St Petersburg in 1765. The first short version of King's book, entitled 'The Present State of the Church of Russia', appeared as an appendix to Macartney's own work on Russia in 1767. Between 1770 and 1772 King was in England, trying to publish his book on the Russian church and seeking a church preferment. On 10 January 1771 he was made a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London, and on 12 February he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He was incorporated MA at Oxford on 19 March 1771, as a member of Christ Church, and on 23 March he took the Oxford degrees of BD and DD. 
After the publication of his book 'The Rites and Ceremonies of the Greek Church' in 1772 King's scholarly reputation was established; the work was highly acclaimed and became a standard text on the subject. However, he failed to find a position in England and had to return to the English factory in St Petersburg, where he spent some eleven years altogether, returning to England in the spring of 1774. He was living in Greenwich when he wrote his will on 2 November 1780, while leasing Tavistock Chapel, St Martin-in-the-Fields, from the duke of Bedford. In July 1783 he was presented to the rectory of Wormley, Hertfordshire, by Sir Abraham Hume, bt. In the summer of 1786 he purchased the chapelry of Spring Gardens, Charing Cross, London; he also purchased, though precisely when is unknown, Dr Warner's chapel in Long Acre. Apart from the two versions of 'The Rites and Ceremonies of the Greek Church' his works include: 'Verses', in the Cambridge University collection on the death of Frederick, prince of Wales (1752); 'A letter to the bishop of Durham, containing some observations on the climate of Russia, and the northern countries, with a view of the flying Mountains at Zarsko Sello, near St Petersburg', written in 1778 and published in the 'Westminster Magazine' (vol. 8, 1780); and 'Nummi familiarum et imperatorum Romanorum'. This substantial catalogue of Roman coinage was probably published in 1787 and includes 102 plates without letterpress. 
King was married, first, to Ann Magdalen (1743/4-1767), daughter of Michael Combrune; she died in Russia, aged twenty-three, leaving King a seventeen-month-old baby, Anna Henrietta. King's second wife, whom he married on 1 August 1776, was Jane, daughter of John Hyde of Blackheath. She is said by Nichols to have died in August 1789 but she may still have been alive in June 1790. 
King had few friends. He had hoped that George Macartney, whom he had known in Russia, would be his patron but their correspondence shows that Macartney was unwilling to continue the acquaintance. King's only known close friend was the musician and music historian Charles Burney, whose daughter Fanny regarded King as a ridiculous man and commented that he 'spouted Shakespeare, Pope and others' ('Early Diary', 134), imitated Garrick, and that her father had observed that he could talk 'three hours upon any given subject, without saying any thing' (ibid., 154). His social popularity was probably also undermined by his financial advice to Elizabeth Allen, later the second wife of Charles Burney, whom King recommended to invest in the merchant banker William Gomm's timber concession in northern Russia; Gomm was declared bankrupt in 1767, after Mrs Allen had invested $5000 in his enterprise. King's last years were devoted to archaeological and numismatic research. He died at his house on Edward Street, Berwick Street, Soho, after a few hours' illness, on 3 November 1787, and was buried on 7 November in Wormley churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 15579


King, Matthew Peter (c.1773-1823), composer, was born in London. Very little is known of him beyond a catalogue of his works. Apparently he studied composition with Charles Frederick Horn, and the appearance of his earliest compositions under the name of 'Master King' could mean, as suggested by Cudworth (1980), that he was a child prodigy. He seems to have spent most of his life in London. 
Early works, before 1800, include a series of piano sonatas and other pieces for keyboard; some theoretical treatises dating from around the turn of the century concentrate on the practice of thoroughbass and challenge the theories of A. F. C. Kollmann. King then turned his efforts to vocal music, especially for the stage, and in this area he enjoyed some success. Between 1804 and 1819 he produced several stage works, sometimes in collaboration with Michael Kelly, John Braham, or John Davy, to librettos generally by James Kenney or S. J. Arnold. These were performed at Covent Garden, Drury Lane, and the English Opera at the Lyceum Theatre, and include the comic opera 'Matrimony' (with Kenney; Drury Lane, 20 November 1804); the melodrama 'Timour the Tartar' (with M. G. Lewis; Covent Garden, 29 April 1811); and the musical farce 'Turn out!' (with Kenney; Lyceum, 7 March 1812). Among other compositions are a number of glees, ballads, madrigals, and piano pieces, and an oratorio, 'The Intercession', which was produced at Covent Garden on 1 June 1816. An aria from this work, 'Eve's Lamentation', became very popular for a time. 
King was a gifted musician and his operas enjoyed considerable vogue. He died in London in January 1823. His son, C. M. King, composed and published some songs and piano pieces. 


@@@@@


doc= 15580


King, Oliver (d. 1503), bishop of Bath and Wells, was born in London. He became a king's scholar at Eton College ('c'.1445-9) and a scholar and fellow of King's College, Cambridge, from 1449 to 1460-65, graduating MA by 1456-7. He then studied civil law at Orleans and Cambridge, gaining a doctorate by 1481. Meanwhile he served as junior proctor of the University of Cambridge (1459-60), was ordained subdeacon (1467) and deacon (1473), and began to collect benefices, starting with the rectory of Broughton, Hampshire, in 1466 and the wardenship of St John's Hospital, Dorchester, Dorset, in 1473. His preferments multiplied thereafter as he advanced in the royal service. King may have been secretary to Edward, prince of Wales, son of Henry VI, during the prince's French exile, but success came in the service of the prince's nemesis, Edward IV. From the clerkship of the signet in 1473 King advanced to the post of principal secretary for the French tongue in 1476. In 1475 he went as ambassador to the duke of Brittany, and in 1479 to the king of France. In 1480 he became the king's secretary; that year alone brought him three prebends and two successive rectories, and on 17 April 1482 he added the archdeaconry of Oxford. 
At Edward's death King became secretary to Edward V, but the protector, Richard of Gloucester, dispensed with his services and had him arrested on 13 June 1483. His movements thereafter are obscure, but by December 1485 he was sufficiently in the confidence of Henry VII to be sent on embassy to France. Early in 1486 he was named as a commissioner to survey the king's rights in Calais, and in 1487 he accompanied French ambassadors from London to Dover. The spiral of promotions recommenced in 1487 with another prebend and the archdeaconry of Berkshire, and in August of that year he regained the secretaryship. In July 1488 he was granted a papal licence to visit the churches of his archdeaconries by deputy because he was constantly engaged in the king's business. By that year he was also registrar of the Order of the Garter. The flow of benefices culminated in his provision to the bishopric of Exeter on 1 October 1492 (he was probably consecrated early in February 1493). His promotion was accompanied by a dispensation to retain his other benefices. Three years later he was translated to Bath and Wells, by bull of 6 November 1495. On this final promotion he relinquished the secretaryship, although he continued to sit in the king's council and to take part in great occasions at court. 
At Exeter, King appears to have been completely non-resident, but he visited Wells with the king in September 1497, and began to spend more time in his diocese from 1499, staying mostly at Bath. A visitation in that year brought a number of suspected heretics to light, and King heard one case in person, but he never ordained in either of his sees. Dr Thomas Gilbert as vicar-general and Thomas Cornish, bishop of Tenos, as suffragan deputized for him in both dioceses. At Bath and Wells he apparently promised the king the nomination to the major livings in his gift, but became distressed when this resulted in the appointment of a non-resident precentor of Wells -- the future archbishop William Warham (died 1532) -- and a consequent decay in the conduct of cathedral services. The other exception he made to this arrangement was in the promotion of his own nephew William Cousin to the deanship of Wells in 1498. In this as in other instances he used the see's resources to provide for his relations, but in his last years he also became a benefactor to his see. He left generous quantities of plate and images to Wells Cathedral and Bath Abbey, and rebuilt the abbey's church with a vault of which his masons promised him that 'ther shal be noone so goodely neither in England nor in France' (Robinson, 4). He claimed that the rebuilding was inspired by a dream, in which he saw the Trinity with angels ascending and descending on a ladder and an olive tree supporting a crown, and heard a voice bidding 'Let an olive establish the crowne, and let a king restore the church' ('Letter to Prince Henry', 1.9). 
King paid attention not only to rebuilding the monks' church, but also to reforming the irregularities in their conduct revealed at visitation. In his will he asked to be buried in the newly built choir, rather than in the chantry chapel he had constructed between 1492 and 1496 in St George's Chapel, Windsor, but it is unclear which site was chosen when he died on 29 August 1503. At Windsor his chapel contains oak panels painted with the pictures of his four royal masters -- Prince Edward, Edward IV, Edward V, and Henry VII; at Bath carved ladders and angels alluding to his dream survive on the west front, but the inscription derived from the book of 'Judges' (9: 8) recorded by Sir John Harington in the reign of James I, and by Thomas Dingley half a century later, '
The trees going to chuse their king 

Sayd bee to us that Oliver King 

' is now lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 15581


King, Paul (d. 1655), Franciscan friar, supposedly baptized David, was the son of Cornelius King, who was employed by one of the barons of Upper Ossory as a clerk or secretary. His uncle, Murtagh King, was a convert to protestantism and beneficed by William Bedell, bishop of Kilmore, who employed him to translate the 'Old Testament' into Irish. King was a native of Leinster, but in early life appears to have fallen victim to piracy, and was imprisoned for a time 'among the Moors' ('DNB'). He owed his liberation to the Franciscan friar Luke Wadding. This may have marked the beginning of King's religious life, and he was eventually to take the name in religion Paulus a Sancto Spiritu. 
By 1641 King was teaching moral theology at Brindisi in Italy, and in 1644 he was doing similar work at Kilkenny. He probably spent time in Rome in 1646-7. In September 1647 King was appointed lector of theology at Kilkenny friary. There he became a staunch supporter of the papal nuncio Giovanni Battista Rinuccini, who had arrived in Ireland in November 1645, espousing his cause against the supreme council of the confederate Catholics. In May 1648 the nuncio passed his second censure on the confederates in reaction to the perceived implications of their dealings with Lord Inchiquin -- the recall of the marquess of Ormond to resume his authority as lord lieutenant. Two months later King, then acting as Rinuccini's confidential agent, was arrested by order of the supreme council. This prompted him to write to Heber Macmahon, bishop of Clogher, inviting Owen Roe O'Neill and his Ulster army, which had always held more aloof from the confederate leadership, to seize Kilkenny and all the nuncio's enemies before Lord Lieutenant Ormond's anticipated arrival in Ireland. The letter was intercepted and King fled to the continent. 
In February 1649 King was chosen by the middle chapter of the Franciscan order to rule as guardian of the friary of Kilkenny, but was then replaced by the pseudo-chapter of 1649, which installed the maverick Peter Walsh instead. At Louvain, King wrote a bitter diatribe against Rinuccini's opponents and the Anglo-Irish party generally. This pamphlet, 'Epistola nobilis Hiberni', was widely circulated in Catholic Europe, largely by the hands of Franciscan monks in France, Spain, and Italy, in order, so it was said, 'to instigate those powers against the English and protestant interest in Ireland' (Ohlmeyer, 4). But its primary purpose was to distance the supporters of the nuncio from the collapse of the Kilkenny confederacy and lay the blame elsewhere. Offering an extremely partisan view of developments in Ireland, it drew a sharp response from a 'controversial and none too scrupulous' Ormondist priest from Cork, John Callaghan, or MacCallaghan, who wrote under the pseudonym Philopater Iranaeus ('DNB'). His 'Vindiciarum Catholicorum Hiberniae', published at Paris in 1650, which defended the Inchiquin truce, was mistakenly attributed to Richard Bellings, secretary to the Catholic confederacy, under whose name it was entered on the papal index of forbidden books in 1654. Callaghan alleged that King was guilty of numerous crimes, but the attempted betrayal of Kilkenny was the only one he cited. The controversy rumbled on for several years, continuing in the pages of the 'Commentarius Rinuccinianus' and in a pamphlet written by John Ponce (Punch), who defended his fellow Franciscan against the Ormondists. 
At the time of his appointment 'in absentia' as guardian of the Kilkenny friary, King had also received his instructions to set out for Rome on urgent provincial business. He had arrived by the time the Franciscans celebrated the feast of their patron saint in 1649. The support of the order helped King overcome some of the inconvenience of his connection with Rinuccini. Pope Innocent X was said to have lost sympathy with his nuncio after the debacle of 1648, while his successor, Alexander VII, was also disparaging of the 1648 censure, having himself resisted treating signatories to the distasteful Westphalian peace in similar fashion while nuncio to the German negotiations. On 21 November 1649 King was nominated guardian of St Isidore's College at Rome in succession to its founder, and King's personal saviour, Luke Wadding, towards whom King later behaved less than graciously. The theologian and historian John Colgan recommended King for the post of commissary responsible for the continental Franciscan colleges, and although he did not receive the appointment King was for some years procurator-general of the order. In his 'Vindiciarum' Callaghan regretted having had no opportunity to show King's patrons that punishment would have been more fitting than such promotions as these. Ponce, on the other hand, averred that King was worthy of much greater honours. In 1651 King attended the general chapter of the Franciscan order in place of the custos of the Irish province, Patrick Brenan. In 1652 he published a Latin elegy on Cardinal Ximenes. While at Rome, King projected a book in ten volumes in honour of his order, but lived to publish only a kind of syllabus, written in Latin in an 'easy style... with vigour, but incorrectly', which was licensed in 1654 as an 'earnest of a great work' ('DNB'). It is believed that King died at Rome the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 15582


King, Peter, first Baron King (1669-1734), lord chancellor, was born in Exeter, the son of Jerome King, a prosperous grocer and drysalter, and Anne, daughter of Peter Locke and first cousin of John Locke, the philosopher. 
King was educated among the dissenters in Exeter, probably by Joseph Hallett ('bap'. 1620, died 1689), who founded the dissenting academy there. Certainly he read deeply in theology and religious history, under the influence of the Exeter presbyterians, and he may have been intended for the nonconformist ministry. In 1691 he published anonymously 'An Enquiry into the Constitution, Discipline, Unity & Worship of the Primitive Church', an intervention in the debates arising out of the 'Toleration Act' and the dissenters' desire for a full measure of comprehension, undertaken to show that in its organization and discipline the primitive church involved elements of presbyterianism as well as episcopacy. It attracted considerable attention, and continued to represent dissenting views into the early eighteenth century. A second part, dealing with the forms of worship of the early fathers, was completed within a few years, but was not published until 1713. 
Such an early demonstration of learning and reasoned argument seems to have persuaded King's family that he should follow a legal career; he was admitted to the Middle Temple on 23 October 1694, and may have studied civil law at Leiden, although his name does not appear in the published list of students for the period. He was called to the bar on 3 June 1698, on the recommendation of Sir George Treby, lord chief justice, whom Locke had urged to befriend him. Locke subsequently became a second father to King, sending a constant stream of advice and providing him with an entree into his London circle of acquaintances, which included whig grandees, judges, Isaac Newton, and Somers, the lord chancellor. In return King carried out Locke's business in the capital, especially the management of his financial affairs. His practice on the western circuit and at Westminster expanded rapidly: the reports show that by 1702 he was appearing regularly as a junior in king's bench, both on behalf of private individuals and in pleas of the crown. He also benefited from the patronage of the Devon gentry, and in February 1701 he was brought into parliament for Bere Alston, a Devon borough partly controlled by Sir Francis Drake of Buckland Abbey, one of the leaders of the west country whigs. He arrived in parliament at a critical juncture, and Locke urged him to put attendance in the Commons before his practice on circuit, although at first, he recommended, he should prompt more experienced members rather than speak himself: 'hereby you will recommend your self when people shall observe soe much modesty joyned with your parts and judgment' (Locke to King, 31 Jan 1701, Bodl. Oxf., MS Locke c. 40, fol. 100). But he made his first speech within a month of his election, and was a partisan in the bitter struggles over the impeachment of the whig lords and the Kentish petition. 
King was a man of strong moral principles, informed by his faith, which he carried into his public life as well as his writings. He was an early member of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, founded in 1701, and in 1702 he published 'The History of the Apostles Creed: with Critical Observations on its Several Articles'. At first this attracted greater attention in Europe than in England, but ultimately it became a foundational text for further research, and generated several editions over the next forty years, one in Latin translation. His energies were now principally given over to his legal practice and attendance in parliament, wherein his nonconformist conscience inclined him to country measures as well as whiggism. He distinguished himself in January 1704 by making an able speech in the great debate over the Aylesbury election case, maintaining the right of electors to have a remedy at common law for denial of their votes, against tory insistence on the privileges of the Commons. In September 1704 Locke congratulated him on his marriage to Anne (1688/9-1767), the daughter of Richard Seyes of Boverton in Glamorgan, who had a fortune of at least $4000; but he lost his mentor the following month, acquiring half of his landholdings and many of his books. During the next few years the focus of his life shifted with increasing success: while he became recorder of Glastonbury in July 1705, his prospects centred on the capital, and when he came to purchase a major estate in 1710 he settled on the manor of Ockham in Surrey, within easy carriage distance of London. 
In parliament between 1705 and 1708 King was prominent among an important group of independent whigs which maintained a broadly 'country' programme of measures. He sponsored a moderate place bill in January 1705; he was one of the leaders in the unsuccessful campaign for the 'whimsical' place clause added to the 'Regency Bill' in January and February 1706; and in December 1707 he took a prominent part in the whig attack on the administration of the Admiralty. Indeed, although he was normally inclined to act with the junto whigs in party issues, his enthusiasm for eliminating 'interest' and exposing administrative mismanagement induced him to support the tory-inspired inquiry into the conduct of the war in Spain in late 1707 and 1708. By this time he had made an impression, and in the spring of 1708 the whigs in the government were keen to appease him with office: 'if he were engag'd, the Whymsical Whigs... wou'd have no Head to govern them, and having generally very indifferent ones of their own, cou'd do no great mischief' (A. Mainwaring to duchess of Marlborough, 9 April 1708, BL, Add. MS 61459, fols. 24-5). Unfortunately his speeches against the Admiralty had offended Queen Anne, who believed they were aimed at her husband, Prince George, the lord high admiral. She therefore vetoed a proposal that he should be appointed solicitor-general, and would not even countenance his becoming one of her counsel. In the event the administration arranged for him to be elected recorder of London on 27 July, and he was knighted on 12 September. The whig junto also nominated him as their preferred candidate for speaker after the general election of 1708, although he eventually gave way to the court candidate, Sir Richard Onslow. 
As recorder of London, King was present at the commemorative service held in St Paul's Cathedral on 5 November 1709, when Dr Henry Sacheverell preached on the text 'in peril among False Brethren', and he subsequently objected to the explosive sermon in the court of aldermen. In December 1709 he took a leading role in censuring Sacheverell's high-flying doctrines in the Commons, and in January he was one of the committee that drew up articles of impeachment. At the trial he naturally took principal responsibility for the second article, which accused Sacheverell of condemning the 'Toleration Act' of 1689. In a closely reasoned but temperate speech on 28 February he effectively demolished the defendant's disingenuous answer, to the effect that he did not intend his criticisms to refer to the act, and showed that his words could be construed only as an argument that liberty of conscience tended ultimately to treason, and that such indulgence should be suppressed, rather than encouraged. Indeed, he cleverly contended that Sacheverell had denied the queen's supremacy over the church, in so far as Sacheverell maintained that the clergy's censures against the dissenters were beyond earthly power to reverse. He also deployed all his deep historical learning to praise Archbishop Edmund Grindal, whom Sacheverell had condemned for recommending toleration to Queen Elizabeth, as 'a man universally esteemed for his virtue, piety, and learning' ('State trials', 15.149). He reiterated this last point nine days later, on 9 March, when he replied to the defence on the second article. This was the high point of King's parliamentary career: his performance could have left no one in doubt of his forensic ability, and by taking a prominent part in such a party set piece he publicly declared his political allegiances. 
Certainly King's instinct for independence and scrupulous governance survived -- in December 1711 he brought in a hopeless motion for balloting at elections, which was duly lost by a large majority, and in 1713 he supported another place clause -- but for the remainder of Anne's reign he was clearly identified as one of the whig leaders in the Commons, especially in their resistance to the tory peace and concern for the Hanoverian succession. In June 1712 he spoke up for William Fleetwood, bishop of St Asaph, an opponent of the peace, who was attacked by the tories on the pretext of objecting to the preface of his recently published collection of sermons. And in February 1713 he was counsel for the whig journalist George Ridpath, prosecuted by the government for attacking the peace in his 'Flying Post'. In July of that year he also defended William Whiston before the court of delegates upon Whiston's prosecution for denying the Trinity. Naturally, in March 1714 he spoke against concurring in the address of thanks for the treaty of Utrecht, concentrating on the need for further safeguards to protect the protestant succession. And of course, as a whig and dissenter, he resisted the 'Schism Bill' in May, deploying his reputation as a patristic scholar to compare it to the Roman persecution of the early Christians. 
When George I arrived in London, King gave a gracious speech of welcome on behalf of the corporation. With the death of Queen Anne the veto on his further promotion was removed, and upon the nomination of Lord Chancellor Cowper he became lord chief justice of common pleas on 27 October 1714, in place of Thomas Trevor, first Baron Trevor, who was removed on political grounds. As such, he shared in the augmentation of all the judges' salaries obtained via the petition of Sir Thomas Parker, chief justice of king's bench. King had now left the Commons and was now effectively removed from the front line of party strife, and during his decade on the common law bench was only occasionally called upon to try state prosecutions. But he continued to influence elections in Devon, and managed the parliamentary borough of Bere Alston for his former patron Sir Francis Drake, thereby obliging Robert Walpole, whose brother was returned to one of the seats in the parliament of 1715. After the Jacobite rising of 1715 he presided at the special commission which tried the commoners accused of taking part. His report to the secretary of state on the proceedings is remarkable for its fairness and humanity towards the prisoners, several of whom he recommended to the king's mercy. With the majority of the judges, in 1718 he gave his opinion for the king when they were tendered questions about his legal right to supervise the education and marriages of the children of the prince of Wales. And in October 1719 he presided at the Old Bailey trial of John Matthews for treason in publishing a tract alleging the right of the Pretender, James Stuart, to the throne. Matthews was only nineteen years of age, and one of the crown counsel admitted he was merely 'an obstinate instrument in the hands of some greater person' ('State trials', 15.1338), but King summed up clinically and the jury brought in a guilty verdict. 
The only other significant criminal trial for which King was responsible was 'R. v. Woodburne and Coke', for a murderous attack on Edward Crispe, Coke's brother-in-law, which was held at Bury St Edmunds in March 1722. Crispe had survived the assault, and since attempted murder was only a misdemeanour at common law, the defendants were prosecuted under a capital clause in an obscure statute of 1670 (22 & 23 Chas. II c. 1) directed against malicious maiming and wounding. Although not represented by counsel, Coke attempted to take advantage of his confessed intention to kill, rather than maim, but King would not accept this as a point of law for argument, and insisted the intention was a matter of fact for the jury, who found both men guilty. His severe speech on giving judgment in this case suggests that his decision may have been influenced by personal abhorrence at the callousness of the crime, from which Coke hoped to inherit Crispe's estate. Some later authorities believed that he allowed the statute to be extended too far ('State trials', 16.54-94). 
In 1725, when Lord Chancellor Macclesfield (previously Sir Thomas Parker) was impeached, King was chosen to conduct his trial. The proceedings were conducted at the bar of the House of Lords, wherein he was commissioned to preside as their speaker. Although the trial took thirteen days in May, his role was largely a formal one, since he was not a peer and had no voice but as the mouthpiece of the Lords. Four days after pronouncing sentence, on 29 May, he was created Baron King, of Ockham, and on 1 June he was appointed lord chancellor himself, with an additional salary of $1200 in consideration of loss of profits from sales of masterships in chancery. But although he had given great satisfaction in common pleas, and his reputation for integrity made the appointment popular, expectations of his performance were greatly disappointed. He was not experienced in chancery practice, and his lack of equity learning destroyed his confidence, thereby enervating his dispatch. Lord Hervey said of his practice on the bench: 'He had such a diffidence of himself that he did not dare to do right, for fear of doing wrong; decrees were always extorted from him; and had he been let alone he would never have given any suitor his due, for fear of giving him what was not so. (Hervey, 1.280-81)' Several of his decisions were reversed on appeal to the Lords, but he was able to settle some important points of doctrine. In 'Coppin v. Coppin' (1725) he ruled that a will settling land in England must conform to the rules of English law, even when made abroad. And in 'Croft v. Pyke' (1733) he determined that a partner's joint estate was liable first to the debts of the partnership, before payment of legacies to his heirs. He was generally reluctant to interpose against the common law, although in cases of married women's separate property he accepted that the practice of the court was to compel a husband to make a settlement on the wife before recovering his wife's portion by equity ('Milner v. Colmer', 1731, and 'Brown et Uxor v. Elton', 1733). 
King's impact on the administration of the court was more significant than his contribution to doctrine, however. The circumstances of his predecessor's disgrace meant that his inclination for honest management was encouraged, and he achieved some important reforms. Steps were taken to ensure that the suitors who were liable to lose by the insolvency of the delinquent masters in chancery were indemnified, and he sponsored legislation which required that suitors' money should in future be paid into the Bank of England. The office of accountant-general was established to oversee the funds and securities brought into the court. Indeed, his reforming efforts may have extended beyond the court of chancery; for during his period in office the legislature was attentive to contemporary complaints about the mysterious nature and crippling expense of litigation proceedings generally. Although not recorded as a speaker at the relevant debate in the Lords, he is said to have been the author of the 1731 statute which required all legal documents and processes to use English, rather than Latin or law French. It may be no coincidence that in 1732 a committee of the House of Commons criticized the increase in the number of chancery officers since the sixteenth century; and in 1733, following its recommendation, a royal commission was established to report on the fees taken in all the courts of England and Wales. King also resisted the extension of royal patronage in the church. He had been reappointed by George II in June 1727, but in July the king told him that henceforth he intended to nominate to all the ecclesiastical offices previously within the chancellor's patronage. King thereupon replied 'that this was a right belonging to the office, annexed to it by act of parliament and immemorial usage, and I hoped he would not put things out of their ancient course' (King's diary, 8 July 1727, in Campbell, 6.108). The king subsequently gave up the point, although Walpole reported that he was 'disobliged' by the lord chancellor's 'peremptory manner' (Ryder's diary, 18 Oct 1739). 
King ruined his health by his efforts to become competent in equity, and by sitting late to deal with the increasing arrears in his court. It is said that towards the end he dozed on the bench, while the proceedings of the court were substantially controlled by Sir Philip Yorke and Charles Talbot, the leaders of the chancery bar. After a paralytic stroke he was forced to resign on 19 November 1733, accepting a gratuity of $20,000. He died of a further stroke at Ockham on 22 July 1734, and was buried in the church there, being survived by his wife, who lived until 1 July 1767, and six children, including four sons, John ('bap'. 1706, died 1740), Peter ('bap'. 1709, died 1754), William (1711-1767), and Thomas (1712-1779), each successively Baron King of Ockham, and two daughters, Elizabeth and Anne, who died unmarried. By his will, in addition to his principal estate at Ockham he left separate estates in land to his two eldest sons and $8000 each to his younger children. But he desired to be buried 'with as little funeral show as possible', and commended his wife and children 'to the protection and providence of Almighty God, which will be their best Defence'. A monument by Rysbrack memorialized him as 'a friend to true religion and liberty' (HoP, 'Commons, 1690-1715'). 
Although he had been an important politician during the party warfare under Anne, and he presided as president of the regency council during the monarch's absence in Hanover, King had little influence over major policy decisions as lord chancellor. Indeed in his later years some old acquaintances and political allies were alienated by what they discerned as a departure from his disinterested principles. William Whiston relates his disappointment on approaching King for a prebend on behalf of a friend: 'I found so prodigious a Change in him, such strange Coldness in the Matters that concerned Religion, and such an earnest Inclination to Money and Power, that I gave up my Hopes quickly. Nay, indeed, I soon perceived that he disposed of his Preferments almost wholly at the Request of such Men as could best support him in his high Station, without Regard to Christianity. ('Memoirs of... William Whiston', 1.35)' These comments on King are qualified by Whiston's self-righteousness, but Walpole also said that he became excessively avaricious after becoming a peer, insisting on having a tellership of the exchequer for his eldest son and claiming a service of plate as speaker of the House of Lords (Ryder's diary, 18 Oct 1739). While these accusations of worldly materialism sit uneasily with his public behaviour, there is no doubt that King was unwise to accept an office for which he was manifestly unsuited, and his reputation suffered accordingly. He was a man whose virtues provoked unusual expectations, however, and it is unfortunate that his successors in office did not follow his lead in reforming the administration of justice. 


@@@@@


doc= 15583


King, Peter, seventh Baron King (1775-1833), politician, was born on 31 August 1775, the eldest son of Peter, the sixth baron, and Charlotte, daughter of Edward Tredcroft of Horsham, and great-grandson of Peter King, first Baron King, lord chancellor. He was educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, and succeeded to the title in 1793. After a short tour on the continent he returned to England on coming of age, and took his seat in the House of Lords. True to the whig traditions of his family, he acted with Lord Holland, whose motion for an inquiry into the causes of the failure of the expedition to the Low Countries he supported in his maiden speech on 12 February 1800. 
Except to oppose a 'Habeas Corpus Suspension Bill', or a bill to prolong the suspension of cash payments by the Banks of England and Ireland, begun in 1797, King at first rarely intervened in debate. He made a profound study of the currency question, and published his findings in a pamphlet entitled 'Thoughts on the Restriction of Payments in Specie at the Banks of England and Ireland' (2nd edn, 1803). Much enlarged, it was reissued as 'Thoughts on the Effects of the Bank Restrictions' (1804). In this classic tract King argued that the suspension had caused an excessive issue of notes, particularly by the Bank of Ireland, and a consequent depreciation of the paper and appreciation of bullion, and he advocated a gradual return to the system of specie payment. It was reviewed by Horner in the 'Edinburgh Review' (2.402), and attracted much attention, but produced no practical result. As the depreciation increased, King in 1811 gave notice to his leasehold tenantry that he could no longer accept notes in payment of rent, except at a discount varying according to the date of the lease. Ministers, alarmed lest his example should be followed generally, hastily introduced a measure making notes of the Banks of England and Ireland payable on demand legal tender in payment of rent out of court, and prohibiting the acceptance or payment of more than 21's'. for a guinea. King opposed the bill, and justified his own conduct in an able and spirited speech (afterwards published as a pamphlet), but it passed into law, and was followed in 1812 by a measure making the notes legal tender in all cases (51 Geo. III, c. 127; 52 Geo. III, c. 50). He sat in the Lords' committee on cash payments in 1819 and took part in the debates on it in 1820, describing an internal failure of consumption, largely due to cash payments coupled with high taxation. 
King was from the first, and as long as he lived, a determined opponent of the corn laws, which he denounced as a 'job of jobs'. He supported Catholic emancipation and the commutation of tithes, and opposed grants in aid of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, pluralities, and other abuses, and was suspected of a leaning to Presbyterianism (see Antischismaticus, 'Hierarchia versus Anarchiam', 1831; and J. T. Law, 'A letter to Lord King controverting the sentiments lately delivered in parliament by his lordship, Mr. O'Connell, and Mr. Sheil, as to the fourfold division of tithes', 1832). His long-standing interest in Locke was embodied in his 'Life of John Locke', published in 1829 and reissued with extra material in 1830; his hatred of the corn laws and of corruption prompted his 'Short History of the Job of Jobs' (1825). 
King married, on 26 May 1804, Lady Hester Fortescue, daughter of Hugh, first Earl Fortescue and his wife, Hester; they had two sons, William, created Lord Lovelace in 1838, and Peter John Locke King. King died suddenly on 4 June 1833 at his house in Dover Street, London, and his widow died aged eighty-nine in 1873 at their home, Brooklands, in Weybridge, Surrey. As Henry Brougham's praise of his capacity and character testifies, King's unexpected death ended a career of increasing distinction. 


@@@@@


doc= 15584


King, Peter John Locke (1811-1885), politician, second son of Peter King, seventh Baron King (1775-1833), and brother of William King-Noel, first earl of Lovelace, was born at Ockham, Surrey, on 25 January 1811. He was educated at Harrow School and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA 1831, and MA 1833. 
In 1837 King unsuccessfully contested East Surrey, but he was elected for the same constituency on 11 August 1847, and retained his seat until the conservative reaction at the general election in February 1874. He supported an alteration in the law of primogeniture for many sessions, various of his speeches being published as pamphlets. On 11 August 1854 his 'Real Estate Charges Act' was passed, according to which mortgaged estates descend with and bear their own burdens; it became known as 'Locke King's Act'. In the session of 1856 he was successful in obtaining the repeal of 120 sleeping statutes which were liable to be put into force from time to time. He also waged war against the statute law commission, and more than once denounced it as a job. His letters to 'The Times' on chancery reform were reprinted in 'A Bleak House Narrative of Real Life' (1856). King introduced a bill for abolishing the property qualification of members, which passed the House of Lords on 28 June 1858, and in eight successive sessions he brought forward a 'County Franchise Bill', on one occasion, 20 February 1851, defeating and causing the resignation of the Russell ministry. He succeeded in carrying through the House of Commons a bill for extending the $10 franchise to the county constituencies, so as to include every adult male who came within the conditions of the borough suffrage. He was also well known for his advocacy of the ballot and of the abolition of church rates, and for his strenuous opposition to the principle and practice alike of endowments for religious purposes. He was distinguished by the legislative effectiveness of his moderate radicalism. 
King married, on 22 March 1836, Louisa Elizabeth ('c'.1813-1884), daughter of William Henry Hoare of Mitcham Grove, Surrey, with whom he had four sons and five daughters. King died at his home, Brooklands, Weybridge, on 12 November 1885. His only surviving son, Hugh Fortescue Locke King, was founder of the Brooklands motor racing track. 


@@@@@


doc= 15585


King, Philip Gidley (1758-1808), naval officer and colonial governor, was born at Launceston, Cornwall, on 23 April 1758, the only son of Philip King, a local draper, and his wife, daughter of John Gidley, an Exeter attorney. Educated at Mr Bailey's school, Yarmouth, he joined the navy on 22 December 1770 as captain's servant in the 'Swallow', and served for five years in the East Indies. In July 1775, on moving to American waters, he became a midshipman in the 'Liverpool', and after two more changes he was commissioned lieutenant in the 'Renown' in December 1778, according to one of his examiners, 'one of the most promising young men I have ever met'. Next year he returned home to serve in the Channel Fleet, coming under Captain Arthur Phillip in November 1781. Two years later he was in Indian waters, still under Phillip, but he was paid off in 1784, when war ended, and was on half pay for two years. 
In October 1786, when the expedition to establish a penal colony in New South Wales was being fitted out, Phillip, its commander, appointed King second lieutenant of the 'Sirius' (20 guns), which was convoying the transports. After many delays in sailing the expedition reached Port Jackson (Sydney) on 26 January 1788, and within three weeks Phillip sent King, 'an officer of merit, whose perseverance may be depended on' (A. Phillip to Lord Sydney, 15 May 1788; 'Historical Records of Australia', ser. 1, 1.20), with seventeen men and six women to occupy Norfolk Island, to 'anticipate' any foreign power, and, he hoped, to prepare its prolific flax-plant for use in the navy. Unfortunately he could not do this, having no flax-dressers; he also found that the island had no timber good for naval masts and no good harbour. However, by January 1790 King had 50 acres under cultivation with wheat and maize and a plentiful supply of fruit and vegetables, so Phillip was able to send two companies of marines and 183 convicts with 27 children to the island to relieve the pressure on provisions in Sydney. In April he sent King to England to report on the settlement, and strongly recommended his promotion. 
Upon reaching London in December King learned that he had been appointed lieutenant-governor of Norfolk Island, and on 2 March 1791 he was promoted commander. Nine days later, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, he married his cousin, Anna Josepha Coombe (1764/5-1844) of Hattersleigh, Devon, according to marine-officer Ralph Clarke's journal 'a genteel woman' but 'not very pretty', though Elizabeth Macarthur thought her 'possessed of a great share of good nature' and King's friend, the future commissary W. N. Chapman, described her as 'almost an angel' (Bassett, 16, 20-21). They sailed in the 'Gorgon' on 15 March, reaching Sydney on 21 September and Norfolk Island on 4 November. There, on 13 December, their first child, the future Captain Phillip Parker King RN (1791-1856), was born, to join King's two illegitimate sons, the future naval officers Norfolk (1789-1839) and Sydney (1790-1840), whose mother, Ann Inett ('b'. 1757), a mantua maker of Grimley, Worcestershire, had been found guilty on 11 March 1786 of stealing clothing and linen, and transported for seven years (in 1792 she married another convict). 
On Norfolk Island, Anna Josepha had to live with only one female companion of her own class, Mrs Paterson, wife of Captain William Paterson, bring up her family (increased by two girls), and nurse her husband, as he suffered increasingly from gout, inflammation of the lungs, difficulty in breathing, and stomach pain. However, despite his ill health, trouble associated with the ill discipline of the New South Wales Corps, and shortage of officials King was a success. After a visit the colony's chaplain, the Revd Samuel Marsden, reported to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts that King's 'whole attention seems occupied in promoting the real interest' of the islanders (2 Jan 1796; 'Historical Records of New South Wales', 3.1). By 1796 King had built a girls' school and an orphanage, funded from customs duties. He had not been able to promote flax production, for two young Maori brought from New Zealand, said to be flax-dressers, told him that flax-dressing was 'woman's work', and they knew nothing about it. However, he restored the economy, which had deteriorated while he was away, and encouraged former marines and former convicts to cultivate land. By 1796 240 people occupied Norfolk Island, with 1500 acres cleared; there were nearly 5000 livestock, mainly swine, five-sixths of these privately owned, and nearly 350 people working as labourers. Although there was a shortage of labour for public works King had built a strong wharf, a large storehouse, barracks, a water-mill, and a government house. But his health had not improved, and he had to ask for sick leave. The Kings departed in October, reaching London next May, with another daughter, Elizabeth, born in February. 
In England, King, now in better health, sent to Sir Joseph Banks and Lord Sydney the native plants he had brought with him, and set about obtaining another appointment. Supported by Arthur Phillip, Banks, and officials at both the Admiralty and the Home Office, King was given, in May 1798, a dormant commission to succeed John Hunter as governor of New South Wales at a salary of $1000 per annum. Although he had been given his sailing orders, lengthy discussions about the design of a ship that would carry Banks's plants for the colony and two false starts delayed his departure and strained his finances. He was promoted post captain in December but did not sail until November 1799 in the 300-ton whaler 'Speedy', with his wife and his daughter Elizabeth, leaving behind his three sons and his other surviving daughter. 
King arrived in April 1800, but Hunter did not leave, much to the new governor's irritation. He could do little more than criticize Hunter, deplore the misbehaviour allegedly prevailing in Sydney, and reiterate his plans for reform, which included establishing a convict outstation, controlling the liquor trade more effectively, and encouraging sheep- and cattle-breeding, cloth manufacture, coalmining, wine-growing, and the budding whale and seal fisheries -- and incidentally send Banks a pickled platypus ('Ornithorhynchus paradox') to prove to the sceptics that such a creature existed. But on 28 September he assumed command. 
The thriving fisheries were stimulated by the discoveries in Bass Strait in 1801-2 by lieutenants Grant and Murray, whom King had sent out from Sydney, and by Matthew Flinders on his voyage to circumnavigate Australia. Following their reports in May 1802, King wrote to London strongly recommending that a settlement be established at the newly discovered Port Phillip. This project (carried out by Captain David Collins but quickly abandoned), he argued, would reduce the number of convicts in Sydney, where he was worried by the arrival of so many Irish rebels, and would anticipate possible French designs in the area, of which the appearance of Nicolas Baudin's allegedly scientific expedition (political according to its hydrographer, Francois Peron) had made him suspicious. These fears led him in November 1802 to send a ship to King Island and examine Port Phillip again. In the following year he ordered the foundation of a settlement under Lieutenant Bowen on the River Derwent in Van Diemen's Land, which, founded in September 1803 and reinforced by Collins's party leaving Port Phillip in January 1804, quickly became an important whaling station. In 1804 King sent a party to Port Dalrymple, on the south side of Bass Strait, to investigate Port Phillip further while checking the appearance of Americans whaling and sealing there. King also continued exploration and expansion elsewhere. He helped to develop the pork and sandalwood trades in the Pacific. In 1801 he had sent a party to examine the Hunter River and establish a penal settlement there to exploit the coal, timber, and shells for lime -- temporarily in 1801-2 and permanently in April 1804. Unfortunately expeditions of exploration to the west were less successful, as the Blue Mountains appeared an impossible barrier. 
This was less important as long as the colony was regarded primarily as a penal settlement, though during King's term only about 2500 convicts arrived, nearly half in 1800-1. Of these about 500 were Irish rebels whom King feared might rebel again in the colony, as indeed about 300 did do in 1804, so he was relieved to ship off the most dangerous to either Newcastle or Norfolk Island. The low numbers of convicts meant fewer public works, with only about 200 men working on them; the majority were assigned to private employment. King reduced the number of government supported servants for military officers and officials from 250 to 58 and tightened the regulations controlling employers' treatment of their convicts. He also laid the foundation of the ticket-of-leave system for the well-behaved, believing that offenders were not consigned 'to Oblivion and disgrace for ever', but when emancipated became 'as Free and Susceptible to every Right as Free Born Britons as any Soul in the Territory' ('Historical Records of Australia', 4.276). 
Mindful of the need for economy in public expenditure and for more reliable food supplies, King encouraged agriculture by increasing land grants to private farmers and the assignment of convicts to private service. He insisted on licences for liquor imports and sent away two-fifths of the 170,000 gallons of spirits brought to Sydney while he was governor. He was also active in importing livestock for food, distributing 60 per cent to deserving settlers, and by the end of his term the area under wheat, maize, and barley had risen from 7000 to 11,000 acres -- all under private (not government) cultivation -- and virtually no farmer remained 'on the stores'. These measures, together with the fact that only a small number of convicts were arriving and others were completing their sentences, meant that he was able to reduce the proportion of people drawing government rations from about three-quarters to one-third, and despite an increase of 30 per cent in the total population, he drew 20 per cent less in treasury bills for stores than his predecessor John Hunter had done in 1796-8. He also encouraged the colony's infant industries -- flour milling, salt extraction, tanneries and leather, woollen and cloth manufacture, agricultural implements, boat building, timber working, and brick making, though all these were necessarily on a small scale; King showed less interest in wool, though on instructions from London he granted more than 60,000 acres for the first time to assist pastoralists, especially John Macarthur and Samuel Marsden. On the debit side, he was in constant trouble with the officers of the New South Wales Corps and local liquor traders. The opening of an orphanage, financed by the (unauthorized) imposition of a 5 per cent import duty on spirits and all non-British goods, his convict policy, his permission for transported Irish priests to celebrate mass, and his establishment of the 'Sydney Gazette' (censored though it was) to provide information though not 'political discussion' all show a progressive attitude to social policy. 
King was a capable and conscientious administrator, and, though occasionally profiting from his position, he did little unusual by eighteenth-century standards, and was a pillar of rectitude compared with almost all his subordinates -- and many of his superiors in London. Sickness accentuated his hot temper, but he was plagued by incapable officials and an arrogant, insolent, and often disobedient military force, though his life in Sydney was greatly helped by the presence of Anna Josepha, a tower of strength in the management of 'Mrs King's Orphanage' and in many personal relationships; she was a very friendly hostess to both Matthew Flinders and Nicolas Baudin (later receiving a dessert service of Sevres china) and a devoted nurse to her husband as his gout worsened and his general health declined while he waited two years for his successor, William Bligh, to arrive after King had submitted his resignation in 1804. When he did, King was unfit to travel, and could not sail before the 'Buffalo' departed on 10 February 1807; he settled in Tooting, Surrey, and died in London on 3 September 1808, aged fifty, within a year of his arrival. He was buried in St Nicholas's churchyard, Lower Tooting. He was survived by his wife, his two natural sons, and four of his five legitimate children; his elder surviving daughter, Maria, married Hannibal Macarthur, cousin of his erstwhile opponent John, in 1812. 
In May 1809 the Treasury granted Mrs King a pension -- $265 per annum, reduced to $200 in 1810 -- and for some time she and the younger children lived in some poverty in Edgware Road, London, but in time her land and cattle in New South Wales, granted to her by Bligh when he assumed office, improved her financial situation. She longed to go back, but not until 1832 did she overcome the opposition of her children and return with her son Phillip to live with the Hannibal Macarthurs (and her eight grandchildren) at Parramatta -- a stately matriarch, as before caring for the local children and the sick and a pillar of the church. A very sensible woman, and one of the more useful and courageous pioneers of the colony, she died on 26 July 1844, aged seventy-nine. 


@@@@@


doc= 15586


King, Phillip Parker (1791-1856), naval officer and hydrographer, born at Government House, Norfolk Island on 13 December 1791, was the third, but only legitimate, son of Captain Philip Gidley King (1758-1808), naval officer and colonial governor. His mother was Captain King's wife, Anna Josepha, 'nee' Coombe (1764/5-1844). Arthur Phillip, governor of New South Wales, was his godfather. He went to England with his parents in 1796, and was educated there at the Revd Peter Thomas Burford's boarding school at Stratford Grove in Essex. Although granted a place at the Royal Naval Academy, Portsmouth, he failed to be admitted there. He entered the navy in November 1807, on the frigate 'Diana', and after six years of active service in the Bay of Biscay, the North Sea, and the Mediterranean, was promoted by Sir Edward Pellew to lieutenant of the 'Trident' on 28 February 1814. On 29 January 1817 he married Harriet (died 1874), one of the six daughters of Christopher Lethbridge of Madford, Launceston, Cornwall, deputy recorder of Launceston. They had eight children. 
Early in 1817 King was appointed to survey the coast of Australia, and was sent out to take command of the 'Mermaid', a cutter of 84 tons, with eighteen officers and men. He arrived in Port Jackson in September 1817, and for the next five years was engaged, almost without intermission, on the survey. He examined and delineated the greater part of the west, north, and north-east coasts, and laid down a new route from Sydney to Torres Strait, inside the Barrier Reef. In December 1820 the 'Mermaid' was found to be no longer seaworthy, and King was transferred to a newly purchased ship, which was renamed the 'Bathurst'. This was about double the size of the 'Mermaid', and carried twice the number of men, but the work on which she was employed was essentially the same. King was promoted commander on 17 July 1821, but continued the survey until April 1822. In September the 'Bathurst' sailed for England, arriving in April 1823. King's voyages had made significant contributions to Australian exploration. For the next two years he was occupied with the narrative and the charts of his survey. The charts were published by the hydrographic office, and formed the basis of those used for the rest of the century. His 'Narrative of the Survey of the Intertropical and Western Coasts of Australia' was published in 1827. 
On 26 February 1824, King was elected FRS; he was also FLS. In September 1825 he was appointed to the 'Adventure', with instructions to survey 'the southern coast of South America from the Rio Plata round to Chiloe, and of Tierra del Fuego'. The 'Adventure' was accompanied by the 'Beagle', commanded by Captain Pringle Stokes, and, after Stokes's death, by Captain Robert FitzRoy. During the four years from 1826 to 1830 the work was carried on with diligence and an exactness which established the reputations of both King and FitzRoy in the very first rank of hydrographers. King was advanced to post rank on 25 February 1830, and in the following November the two ships returned to England. In April and May 1831 King read an account of the results of his voyage before the Royal Geographical Society, and in 1832 published a volume of 'Sailing directions to the coasts of eastern and western Patagonia, including the Straits of Magalhaen and the sea-coast of Tierra del Fuego'. In 1839 a fuller account of King's voyage was published in the first volume of the 'Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle', edited by Captain FitzRoy. 
King had no further service in the navy, but returned to New South Wales, where he had already been granted land, settled in Sydney, and entered busily into the sometimes dubious affairs of the colony; he was for many years commissioner of the Australian Agricultural Company, and a member of the legislative council. In September 1855 he became a rear-admiral on the retired list. Following an apoplectic fit he died at his home, Grantham Villa, North Sydney, on 26 February 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 15587


King, Sir Richard, first baronet (1730-1806), naval officer, was born at Gosport, Hampshire, on 10 August 1730, the third but first surviving son of Curtis King (died 1745), master in the navy and afterwards master-attendant at Woolwich Dockyard, and Mary ('fl'. 'c'.1700- 'c'.1750), daughter of Lieutenant Benjamin Barnett RN (died 1703), and sister of Commodore Curtis Barnett. 
King entered the navy in 1738 on the 'Berwick' (70 guns), of which his father was master, but he was soon moved to the 'Dragon' (60 guns), commanded by his uncle, Barnett, whom he accompanied to the Mediterranean. He returned to England in the summer of 1742. In March 1744 he joined Barnett in the 'Deptford' (60 guns), and in January 1745 took part in the capture of three French East-Indiamen in the Strait of Banca, which the governor of Batavia bought for $92,000. Probably as a result of this action King was promoted lieutenant on 1 February 1745. Other prizes followed before Barnett reached Madras where he died in April 1746. King returned to England at the end of the war, but in 1754 he again went to the East Indies, as lieutenant of the 'Tiger' (60 guns), from which he was moved by the commander-in-chief, Rear-Admiral Charles Watson into the flagship 'Kent' (70 guns) as first lieutenant. King was thus at the taking and destruction of the pirate stronghold of Gheria in February 1756, capturing stores, money and valuables to the value of approximately $130,000; and on 23 July 1756 he was promoted commander of the fireship 'Blaze', bought by the admiral the previous day. Unfortunately the 'Blaze' sprang a leak and was sent to Bombay for repairs so that King was merely a volunteer, though an active one, in the capture of Calcutta Fort in December 1756. 
King took an equally active part and commanded the boats and landing party at the capture of the city of Hooghly, 30 miles north of Calcutta, on 10 January 1757. His courage and promptitude pleased Watson who, in February, as a mark of favour, sent him home with dispatches, in the sloop 'Pilot', with a strong recommendation to Earl Temple, the first lord of the Admiralty. King made an exceptionally swift passage, never stopping until he reached England in July 1757. The first lord, now Lord Anson, appreciative of zeal and activity in an officer, immediately ordered King to the West Indies in the sloop 'Bonetta', from which he was posted, by Commodore John Moore, to the frigate 'Rye' (24 guns) on 29 January 1759. Moore's squadron, reinforced in January 1759 for an attack on the French islands, made an unsuccessful attack on Martinique but captured Guadeloupe in May. In that month King was moved to the 'Ludlow Castle' (40 guns) and sent home with a convoy; and in the following January he was appointed to the frigate 'Argo' (28 guns), in which he cruised with some success on the coast of France and in the North Sea. 
On the outbreak of war with Spain in 1762 an attack on the Philippines was planned and King was chosen to convey General Draper to the East Indies, where he arrived in June. He took part in the expedition to Manila, which set sail on 6 October, and on 31 October, with Captain Hyde Parker, he captured the 'Santissima Trinidad', an immensely rich galleon from Manila. Parker and King had hoped to take the annual Acapulco galleon, the 'Santa Philippina', but, missing her, had chanced on an almost equally golden prize. The total prize money was estimated at $3 million (more than $600,000), and King's personal share was more than $30,000. In 1763 he returned, with the galleon, to England, commanding the 'Grafton' (68 guns). It was this fortune and the consequent rise in status which enabled him, on 30 November 1769, to marry Susannah Margaretta Coker (died 1794), daughter of William Coker of Mappowder, Dorset. The couple had three daughters and a son, Richard King, naval officer. 
During the Falklands crisis with Spain in 1770 King commanded the 'Northumberland' (68 guns). Following a series of short-term commands in early 1778 he was appointed to the 'Pallas' (36 guns) in which he convoyed the Quebec trade to Canada; he then formed part of a successful expedition, with Commodore John Evans, against the French islands of St Pierre and Miquelon, before returning to England in command of the 'Europe' (64 guns). In January 1779 he was appointed to the 'Exeter' (64 guns), part of Sir Edward Hughes's squadron which sailed in March for the East Indies and captured the French west African trading station of Goree 'en route'. On arrival King was ordered to wear a broad pennant as an established commodore and second in command. Thereafter he was at the taking of Negapatam in November 1781 and of Trincomalee from the Dutch in January 1782, and in all Hughes's actions with the French commander Suffren. In that off Sadras, 17 February 1782, the 'Exeter' was the rearmost ship of the English line. For some time she was attacked by four French ships and severely mauled, being almost entirely dismasted, receiving several shot below the waterline, and having ten men killed and 47 wounded. As the flag captain, Reynolds, was killed, his brains were dashed in King's face, temporarily blinding him. The master, seeing two more enemy ships bearing down on the 'Exeter', asked what they should do. Wiping his face with his handkerchief, King replied, 'There is nothing to be done but to fight her till she sinks' ('DNB'). A lucky shift of wind, however, allowed the British van to tack to the assistance of their rear, the 'Exeter' was rescued by the 'Hero', and the French withdrew. The other actions between Hughes and Suffren were on 12 April, 6 July, and 3 September 1782 -- in this last the 'Exeter' was again engaged by four French ships -- and 20 June 1783. The 'Exeter' played a distinguished part in all these naval battles, having a total of 178 men killed and wounded. King himself was unhurt, though in the action of 20 June a shot struck the speaking trumpet out of his hand. So badly damaged was the 'Exeter' that, on the passage home with nine sail of the line, she was condemned at the Cape of Good Hope as unseaworthy, and King moved to the 'Hero' for the remainder of the passage. He arrived in England in May 1784, and was knighted on 2 June. 
Peace brought unemployment, but on 24 September 1787 he was promoted rear-admiral of the white. In September 1789 he applied to William Pitt for a baronetcy, 'in consideration of long and faithful service at sea and a firm attachment to his Majesty's person and government' (HoP, 'Commons', 4.337). On 24 June 1790 he wrote again, urging his attachment to the present government, in the recent election. King had gone to Portsmouth to vote for the government candidate, despite a fever. Ignoring both comfort and dignity he made the journey from the Downs in the sloop 'Wasp' 'because the captain had a vote for the county, that he might be in a convenient situation to attend the election' (ibid.). 
Whether this was decisive or not, King was promoted rear-admiral of the red on 21 September 1790 and commander-in-chief at the Downs. In the mobilization of the fleet at Spithead in 1791 he was given a junior command in the 'St George'. He was made a baronet on 18 July 1792 and appointed governor and commander-in-chief at Newfoundland until 1794. In the same year he was returned unopposed as MP for Rochester. King is reputed to have spent about $5000 in these elections, and on standing again in May 1796, when he won handsomely, he referred to his exertions on behalf of his constituents, but he made no impact in the Commons and retired in 1802. 
King had repeatedly applied to Pitt for promotion and in 1796 he made an unsuccessful application for the governorship of Greenwich Hospital. Having become vice-admiral of the red in July 1793, he was promoted admiral of the blue on 1 June 1795, admiral of the white on 14 February 1799, and finally admiral of the red on 9 November 1805. This was a considerable achievement for someone of King's social background, and illustrates how connections, courage, and luck could make a naval career the path to professional and social advancement. King's naval career had been distinguished and lucrative. He invested in East India Company stock and at his death was worth approximately $35,000. He died on 27 November 1806 at his London house, 39 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, and was buried at Marylebone church on 4 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 15588


King, Richard (1748-1810), Church of England clergyman, was born in the parish of St Augustine, Bristol, on 30 November 1748, the son of Henry King, who lived in that parish. He was admitted scholar of Winchester College in 1762, matriculated at Oxford University from Queen's College on 4 April 1767, and was elected fellow of New College in 1768; he graduated BA in 1772, and proceeded MA in 1776. In 1782 he resigned his fellowship, and received the college livings of Worthen, Shropshire, and Steeple Morden, Cambridgeshire. On 17 August 1782 he married Frances Elizabeth Bernard (1757-1821) ['see 'King, Frances Elizabeth], third daughter of Sir Francis Bernard, governor of Massachusetts Bay. His wife was a philanthropist and devotional writer. According to an obituary, King was 'eminently orthodox and loyal: he was a strenuous assertor of the rights of the establishment of which he was a member' ('GM', 80/2, 1810, 589). 
King wrote 'A Discourse on the Inspiration of the Scriptures' (1805). Two years later 'Remarks on the Alliance between Church and State, and on the Test Laws' appeared. Another work, 'Brother Abraham's Answer to Peter Plymley' (1808), was a reply to Sydney Smith's book of letters on the subject of Catholics, addressed to a brother (Abraham), who lived in the country. King died at Steeple Morden, Cambridgeshire, on 30 October 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 15589


King, Sir Richard, second baronet (1774-1834), naval officer, was born on 28 November 1774, the only son of Admiral Sir Richard King, first baronet (1730-1806), and his wife, Susannah Margaretta (died 1794), daughter of William Coker, of Mappowder, Dorset. He entered the navy in 1788 on the 'Crown' in the East Indies with Commodore Cornwallis, by whom he was made lieutenant on 14 November 1791, commander in 1793, and captain on 14 May 1794. On his return to England he was appointed in November 1794 to the 'Aurora' (28 guns), for cruising service in the channel. He commanded different ships with credit in the channel and the North Sea. King married, in 1803, Sarah Anne (died 1819), only daughter of Vice-Admiral Sir John Thomas Duckworth; they had four sons and one daughter. In April 1804 he was appointed to the 'Achille' (74 guns), in which, on 21 October 1805, he served at Trafalgar. 
On the death of his father in November 1806, King succeeded to the baronetcy, but continued in the 'Achille', employed on the west coast of France and Spain until 1811, when he was appointed captain of the fleet to Sir Charles Cotton in the Mediterranean, and afterwards in the channel. He was promoted rear-admiral on 12 August 1812, and for the rest of the war had his flag in the 'San Josef' (110 guns), in the Mediterranean, as second in command to Sir Edward Pellew. He was made a KCB on 2 January 1815, was commander-in-chief in the East Indies from 1816 to 1820, and became vice-admiral on 19 July 1821. In 1822, he married Maria Susanna (died 8 January 1871), daughter of Admiral Sir Charles Cotton; they had four sons and three daughters. In July 1833 he was appointed commander-in-chief at the Nore. He died of cholera at Admiralty House, Sheerness, on 5 August 1834. 
King's second son from his first marriage, Admiral 


@@@@@


doc= 15590


King, Richard (1810/11-1876), Arctic traveller and ethnologist, was born in London, the son of Richard King. He was educated at St Paul's School, London, and in 1824 began a seven-year apprenticeship to an apothecary. In 1832 he was made licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries and member of the Royal College of Surgeons. He was appointed surgeon and naturalist to the expedition led by George Back to look for John Ross, who had been gone four years on a search for the north-west passage. Although only second in command, King had a much more arduous share of the work than Back and was largely responsible for the success of the expedition. Back's 'Narrative' (2 vols., 1836) contains meteorological and botanical appendices by King who also wrote his own 'Narrative' (2 vols., 1836). King's is in many respects the better book, since he showed a far deeper understanding of the indigenous peoples of the Arctic and did not indulge in dramatic exaggeration. His narrative made clear that, had the journey been better organized, more could have been accomplished. He resolved to return and complete his discoveries, a resolution which remained unfulfilled, not least because Back prevented his gaining the support of potential sponsors. In 1836 King proposed an expedition to clear up the uncertainty surrounding the Boothia isthmus, which he rightly suspected was the extreme north-eastern point of the continent. After the colonial secretary rejected his proposal, King took the highly unusual step of opening a public subscription for the $1000 he needed. The subscription went well until the Admiralty and the Hudson's Bay Company each decided to send an expedition to the area, neither under King's command but both, as he thought, inspired by him. The Admiralty expedition was a failure but the company, using the methods and even some of the personnel that King had suggested, achieved complete success. In 1842 King again proposed an expedition and was again rebuffed. 
King took great interest in Franklin's expedition and was one of the first to raise the alarm when he failed to return. He insisted, at first on very slender evidence, that Franklin's party would be found near the mouth of the Great Fish River. His opinion was discounted and in 1847 and 1856 his offer to lead a search party was refused. His loud and continued insistence on the need to search his favoured site increased the animosity of the Admiralty, the Hudson's Bay Company, and the Royal Geographical Society, who were also irritated by popular journals which took up King's point of view. Matters were not helped by King's 'Franklin Search from First to Last' (1855) which set out his own convictions and dwelt on the obduracy of those who would not listen to him. Franklin's party was finally found by M'Clintock in 1859 in the spot King had suggested eleven years earlier. The delay, however, probably made no material difference since, even if his advice been taken immediately, it would probably have come too late to save any of Franklin's men. 
King took no further part in Arctic affairs but was active in his profession and in learned societies, notably the Ethnological Society (later the Royal Anthropological Society), which he helped found in 1842. He served on the council and contributed several valuable works on the Inuit (1844), North American Indians (1869), Manxmen (1870), and the Sami (1871). His medical works on the cause of death in stillborn babies and on cholera were much respected at the time and he received several medical honours. In 1857 he married Elizabeth Lumley and they had at least one son, Richard. He died at his home at 1 Blandford Street, Manchester Square, London, of cerebral congestion on 4 February 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 15591


King, Richard John (1818-1879), antiquary, eldest son of Richard King (died 1829) and his wife, Mary Grace Windeatt (1798-1884), was born on 18 January 1818 at Montpelier, Pennycross, a chapelry attached to St Andrew, Plymouth. He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, on 17 November 1836, and graduated BA in 1841. On his father's death he inherited considerable property, including the estate of Bigadon in Buckfastleigh, Devon, where he lived until 1854. However, the lands were heavily mortgaged, and in that year King was forced by financial pressures to sell them, as well as his father's collection of pictures and the magnificent library which he himself had built up. He then moved to The Limes, Crediton, where he supported himself by writing. King's literary career had started early. While still an undergraduate, he printed in 1840, for private distribution, thirty-three copies of two lectures read before the Essay Society of Exeter College. Their subjects were 'The supernatural beings of the Middle Ages' and 'The origin of the romance literature of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries'. To the 'Oxford Essays' for 1856 he contributed a paper on 'Carlovingian romance'. His first separate publication was 'Selections from Early Ballad Poetry' (1842), with many notes and preliminary observations. In 1850 he published an anonymous novel entitled 'Anschar: a Story of the North': set in the viking period, it met with no great success. In 1856 he published the first two chapters of an intended history of Devon, under the title of 'The Forest of Dartmoor and its Borders: an Historical Sketch'. 
King was elected a member of the Devonshire Association in 1874, and served as president in 1875, when his address dealt with the early history of the county. He contributed several papers to the association's 'Transactions', and at the time of his death was on no fewer than eight of its special committees. With several other members he was involved in translating and editing the 'Devonshire Domesday'. 
King was a large contributor to Murray's series of handbooks to the English counties. He prepared handbooks on Kent and Sussex (1858), on Surrey and Hampshire and the Isle of Wight (1858), and on Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, and Cambridgeshire (1870). He also worked on Yorkshire (1866-8), Northamptonshire (1872-7), Warwickshire and Hertfordshire (1872-5), and the fifth and later editions of Devon and Cornwall. He was the leading writer in the same publisher's series of 'Handbooks to the Cathedrals of England' (1861-9) and in the subsequent volume on the 'Cathedrals of Wales' (1873). Sections of both the county and cathedral handbooks were also issued separately. For many years King was a regular contributor to the 'Saturday Review', the 'Quarterly Review', and 'Fraser's Magazine'. A selection from his articles, including his early paper on 'Carlovingian romance', was published in 1874 under the title of 'Sketches and Studies'. King also frequently wrote for 'The Academy' and 'Notes and Queries', and contributed to the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. The first five parts of 'Our Own Country' (1878-83) were written by him for Cassel & Co., and he assisted in the compilation of 'Picturesque Europe' (1876-9). His paper on 'Bristol Cathedral' appeared in volume 3 of the 'Transactions of the Bristol and Gloucestershire Archaeological Society', and a letter by him, 'On the family and parentage of Judhael de Totnais', is in W. Cotton's 'A Graphic and Historical Sketch of the Antiquities of Totnes' (1850). 
King died at his home, The Limes, Crediton, on 10 February 1879, and was buried in Crediton churchyard. The stained-glass east window of the lady chapel was dedicated to his memory. The east window and four smaller windows in Buckfastleigh church were given by him while he was living at Bigadon. 


@@@@@


doc= 15592


King, Robert (d. 1557), abbot of Thame and bishop of Oxford, was the second son of William King of Thame, yeoman, who was still living in 1508. He became a monk at the Cistercian abbey of Rewley, near Oxford, spending some of his time studying at St Bernard's College before obtaining his bachelor degree in theology in February 1507. He was university preacher on Passion Sunday 1512. In May 1515 he was appointed abbot of Bruern, also in Oxfordshire, and he became doctor of theology in March 1519. John Longland, bishop of Lincoln between 1521 and 1547, was a patron of King, and it was due to the bishop that he became abbot of Thame, probably in 1527 (the year in which he resigned from Bruern), following serious complaints about the previous abbot. On 7 January 1527 King was made a suffragan to the bishop of Lincoln with the title Reonensis (from the diocese of Rheon in the province of Constantinople), while on 15 April 1535 he received the prebend of Crackpole St Mary in Lincoln Cathedral, exchanging it in November 1536 for that of Biggleswade; he held the latter until 1542. In 1530 he is also recorded as vicar of Charlbury in Oxfordshire. 
On 22 December 1537, although he was a Cistercian, King was elected abbot of the Augustinian house of Osney, an appointment organized by John London and John Tregonwell, themselves acting on the instructions of Thomas Cromwell, to whom King was connected by the marriage of his brother William to Anne Williams, a relative of Cromwell's. This election was made simply to facilitate the abbey's surrender, which took place on 17 November 1539, the day after that of Thame. 
King's reward was the new bishopric of Osney and Thame founded on 1 September 1542. He surrendered his office on 20 May 1545, but had his diocesan status renewed on 26 January 1546, when the new diocese of Oxford was established, with the former priory church of St Frideswide (part of the new college of Christ Church) replacing Osney as its cathedral. As bishop of Osney and Thame King lived both at Gloucester Hall in Oxford and at Thame Park (as his former monastery became known). Gloucester Hall did not, however, form part of the endowment of the bishopric of Oxford, and after Thame Park was conveyed to Sir John (later Lord) Williams of Thame, the brother of Anne Williams and an associate of King's, in July 1547, it is not clear where the bishop lived. 
King remained bishop of Oxford throughout the reigns of Edward VI and Mary, apparently adjusting his religious convictions to suit the climate of the times, although his attendance at the trial of Thomas Cranmer in 1555 as one of the 'persecuting bishops that died before Queen Mary' ('Acts and Monuments', 8.636) is at least consistent with his having preached a sermon at Stamford some seventeen years previously denouncing those who read the 'New Testament' in English. 
Whatever King's doctrinal beliefs, his status as a patron of architecture is demonstrated by his work at Thame Park, probably of 'c'.1530, where his three-storey tower completed the abbot's lodging range begun by his predecessor, John Warren; the most notable feature of the tower is the parlour, in which Renaissance panels of arabesques, roundels, mermaids, putti, and the like constitute a splendid sight above the rich linenfold panelling below. A heraldic frieze displays King's connections, with the arms of Norreys, Fermor, Longland, and others, as well as those of the crown, being represented alongside his own initials. Given this Italianate taste it is perhaps surprising that after King died, on 4 December 1557, he should have been interred in a tomb in Oxford Cathedral which is entirely Gothic in character, comprising an elaborately traceried tomb chest with vaulted canopy. It now stands in the south transept. 


@@@@@


doc= 15593


King, Sir Robert (d. 1657), politician, was the eldest son of Sir John King (d. 1637) of Boyle Abbey, co. Roscommon, and his wife, Catherine Drury. He succeeded his father as muster-master-general of Ireland in 1618, was knighted in 1621, and served in the administration of Ireland throughout the 1620s and 1630s. King married twice. His first wife, Frances Folliott, the daughter of Henry Folliott, first Baron Folliott, of Ballyshannon, died on 13 March 1638. His second wife, Sophia Cecil ('c'.1618-1691), the daughter of Sir Edward Zouch of Woking, Surrey, had married Edward Cecil, Viscount Wimbledon, in 1635 and was left a rich young widow on Wimbledon's death in November 1638. Cecil (or Wimbledon) House on the Strand was to be King's residence in London in the 1640s and 1650s and the place where he was to die. 
Elected for the borough of Boyle in the Irish parliaments of 1634 and 1640, King played no part in the initial attack on the earl of Strafford, and gave evidence against his old master only once he had been called to London as a witness. In the event, his account of Strafford's tyrannical intentions, and his support of Sir Henry Vane's evidence 'that the army in Ireland should be employed against England' (BL, Harleian MS 164, fol. 153), was an important factor in bringing about the lord lieutenant's execution. 
King was still in London at the outbreak of the Irish rising in October 1641, but in 1642 he returned to Roscommon, where he fought in the battle of Ballintobber. In April 1643 he travelled to Oxford with William Jephson and Arthur Hill, hoping to persuade Charles I to allow parliament to raise more money for the Irish war. Their failure confirmed King in his support of parliament, and in the summer of 1643 he was appointed to a council of war for Ireland, and he continued to give advice to the various Irish committees. He had taken the solemn league and covenant by late 1644, and in January 1645 Charles I finally dismissed him as muster-master-general, saying that he was 'a person disaffected to us, having taken the Covenant and adhering to the rebels' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 13, fol. 528'r'). In April 1645 King was appointed one of parliament's Ulster commissioners, with orders to direct the war effort and liaise with the Scottish commanders in the province. From November 1645 the Ulster commissioners were involved in attempts to persuade the king's lord lieutenant, the marquess of Ormond (James Butler), to join the parliamentarians. Ormond's decision to make peace with the Irish confederates in the summer of 1646 was a set-back, but the collapse of the 'Ormond peace' soon afterwards gave King and his colleagues another chance. In September King was named one of the five commissioners who would reopen peace talks with Ormond. In June 1647 an agreement was finally concluded, and the lord lieutenant surrendered Dublin to parliament. King's position during these negotiations was ambiguous. He was loyal to parliament but was also considered to be one of Ormond's friends, and he corresponded privately with the lord lieutenant during the negotiations. King also remained aloof from the factionalism of Westminster, and his primary concern seems to have been the survival of the protestant interest in Ireland. 
This overriding concern for the fate of Ireland also characterized King's reaction to the 'revolution' of the late 1640s and early 1650s. He was apparently happy to serve parliament after the execution of the king, and he advised Oliver Cromwell in his invasion of Ireland in August 1649. He was reappointed muster-master-general in November 1649, and returned in early 1651 to Ireland, where he helped to organize the pay and supply the army. During this period he cemented his ties with the Irish protestant community with a series of marriages for his children with leading families such as the Cootes, Merediths, and Fentons. His strong ties with the regime and the Irish protestants made him an influential figure in the early Cromwellian parliaments: he was chosen to represent Ireland in the nominated assembly of 1653, and sat for Sligo, Leitrim, and Roscommon in the parliament of 1654. He was elected for the same seat in 1656, and was expected to play an important part in the forthcoming parliament. King duly travelled to England, but fell ill in the winter of 1656-7 and died in June 1657. He was succeeded by his son, Sir John King, who became Lord Kingston in 1660. 


@@@@@


doc= 15594


King, Robert (1599/1600-1676), college head, was born in Kent. He matriculated pensioner of Christ's College, Cambridge, on 5 July 1617, graduating BA in 1621 and proceeding MA in 1624. From 1625 he was a fellow of his college. On 16 January 1628 (or 1629) he was admitted proctor in the consistory court of the bishop of Ely. During academic year 1629-30 he was junior proctor of the university. In 1636 he received the degree of LLD. That year King resigned his fellowship, and by 1637 he had married Frances (died 1684), daughter of Jasper Wareyn of Great Thurlow, Suffolk. The Jasper Wareyn who matriculated at Christ's five years before King, in 1612, was probably her brother. 
On 10 October 1641 King was admitted advocate in the court of arches. From 1641 to 1664 he was official to the archdeacon of Suffolk, and from 1642 to 1645 held the additional office of commissary in that archdeaconry. In 1645 he became commissary in the neighbouring archdeaconry of Sudbury; this post he resigned in the same year, but he remained official of Sudbury from 1645 to 1674. On 28 October 1645 he was elected master of Trinity Hall, following the refusal of the place by the fellows' first choice, John Selden. King's election was approved by the House of Lords on 6 November, but the Commons were disinclined to endorse the promotion of a man so closely involved in the machinery of the Laudian church. The fellows of Trinity Hall were told to try again, and in March 1646 they elected John Bond. 
King's sympathies were clearly with the royalist cause, and following the Restoration he was re-elected to the mastership on 20 August 1660. By the end of that year he had also been appointed chancellor, commissary, and vicar-general to Bishop Matthew Wren of Ely, retaining all three posts to his death. He was confirmed in office by the bishop's patent of 20 December 1662, and the diocesan records give ample evidence of the work he did there. 
As master of Trinity Hall, King was involved in a running controversy over the appointment of clergymen to fellowships designated for laymen. The younger dons objected in particular to the crown's nomination of Robert Eade, who was in orders and who owed his MA to the king's mandate. In February 1666 the master of Corpus, Francis Wilford, sent the earl of Manchester an account of the disputes at Trinity Hall, observing that King was 'soe quiet and peaceable a person' that he could not understand the fellows' behaviour. This (thought Wilford) must be because of King's 'great mildness... in government', since as an LLD he might be thought to know his own college's statutes (Malden, 154). In March the matter was referred to a royal commission, which unsurprisingly upheld and extended the crown's right to nominate. 
King died at Trinity Hall lodge on 6 November 1676 aged seventy-six, and was buried in the college chapel; a marble tomb slab displays his arms: sable, a lion rampant a la queue furchee argent. His daughter Anne was buried at Great Thurlow in 1660, aged twenty-two. His only son, also Robert, entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1657 and trained for the law. He is said to have become vicar of Witcham, Cambridgeshire, in 1673; yet he is not mentioned in King's will of 17 April 1672. This left to his grandsons Robert, Henry, and Thomas a property at Sowley Green (near Great Thurlow) which King had bought. The interest in another landholding nearby at Great Bradley, which King had leased from St John's College, was passed to his widow. She was buried at Great Thurlow on 18 April 1684. 


@@@@@


doc= 15595


King, Robert, second Baron Kingston (c.1660-1693), army officer, was the eldest son of John King, first Baron Kingston (d. 1676), parliamentarian soldier and owner of large estates in Ireland, and his wife, Catharine (died 1669), daughter of Sir William Fenton of Mitchelstown, co. Cork. He was trained to a military career, receiving a cornet's commission in his father's cavalry regiment in 1663, while still an infant. Brought up on the family estate at Boyle Abbey, co. Roscommon, he was educated by a private tutor. 
Kingston purchased a captain's commission in the duke of Ormond's cavalry regiment in 1684 and within two years was the regiment's colonel. He was deprived of his post in 1687 during Tyrconnell's purge of protestant officers from the Irish army. On the eve of civil war he left his estate in Boyle and travelled to Sligo, where on 4 January 1689 he and Captain Chidley Coote were elected joint commanders of the forces in the county by the protestant association of Sligo. Kingston garrisoned the town, improved its defences, and garrisoned posts on the borders with Mayo and Roscommon to prevent incursions by Irish raiders, against whom he was active in a series of skirmishes. On 7 March, Tyrconnell issued a proclamation in Dublin offering a free pardon to all those who laid down their arms, but specifically excluded Kingston and nine others as being 'principal actors in the rebellion' who were 'not deserving of His Majesty's mercy or favour' (Leslie, 22). 
Kingston received several messages from Robert Lundy, the governor of Londonderry, urging him to leave Sligo so that the protestant forces might be consolidated. He abandoned Sligo to the Irish on 22 March and led his troops and the whole protestant population to Ballyshannon, which was then held and fortified by his cousin Henry Folliot. On 14 April, Kingston received an order from Lundy to join forces with him, by which time King James's Irish army had got between him and Londonderry. Unable either to return to Sligo, which was then occupied by the Irish, or to reach Lundy, Kingston instructed his men to join the garrisons at Enniskillen, Ballyshannon, and Donegal. With some of his officers he seized two French smacks at Killybegs, from where he sailed to get help. He arrived in Scotland after a hazardous seven-day crossing, having left all his possessions behind 'but some plate'. 
While in England, Kingston was attainted by the Dublin parliament and his lands were sequestered. In October 1689 he was chosen by other Irish exiles to sit on a committee to address the king in parliament and make proposals for the settlement of Ireland. On 17 February 1690 he married Margaret Harbord (died 1698), a daughter of William Harbord (d. 1692), the vice-treasurer of Ireland. In London he wrote an account of his actions in Sligo, which was published in Mackenzie's 'Narrative of the Siege of London-Derry' (1690). After the war his property was restored to him and he took his seat in the Irish parliament of 1692. He died in December 1693 leaving no children. By his will he demised all his property either to charitable purposes or to his cousins in an attempt to prevent his lands from passing to his brother John, the third baron (1664-1728), who had married Margaret O'Cahan, a Catholic who had been a servant in his father's house. After fifteen years of litigation, his brother succeeded to most of the estates in 1708. 


@@@@@


doc= 15596


King, Robert (d. 1726?), composer and concert promoter, was admitted to the royal private musick as a violinist on 6 February 1680. In December 1689 he was granted a royal licence to promote concerts and apparently did so with the composer Johann Franck, first at the Two Golden Balls in Bow Street, London, and from January 1691 at Charles Street, Covent Garden, in a purpose-built room soon to be used also for auctions of paintings and called The Vendu. In September 1691 it was 'inlarging to a far greater Dimension for the Convenience of Mr. FRANK's and Mr. KING's Musick' ('LondG', 14-17 Sept 1691). King graduated MusB at Cambridge in 1696. James Brydges, later duke of Chandos, wrote in his diary of visits by King in 1697 'to play with me on the flute [recorder]' (Baker and Baker, 37). By January 1698 King was organizing concerts with John Banister at York Buildings, Villiers Street, and in June 1699 the music publisher John Walsh advertised 'a choice Collection of new Musick, made for Mr. 'Banister's' and Mr. 'King's' Consort, performed by Gentlemen at Exeter Exchange' ('Flying Post', 8-10 June 1699). In July 1700 King and Banister were selling 'The New Sonata's of the famous Signior Archangelo Corelli' ('LondG', 8-11 July 1700) and they advertised sonatas by Nicola Cosimi in November 1702. 
King composed songs and instrumental music for the theatre, concerts, and amateur performers. His songs appeared in numerous collections, including 'Choice Ayres and Songs' (1684), 'The Theater of Music' (1685-7), 'Comes Amoris' (1687-93), 'The Banquet of Music' (1688-90), and 'Thesaurus musicus' (1693-5), in issues of the 'Gentleman's Journal' (1692-4), and in 'Mercurius Musicus' (1699). Many of these songs were republished in editions of 'Wit and Mirth' between 1700 and 1720. The manuscripts of some of his songs and incidental music from the 1690s are in the British Library. About 1690 King, displeased by incorrect and badly printed versions of his songs 'in the Common Printed Books about Town', published his 'Songs for One Two and Three Voices', writing in his preface that he had 'imitated the Italians in their manner of Ariettas; who for there Excellence in Vocal Musick are (in my Judgment) the best Paterns' (Smith, 6). He published another thirty-three pieces in 'A Second Booke of Songs Together with a Pastorall Elegy, on... Queen Mary' (1698?). Instrumental music by him appeared in 'Tripla concordia' (1677), 'Thesaurus musicus', 'The Theater of Music', and other publications up to 1705. He was replaced in the private musick on 6 November 1726, but details of his death are not known. Manuscripts of his songs and other compositions are in the British Library; the Bodleian Library, Oxford; Christ Church, Oxford; the Royal College of Music, London; and the University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 


@@@@@


doc= 15597


King, Robert, second earl of Kingston (1754-1799), accused murderer and property developer, was the eldest son of Edward King, first earl of Kingston (1726-1797), then MP for Boyle and later for co. Sligo, and his wife, Jane (1737-1784), illegitimate daughter of Thomas Caulfeild of Donamon, co. Roscommon, and Peggy Jordan. His younger sister, Lady Isabella King, later achieved note as a philanthropist in Bath and Bristol. After schooling at Eton College, King assumed the title Viscount Kingsborough in 1768. On 5 December of the following year at St Michael's, Dublin, he married his cousin, Caroline (1755-1823), only daughter of Richard FitzGerald of Mount Ophaly in co. Kildare and Margaret King, heir to the estate of Mitchelstown, co. Cork, from her father, the fourth and last Baron Kingston. 
The couple's first child, George, was born in 1771, by which time Kingsborough was in London on the first stage of a European tour which took him to Paris before his return to Mitchelstown in 1776. Lord and Lady Kingsborough had a further five sons and five daughters, who were brought up alongside one Henry Gerald FitzGerald, the illegitimate son of Caroline's brother. FitzGerald appears to have been a dashing and spirited young man who rose to the rank of colonel in the army. Though married, in 1797 he eloped with the Kingsboroughs' third daughter, Mary Elizabeth, who was soon after reunited with the family following the viscount's offer of a reward of 100 guineas for information. 
This, however, was not sufficient for Kingsborough's son Colonel Robert Edward King, who challenged FitzGerald to a duel in Hyde Park, London, on 1 October 1797. Plans for a rematch after an inconclusive first exchange were prevented when both men were arrested on the instruction of George III ('GM', 67, 1797, 1120-21). Now disguised, FitzGerald returned to Kilworth, near Mitchelstown, to where Mary had been taken. His presence came to the attention of Robert Edward King and his father, who, following the first earl of Kingston's death (8 November 1797), had assumed the earldom. Father and son confronted FitzGerald at his lodgings in Kilworth, and a struggle ensued between King and his sister's seducer. In the course of the fight Kingston produced a pistol, fired, and killed FitzGerald. On his arrest the newly ennobled earl demanded his right to be tried in the Irish House of Lords, where he was represented by John Philpot Curran. The trial, the third of its kind in the Irish house, began on 18 May 1798. Faced with a press sympathetic to the actions of an honourable and protective father, the crown offered no evidence against Kingston, who was subsequently acquitted, as was his son at the Cork assizes. 
There remains a second, somewhat less sensational, side to Kingston's career. Before his ennoblement he was three times elected MP for co. Cork. Prior to his confrontation with Colonel FitzGerald, Kingston had also earned recognition for his redevelopment of the Mitchelstown estate, which he had inherited at his marriage. Among his more notable improvements were the building of Kingston College, the construction of a new town on a 138 acre site, and the modernization of Mitchelstown Castle along neo-Palladian lines. In this Kingston was assisted and advised by the agrarian improver Arthur Young, who worked on the estate between 1777 and 1778. A decade later Lord and Lady Kingston employed, briefly and unhappily, the young Mary Wollstonecraft as governess to their three eldest daughters. Wollstonecraft's principal dealings were with Caroline, whom she found more engrossed in her lapdogs than in her children; Lord Kingston, though a lesser presence, was thought a scarcely more edifying role model, his countenance suggesting no 'more than good humour, and a little 'fun' not refined' (Wollstonecraft to Eliza Bishop, 5 Nov 1786, 'Collected Letters', 123). 
Kingston died at Mitchelstown Castle on 17 April 1799, whereupon the title passed to his eldest son, George. He was survived by his wife, from whom he had long been separated; she lived until 13 January 1823 and was buried in Putney, Surrey. Lady Mary Elizabeth King, the object of FitzGerald's intemperate passions, moved to Wales, where, under a false name, she lodged with a clergyman's family until her marriage in April 1805 to George Galbraith Meares of co. Sligo. She died at Shirehampton, Gloucestershire, in summer 1819. The erstwhile defender of her honour, Robert Edward, later first Viscount Lorton, subsequently travelled and wrote on the Italian states before his death in 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 15598


King, Samuel William (1821-1868), traveller and scientist, was born on 20 September 1821 at Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, the eldest son of William Hutchinson King of Manchester, vicar of Nuneaton, Warwickshire, and Eliza Sanders of Morton House, Lincolnshire. He was admitted to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, in 1841, graduated BA in 1845, and proceeded MA in 1853. He was ordained deacon at Chester in 1846 and priest at Manchester in 1848, and was curate at Walley, Lancashire, before becoming rector of Saxlingham Nethergate, Norfolk, in 1851. In 1849 he married Emma, daughter of John Fort MP. 
King was from boyhood an enthusiastic entomologist and geologist, and helped his friend Charles Lyell in his investigations in England and abroad. In 1860 they explored the deposits at Hoxne, Suffolk, and in 1865 King investigated the cave at Aurignac, which had been described by Lyell in his 'Antiquity of Man' (1863) as containing human remains interred in the palaeolithic age. King's findings, published by William Boyd Dawkins in 1871, suggested a far later date for the human remains. He travelled frequently in continental Europe, and was an enthusiastic mountain climber. His wife usually accompanied him, and the records of a long expedition in northern Piedmont made about 1855 are contained in King's only book, 'The Italian Valleys of the Pennine Alps' (1858), illustrated from drawings made by the author. He was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society (1858), the Geological Society (1860), and of the Society of Antiquaries. 
Worsening health put an end to King's geological work and led him to travel abroad. He died at Pontresina, Switzerland, on 8 July 1868, and was buried there. His collection of fossil mammalia from the Norfolk forest beds he bequeathed to the Museum of Practical Geology, Jermyn Street, London. Its main importance derives from the careful notes on the stratigraphical position of each specimen. He published a number of articles on zoology and archaeology, of minor but not lasting interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 15599


King, Thomas (d. 1766x74?), portrait painter, was a pupil of George Knapton. Although he was an artist of ability, he was eccentric and thriftless in his habits. Four of his portraits have been engraved in mezzotint: Anthony Maddox the rope-dancer and Matthew Skeggs the actor (as Signor Bumbasto, playing on a broomstick as if it were a cello), both by R. Houston; John Keeling JP, by J. McArdell; and John Harrison the chronometer maker, by P. J. Tassaert. Prints after his portraits are held in the British Museum. He died in the Bull and Axe public house in John Street, Oxford Road, London, possibly in the late 1760s. He was buried in St Marylebone churchyard, where gravestones record the deaths of two Thomas Kings, on 7 December 1766 and 24 December 1774. 


@@@@@


doc= 15600


King, Thomas (1730-1805), actor and theatre manager, was born on 20 August 1730 in the parish of St George, Hanover Square, the son of a London merchant. He entered Westminster School at the age of six, and is probably the Thomas King on the school list in 1736. At the age of fourteen he was articled to a solicitor, but, having gained a taste for the stage as an amateur, he ran away to join a company of strolling players when he was seventeen, in the company of Ned Shuter. In later life he would say that his first company was playing at Yarmouth, and that after a very short time he transferred to one in Tonbridge, having had two days at sea in between. In summer 1748 he was performing small parts in a booth theatre at Windsor, set up by Richard Yates, a London actor, when David Garrick saw him, recognized his potential, and engaged him for Drury Lane. King stayed there, however, for two years only, playing minor roles. In summer 1749 he went with other London actors for a season at the Jacob's Wells Theatre in Bristol, where he did rather better: Hannah Pritchard was in the company, and chose him to play Benedick to her Beatrice and Rover to her Clarinda. He also had a chance at Romeo. Back in London for the winter he had slightly better parts: the Younger Brother in John Dalton's and Thomas Arne's 'Comus', and Claudio in 'Much Ado about Nothing', for instance. But following another summer in Bristol, in the autumn of 1750 he left Drury Lane for Ireland. It was nine years before he returned. 
Why King should have taken himself away from the centre of the London stage at this early point in his career is uncertain, but it turned out well. Thomas Sheridan was having a sparkling success as manager of the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin, and under his guidance King developed his strengths as a comedian. He became a popular favourite of audiences in Dublin as well as in Cork, where he played two summers. It was in Dublin also that he developed a particular specialism in delivering prologues and epilogues -- a more important craft in his day than it has ever been since. 
Although he had gone to Dublin in the company of a Miss Cole, a dancer, King transferred his affections at some stage to Mary Baker (1730-1813), another dancer, who, after experience at Covent Garden and Drury Lane, also arrived on the Dublin stage in 1750. 
In the summer closure of 1751 King returned to England to play at Simpson's Theatre in Bath; he went there a second time, in 1755 after Simpson himself had died, to act and to manage the theatre in what was to be its last season. This was his first experience of management, but there was to be a good deal more. Mary Baker came with him, and from this time they were partners for life, marrying in 1760. 'The Secret History of the Green Rooms' (1790) claimed that Frances Barton, a young actress in the company, gave Mary grounds for jealousy during that summer. If so, it would have been for the last time. Although King was to play opposite her many times in future, when she was better known as Frances Abington -- most notably as Sir Peter to her Lady Teazle -- he found her a troublesome colleague at Drury Lane and shared Garrick's dislike of her. 
King was brought back to Drury Lane in October 1759, after Garrick had lost the services of his principal comedian, Henry Woodward, who had gone to Ireland with Spranger Barry to set up a new theatre. By the time of Garrick's retirement in 1776 he had become his most loyal lieutenant, as well as his closest friend within the profession. He advanced in skill and reputation, and came to be regarded as the supreme comic actor of his age. He wrote his first plays in the period: 'Love at First Sight' (1763) and 'Wit's Last Stake' (1768). Neither is more than run-of-the-mill. 
King's creation of the part of Lord Ogleby, in 'The Clandestine Marriage', by Garrick and George Colman the elder, put the seal on his pre-eminence. The part had been intended for Garrick himself, and his passing it on to King (who undertook it reluctantly) caused a breach between the authors, with serious consequences, but it gave King a huge success. 
Garrick capitalized on the public affection felt for King by sending him before the curtain when audiences were unruly, for instance when William O'Brien's 'The Duel', after a poor start, was announced to be repeated, in December 1772; and when Samuel Reddish failed to turn up to play on 3 March 1773. He made frequent use of his talents as a speaker of prologues and epilogues: 'The Picture of a Playhouse, or, Bucks have at ye All' (1760), probably written by James Love, became the most celebrated, all-purpose epilogue of the age. Garrick also gave King a huge range of parts, both classical and new. In Shakespeare he played Parolles, Pistol, Speed, Osric, Shylock, Touchstone, Malvolio, and Cloten, as well as others after Garrick had retired. He appeared in revivals of Jonson and Wycherley. The many new parts he created for Garrick have not lasted as well as those which Sheridan later gave him: Vandercrab in Harriet Lee's 'The New Peerage' now means little; and it is merely a curiosity that he had, in his first years with Garrick, a small part in Johnson's 'Irene', and that at the end of his career he played the Fool in Samuel Ireland's Shakespeare forgery 'Vortigern'. 
In 1769 Garrick staged his three-day jubilee in Stratford upon Avon, a celebration of Shakespeare in the town of his birth, which included spectacular processions, masquerades, dinners, and fireworks, but no Shakespeare play. The climax was Garrick's reciting of a jubilee ode in a specially built rotunda before a thousand spectators. King was cast as devil's advocate, rising up to voice a mean-spirited condemnation of Shakespeare and to repeat all Garrick's enemies' criticisms of the festival, so that the ode could triumphantly refute them. Boswell, who was present, thought that this detracted from the dignity of the occasion. Others misunderstood the event entirely, believing King to be a genuine protester; but it did perhaps contribute to the rapture with which the ode was received. 
Because of the Stratford rain Garrick incurred losses. However, he recouped these in a stage version of the jubilee at Drury Lane in that and the following season, with great success. King had a large but different role in it. Garrick and King had one of their few differences in 1772. King, sensitive for his wife's position in the company, had noticed that his opposite number at Covent Garden, Woodward (now returned from Ireland), was paid at a higher rate than he was, and interpreted it as a want of esteem. 'You have been for years my chief and shall be my last theatrical connection', wrote Garrick; but he went on to reproach him, with the suspicion and sensitivity to gossip that was one of his faults, with having 'whisper'd about in hints and ambiguities your uneasiness, all which by circulation have partly crept into the public prints' ('Letters', 2.823, 6 November 1772). In the hothouse atmosphere of the theatre, others saw King as one of the channels by which Garrick's suspicions of others were fed, but this was perhaps no more than the price of intimacy with him. But the affection between them was real. When Garrick retired in 1776 he sent King a gift: 'Accept a small token of our long and constant attachment to each other -- I flatter myself that this sword, as it is a theatrical one, will not cut love between us, and that it will not be less valuable to you for having dangled at my side some part of last winter. ('Letters', 3.1112, 25 June 1776)' In the last decade of his career Garrick was frequently absent through sickness or on travels, and King would be left in charge of productions, as acting manager (a role similar to but without the powers of the modern director). He was also one of Garrick's talent scouts. Most notably, Garrick sent him to Cheltenham to see the young Sarah Siddons in Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent', and on his favourable report gave her a trial at Drury Lane in 1775. She played Portia to King's Shylock, billed as 'a young lady, her first appearance', but neither played well, and it was seven years before Siddons came back. 
The London theatres were closed each summer from June until the middle of September, and the actors normally continued their profession elsewhere. King had had experience in management at Bath, in the 1750s, and he returned to it in Bristol in 1770. The King Street Theatre (which operated only during the summers, like other provincial theatres) had had mixed fortunes since its opening in 1766. William Powell, its first manager, died suddenly in 1769, in the height of the summer season, and his partner Charles Holland died the following December. King bought a share of the theatre and managed it during the next two seasons, bringing to it actors such as Charles Bannister and John Moody. He had problems holding the company together, however, and suffered financial losses, and in June 1771 he had a serious coach accident on the way from London. He sold his share to James Dodd the following winter. 
Since 1769 King had had a role in the management of the Sadler's Wells Theatre, and on giving up Bristol he bought a major share in it. Sadler's Wells, described in 1744 as a place 'of great extravagance, luxury, idleness and ill-fame' (Mander and Mitchenson, 246), was a resort where a wooden music house had been replaced by an unlicensed stone theatre in 1765. A summer programme of music, pantomime, acrobatic displays, and illegitimate drama had been successfully managed by Thomas Rosoman, a builder. Rosoman retired in 1772. King assumed full control and held it for ten years. He made no change of policy; he was as accomplished a showman as an actor. But under his reign the music improved, through the work of Charles Dibdin; the hazards on the roads from central London were reduced, through better policing; and audiences became more fashionable, drinking tea and good wine during the shows rather than porter. The theatre developed a taste for patriotic spectacle. King had begun to reduce his participation in Sadler's Wells in 1779, and from 1782 he was fully engaged in the management of Drury Lane, on behalf of Richard Brinsley Sheridan. 
Garrick retired in 1776 and passed over the control of the theatre to Sheridan, having sold a half share to him, his father-in-law Thomas Linley, and a certain Dr Gray. Sheridan started brilliantly, with 'The School for Scandal' (1777), which gave King one of his greatest roles in Sir Peter Teazle. 'The Critic' followed in August 1779, with King playing Puff, the writer of the pretentious tragedy 'The Spanish Armada'. (There was a sly joke here, for King himself had two months previously presented at Sadler's Wells a stirring pageant about Queen Elizabeth, which had spectacularly depicted the defeat of the Armada.) In succeeding years, while becoming increasingly occupied in national politics, Sheridan was to provide two or three further scripts for the Drury Lane company, but his interest in management grew less, and his control of the theatre deteriorated. In September 1782 King agreed to take over the stage management of the theatre for him. Essentially a kind, agreeable man, he found the quarrelling of his actors and their lack of discipline very troubling -- and he was losing money by it. After one season he had had enough; he refused to sign on again either as actor or manager, and spent the next twelve months away from London, touring Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. His London celebrity had preceded him, and guaranteed success. 
King returned in 1783 and yielded again to Sheridan's charm, resuming the burden for another five years. This period was no easier than the earlier one, and ended spectacularly in 1788 with a series of public statements which expose both the general difficulties of theatre management in the period and specific failings in Sheridan as theatre licensee. The management of Drury Lane passed to John Philip Kemble, a much sterner operator. King went on tour again in 1788-9. Tate Wilkinson remembers his generosity in refusing payment after a dismal house in York and playing a whole week in Leeds the following month without payment, in further recompense. On his return to London, King took the extreme step of signing for Covent Garden, and he played there during the 1789-90 season. In summer 1790 he was on tour again, and was appearing in Edinburgh when John Jackson, the manager, went into hiding to escape debtors; King, with his usual goodwill, took over the management for a month. 
The call back to Drury Lane was strong. King returned in September 1790 and remained there until he retired. He was growing fat and suffering from gout, but he was still able to hold audiences with his old parts and still ventured on new; and he still (according to his diary) lived perpetually on the edge of exasperation with Sheridan. He gave up the stage on 22 May 1802, with a final performance of Sir Peter Teazle. A lavish presentation was made to him in the green room by Dorothy Jordan on behalf of the whole company. 
In his prime King was a tall, handsome man, although his nose was thought rather too long. He was at home and respected in all company; Boswell found him 'a genteel, agreeable man' during the Stratford jubilee and was glad to breakfast with him in London a month later, and in 1783 he was elected to the Sublime Society of Beefsteaks. He was the master of the Drury Lane Theatrical Fund for a few years in succession to Garrick, though he gave this up when he took on the management of Drury Lane. He had, however, one disastrous failing: he was a heavy gambler. His wife and Garrick prevailed on him to give up the habit on one occasion, and he remained free of it for a number of years, but relapsed. 
Although it was his destiny to play the lieutenant to two of the geniuses of the eighteenth-century theatre, Garrick and Sheridan, King had outstanding personal qualities of his own. In an age of great actors he was among the greatest, and he created at least two roles which have remained in the permanent repertory. At a time when the theatre in various forms was the dominant mode of popular culture, he was one of the essential organizers and managers of it. In a profession where rivalries and jealousy were endemic, he comes down as a kindly reconciler. 
King and his wife had an ideally supportive marriage, in spite of the heavy debts his habit incurred. When he was on tour they wrote to each other almost every day. He died at his home in New Store Street, Bedford Square, London, on 11 December 1805. The whole Drury Lane company attended his funeral in St Paul's, Covent Garden, where he was buried on 20 December. His wife survived him until 30 November 1813, in some poverty because of his gambling, but relieved a little by a benefit given for her in 1806. There is no record of any children. 


@@@@@


doc= 15601


King, Thomas (1835-1888), pugilist, was born in Silver Street, Stepney, on 14 August 1835, and as a youth served before the mast both in the navy and in a trading vessel. About 1858 he obtained a position as foreman of labourers at the Victoria docks. His courage in disposing of a dock bully known as Brighton Bill commended him to the notice of the ex-champion Jem Ward, who coached him with gloves at The George in Ratcliffe Highway. On 27 November 1860, on the Kentish marshes, King beat Tommy Truckle of Portsmouth in forty-nine rounds (sixty-two minutes). He was now taken in hand and trained by Nat Langham at The Feathers, Wandsworth, for a contest with William Evans (Young Broome). The betting of two to one on King was justified by the event on 21 October 1861, after a long fight interrupted by the police at the seventeenth round, but then resumed until the forty-third. 
The fight between the Young Sailor, as King was called, and the 'scientific' Jem Mace of Norwich, the national champion, had a different outcome: King was outclassed after displaying the utmost pluck in a contest of sixty-eight minutes (28 January 1862). A return match, which excited much greater interest, took place at Aldershot (26 November 1862). The betting was seven to four on Mace, who had the best of the fighting, but was knocked out by a single blow, a 'terrific cross-counter on the left cheek', in the nineteenth round. In this battle of thirty-eight minutes King had shown himself a glutton for punishment, of a 'bottom' and endurance worthy of the best traditions of the ring. 
King now married and announced his intention of leaving the ring, thus acquiescing in the resumption of the championship by Mace. But he was yet to champion England against America in the great fight with the Benicia Boy, John Camel Heenan, the adversary of Tom Sayers. The ring was pitched at Wadhurst, near Tunbridge Wells, at an early hour on 10 December 1863. King weighed a little below 13 stone, Heenan (much the favourite) just over 14; both were over 6 feet in height. Heenan's game was to close in and wrestle his antagonist to the ground. King's consisted of dealing his adversary a series of sledge-hammer blows on his nose. Both were extremely successful in their respective tactics, and in the absence of the orthodox feinting, sparring, and 'science', the result came to be mainly a question of sheer endurance. At the eighteenth round the tide of victory turned in King's favour. At the close of the twenty-fourth round, after nearly forty minutes' fighting, Heenan lay unconscious and his seconds threw up the sponge. Public anxiety as to his condition was allayed by a medical report in 'The Times' (12 December). Both combatants appeared in person at Wadhurst, in answer to a summons, on 22 December, when they were bound over to keep the peace, and both King and Heenan agreed never to fight again in Britain. King, having won about $4000 in stakes and presents, fulfilled his promise to the letter. He subsequently set up as a bookmaker in Tulse Hill and Hastings and became a wealthy man. He also invested in barge property. 
In 1867 King won a couple of sculling races on the Thames, but in later years was best-known for his success in metropolitan flower shows. He died of bronchitis at Clarence House, Clarence Road, Clapham, on 4 October 1888, and was buried in Norwood cemetery. He was survived by his wife, Jane Elizabeth, and at least one daughter. After 1863 the vigilance of the police confined bare-knuckle pugilism in England more and more to the disreputable and dangerous classes, and Tom King is thus not incorrectly termed by the historian of the English prize-ring as Ultimus Romanorum. 


@@@@@


doc= 15602


King, Thomas Chiswell (1818-1893), actor, was born at Twyning, near Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire, on 24 April 1818. He adopted his wife's maiden name of Chiswell in addition to his own name on his marriage, which took place shortly after he joined the theatrical profession. He was apprenticed in his youth to a painting and paper-hanging business in Cheltenham, and acquired a taste for the stage through acting with amateurs. About 1840 he joined the company of the ballad composer Alexander Lee to support Harriett Waylett in one-act dramas and operettas in Cheltenham, Worcester, Warwick, and Leamington Spa. In 1843 he became attached in a subordinate capacity to the Simpson-Munro company at Birmingham, playing Conrade in 'Much Ado about Nothing' and Sir Thomas Fairfax in 'The Field of the Forty Footsteps'. The following year he was seen as Young Scrooge in 'A Christmas Carol', in which his wife played Fezziwig. 
King made rapid progress in his profession, and by August 1847 was playing leading business on the York circuit under J. L. Pritchard. He went on to Gourlay's Victoria Theatre, Edinburgh, in June 1848, and remained there for four months. In November 1848 he joined W. H. Murray's company at the Theatre Royal in the same city, where he appeared as Sir Richard Wroughton in 'The Jacobite'. In April 1850 he supported Charles Kean during the latter's visit to Edinburgh, and was engaged by him to play secondary tragic parts during the opening season of his management in London. 
King made his debut at the Princess's in October 1850, as Bassanio in 'The Merchant of Venice', and subsequently played the King in '1 Henry IV'. In January 1851 he was seen as the exiled Duke when 'As You Like It' was performed before the queen at Windsor. Late in the year he was engaged by John Harris of Dublin as leading actor at the Theatre Royal there. He opened under the new management as Colonel Buckthorne in Boucicault's 'Love in a Maze', and soon became an abiding favourite with Dublin playgoers. He remained in the city for five seasons and appeared in no fewer than fifteen notable Shakespearian productions: his Macbeth, Master Ford, Hotspur, and Leontes met with much approbation. During 1855 he was in leading support to Helen Faucit, Samuel Phelps, and Isabella Glyn during their visits to Dublin. In March 1856 he abruptly left the Theatre Royal, and in April began a three-week engagement in 'Hamlet' at the Queen's Theatre, Dublin. In October 1856 he opened at Birmingham with Isabella Glyn. King remained there after her departure, and was seen as John Mildmay in Tom Taylor's comedy 'Still Waters Run Deep' and as Quasimodo in 'Esmeralda'. In July 1857 he made his first appearance in Manchester. After returning to Birmingham he appeared as Mephistopheles in Boucicault's version of 'Faust and Marguerite', which ran for forty-eight nights at a great profit. During 1859 he fulfilled several engagements at the Queen's Theatre, Dublin, and also played at the City of London Theatre as Hamlet. 
From 1861 to 1868 King's record was one of splendid strolling. In March 1869 he was given a trial engagement at Drury Lane by F. C. Chatterton, and opened there as Richelieu to the Julie de Mortemar of his daughter Bessie, who was making her London debut. He was favourably received, and subsequently played Hamlet and Julian St Pierre, besides alternating Othello and Iago with Charles Dillon. At the same house in 1870 he was the original Varney in Andrew Halliday's 'Amy Robsart'. At Easter 1871 he moved to the Adelphi, where he originated the role of Quasimodo in Halliday's version of 'Notre Dame', which ran for most of the year. 
King made his American debut on 11 September 1873 at the Lyceum Theatre, New York, as Quasimodo. The play did not repeat its Adelphi success, although it was performed for six weeks. Afterwards he made a successful tour of Canada, exclusively in Shakespearian plays, and returned to New York and the Lyceum in March 1874. 
From 1878 to 1880 King leased the Worcester theatre, an unprofitable speculation. In 1883 he made a short provincial tour under J. Pitt Hardacre's management, but he had outlived his popularity. He was the last exponent of an increasingly unpopular school of acting which subordinated intelligence to precept and tradition. Later appearances were infrequent, but in July 1890 he performed for six nights to good houses at the Queen's Theatre, Manchester, and was much admired as Ingomar, one of his most characteristic roles. He retired finally to King's Heath, Worcestershire, where he died on 21 October 1893. He was buried at Claines, near Worcester. He had a son and two daughters, all of whom took to the stage, his elder daughter, Bessie King, being the most successful. 
A sound second-rank tragedian, King had a tall and shapely figure, with dark expressive features and well-set eyes. His rich bass voice was flexible and resonant. A temperate, graceful actor, he had more individuality and fewer vices of style than most conventional tragedians. He never established his hold in London, but in one or two sizeable provincial centres, notably Dublin and Birmingham, his following was large and affectionate. 


@@@@@


doc= 15603


King, William (1624-1680), musician, was the son of George King (died 1665), organist of Winchester Cathedral. He was admitted a lay clerk of Magdalen College, Oxford, on 18 October 1648 and graduated BA on 5 June 1649. He gained in 1652 a chaplaincy at Magdalen, which he left in 1654. He was appointed organist at New College on 10 December 1664. 
King composed songs and sacred vocal music. Eighteen anthems and three services are in the New College partbooks (Bodl. Oxf., MS Mus. C.48). His anthems 'O be joyful in God' and 'The Lord is King' enjoyed wide circulation. His old-fashioned syllabic style sometimes produced inelegant homophony with little harmonic interest. His verse anthems often used two trebles and had weak concluding alleluias. As a composer of songs King was an isolated figure. The examples in his 'Songs and Ayres' (Oxford, 1668) reject the tuneful influence of the dance but are marked by a suppleness of line. This anticipates younger composers and brings freedom to what would otherwise be a rigid declamatory pattern. King died at New College on 7 November 1680. He was buried there in the cloisters beneath the epitaph 'his singular eminence in music made him a partaker of the consort of angels'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15604


King, William (1663-1712), writer, was born in London, the son of Ezekias King ('b'. 1637, died in or after 1672), gentleman. His forebears included merchants and a clergyman grandparent, Ezekias King, who turned presbyterian and was silenced in 1662. William King was a king's scholar at Westminster School, from 1678 to 1681, under Richard Busby's headmastership. He was admitted to Christ Church, Oxford, as a king's student in Michaelmas term 1681, matriculated on 16 December, and graduated BA on 8 December 1685, as a grand compounder -- this higher fee indicating an estate worth at least $300 per annum. After proceeding MA (6 July 1688) he embarked on the study of civil law, becoming BCL and DCL (7 July 1692) and a member of Doctors' Commons (12 November) -- a more prestigious than lucrative branch of advocacy. At Oxford he read widely but, as Dr Johnson calculated, could hardly have dispatched in eight years the twenty-two thousand books and manuscripts alleged, from his 'Adversaria', by Joseph Browne (Johnson, 'Poets', 26; Browne, 16). 
King had already embarked on a writer's life: 'Reflections upon Mons Varillas's History of Heresy', written with Edward Hannes (1688), defended Wycliffe; 'An Answer to a Book' (1693) attacked William Sherlock, accused of tritheism; 'Animadversions on a Pretended Account of Danmark' (1694) disputed Robert Molesworth's exposure of Danish absolutism, earning him Prince George of Denmark's gratitude and the post -- which seems not to have involved much -- of secretary to his wife, Princess Anne. King also wrote poetry in Dryden's 'Examen poeticum' (1693) and translations for the bookseller Thomas Bennet. A letter from King recalling, from spring 1694, Richard Bentley's 'Pride and Insolence' in a conversation, overheard by King, between Bentley and Bennet, was printed in the collaborative attack on Bentley by the so-called Christ Church wits (C. Boyle, 'Dr Bentley's Dissertations... Examin'd', 1698, 8). King supposedly contributed their mock-proof that Bentley had not written his own dissertation; also a satirical index; if so, he wrote the 'Examination''s best parts. Bentley, in his revised 'Dissertation', poured scorn on King's letter, quoting Horace's ''The filth and venom of' Rupilius King' (R. Bentley, 'A Dissertation upon the Epistles of Phalaris', 1699, xxix). King then ridiculed 'Bentivoglio' in his anonymous 'Dialogues of the Dead' (1699); he may also have written the appendix 'A Short Account of Dr Bentley's Humanity' (1699). 
King was making fun of other people too: 'A Journey to London' (1698) parodied Martin Lister's recent 'Journey to Paris', with its triviality and muddle; 'The Transactioneer' (1700), two dialogues reminiscent of Shadwell's 'Virtuoso', caricatured the Royal Society's secretary, Hans Sloane. Perhaps King was lazy and preferred being a litterateur to a lawyer (Nichols, 1.xiv); but he looks conscientious enough in two business letters to under-secretary John Ellis (Engel, 39-40). His most famous case was lost: defending the earl of Anglesey in the House of Lords (February-April 1701) against his wife's action for separation. Soon after that King gave up Doctors' Commons to become a judge of the Admiralty court in Dublin. His reasons are unclear, but the move must owe something to the earl of Rochester, who arrived in Ireland as lord lieutenant on 16 September 1701: King had some family connection with the Hydes and had been active in tory politics (Engel, 36-7). He arrived in Dublin before Rochester, only to find his patent delayed and the Admiralty court defunct. The city regarded King's appointment as an infringement of its rights: although he was appointed agent for prizes at Dublin on 29 August 1702, he was still waiting for his Admiralty court commission when he wrote to Ellis on 16 January 1703 and complained, 'inter alia', of the Irish people's being 'insolent, & proud as they are poor' (BL, Add. MS 28890, fol. 17). 
King found an English friend in Anthony Upton, judge of common pleas, who entertained him on his estate at Mountown outside Dublin. King's poem about the red cow 'Mully of Mountown' was pirated, as was a parody of Orpheus and Eurydice, and attributed to 'the author of the Tale of a tub'. King published authorized versions of both poems in 'Some Remarks on the 'Tale of a Tub'' (1704), where he denied writing 'A Tale'. He was replaced as agent for prizes on 13 May 1706 but secured the vicar-generalship of Armagh. On 19 June 1707, helped perhaps by the new lord lieutenant, the earl of Pembroke, he was made keeper of the records in Dublin Castle. The post was poorly paid and required more of an antiquary than King was; he resigned on 28 November 1707 and returned to England. 
King was now dependent on his income as a writer: Bernard Lintott paid him 30 guineas each for 'The Art of Cookery, in Imitation of Horace's Art of Poetry' ([1708]) and 'The Art of Love: in Imitation of Ovid De arte amandi' ([1708]). The poems' popularity prompted Lintott to print a two-volume collection of King's 'Miscellanies' ([1708-9]); also his 'Historical Account of the Heathen Gods and Heroes', much used in schools, for which he subsequently received $50. King returned to his attack on Sloane with the mock-proceedings 'Useful Transactions in Philosophy', which ran for three issues (January-September 1709). In May 1711 Gay noted its demise and added that the 'Author deserves a much better Fate, than to Languish out the small remainder of his Life in the 'Fleet' Prison' ('Poetry and Prose', 2.449). On 19 December 1711 Swift described King, whose Irish footman had just died, as 'a poor starving wit' (Swift, 2.442). But King commended himself to Swift as a high-church tory, publishing five pro-Sacheverell pamphlets (1710-11) and early in 1712 satirizing Marlborough in 'Rufinus, or, An Historical Essay'. 
On 8 January 1712 Swift wrote to Archbishop King in Dublin, 'I have got poor Dr. 'King'... to be Gazetteer, which will be worth 250 'l'. to him, if he be diligent and sober, for which I am engaged.' In his reply the archbishop fears that 'poor Dr. King' will 'forfeit your recognisance' (J. Swift, 'Correspondence', vol. 1, ed. H. Williams, 1963, 286, 290). His apprehension was justified: on 1 July 1712 the 'Gazette's' editorship was taken over by Charles Ford; according to Thomas Hearne, King 'did not hold it above two Months' (Swift, 2.543; 'Remarks', 4.45). 
Although King's health was now poor, he wrote 'Useful Miscellanies' (1712), worked on translations, and celebrated Bolingbroke's return from France (August 1712) with a poem, 'Britain's Palladium'. Living with a friend at Lambeth, he made another tory gesture: when Archbishop Tenison did not celebrate the surrender of Dunkirk, King 'invited the watermen and his poor neighbours... to partake of some barrels of ale' (Nichols, xxv). On 24 December 1712 Lord Clarendon learned that King was seriously ill and had him brought to a lodging in the Strand opposite Somerset House. That night he made his will (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/531), leaving everything to his sister Elizabeth, and about noon on Christmas day he died. He had never married. He was buried in the north cloister of Westminster Abbey on 27 December 1712. Hearne commented, 'he was so addicted to the Buffooning way, that he neglected his proper Business'; Gay, however, had allowed King 'a World of Wit, yet as it lies in one particular way of Raillery, the Town soon grew weary of his Writings' ('Remarks', 4.45; 'Poetry and Prose', 2.449). 


@@@@@


doc= 15605


King, William (1650-1729), Church of Ireland archbishop of Dublin, was born in Antrim town on 1 May 1650, the son of James King (still alive in 1701), who had emigrated to Ulster from Barra in Aberdeenshire and who was later said to have been a miller or a merchant. In 1658 he moved with his household from Antrim to co. Tyrone. 
King's later reference to the family's inability to support him while a student at Trinity College, Dublin, suggests that by that time at least it was not prosperous. A fragmentary autobiography, written some time after 1697, describes a succession of unsatisfactory early schooling experiences, with sudden breakthroughs in reading, mathematics, and later Latin being attributed primarily to the young King's own efforts. He entered the Royal School at Dungannon in 1662, and was admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, on 7 April 1667. 
James King was, according to his son, 'a most rigid adherent of the Presbyterian sect' (King, 'A Great Archbishop', 2), although at the time of William's birth he was under excommunication for having refused to accept the solemn league and covenant. William King presents himself in his autobiography as having been poorly instructed in, and largely indifferent to, religion of any kind until his arrival at Trinity College. There the influence of his tutor John Christian led him to undergo a period of spiritual crisis and anxious enquiry, by the end of which he had become a convinced member of the established church. He graduated BA on 23 February 1670, and on 25 October 1671 was admitted to deacon's orders as chaplain to John Parker, archbishop of Tuam, who appointed him to the prebend of Kilmainmore, co. Mayo, on 14 July 1673. King received his MA in 1673 and was ordained on 12 April 1674, taking up residence in Parker's household. He resigned Kilmainmore on becoming provost of the cathedral of St Mary, Tuam, on 26 October 1676 and took up residence in the town of Tuam. On 27 October 1679 Parker, now archbishop of Dublin, had him appointed chancellor of St Patrick's and minister of St Werburgh's parish in the city. King later presented this demanding assignment, plunging him into a round of intense pastoral effort combined with diligent study, as having rescued him from the life of provincial inactivity into which he had been preparing to settle. During this period at St Werburgh's he engaged in his first public controversy. In response to the former dean of Derry's apologia for his conversion to Catholicism, King published 'An answer to the considerations which obliged Peter Manby... to embrace, what he calls the Catholick religion' (1687). Manby's reply led King to publish 'A Vindication of the Answer' (1688), to which, after a further paper by Manby, he added 'A Vindication of the Christian Religion and Reformation' (1688). 
King was appointed chaplain to the lord deputy, the earl of Arran, on 20 October 1683, and on 25 November 1684 chaplain to the lord lieutenant, the duke of Ormond. He received his BD and DD degrees from Trinity College on 11 July 1688. He was installed as dean of St Patrick's on 1 February 1689. In the same month the archbishop of Dublin, Francis Marsh, withdrew to England, having appointed King and Samuel Foley (King's successor as chancellor of St Patrick's) as commissaries to manage the diocese in his absence. When Foley, too, fled to England King was left in sole charge. He later had Anthony Dopping, bishop of Meath, elected guardian of the diocese by the city's two cathedral chapters. According to his own account this was because he feared the authority he had been given was insufficient. However it has been suggested ('Diary', 10) that he may have believed that his commission lapsed following Marsh's attainder for treason by the Jacobite parliament. King and Dopping worked closely together to maintain ecclesiastical discipline and sustain protestant morale in Jacobite-dominated Dublin. King was arrested in July 1689 and imprisoned in Dublin Castle until December. He was again detained, along with other prominent protestants, in June 1690, and was held until the occupation of the city by Williamite forces following the battle of the Boyne. 
King's conduct in 1689-91 subsequently became the subject of controversy, especially in his exchanges with the nonjuror Charles Leslie, who accused him of having abandoned his earlier principles of passive resistance by providing military intelligence to the Williamites. His own version was that he had taken no direct action and had advised no one else to take up arms; the furthest he had gone was to accept that it was lawful to accept the deliverance that providence had sent in the person of William of Orange. His arrest by the Jacobite authorities he blamed on the indiscreet publication of letters that others had sent to correspondents in England and Ulster. However, he seems to have admitted privately to James Bonnell that he had, in fact, transmitted intelligence both to the duke of Schomberg, William's commander in Ulster, and directly to England, and even to have boasted of the ingenuity with which he ensured that these letters could not be traced back to him (Bonnell to John Strype, 21 Feb 1691, 24 April 1691, CUL, Baumgartner Papers, Strype MSS I, fols. 87, 93). In 1691 he published a detailed defence of his own and others' conduct, 'The State of the Protestants of Ireland under the Late King James's Government' (1691), which established him as the leading Irish defender of the revolution. His central argument was that Irish protestants were justified in withdrawing their allegiance from James II because a ruler who sought the destruction of his subjects, as James had done when he placed them in the power of their Catholic enemies, abdicated his government over them. Even here, however, he held back from justifying direct resistance. He insisted that those who had taken up arms at Derry and Enniskillen had done so only in self-defence, and presented Irish protestants in general as having passively accepted the deliverance sent by providence or, alternatively, as having acquiesced in the 'de facto' transfer of power in England, as Ireland's dependent status required them to do. The argument that James's removal had been the work of providence was stated even more clearly in 'Europe's Deliverance from France and Slavery' (1691), a sermon preached at St Patrick's before the lords justices on 30 November 1690, which concluded bluntly that ''twas manifestly God rather than the people set our king and queen on the throne' (p. 21). 
In summer 1690 King used contacts in England to urge on the new monarchs his claims for a bishopric. He was appointed bishop of Derry on 7 December 1690 and consecrated on 25 January 1691. He took up residence in March and began a vigorous campaign to restore regular pastoral services in a diocese ravaged by war and which had been without a resident bishop for two years. His autobiography records a sharp initial conflict with clergy who were using post-war economic dislocation as an excuse not to live on their benefices. By 1693 there were twenty-eight beneficed clergy living in the diocese, compared with only ten in May 1691, as well as eleven curates. King also lobbied the government for funds for church repair and the provision of glebes and houses. He paid close attention to the provision of schools, established a library at Derry for the use of the clergy and gentry, and sought to make schoolmasters and clergy the agents of a revived system of parish-based moral discipline. When a colony of episcopalian highlanders settled at Clonmany in co. Donegal, King provided a minister able to preach and conduct services in Gaelic. 
In addition to these efforts to improve pastoral standards in his own diocese, King joined with other reform-minded bishops, notably Nathaniel Foy of Waterford and Lismore and Dopping, to lobby the English government for a programme of church reform in Ireland, concentrating particularly on the issue of ecclesiastical appointments. In 1693-4 he was one of the commissioners appointed to investigate the outstanding clerical scandal of the period when Thomas Hacket, bishop of Down and Connor, was removed, along with several of his clergy, following complaints of long-term absenteeism, neglect, and mismanagement. 
In Derry, King came into conflict with the Presbyterians, who outnumbered conformists in the diocese and dominated urban government in Derry city and other centres. In 1694 he published 'A Discourse Concerning the Inventions of Men in the Worship of God', which sought to show that the practice of the Church of Ireland in relation to music, forms of prayer, the celebration of the eucharist, and other matters was in closer conformity with scripture than that of the Presbyterians. The pamphlet was attacked by Joseph Boyse, who had earlier clashed with King over comments made during his controversy with Manby, and by the Presbyterian minister of Derry itself, Robert Craighead. King replied to Boyse in 'An Admonition to the Dissenting Inhabitants of Derry' (1694), followed by 'A Second Admonition' (1695). Alarm at the threat from dissent, as well as an acute concern to protect the church's legal entitlements, also played a part in King's prolonged controversy with the Irish Society of London. This began as a dispute over terms for the renewal of the society's sixty-year lease on church lands, which expired in 1694, but broadened into a conflict over the ownership of other lands and fishing rights. King was concerned to curb the power of the society, which he saw as supporting the dissenting interest, and to generate revenue for an Anglican college at Derry that would combat Presbyterian influence in the region. The society, on the other hand, had the backing of the Presbyterian-dominated corporation of the city. In November 1697 the Irish House of Lords, reversing an earlier decision of chancery, granted King possession of the disputed lands. The society, however, appealed to the English House of Lords, which overturned the Irish decision in May 1698. When King continued to assert his right, the English House of Lords tried unsuccessfully to have him brought to England to face charges of contempt. In the end the Irish executive helped to negotiate a compromise solution. The episode did not turn King into an Irish patriot. As early as 1695 he had told Bonnell that he had no hopes for the forthcoming parliament because 'England doth not intend we should do ourselves good, and will look to it, lest we should' (28 June 1695, TCD, MS 1995-2008, no. 445). But the sense of personal grievance almost certainly contributed to his vehement response to later constitutional conflicts. 

'The State of the Protestants', with its remorseless catalogue of the abuses endured under Tyrconnell's government, has given King an undeserved reputation as an anti-Catholic polemicist. In fact he was a strong critic of much of the anti-Catholic legislation proposed or introduced during the 1690s. He accepted without question that Catholics, on account of their dangerous principles, should be excluded from civil office. However, he regarded the promises made to them in the treaty of Limerick as an agreement binding in honour, and signed the formal protest against what he considered the fraudulently incomplete bill to ratify the treaty passed in 1697. He also condemned the draconian bill to preserve the king's person, complaining that 'men of no religion, nay that scoffed at all religion... should impose on men that had some, though an ill one'. Specifically, he considered that the arbitrary power it was proposed to vest in magistrates was a breach of 'Magna Carta', while to take away men's lives or liberties for refusing to renounce an article of faith, the authority of the pope, amounted to religious persecution (TCD, MS 750/1, pp. 134, 147-50). 
In 1702 King published his most important philosophical work, 'De origine male' ('The origin of evil'). Conceived as a reply to the scepticism of Pierre Bayle and his followers, this took as its starting point the argument that we can achieve a pragmatic if necessarily incomplete knowledge of God, as a unitary, omnipotent and perfect first cause, by analogy from His works. Although God had created the best possible world, evil existed owing to the necessary imperfection of created things, the natural evil created by the movement of matter according to physical laws, and the moral evil arising from the existence of human free will. The book attracted comment from Bayle as well as from Leibnitz and others. An English translation by Edmund Law appeared in 1731 and went through five editions by 1781. King's other major philosophical work, his published sermon 'Divine Predestination and Foreknowledge, Consistent with the Freedom of Man's will' (1709), sought to reconcile divine omniscience and human freedom by arguing that God's foreknowledge of events, which we know only by analogy, should not be assumed to be identical with that of humankind. Although King is often described as drawing on Lockean epistemology, Kelly (in 'The Dictionary of Eighteenth-Century British Philosophers') emphasizes instead his debt to older scholastic concepts. Berman (in his introduction to Carpenter's edition of the sermon) has characterized his overall philosophical outlook as 'theological representationalism', noting the debt to his fellow Irish bishop Peter Browne. 
On 11 March 1703 King was appointed archbishop of Dublin. He approached his duties with the same scrupulous concern for propriety, attention to administrative detail, and rigorous disciplinary zeal that he had shown in Derry. Writing to Francis Annesley on 24 March 1713, he admitted that he was not surprised by claims that he was excessively strict: '... on recollection I remember I have degraded four from their orders. I have laid in jail two excommunicated clergymen who died there. I have writs or warrants out against three more. I have discovered six or seven with counterfeit letters of orders and some in good places turned out on that account. I have deprived of their living six or seven and have suspended or otherwise censured about 30. Add to these many that I have rejected from orders, several to whom I have refused benefices or institution for want of qualifications and the many I have chid or reproved, both publicly and privately. (TCD, MS 750/4/1, pp. 133-4)' In addition to measures against unsatisfactory clergy King was particularly insistent on refusing to ordain those who seemed to him unprepared or unsuited for the clerical life, or for whom there was no realistic prospect of employment. There were also more positive achievements. During King's episcopate the number of churches in repair in the diocese rose from 27 to 69, while he claimed in 1727 that he had built eleven glebe houses. As in Derry he fiercely defended the legal rights of the see. In 1704 he began what was to be a twenty-year struggle to establish his jurisdiction over Christ Church Cathedral. The dean and chapter accused King of invading their liberties as a royal foundation. He insisted that the issue was a matter of ecclesiastical discipline, alleging that the chapter had failed to supply clergymen or provide for the repair of churches in the twenty-seven parishes appropriated to it. A first legal battle, over rights of visitation, commenced in 1711; a second, arising from the chapter's refusal to admit King's nephew, Robert Dougat, whom he had appointed archdeacon of Dublin, began in 1715. Both dragged on until 1724, when the British House of Lords gave final judgment in King's favour. 
At national level King was by now a leading spokesman for the established church. He took a leading part in the attempt to persuade Queen Anne to redirect for ecclesiastical purposes the former papal dues known as the first fruits and twentieth parts, and vigorously opposed attempts in 1707-8 to secure the removal of the sacramental test. He also joined in the campaign which eventually secured a meeting of convocation in 1703. He initially saw this revival of the representative body of the clergy as the best means of tackling the church's institutional weaknesses, and on 16 January 1705 supplied the prolocutor of convocation, Samuel Synge, with a long list of proposed reforms, covering pluralities, non-residence, the qualifications of candidates of ordination, and the supply of curates in large or appropriated livings (TCD, MS 750/3/1, pp. 67-72). In 1709 the chief secretary paid tribute to his success in damping down an unproductive debate on the issue of dissent, reporting that 'the archbishop is looked upon as the oracle of the church party in this kingdom' ('The Letters of Joseph Addison', ed. W. Graham, 1941, 144). However King became increasingly disillusioned at the failure of convocation to implement the sort of practical reforms he had advocated, although he placed the blame for this failure mainly on his fellow bishops, who had repeatedly failed to respond to initiatives sent up from the lower house. 
As conflict between whig and tory intensified during Anne's reign King wrote critically of what he saw as the unnecessary importation into Ireland of the factional divisions of English politics. The only issue that concerned the protestants of Ireland, he insisted, was the maintenance of the protestant succession. His own political principles remained conservative. In 1701, for example, he complained to Bishop Thomas Lindsay of Killaloe that the powers to be given to the English privy council under the 'Act of Succession' made the monarch 'a princeps concilii', adding that 'I cannot but with concern think to what a pass the king has brought the monarchy by a republican ministry' (21 March 1701, TCD, MS 750/2/2, p. 88). In December 1710 he observed that if the new tory ministry 'go on as they begin... they will confound whiggism' (King to Francis Annesley, 16 Dec 1710, TCD, MS 2531, p. 238). As late as January 1714 he sought to dissuade leading whigs from taking what he considered the extreme step of voting against the crown's choice of speaker. 
The new whig ministry's choice of King as one of the three lords justices appointed on 4 September 1714 can thus be seen as reflecting his status as a known supporter of the protestant interest in its two great crises of 1688-90 and 1710-14, rather than any strong party affiliation. King himself supported the impeachment of the English tory leaders, but argued that the majority of the rank and file had been unaware of their Jacobite intrigues and that all well-affected men should be fairly treated. Later, however, he sought to minimize and defend as reasonable the extensive purge of tory office holders of all levels that had in fact taken place (TCD, MS 2533, pp. 116-17). Lord Coningsby, in a confidential report to George I, described him as 'a perfectly honest man, truly zealous for your Majesty and your service but entirely a stranger to the business he is engaged in' (PRONI, D638/145). However King's own correspondence suggests that he approached his duties confidently and systematically, dealing firmly but without undue panic with the Irish repercussions of the Jacobite rising in England and Scotland in 1715. He continued as lord justice until 6 September 1715, and was to serve again from 22 February to 27 April 1717, and from 25 November 1717 to 31 May 1719. 
Despite this political prominence King's relationship with the new whig establishment was an uneasy one. One major reason was his continued commitment to the defence of the established church and the containment of dissent. As before, he saw the main threat as coming from the Presbyterians of Ulster. He maintained a watchful opposition to further attempts in 1715-16 to secure the repeal of the test. Writing to Archbishop Wake of Canterbury on 24 March 1716 he insisted that the Ulster Presbyterians were wholly different from English nonconformists: 'they are a people embodied under their lay elders, presbyteries and synods,... and will be just so far the king's subjects as their lay elders and presbyteries will allow them' (TCD, MS 2533, p. 165). However, he also opposed legal concessions to Quakers on the grounds that they did not subscribe to what he considered fundamental Christian doctrines, and joined with Bishop Moreton of Kildare in attempts to force French protestant refugees to conform to the liturgy of the Church of Ireland. In the same way his vigorous opposition to the 'Irish Toleration Act' of 1719 was motivated less by the negligible improvement it brought to the status of Presbyterians than by the absence of any requirement that those claiming its protection should make even the most basic profession of Christian faith, so that 'Jews, Turks, deists, pagans, &c. may all set up for teachers' (Mant, 2.342). 
Where Catholics were concerned King remained critical of existing policy. He supported the proposals of the Revd John Richardson in 1712 to promote a new missionary effort by producing bibles and prayer books in Irish, and criticized the lukewarm response of his fellow bishops, although he also privately suggested that Richardson had been precipitate in launching his scheme without proper backing. Shortly after the accession of George I, in January 1715, he addressed two long letters to the new lord lieutenant, the earl of Sunderland, condemning what he saw as the ruinous policy of subjecting Catholics to excessively severe penal laws that were not then enforced, and calling for a more consistent approach. He opposed bills in 1719 and 1723 which sought to impose new and harsher penalties on unregistered priests. By 1727, on the other hand, he had come to feel that policy had moved too far in the opposite direction, complaining that he did not 'remember Popery so rampant, or so much encouraged, as at present, except in King James's time' (Mant, 2.487). 
When new lords justices were appointed in October 1719 King was not included, explaining to Archbishop Wake that, by his opposition to the 'Toleration Act' and other measures, 'I have quite lost the favour of the government here' (Mant, 2.337). He was, however, reappointed to the lord justiceship between 31 January 1722 and 13 August 1723, although this was only, according to his own account, to facilitate the exclusion of Lord Chancellor Midleton (TCD, MS 750/7, p. 88). Henry Downes, bishop of Killala, one of the English-born bishops who had repeatedly been made aware of King's hostility, believed that his show of indifference at being excluded in 1719 merely concealed his mortification at the implied loss of consequence. Downes was likewise sceptical of King's claims in 1722 that his reappointment to the office would kill him, suggesting that 'perhaps he would have been as uneasy had he been left out of the government'. He also reported that King had made his fellow lords justices 'sick of him', because he left such 'invidious work' as the signing of patents for pensions to them, 'and serves himself at the expense of their and some other greater person's honour' (Nichols, 2.497, 536, 556). 
By this time King had emerged not only as a critic of whig laxity in religious policy but as an intransigent defender of Ireland's constitutional rights. The insistence of the British House of Lords on its entitlement to deliver final judgment in the case of 'Sherlock v. Annesley' in 1719 revived the issue of legislative and judicial autonomy that had arisen in his own dispute with the Irish Society. King led the Irish lords in having the Irish barons of the exchequer taken into custody for implementing the decision of the British house, and in drawing up a 'Representation' reasserting their status as the court of final appeal. William Nicolson, the English-born bishop of Derry, reported that he had become the 'darling' of the mob, and that 'The Angel of St Patrick's is now the Guardian of the Kingdom' (McNally, 159). In 1720-21 he opposed the proposal for an Irish bank, and in 1722-5 he was a prominent opponent of Wood's halfpence. On 19 December 1723 the lord lieutenant, the duke of Grafton, reported to Walpole that King 'is very indiscreet in his actions and expressions, pretty ungovernable, and has some wild notions, which sometimes make him impracticable in business, and he is to a ridiculous extravagance, national. Upon some points (of which the jurdisdiction of the house of lords is a principal one) he loses both his temper and his reason. (Coxe, 2.357)' Even after the ministry had capitulated King sought to drive home the victory by adding to the Lords' resolution of thanks a reference characterizing the surrender of the patent as an instance not just of the king's 'goodness' and 'condescension' but also of his 'great wisdom' ('Letters... Boulter', 1.41-2). 
King was also largely responsible for the sharp divide that emerged in the years after 1714 between bishops of Irish and English origin. In the immediate aftermath of the change of government in August 1714 the new whig ministry had taken King's advice in filling three vacant bishoprics. However the appointment of the Welshman John Evans to Meath in 1716 and of the Englishman William Nicolson to Derry in 1718 caused outrage in Irish church circles. King complained bitterly that English churchmen, having squandered the resources of their own church for short-term profit, were now beginning to invade the better managed Irish establishment, and that the disposal of the best dioceses to outsiders left native clergy with little incentive to diligence or self-improvement. In the case of Nicolson he took his revenge by insisting that he should take the most junior place on the episcopal bench in the House of Lords, despite having held an English bishopric for sixteen years. Tensions were further exacerbated when five recently appointed outsiders broke ranks to support the 'Toleration Bill', leaving King to complain to an English correspondent that the measure could have been defeated 'if your brethren that came from your side the water had not deserted us' (King to Annesley, 10 Nov 1719, TCD, MS 750/5, p. 200). Later, in 1722, he refused to consecrate Josiah Hort as bishop of Ferns and Leighlin, objecting to his dissenting background and claiming that he had not been properly ordained; instead Hort had to be consecrated by a specially constituted commission composed of three English bishops. 
Following the death of Thomas Lindsay, archbishop of Armagh, on 13 July 1724 there was speculation that King might succeed him as primate. In the event the see went to Hugh Boulter. King's attitude to thus being passed over remains unclear. A well-known anecdote, first recorded by Orrery in 1752, presented him as greeting Boulter on their first meeting, from a chair in his parlour, with the sarcastic comment that he was too old to rise. King himself insisted that he had resisted pressure from friends to press his claims on the grounds that 'a crazy, lame and superannuated primate' could be of no service to either the church or the kingdom (King, 'A Great Archbishop', 248 n. 4). However this was precisely the sort of self-denial that Bishop Downes had earlier dismissed as spurious. What is clear is that Boulter from the start regarded King as the leader of a rival 'Irish' faction within the church, whose influence should be systematically curbed by further appointments of Englishmen as sees became vacant. By contrast one of the executive's leading parliamentary managers, Marmaduke Coghill, reporting in September 1727 on attempts by Midleton, now openly in opposition, to woo King, believed that the archbishop could be kept in good humour for the coming session by a kind message from the king ('it would captivate the old gentleman, who is highly pleased with such compliments') and possibly the bestowal of a living that he sought for his nephew (BL, Add. MSS 21122, fol. 32). 
William King was the single most important Irish protestant churchman of his era. He was also a central figure in Irish intellectual life for four decades. In addition to his theological writings and his 'State of the Protestants' he was an early member of the Dublin Philosophical Society, to which he presented papers on a range of scientific topics. Two of these, on the origin of Irish bogs (1684) and on the use of sea shells as manure (1708), were published in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. However a mock speech printed at the time he received his DD (1688) derided his bad Latin, and a modern editor has likewise commented on the 'curious Latin' of his autobiography ('Diary', 19). His extensive personal correspondence, mainly preserved in Trinity College, Dublin, makes him almost certainly the most thoroughly documented figure in late seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century Ireland, and provides a vivid if often opinionated depiction of political and ecclesiastical affairs. Richard Mant in 1840 and Sir Charles King in 1906 presented uniformly favourable accounts of a dedicated churchman and great reforming bishop and archbishop. Contemporary opponents such as Downes and Boulter suspected that his declarations of disinterested principle could also mask personal ambition, malice, and resentment. Yet even Grafton, while deploring his political volatility, described him as 'charitable, hospitable, a despiser of riches, and an excellent bishop' (Coxe, 2.357). Patrick Kelly has suggested plausibly that King's childhood experiences in an Ulster devastated by civil war, and what he saw as his providential survival during the crisis of 1688-90, provided the basis for his unwavering commitment to the constitution in church and state as the only guarantees against anarchy. 
Portraits of King in middle life suggest a man of average build with broad, regular features. An anonymous contemporary account stated that he had acquired from his schoolmaster at Dungannon 'an habit of speaking in the Scotch dialect that he lamented all his days after,... which, with a kind of lisping and stammering natural to him, render his voice and manner of speaking very ungraceful' (G. T. Stokes, 'Some Worthies of the Irish Church', 1900, 149 n. 1). He suffered from gout from the early age of twenty-five. His autobiography records how his labours in St Werburgh's led to a collapse in his health, forcing him to go to England to take the waters at Tunbridge Wells. Complaints of illness recur throughout his later correspondence, but his survival until the age of seventy-nine suggests a strong constitution. He never married. A funeral sermon claimed that he had chosen 'a single life' so as to be able to devote as much as possible of his resources to charity, but he himself admitted to Swift in 1712 that he had 'an awkward way of address to ladies' ('Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 1.290). He died at the episcopal palace of St Sepulchre on 8 May 1729 and was buried in St Mary's Church, Donnybrook, on 10 May. He left his property, valued at $17,000, to public purposes, including the Archbishop King's lecturership in divinity at Trinity College, Dublin, which he had founded in 1718. 


@@@@@


doc= 15606


King, William (1685-1763), college head and Jacobite sympathizer, was born at Stepney, Middlesex, on 5 March 1685 and baptized there six days later, the son of Peregrine King (1649-1714), a Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Margaret ('c'.1651-1692/3), daughter of Sir William Smyth, first baronet, of Radclive, Buckinghamshire. His mother died when he was seven. Having attended the free school in Salisbury he entered Balliol College, Oxford, on 9 July 1701. At the end of an interrupted undergraduate career he was admitted a fellow commoner in June 1709, and proceeded BCL on 12 July 1709 and DCL on 8 July 1715. In late autumn 1709 he married his cousin Henrietta Maria Wither at St Anne's, Westminster; a son, Charles (1711-1759), vicar of Great Bedwyn from 1748 until his death, and a daughter, Dorothy (died 1761), who married William Melmoth (bap. 1710, d. 1799), were the only children of the marriage. 
Though called to the bar at Gray's Inn on 12 July 1712 King never sought practice, but he retained rights of residence in the Temple until 1747. Instead, supported by a modest patrimony he devoted himself to scholarship, literature, and politics. From about 1714 until 1722 he acted as secretary successively to James Butler, second duke of Ormond, and Ormond's brother Charles Butler, second earl of Arran -- who both served as chancellor of Oxford University and whose Jacobite loyalties he shared. His 'Political and Literary Anecdotes' contains reminiscences of a dinner at Ormond's house in Richmond at the time of the Jacobite rising of 1715 that was attended by Jacobite leaders, including the earl of Mar, Bishop Francis Atterbury, and Sir William Wyndham. In Oxford he was on friendly terms with Thomas Hearne, the Jacobite antiquary and diarist, who recorded in 1718 that King's rooms in Balliol contained portraits of Charles I, James II, and Prince Rupert, and in 1720 that King had been proud to show him a newly struck medallion of the exiled Stuart queen Clementina. In the parliamentary election of 1722 King was chosen by the high tories of Oxford to stand for the second university seat against a sitting moderate tory, George Clarke. He resigned his post as secretary to the chancellor before contesting the election, which he eventually lost heavily, despite securing majorities over Clarke in five colleges (Corpus Christi, Exeter, Jesus, St John's, and Lincoln). 
On 9 December 1719, following the death of Dr John Hudson, King was installed as principal of St Mary Hall, Oxford. This small institution had no fellows and no corporate body to govern it, and King, who remained principal for the next forty-four years, came to refer to it as 'my monastery' (Greenwood, 19). During his time as principal the east side of the quadrangle was rebuilt and a new room added to the principal's lodgings. 
King's earliest, and longest, work -- a mock-heroic poem called 'The Toast' -- appeared first in octavo in Dublin in 1732 and then, complete in four books, in a handsome quarto London edition in 1736. It has been justly described as 'one of the strangest and most vituperative pieces of writing which eighteenth-century England produced... an original and ingenious conception... spoilt by its author's prurience and lack of reticence' (Greenwood, 40, 357). Although he reissued the work in 1747 King later professed regret at its tone, and remaining copies were burnt at his death. It was written to relieve the frustrations of his attempt to secure the restitution of a loan of several thousand pounds to his uncle Sir Thomas Smyth, of Dublin, and his elderly and extravagant wife, Myra, the former countess of Newburgh. This lawsuit, which obliged King to make frequent and protracted visits to Ireland over a period of nearly twenty years, eventually cost King more in legal fees than the sum that he was seeking to recover, and when the matter was finally concluded, in 1746, he was only partly successful. However, it proved the instrument for establishing contact between King and Jonathan Swift -- to whom, as 'Cadenus', King dedicated the complete version of 'The Toast', in nine pages of Latin dactylic hexameters containing 'some of the most elegant tributes ever paid to Swift' (ibid., 57), who was equally complimentary in return. They corresponded for about five years, and Swift sought King's assistance over the publication of some of his own work. In the summer of 1737 King received a manuscript of Swift's 'History of the Four Last Years of the Queen'. Concluding rapidly that the authentic text could not safely be printed, he worked effectively to postpone publication. Holding similar views about 'Verses on the Death of Dr Swift', a manuscript of which he received early in 1738, King was principally responsible for the fact that the text published by Charles Bathurst in January 1739 suffered from extensive excisions and interpolations. King's attempts to assuage Swift's displeasure failed, and their association ended. During this period King also wrote regularly for the opposition paper 'Common Sense, or, The Englishman's Journal'. A satirical piece, published on 28 May 1737, was particularly notable: King proposing that the people of Britain ('Corsica') should 'have such a King as 'Jupiter' first gave to the Frogs' (ibid., 79). 
At the same time King began to compose his first political satires in Latin verse. 'Miltonis epistola ad Pollionem', which appeared in two separate folio editions in 1738, was an extended poem in Latin hexameter dedicated to Alexander Pope and attacking the corruption of the whig government and the venality of the times. Reprinted in Edward Popham's 'Selecta poemata Anglorum Latina' (1774), it was widely read. A sequel, 'Sermo pedestris', with two separate folio editions in 1739, was more academic in tone and included a striking attack on the political subservience of the contemporary episcopal bench. 'Scamnum, ecloga' (1740), dedicated to George Keith, Earl Marischal, who had been attainted and exiled after commanding troops during the 1715 rising, was a grand eclogue on the preoccupations of the tory opposition. 'Templum libertatis' (2 vols., 1742-3), an unfinished allegorical epic in dactylic hexameter inspired by 'Paradise Lost', was a celebration of British liberty under threat, and included a fine apostrophe to Oxford -- 'one of the most superb passages in Anglo-Latin poetry' (Greenwood, 131) -- and a notable description of Stowe. 
By delivering Latin speeches on major university occasions King soon established a reputation for oratory as well as for writing. His success derived from elegance of composition, a confident delivery, and -- very frequently -- an aggressive political message. 'Tres oratiunculae habitae in domo convocationis Oxon' (1743), marking the granting of honorary DCL degrees to the sixth duke of Hamilton, the third earl of Lichfield, and John Boyle, fifth earl of Orrery, contrasted the virtues and patriotic independence of the honorands with the general corruption and servility of the times. Orrery was King's literary and political associate for many years, and his notable translation of Pliny's 'Epistles' owed much to King's encouragement. King's most influential speech was undoubtedly that given on 13 April 1749 at the opening of the new Radcliffe Library, designed by King's friend James Gibbs. In this speech, printed in 1749 as 'Oratio in Theatro Sheldoniano habita idibus Aprilis, MDCCXLIX: die dedicationis Bibliothecae Radclivianae' and reprinted in 1750, King praised the high-tory Radcliffe trustees, among whom were three Jacobites (the fourth duke of Beaufort, Sir Walter Wagstaffe Bagot, and Sir Watkin Williams-Wynn). He went on to expound familiar themes, condemning modern luxury and invoking nostalgia for ancient virtue, and rising to an enthusiastically received peroration in which six prayers for the delivery of the nation, all commencing ''REDEAT'', were generally understood to signify the restoration of the exiled Stuart family. Thomas Warton's description evokes the scene: '
See, on yon Sage how all attentive stand, 

To catch his darting eye, and waving hand. 

Hark! he begins, with all a Tully's art, 

To pour the dictates of a Cato's heart: 

Skill'd to pronounce what noblest thoughts inspire, 

He blends the speaker's with the patriot's fire; 

Bold to conceive, nor timorous to conceal, 

What Britons dare to think, he dares to tell. 
(T. Warton, 'The Triumphs of Isis'; Greenwood, 200)' Ten years later, at the installation of the seventh earl of Westmorland as chancellor in July 1759, following the death of the earl of Arran, Samuel Johnson (whose MA diploma had been brought to him by King in February 1755) clapped his hands until they were sore at another virtuoso speech, which lasted fifty minutes but whose text has not been preserved. 
Unsurprisingly St Mary Hall in King's time acquired a reputation for Jacobitism. A nonjuring clergyman, John Leake, lodged there with his wife for at least three years after 1725, by special leave of the principal, and the leader of a notorious Jacobite disturbance in Oxford on the night of 23 February 1748 was an undergraduate of the college, James Dawes. Though it is unlikely that King had any direct connection with this disturbance his Jacobite convictions remained strong at the time. In 1746, after the battle of Culloden, he had described the duke of Cumberland as a man 'qui timet omnia praeter Deum' ('who is afraid of everything except God'), and in September 1749 he attended the important Jacobite gathering at Lichfield races and prepared a list of 275 loyal gentlemen who were present. In September 1750 he was introduced to Prince Charles Edward Stuart at the house of Lady Primrose in Essex Street, London, although he later became disillusioned by the prince's avarice and religious duplicity. Oxford whigs -- such as Richard Blacow of Exeter College, John Gilbert, canon of Christ Church, Edward Bentham of Oriel, John Burton of Corpus Christi, and Robert Jenner of Trinity, all of whom were engaged in controversy with King about this time -- were slow to detect the waning enthusiasm for the Stuart cause that King chronicled in his 'Political and Literary Anecdotes of his Own Times', composed about 1760 but not published until 1818. King's final reconciliation with the court came in 1761, when he accompanied a university deputation to present an address of congratulation on the royal marriage and was personally introduced to George III by Lord Shelburne. 
Despite his abjuration of Jacobitism King remained an active Anglo-Latin writer and scholar. His collected writings, 'Opera Guilielmi King', were published in 1760, and a new composition of the same date, 'Aviti epistola ad Perillam, virginem Scotam', contained significant praise for the condition of Britain under the house of Hanover. Two further short Latin works were published in 1761: 'Elogium', on Dr John Taylor, an eccentric oculist, and 'Epitaphium Richardi Nash', a long and elaborate tribute that 'excelled in grandeur many which had been composed in memory of sovereign rulers' (Greenwood, 311). On 8 July 1763 King made his last encaenia speech; a witness, Charles Godwyn, commented that 'his strength and memory, and the applause he received, were just the same as usual' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 8.236). 
King died at Bath on 30 December 1763 and was buried on 5 January 1764 at Ealing, where he had succeeded his father as lessee of the rectory. His heart, enclosed in a silver urn, was deposited in the chapel of St Mary Hall, with a monument to his memory and a Latin epitaph of his own composition; it was subsequently moved to Oriel College chapel. A brief obituary in 'Jackson's Oxford Journal' of January 1764 noted that King was 'the oldest Head of a House in Oxford' and 'a gentleman whose Character in the polite and literary World is too well known to need any Encomium, and who was universally allowed to be the most celebrated Orator in all Europe'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15607


King, William (1701-1769), Independent minister, was born in Wiltshire on 9 June 1701. He was educated at a local school, and in 1721 entered the University of Utrecht. He studied successfully there, and on returning to England in 1724 became minister at the Independent church at Chesham, Buckinghamshire, where he also ran a school. He was ordained on 25 April 1725. 
King moved to London in 1740, and in February of that year became pastor of the Independent church in Hare Court, Aldersgate Street, as successor to Samuel Bruce. Shortly afterwards he received from a Scottish university a diploma creating him DD. From 1748 until his death he was merchant's lecturer at Pinners' Hall, where he delivered 192 lectures (sermons) in total. He was engaged also for many years in Sunday evening lectures at Silver Street and Lime Street chapels, but according to Walter Wilson he was not a popular preacher and never distinguished himself as an author. 
During the last four years of his life King suffered great pain from a gallstone. He preached for the last time at Hare Court on 26 February 1769 and died at Pinners' Hall on 4 March. He was buried in Bunhill Fields. He was survived by two children, William and Ann, but not by his wife, who appears to have died before October 1768, when he made his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 15608


King, William (1786-1865), physician and promoter of co-operative principles, was born on 17 April 1786 at Ipswich, one of ten children of the Revd John King (1738-1822) and his wife, Elizabeth Sarah, 'nee' Bishop. King was educated at Ipswich grammar school, where his father had been master. Aged fifteen he entered Westminster School, subsequently going up to Peterhouse, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1809 and MA in 1812. Originally intended for the church, King studied medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and in France, at Montpellier and Paris. He returned to Cambridge in 1817, graduating MD in 1819. In 1820 he became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. On 17 January 1821 he married Mary Hooker of Rottingdean, and the following December settled in Brighton. 
King supported initiatives promoting working-class self-help and charitable organization in Brighton, associating with philanthropists including Elizabeth Fry and Lady Noel Byron. Educational interests led him to sponsor the establishment of a mechanics' institute in 1825. Speaking engagements at the institute initiated his involvement with co-operation. Many of the workmen who fostered co-operation locally, including their leader William Bryan, were institute members. 1827 saw the establishment of the Brighton Co-operative Benevolent Fund Association to amass capital in support of Owenite communitarianism, and an extension of fund-raising through the foundation of a co-operative trading association. 
King's contribution to co-operation was educational, leaving a legacy of national importance. 'The Co-Operator', a monthly periodical started by him in May 1828, outlined the potential for societal transformation through the extension of co-operative activity from retailing to manufacture and self-employment, and eventual full community. Publication of such ideas in an intelligible form contributed greatly to the upsurge of co-operative society foundations in the late 1820s and early 1830s. However, King's willingness to publish advocacy of elite patronage for co-operation and his unease about Owenite radicalism and anti-clericalism led to attacks on him in other co-operative journals. These contributed to his decision to cease publication in August 1830. Requests that he republish essays from 'The Co-Operator', and an invitation to the 1833 Co-operative Congress, were declined. He was aware, too, that advocacy of progressive causes, also including Catholic emancipation, was damaging his professional prospects. 
King's subsequent career was chiefly of local significance. In 1842 he was elected physician to the Sussex County Hospital. He was also physician to the Brighton Provident Dispensary from 1849. As one of the commissioners responsible for urban government in Brighton, he played a leading role in the town's acquisition of the Royal Pavilion in 1850. 
Although few copies of 'The Co-Operator' survived, its advocacy of association was rediscovered by later co-operators, including the Rochdale Society of Equitable Pioneers in the 1840s. King's ideas anticipated aspects of Christian socialism, which itself sponsored co-operatives during the 1850s. King expressed support for such initiatives and maintained a continuing faith in co-operation's redemptive power. He retired as physician to the Sussex Hospital in 1861. In his latter years he suffered from a heart condition, which led to his death on 19 October 1865, at his home, 23 Montpelier Road, Brighton. He was buried in Hove parish church on 25 October. King was survived by his wife and at least two children, a daughter, Catherine, and a son, George. 


@@@@@


doc= 15609


King, William (1809-1886), geologist, was born in Low Row, Sunderland, co. Durham on 22 April 1809, the son of William King, coal caster, and his wife, Eleanor ('nee' Armstrong), confectioner and shopkeeper. He was educated at Mr Finlay's school in Moor Street, Sunderland, and during short careers, as an apprentice ironmonger and as a bookshop owner and librarian, he established a reputation as an avid collector of fossils. He married Jane Nicholson in 1839, and in 1841 was appointed to the curatorship of the Newcastle Museum (later the Hancock Museum), Newcastle upon Tyne, leaving the post in 1847 following a disagreement with his employers. 
In October 1849 King was appointed to the foundation chair of mineralogy and geology of Queen's College, Galway. During a distinguished career he published more than seventy scientific papers, established the geology and natural history museum in the college, and developed a teaching programme in geology for the arts, agriculture, and engineering faculties. In 1859 King was appointed examiner in geology, mineralogy, and physical geology for the Queen's University of Ireland. His research programme ranged from the shell structure of brachiopods to the development of cleavage in metamorphic rocks and the uplift of the Burren. His 'Monograph of the Permian Fossils of England', published in 1850 by the Palaeontographical Society, formed the basis for the description of the Permian system; his many taxonomic papers helped set the agenda for animal and plant classifications. He recognized the antiquity of Neanderthal man, gave modified support to Darwin's 'Origin of Species' and with Thomas Henry Rowney, professor of chemistry at Queen's College, Galway, established the non-organic nature of the dawn animal 'Eozoon'. His son, William King jun. studied geology at the college and was later director of the geological survey of India. 
King was elected to the Geological Society of France and the Natural History and Medical Society of Dresden, lectured in Bandon and Galway for the committee of lectures, Dublin Castle, and organized all-Ireland field excursions. In 1870 he was awarded the first honorary DSc by the Queen's University. King was appointed to the new chair in natural history, geology, and mineralogy in 1882, but resigned following a stroke in 1883 and was appointed emeritus professor. He died at home in Glenoir, Taylor's Hill, Galway on 24 June 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 15610


Kinghorn, Joseph (1766-1832), Particular Baptist minister, was born at Gateshead on 17 January 1766. His father, David Kinghorn (1737-1822), was a shoemaker and Baptist preacher at Newcastle upon Tyne; he was ordained on 1 May 1771 as minister of a Baptist congregation at Bishop Burton in the East Riding of Yorkshire, serving until July 1799, when he retired to Norwich. Joseph was the eldest son of David and his second wife, Elizabeth (1737/8-1810), second daughter of Joseph Jopling of Satley. After four years' classical schooling, Kinghorn was taken on trial as an apprentice to a watch- and clockmaker in Hull in 1779, but in March 1781 became a clerk in Richard Fishwick's white-lead works at Elswick, Northumberland. In April 1783 he was baptized by his father at Bishop Burton and looked forward to entering the ministry. He made the acquaintance of Robert Hall (1764-1831) and had thoughts of joining him at the University of Aberdeen, but on 20 August 1784 he entered the Bristol Baptist college, under Caleb Evans. Among his fellow students his most intimate friend was James Hinton, father of John Howard Hinton. On leaving the college he ministered for several months (from May 1788) at Fairford, where some found his Calvinism not high enough: he was always in favour of a robust call to the unconverted to turn to God. His former employer, Richard Fishwick, introduced his name to the Baptist congregation at St Mary's Chapel, Norwich, located in the parish of St Mary-in-Coslany. On 27 March 1789 he settled in Norwich, and he was ordained on 20 May 1790. One of his closest friends there was William Wilkin of Costessy, a farmer and miller of both fortune and culture. Wilkin died in 1799 leaving his eight-year old son, Simon, to the care of the bachelor Kinghorn, who soon began a school for his ward and other pupils. 
Kinghorn's ministry at Norwich, which lasted until his death, was unusually distinguished. He was famed for his pulpit rhetoric, which was at once scriptural, systematic, and practical; his power of apt illustration was noted by Edward Irving. In 1804 he was invited to preside over the new Horton College, about to be established in Bradford, and six years later was invited to take a similar position at the new college established by the London Particular Baptists at Stepney. Kinghorn had an extremely high view of his local pastorate and therefore refused to move from Norwich, though he did prepare in his own home a number of candidates for ministerial training for work both in Britain and overseas. His old chapel was replaced in 1811 by a very handsome structure on the same site. 
Like many dissenters Kinghorn welcomed the French Revolution, and the fall of the Bastille in particular, but he was not a political preacher, though he was active in seeking the removal of dissenting disabilities. He also worked for the opening up of British India to dissenting missionaries through the revision of the East India Company charter in 1813, by persuading Bishop Bathurst of Norwich to present the case in the Lords and William Smith (MP for Norwich and a Unitarian associate of the Clapham Sect) to present it in the Commons. In the communion controversy which much occupied Baptists in the years following the end of the French wars, Kinghorn, after some initial hesitation, became the chief spokesman of the closed-communion position, against the open-communion position of his friend, Robert Hall. Kinghorn believed that baptism as a believer was clearly required by the 'New Testament' as a prerequisite for participation in holy communion, and that unless this position were protected, Baptist insights into the restriction of baptism to believers would be lost. Kinghorn served on the committee of the infant Baptist Missionary Society and journeyed to Scotland in 1818 and 1822 on its behalf. In every enterprise connected with the Baptist denomination he played a prominent part, and has been called 'the de facto Bishop of the Baptists in Norfolk' (Jewson, 73). 
Norwich at this time enjoyed a lively intellectual life. From 1790 Kinghorn was a member of the Speculative Society, of which William Taylor, the German scholar, was the leading spirit; the society welcomed cultured Roman Catholics to its discussions, alongside representatives of all protestant churches. Kinghorn gave considerable time to linguistic and critical studies, not only mastering Greek, Hebrew, and Syriac, but also becoming an authority on rabbinical writings. He was much involved in the work of the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews. In 1828 he was awarded the honorary degree of MA by Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island, but never advertised the honour. 
Kinghorn died, unmarried, on 1 September 1832, and was buried on 7 September in the vestibule of St Mary's Chapel. Joseph John Gurney, the Quaker philanthropist, spoke at his funeral; the sermon was preached by John Alexander, minister of Prince's Street Congregational Church. 
A list of twenty of Kinghorn's publications is given in Wilkin's biography; they include controversial works on the nature of the church, Christian baptism, the terms of communion, and the training of Christian ministers, as well as treatises in opposition to the beliefs of Unitarians and Roman Catholics. He wrote on Christian worship and edited several collections of hymns. A number of his sermons were published, and he was a frequent contributor to the 'Baptist Magazine', the 'Eclectic Review', and the 'Evangelical Magazine'. Wilkin also enumerates twelve of his unpublished manuscripts, chiefly controversial. The catalogue of his extensive library was published at Norwich in 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 15611


Kinglake, Alexander William (1809-1891), historian and travel writer, was born on 5 August 1809, in Taunton, Somerset, the eldest son of William Kinglake (died 1852), banker and solicitor, and his wife, Mary (died 1853), daughter of Thomas Woodforde from Castle Cary. He was one of four sons and two daughters who survived to adulthood. The Kinglakes were descended from the Scottish Kinlochs, who had migrated to England under James I and Anglicized their name. Alexander William, known as Alec to his family, did not grow tall, had a pallid complexion and was short-sighted. Taught to read by his mother, he developed a lasting love of Homer, and in childhood also became a proficient horseman. Through his grandfather, the family inherited Saltmoor, in Somerset, where Kinglake became lord of the manor on his father's death. At the age of twelve, he went to board with the Revd George Coleridge at Ottery St Mary in Devon, which Kinglake considered 'a sad intellectual fall' from his mother's tuition. Between April 1823 and July 1828, he happily attended Eton College, where he became a good oarsman and swimmer. His one regret was that myopia denied him a military career. After Eton, he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where Alfred Tennyson, Arthur Hallam, and William Makepeace Thackeray were contemporaries. He spoke in union debates and seemed perpetually short of money, but secured a BA in 1832, and an MA four years later. After Cambridge, he entered Lincoln's Inn on 14 April 1832 and studied law under Bryan Procter (whose wife Anne's literary circle included Thomas Carlyle) and visited Wales and France to reveal an early taste for travel. 
In August 1834, Kinglake set out on an eighteen-month odyssey through Europe and the Ottoman empire. After encountering plague in Constantinople, he travelled to Smyrna, Cyprus, Beirut, the Holy Land, and Jerusalem, before crossing the Sinai Desert to Cairo. Following three weeks in Egypt, he returned north through Damascus and Asia Minor then via Athens, Corfu, Rome, and Turin to London. On 5 May 1837, Kinglake was called to the bar but did not enjoy a distinguished legal career. He continued to travel, visiting Switzerland in 1843, and the following year 'Eothen', his account of the 1834-5 Turkish adventures, was published and included two of his own watercolours. Leslie Stephen wrote of 'Eothen' in the 'Dictionary of National Biography': 'though the book was rather absurdly compared with the ordinary records of travel, it is more akin to Sterne's 'Sentimental Journey', and is a delightful record of personal impressions rather than outward facts'. Soon after 'Eothen', two articles appeared in 'Quarterly Review': 'Rights of women' (December 1844) and 'The Mediterranean a French lake' (March 1845). Kinglake became a member of the Travellers' Club in 1845 and, eight years later, of the Athenaeum. 
From August until October 1845, Kinglake travelled in Algeria, where he met Colonel A. J. L. de St Arnaud and heard about Colonel A. J. J. Pelissier, who would each command the French forces in the Crimea and were currently suppressing rebel tribesmen. Back in London, Kinglake resumed a busy social life. The writer Mrs M. C. M. Simpson recorded that 'he was exceedingly courteous to women and very generous to all who needed help' (de Gaury, 88). Although not musical he entertained Caroline Norton at the opera, and allegedly vied with the exiled Louis Napoleon (later Napoleon III) for the same mistress, the wealthy courtesan and self-styled Miss Howard (Elizabeth Ann Maryett). In February 1846, he crossed to Calais for a duel with Edward Marlborough FitzGerald, which failed to take place. The high point of his many travels occurred in 1854. Kinglake went with John Delane, editor of 'The Times', and A. H. Layard MP to Constantinople and on to join the invasion fleet off the Crimean coast on 10 September 1854. After the military landing, he went ashore, witnessed the battle of the Alma from close hand, dined that night with Lord Raglan (commander of the British army, whom he had met riding with the duke of Beaufort's hounds in 1853), helped the wounded, sketched and recorded the scenes in his diary. Kinglake rode with the allies towards Sevastopol and watched them take up siege positions on upland to the south. From there, he saw the charges of the heavy and light brigades on 25 October near Balaklava, though soon afterwards he was invalided back to England. 
In 1852 Kinglake had failed to enter parliament, but five years later he secured election for Bridgwater, as a Liberal. He spoke frequently in the house, but made little impact due to his weak voice and unimpressive demeanour, although he successfully took up the case of British engineers unjustly gaoled in Naples, gaining for them release and compensation. In 1869 he was unseated after bribery involving his election agent. He then concentrated on his massive work 'The Invasion of the Crimea', which would cover eight volumes, the first published in 1863, the last in 1887. Kinglake had been granted unlimited access to Lord Raglan's papers by his widow, consulted French, Russian, and Turkish sources, and corresponded and interviewed exhaustively. He returned to the Crimea, hosted by the Russian engineer Todleben, who had so ably defended Sevastopol. But Kinglake's diligence, which delayed completion of the story until a generation after the war, frustrated readers and subjected him to repeated and tiresome letters from individuals like Lord Cardigan, who were determined to see their version of events in print. Inevitably, there were criticisms, not least because Kinglake's anti-French bias showed through. Nevertheless, W. G. Romaine, judge-advocate in the Crimea, wrote: 'For once the world is agreed and welcomes your work with a chorus of praise'; and Sir Robert Morier whimsically observed: 'It is a noble monument... one singularly typical of the imbecility and heroism which make up the British character' (de Gaury, 131-2). 
During the work's gestation, Kinglake published, anonymously, in 'Blackwood's Magazine' (September 1872) 'The life of Madame de La Fayette'. He still rode frequently in Rotten Row when over seventy. Towards the end of his life, he engaged in prolonged correspondence with Olga Novikov, god-daughter of the tsar, and also the Turkish playwright, Augusta Persee, wife of Sir William Gregory, under whose influence he subscribed to the defence of the Egyptian nationalist leader, Arabi Pasha. Kinglake dined regularly at the Travellers' and Athenaeum, despite increasing deafness, which made conversation difficult. In his eightieth year, on doctor's advice, he forsook the clubs, as gout and throat cancer took their toll. He died on 1 January 1891 at his home, 17 Bayswater Terrace, London, and was cremated at Woking, following a service in Christ Church, Lancaster Gate. His ashes were placed near family graves at Pitminster church, Somerset. Although Kinglake lived in rented rooms, he owned the manorial lands at Saltmoor, which were left to two nieces, as he had remained unmarried. The rents were allocated as annuities to certain friends and retainers, and provision was made for the nurse, Alice Dumper, who cared for him during his last days. His collection of books, oriental swords, and other artefacts was distributed among friends. 
Janet Ross, daughter of a long-standing acquaintance, wrote about 'that marvellous mixture of pride, of humility, of daring and intense shyness', and Kinglake himself admitted that, 'I have all my life suffered from constitutional shyness' (de Gaury, 146, 128). He also chided Olga Novikov, 'pray remember that I am a heathen' (ibid., 135), reinforcing Thackeray's post-Cambridge conclusion that Kinglake was an atheist. 


@@@@@


doc= 15612


Kinglake, Robert (1765-1842), physician, graduated MD at Gottingen, and also studied at Edinburgh. After practising for some years as a surgeon at Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, he moved to Somerset, first to Chilton upon Polden and then in 1802 to Taunton. At Taunton he frequently attended public meetings and made a number of speeches in support of the first 'Reform Bill'. He was a member of the Royal Medical Society of Edinburgh, the Physical Society of Gottingen, and other learned societies. He married Joanna, daughter of Anthony Apperlay, of Herefordshire. They had at least two sons. 
Kinglake attracted considerable attention through his writings on gout, in which he advocated the cooling treatment. His first papers on the subject appeared in 1801 and 1803 in the 'Medical and Physical Journal' (nos. 33 and 48). His views were opposed by William Wadd, W. Perry, John Hunt, J. King, and others. He replied to his antagonists in: 'A Dissertation on Gout' (1804, with appendix), and in a 'Reply to Mr Edlin's Two Cases of Gout' (1804). He also published in 1820 his 'Observations on the medical effects of digitalis' in the 'Medical and Physical Journal'. In Robert Macnish's 'Anatomy of Drunkenness' (1827) there is a short article by the author on Kinglake's experiment with ether. 
Kinglake died on 26 September 1842 at West Monkton rectory, near Taunton, the home of his son, the Revd W. C. Kinglake. 


@@@@@


doc= 15613


Kingsbury, William (1744-1818), Independent minister, was born on 12 July 1744 in Bishopsgate Street, London, one of five children of Thomas Kingsbury. In 1753 his father died, and William was placed at Merchant Taylors' School; later, under the patronage of Sir John Barnard, he was sent to Christ's Hospital school. In October 1758, through the interest of Dr Thomas Gibbons, he became a boarder at the Congregational academy, Mile End, under Gibbons himself, Dr John Conder, and Dr John Walker. Walker's free instruction included Hebrew, mathematics, geography, astronomy, and experimental philosophy. In 1760 Kingsbury became a divinity student, mainly because of Conder's persuasiveness and a conversion experience on Tuesday 7 October. In February 1762 he joined the Independent congregation at Haberdashers' Hall, where Gibbons was pastor. In August 1763, the year his mother died, Kingsbury preached his first sermon at Bethnal Green. In September, having preached at Lower Tooting, he was invited to be pastor. Until mid-1764, when he left the academy, he travelled weekly to Tooting. 
In the autumn, Kingsbury preached at Above Bar Congregational Church in Southampton. On 28 December 1764 he was appointed pastor and ordained there on 8 October 1765. In 1767 the University of Aberdeen awarded him the degree of master of arts. On 23 November 1768 he married at Holy Trinity, Gosport, Mary Andrews (1744/5-1789), daughter of Independent minister Mordecai Andrews. They had four sons and four daughters. In 1787 he was invited to be resident tutor at Homerton Academy. He declined, but, advised by his friend John Howard, opened an academy in Southampton. Kingsbury describes their first meeting in 1772 in James Baldwin Brown's 'Memoirs of Howard'. Another friend was the evangelical divine John Newton. Other educational interests of his included Sunday schools, which he helped form in Southampton in 1786, charity schools, and the Revd David Bogue's seminary in Gosport for training missionaries. In 1793 Kingsbury became a founder contributor and trustee of the 'Evangelical Magazine'. 
Following the death of his wife on 2 January 1789, aged forty-four, Kingsbury married in spring 1790 Miss Redfearne. The following year Kingsbury's eldest son suffered a breakdown from which he never recovered. About the same time, Mrs Kingsbury developed a progressive mental disorder. By 1809 the condition was severe, and she was institutionalized. From 1776 onwards Kingsbury himself experienced periods of illness and depression. His extensive diaries present a 'picture of persevering piety,... strict habit of severe self-observation... a practice of viewing all... events with reference to the over-ruling providence,... and the merciful designs of the Almighty God' (Bullar, 23). 
Kingsbury's ministry was dominated by popular evangelical preaching: 'Thousands of manuscript sermons attest the diligence with which he... prepared' (Bullar, 179). Some, often funeral sermons, were published. He habitually preached special sermons. One, on the recovery of George III (1789), was subsequently preached in at least two Anglican churches. Kingsbury, however, vociferously defended nonconformist beliefs and practices. A sermon in which the Revd Richard Mant criticized extemporary prayer led to the publication of 'The manner in which the protestant dissenters perform prayer in public worship, represented and vindicated' (1796). He was also passionate about evangelical mission. In 1798 he published 'An Apology for Village Preachers'. A founder member of the London Missionary Society, on 22 September 1795 he presided at two of the inaugural meetings. For a time he was a director of the society. 
In 1802 George Clayton was appointed Kingsbury's assistant at Above Bar. Despite good relations, Clayton moved in 1804. On 8 October 1805 Henry Lacey became co-pastor. Relations were less harmonious and Lacey resigned in 1807. On resigning the pastorate of Above Bar in 1809, an annuity of $200 was agreed, but in a letter dated 9 August Kingsbury declared, 'I 'cannot' be prevailed upon to receive more than $120'. Kingsbury moved to Caversham, near Reading, where he opened a small place of worship. He died in Caversham on 18 February 1818 after a paralytic stroke. His daughter, Sarah Jameson, and son, Walter, were present. He was buried in Reading, and George Clayton delivered the funeral sermon. The Revd David Bogue preached a memorial sermon in Southampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 15614


Kingscote, Henry Robert (1802-1882), philanthropist, was born on 25 May 1802, the second son of Thomas Kingscote (died 1811), the brother of Robert Kingscote of Kingscote, Gloucestershire; his mother was Harriet, the third daughter of Sir Henry Peyton of Doddington in the same county. He was educated at Harrow School, and early became a cricketer and rider to hounds. Six feet five inches tall, he played his first match at Lord's on 21 May 1823. President of the MCC for 1827, he initiated a three-match series between Sussex -- whose bowlers used the controversial round-arm style denounced by its opponents as 'throwing' -- and 'All England', which aroused much interest. 
A narrow escape from drowning, probably in the late 1820s, apparently led to his conversion. An evangelical, he became a friend of Bishop Charles Blomfield, and with him was instrumental in founding the Church of England Scripture Readers' Association and the Metropolitan Visiting and Relief Association, of which he was a trustee all his life. He munificently assisted St Matthias, Bethnal Green. In 1846 he published 'A Letter to... the Archbishop of Canterbury on the Present Wants of the Church', which ran through several editions. In it he urged the extension of lay agency and the foundation of new bishoprics. 
A leading and generous London evangelical, in 1846 Kingscote helped to found the Southwark Fund for schools and churches, and in 1847 he assisted in alleviating the distress of the famine in Ireland. He sent out supplies to the troops during the Crimean War. In 1868 he was one of the founders of the British and Colonial Emigration Society; he was also the founder of the scheme for establishing workshops for the indigent blind, which was not very successful, and of the National Orphan Asylum at Ham Common, Surrey, in 1849. 
Kingscote married, on 11 July 1833, Harriet Elizabeth Tower of Weald Hall, Essex; they had three sons and five daughters. Harriet died on 10 March 1875. Kingscote died on 13 July 1882 at his home, 10 Seville Street, Lowndes Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 15615


Kingsford, Anna (1846-1888), physician and spiritualist, was born on 16 September 1846 at Maryland Point, Stratford, Essex. She was a sickly child, the youngest daughter of twelve children born to Elizabeth Ann Schroder and her husband, John Bonus (died 1865), a London merchant and shipowner. According to Kingsford's spiritual soulmate and biographer Edward Maitland (1824-1897), who believed Kingsford to be a 'special instrument of the Gods' (Maitland, 1.114), the Bonuses were descended from 'a great Italian family' (ibid., 1), one of whom was a cardinal 'of strong mystical tendencies' (ibid.). If this is true, then it might explain where the origins of Kingsford's own clairvoyant talents lay. As a child she would converse with flowers and believed herself to be a fairy, and at an early age displayed mystical 'powers' of premonition. As an adult she functioned within two fringe movements: theosophy, which sought a mystical and intuitive understanding of and contact with the divine, and spiritualism, which supported the idea of the existence of the human character after death and the ability of the dead to communicate with the living via a medium. Kingsford often attended seances with Maitland, received religious information by means of dreams (many of which were published in 'Dreams and Dream Stories', 1888), and discovered a strong spiritual affinity with, among others, Anne Boleyn and Joan of Arc. As an adolescent she also demonstrated her talents as an author: at thirteen she wrote her first book, 'Beatrice: a Tale of the Early Christians' (1863), and received 2 guineas from the publishers for her efforts. Thereafter followed a series of poems for the 'Churchman's Companion'. She continued writing throughout her life, expounding her (radical) views on spiritualism, vegetarianism, and anti-vivisection. She wrote stories under the name of Ninon Kingsford for the 'Penny Post' from 1868 to 1872 and a series of weekly articles for the 'Ladies Pictorial' between 1884 and 1887. 
On new year's eve 1867 Annie Bonus married her 22-year-old cousin Algernon Godfrey Kingsford (1845-1913), the son of Godfrey Kingsford, a priest, and then moved to Lichfield where Algernon Kingsford trained to enter the ministry. Kingsford soon gave birth to her only child, a daughter named Eadith, an event which did little to improve her poor health. She often lapsed into trance-like states and suffered from severe asthma, epilepsy, neuralgia, and nervous panics which often prevented physical exertion. In 1870 she experienced a religious reawakening after receiving three nocturnal visits from Mary Magdalen. She converted to Catholicism and adopted, alongside her other identities, the names Mary Magdalen Maria Johanna. Kingsford later became somewhat dissatisfied with what she discerned as the materialism and idolatry of Catholicism, and she criticised the Roman Catholic church's avoidance of the vivisection question. Kingsford never seems to have acquired a secure sense of who she was; she was tormented rather than contented by life, and believed that her karma would allow her neither rest nor a peaceful existence. 
By the time Kingsford converted to Catholicism her husband had accepted a curacy at Atcham near Shrewsbury which proved detrimental to his wife's health. She decided to remove herself from these deleterious surroundings and also make a life for herself outside her marriage. In 1872 she purchased 'The Lady's Own Paper', and divided her time between Shrewsbury and the journal's offices in London. It was at about this time that she made the acquaintance of Edward Maitland. While acting as editor Kingsford was made aware of vivisection after she published a letter by the anti-vivisectionist Frances Power Cobbe, and in 1874 she decided to train for a medical career in order to find out more about medical research. She undertook her training, without her husband and daughter, in France, and received her medical degree in 1880. The topic of her dissertation, 'De l'alimentation vegetale chez l'homme', reflected her growing animal welfare and vegetarian sentiments, and was eventually published in London in 1881 as 'The Perfect Way in Diet'. She believed that only with a vegetarian diet would body and soul be united and feed off each other: 'his [the vegetarian's] sensuous enjoyments will be keener, his perceptions clearer, his brain stronger, his whole person lighter, purer, and more healthful' (Kingsford, 504). While studying in France Kingsford apparently suffered a stroke which paralysed her left side, although she seems to have recovered. Kingsford compensated for corporeal weakness by honing her spiritual powers. In 1877 Kingsford and Maitland were 'visited' by Sir William Fergusson (1808-1877) who encouraged the pair to work for the abolition of vivisection; she brought to the public's attention the physical damage done to animals and the moral damage done to man in works such as 'The uselessness of vivisection' (1882) and 'Notes by a Medical Student'. In 1880 she sat on the board of the International Society for the Suppression of Vivisection until a conflict among board members over Kingsford's presence and Maitland's pamphlet, 'The Woman and the Age', prompted her and Maitland to resign. In 1883 she organized anti-vivisection societies in France and Geneva, and was also, for a brief spell in 1883 and 1884, president of the London lodges of both the Theosophical Society and the Hermetic Society, which she founded. Her spiritualism fed into her anti-vivisection activities, and she considered her talents an asset to the cause, especially after she convinced herself that she had willed the French vivisector Claude Bernard's death in 1878. 'Oh! I will make it dangerous, nay, deadly, to be a vivisector,' she told Maitland (Maitland, 1.252). 
Alongside her spiritual and anti-vivisection work Kingsford also supported the English women's movement. As early as 1867 she canvassed for signatures for a petition supporting married women's property rights, and her move to London in 1872 facilitated greater participation in women's rights activities by bringing her into contact with many of the feminists of her day, Frances Power Cobbe, Barbara Bodichon, and Elizabeth Wolstenholme. Kingsford contributed to debate by writing in 1868 'An Essay on the Admission of Women to the Parliamentary Franchise' wherein she argued for suffrage on the grounds that it would allow women to fulfil their God given functions as responsible citizens. Her active role in the women's rights movement lasted only a short time; she became increasingly frustrated and dissatisfied with what she detected as the denigration of women as wives and mothers and an unnecessary antagonism between the sexes. She herself seems to have lived an unconventional married life; she spent more time with Maitland than with her husband and daughter, although there is no indication that Algernon stood in the way of his wife's activities. She divided her time, with Maitland in tow, between London, the continent, and Atcham, and was plagued by extreme ill health and pain which was relieved by increasingly liberal doses of chloroform and morphine. Kingsford died in Maitland's arms from consumption at 15 Wynnstay Gardens, Kensington, London, on 22 February 1888. Algernon was not present. She was buried at Atcham a week later. 


@@@@@


doc= 15616


Kingsford, William (1819-1898), civil engineer and historian, born on 23 December 1819 in the parish of St Lawrence Jewry, London, was the son of William Kingsford, innkeeper of Lad Lane, London, and his wife, Elizabeth. Educated at Nicholas Wanostrocht's Alfred House Academy in Camberwell, he shared his teacher's preference for physical pursuits over book learning. He was articled at an early age to an architect, but disliked the life and enlisted in the 1st dragoon guards at the age of seventeen. He went with his regiment to Canada in 1837, became sergeant, and in 1840 obtained his discharge, despite the fact that his colonel, Sir George Cathcart, offered to procure a commission for him. 
Kingsford had learned some rudimentary surveying with his regiment and on the strength of this entered the office of the city surveyor of Montreal in 1841, and in 1842 was promoted to deputy city surveyor, a post which he held until July 1845. Meanwhile, in 1844, with Murdo McIver, he founded the 'Montreal Times'. He vigorously supported the constitutional party in the paper and during the election riots of 1844 in which he was a prominent vigilante. His reform opponents took revenge two years later, nearly killing him and leaving him with two scars to the head. 
In 1846 Kingsford returned to surveying and took temporary positions across Lower Canada, acquiring as he did so the skills of civil engineering. On 29 March 1848 he married Maria Margaret, daughter of William Burns Lindsay, clerk of the legislative assembly of the province of Canada; they had two children. In 1849 he moved to the United States, laying out building lots in Brooklyn, New York, and then in 1850 becoming assistant engineer on the Hudson River railroad, New York. In 1851 he went to Panama to work on the railway and then on the water supply for Panama City. He returned to Canada in 1852 and surveyed several stretches of track for the Grand Trunk, especially around Montreal, and helped construct Victoria Bridge across the St Lawrence at Montreal. He was chief engineer of the city of Toronto for a few months during 1855, but, when he found that his assistants' salaries were to be paid from his own, he returned to work for the Grand Trunk around Toronto until 1864. After undertaking freelance work in Canada, he went to England in 1865, where his experience and his mastery of French, German, Italian, and Spanish led to his being engaged by some English firms, including Thomas Brassey, to advise on railway construction and other commercial projects in Europe. 
In 1867, at the instigation of English capitalists who hoped to build the Canadian Intercolonial Railway, Kingsford returned to Canada, where he remained for the rest of his life. As the dominion resolved to build the line as a government work, he reverted to freelance civil engineering, while continuing his journalism. As a vocal Conservative he benefited when, from 1870, the department of public works was in the hands of the Liberal-Conservative ministry. He was appointed engineer in charge of the harbours of the Great Lakes and the St Lawrence. He continued in this post until 31 December 1879 when he was dismissed by Sir Hector Louis Langevin, minister of public works, ostensibly because reorganization in the department had made the post redundant. Kingsford argued that his was a professional post which should be unaffected by party politics, and the Canadian House of Commons debated the case which tested the incompatibility of the old patronage and the new professionalism. Kingsford argued his point in 'Kingsford and Sir Hector Langevin' (1882) but achieved no redress beyond six months' salary. 
Thus, at the age of sixty, Kingsford found himself cut off from the public civil-engineering projects which gave his profession a unique standing in the new country. He turned instead to history, using material he had collected himself and that in government offices. He had already published several works on Canadian history and geography and his professional life had given him good knowledge of Canadian topography and of military matters. He set to work, following a strict daily routine which allowed him to complete the ten volumes of his 'History of Canada' between 1887 and 1898. To raise the $1200 needed to produce each volume he mortgaged his house and furniture, and he and the project were saved from ruin only through the intervention of friends. The 'History' was warmly received in both England and Canada: Queen's University at Kingston and Dalhousie in Nova Scotia conferred on him the degree of LLD and McGill University gave his name to a recently endowed chair of history. However, the work was criticized by academic historians in Canada, then just beginning to assert professional control over the writing of history, and a more recent judgement is that his 'History' was 'a generally uncoordinated recapitulation of commonplaces, interrupted by irrelevant digressions and delivered in a pedestrian prose of interminable length' ('DCB'). 
Kingsford was a fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, to which he contributed several papers, and in 1887 helped found the Canadian Society of Civil Engineers. He died on 29 September 1898, just a few months after completing his history: his widow was granted a civil-list pension of $100. As Taylor remarks in the 'Dictionary of Canadian Biography', it is a pity that Kingsford is remembered primarily as an amateur historian, when his real contribution was as a professional civil engineer. 


@@@@@


doc= 15617


Kingsley, Charles (1819-1875), novelist, Church of England clergyman, and controversialist, was born on 12 June 1819 at Holne vicarage, Devon, on the eastern edge of Dartmoor. He was the eldest of the six surviving children of Revd Charles Kingsley (1781-1860), then (briefly) curate of Holne, a Hampshire country gentleman from an old family, including soldiers who had fought at Naseby and at Minden, who had taken orders only at the age of thirty-five, three years previously, after his mismanaged inheritance was exhausted. His mother, Mary Lucas (1787-1873), was born in Barbados, the daughter of a judge who had inherited slave-run sugar plantations. But any prospect of substantial wealth from this source eventually passing to the Kingsley family vanished with the decline of the West Indian sugar trade and the abolition of slavery in 1833. His father's subsequent career in the church took the family to Nottinghamshire, to Barnack, near Stamford (1824-30), close to the fen country which later supplied background for his historical novel 'Hereward the Wake', to Clovelly on the north Devon coast (1830-36), which inspired an enduring fascination with sea and shore later reflected in 'Westward Ho!' and 'The Water-Babies', and, finally, in 1836, to St Luke's rectory, Chelsea (1836-60). 
A delicate, nervous, imaginative child afflicted with a stutter which persisted into adult life, Kingsley nevertheless shared his father's passion for country sports and natural history. His education started at home, where he showed a precocious interest in writing sermons and poems. In 1831 he and his brother Herbert were sent to a preparatory school at Clifton, where he was a horrified and fascinated witness to the Bristol riots associated with the 'Reform Bill' agitation, an experience which influenced his ambivalent attitude towards popular politics in later years. The following year the boys went to Helston grammar school in Cornwall, a small school run by Revd Derwent Coleridge, second son of the poet. Kingsley had an attack of cholera at the school (English cholera rather than the more virulent Asiatic cholera then ravaging Cornwall), which left him with a lifelong intestinal weakness but also stimulated his passion for sanitary reform as a way of containing and preventing disease. He seems to have learnt a great deal from informal botanizing expeditions with one of the masters, C. A. Johns, later a distinguished naturalist, and from browsing in the headmaster's library, where he encountered arcane treasures such as Iamblichus and Porphyry, but his formal instruction in classics and mathematics was rather neglected until he and his family moved to London in 1836. He studied at King's College, London (1836-8), where he worked hard and engaged in extensive private reading. Living at home, he became increasingly bored and irritated with the puritanical restrictions of rectory life and the endless fuss of church business and district visiting in his father's large and active evangelical parish. 
In October 1838 Kingsley went up to Magdalene College, Cambridge. Lonely, intensely shy, and physically restless, he gradually found companionship through rowing and riding to hounds, and acquired a close friend in the brilliantly eccentric athlete and amateur scientist Charles Mansfield, another clergyman's son. He discovered the calming effects of tobacco and was soon addicted, though he had already suffered from lung disease. More significantly, he developed religious doubts. He managed to win a scholarship in the May examinations at the end of his first year, and during the long vacation of 1839 met his future wife, Frances Eliza Grenfell, known as Fanny ['see 'Kingsley, Frances Eliza (1814-1891)], devout daughter of Pascoe Grenfell (1761-1838) MP, a wealthy industrialist who had married (as his second wife) Georgiana St Leger, daughter of the first Viscount Doneraile. Kingsley gradually shared his religious difficulties with her. A prolonged period of feverish restlessness, dissipation, and depression, interspersed with fishing trips, boxing lessons, and geologizing expeditions with Professor Sedgwick, came to an end in 1841 when he and Fanny came to an understanding and he resolved to become a clergyman. Six months of desperate work to make up lost time secured him a first class in classics in 1842, and he was ordained to the curacy of Eversley in Hampshire, where he immediately proved himself an energetic pastor deeply concerned with the poor. 
Despite Fanny's predilection for a celibate life associated with one of the Anglican sisterhoods springing up under the influence of the Oxford Movement, and despite opposition from her family mainly because of Kingsley's lack of funds, they eventually married on 10 January 1844. One of Fanny's sisters had married the well-connected Revd Sidney Godolphin Osborne, and it was through Osborne's influence that Kingsley was appointed to the curacy of Pimperne in Dorset and turned his mind increasingly to the problems of agrarian poverty, on which Osborne had published pamphlets. He had spent the difficult years just before his marriage in a bizarre religiously erotic correspondence with Fanny, and in reading Coleridge, F. D. Maurice, and Carlyle under her guidance to develop some kind of intellectual framework to reconcile his poetic, almost pantheistic love of the physical world, his developing social concern, and his powerful awakened sexuality with traditional religious belief. He also began to write and illustrate a prose life of St Elizabeth of Hungary, a conspicuously married saint, as a wedding present for Fanny; it was an early instalment in his lifelong crusade against the celibate ideal of the religious life which had threatened to keep Fanny from him. The material was eventually reworked as a rather uneven quasi-Shakespearian verse tragedy, 'The Saint's Tragedy', and published in 1848 with an aggressively protestant preface. It seemed to attract little attention at the time except among critics of the Oxford Movement in Oxford itself, but Baron von Bunsen, the Prussian ambassador, and Prince Albert greatly admired it, as did Daniel Macmillan, later Kingsley's publisher. In May 1844 Kingsley was invited to return to Eversley as rector, and proceeded to transform a badly neglected parish in what was then a wild country district. A daughter, Rose, was born in 1846. He corresponded with F. D. Maurice, then professor of English and history at King's College, London, on parish and theological matters, and came increasingly under his influence. In 1847 Maurice stood godfather to the Kingsleys' second child, a son who was named after him. In 1848, on Maurice's recommendation, Kingsley obtained a part-time appointment as professor of English at the newly formed Queen's College for Women in London, where he gave lectures on Anglo-Saxon literature and history, among other topics. 
Like Maurice and Maurice's friends the London barristers J. M. Ludlow and Thomas Hughes, Kingsley was affected by the growing social unrest of the 'hungry forties'. When the Chartist movement organized a major demonstration at Kennington Common for 10 April 1848, he and Ludlow were present in person. He sat up late that night drafting a poster addressed to Chartists and signed 'A Working Parson', being deeply sympathetic to the hunger and poverty which had prompted the demonstration but claiming the constitutional reforms demanded by the 'Charter' would not go far enough to secure genuine freedom and reform: that depended on developing moral independence from demagogues and from electoral bribery and corruption, and on reuniting politics with religion. 
In company with Maurice and his friends Kingsley threw himself into a controversial new Christian socialist movement devoted to spreading this gospel and to setting up co-operative workshops for tailors and other oppressed trades. Kingsley and Ludlow co-edited the short-lived Christian socialist journal 'Politics for the People', launched on 6 May 1848. Writing as Parson Lot, Kingsley supplied much of the copy for the paper himself, as well as contributing to its successors the 'Christian Socialist' and the 'Journal of Association'. At a time when the Church of England had remained conspicuously aloof from working-class political movements, he caused consternation by declaring himself a Chartist as well as a Church of England parson. But he was a moralist and a reformer rather than a revolutionary, an upholder of the House of Lords who abhorred the 'physical force' strand in Chartism and dreaded any recurrence of the mob violence he had witnessed as a schoolboy at the Bristol riots. Even so, he was briefly banned from preaching in the diocese of London. His first novel, 'Yeast', characteristically vivid and chaotic, responding to the ferment of the times, attacked celibacy and bad landlords and drew on his experience of rural poverty; it began to appear serially in 'Fraser's Magazine' in July 1848, though it was brought to a hurried conclusion as the publisher, John Parker, became alarmed by its radical tendency. 
Financial worries and the prolonged strain and excitement of all these activities alongside Kingsley's regular parish work brought about the first of several episodes of complete nervous exhaustion. He resigned his position at Queen's College and retreated to Devon for a period of complete rest. But he soon recovered sufficiently to write 'Cheap Clothes and Nasty' (1850), an indignant Christian socialist pamphlet about the clothing industry, and to start work on 'Alton Locke' (1850), a propagandist novel about a working tailor and poet (partly modelled on his Chartist friend Thomas Cooper) who becomes an active Chartist and eventually a Christian. This incorporates some of Kingsley's other recurring concerns, such as sanitary reform, and his conviction that science and religion needed to learn from each other. The novel was harshly reviewed, though Thomas Carlyle liked it -- perhaps because the sympathetic portrait of the radical bookseller Sandy Mackaye was clearly modelled on himself. 
Kingsley's direct involvement with Christian socialism gradually slackened, and he played little part in the movement's most enduring achievement, the Working Men's College, founded in 1852, but his natural combativeness and his vision of a manly and socially committed Christianity, comprehensive and democratic, found alternative expression, notably in his first historical novel, 'Hypatia' (1853), subtitled 'New Foes with an Old Face'. The new foes were J. H. Newman, now a Roman Catholic, and the other leaders of the Oxford Movement, such as E. B. Pusey; the old face imputed to them was that of the fanatical (and of course celibate) monks of fifth-century Alexandria who murdered the Neoplatonist philosopher Hypatia, and who Kingsley viewed as extreme and discreditable examples of the asceticism of the early church from which contemporary Catholic spirituality had drawn inspiration. By way of contrast Kingsley introduces the ostrich-hunting married bishop Synesius and, a little improbably, a crew of cheerfully brutal proto-British Goths who embody Kingsleyan virtues of rough, unconventional decency, courage, physical sturdiness, and a saving respect for women. 
Kingsley had already introduced the type in Lancelot Smith, the hero of 'Yeast', and it was to recur in later work -- in the bluff sea dogs of 'Westward Ho!' and the fierce Saxon warriors in 'Hereward the Wake', and even in the presentation of Greek heroes such as Perseus in 'The Heroes' (1856), written for children. T. C. Sandars, reviewing 'Two Years Ago' in the 'Saturday Review' (February 1857), insisted that he preached a gospel of 'muscular Christianity' (Feb 1857, 176), a gibe taken up by other critics, but Kingsley preferred to call it 'Christian manliness', exemplified by biblical heroes such as David, on whom he delivered a series of sermons published in 1865. Contemporary evidence suggests Kingsley's aggressive masculinity in print was balanced by vulnerability, quick sympathy, and a feminine sensitivity in private. He was far from being the hearty muscular giant he seemed to idolize: nervously active, tall, thin, with piercing eyes and beaky features, he had had more than his share of physical illness since childhood. 
Kingsley's greatest popular success, the historical novel 'Westward Ho!' (1855), was originally planned as a patriotic anti-Catholic tale about the defeat of the Spanish Armada which he hoped would strike a sympathetic note amid contemporary anxieties about 'the Pope and the French invasion', triggered by the restoration of the papal hierarchy in England in 1850 and the aggressive anti-English posturing of Emperor Napoleon III. By the time the novel was finished patriotic feeling had been redirected, as England was fighting Russia in the Crimean War, of which Kingsley was an enthusiastic supporter, but this made the novel seem even more timely. His pamphlet 'Brave Words for Brave Soldiers and Sailors' (1855) was published the same month as 'Westward Ho!' and distributed among the troops at Sevastopol. The Crimean War and the outbreak of cholera in 1853-4 were the principal events of the recent past invoked by the title of his next novel 'Two Years Ago' (1857), his most successful and coherent novel of contemporary life. Kingsley's continuing concern with sanitary reform, which had led him to join a deputation to the prime minister on the subject in 1854, was dramatized in the efforts of his doctor hero to combat cholera and unhealthy housing conditions. 
The prince consort had admired the protestant and Germanic emphasis of Kingsley's 'Saint's Tragedy' and 'Hypatia', and shared his scientific and sanitary enthusiasms, and this led to his appointment as chaplain to the queen in 1859. In 1860, again on the recommendation of the prince consort, Kingsley succeeded Sir James Stephen as regius professor of modern history at Cambridge, then a part-time appointment. He was not the first choice, and he lacked some of the critical and technical skills of later professional historians, but he had published historical lectures on 'Alexandria and her Schools' (1854) as a scholarly offshoot of his background research for 'Hypatia' and he was a popular historical novelist and public figure. Despite his own misgivings his inaugural lecture, 'The limits of exact science applied to history', was a conspicuous success, and in subsequent lectures he was able to hold steady audiences of 100 or more undergraduates, far more than his predecessors had managed. He stimulated interest in his subject and was an effective and tactful private tutor to the prince of Wales during his brief period at Cambridge. But he encountered stern if not entirely disinterested criticism. His Romantic fascination with manly Goths and other early Germanic peoples was rather undiscriminating. The lectures published as 'The Roman and the Teuton' (1864) and his imaginative rather than critical use of sources in 'Hereward the Wake' (1866) were savagely attacked by the historian of Anglo-Saxon and Norman England, E. A. Freeman, who was eager to establish historical studies on a more rigorously professional footing and wanted professors of history to be severe scholars. Professional diffidence, exacerbated by Freeman's criticism, continuing ill health, renewed money worries since there were now four children to educate and launch into adult life (Mary ['see 'Harrison, Mary St Leger] had been born in 1852 and Grenville in 1858), and the strain of preparing lectures, induced him to resign his professorship in 1869, hoping for preferment in the church. A few months later the queen appointed him to a vacant canonry at Chester which was better paid and less demanding. He showed some interest in becoming dean of Winchester in 1872, but this came to nothing. The following year Gladstone proposed, with the approval of the queen, that he should exchange his Chester canonry for a much more lucrative one at Westminster Abbey, and he accepted. Despite his habitual nervousness in public he was a popular and effective preacher when he was in residence and worked particularly well with the dean, A. P. Stanley, with whose broad-church religious views he was substantially in agreement. 
Success and royal favour have been blamed for silencing the radical in Kingsley, but this overstates the case. It is true that he modified the criticism of Cambridge in the revised edition of 'Alton Locke' published in 1862. But even in his Christian socialist heyday his democratic sympathies had been modified by distrust of constitutional reform without moral improvement and by admiration for benignly autocratic Carlylean heroes such as the mysterious Barnakill in 'Yeast'. Early in the 1850s, before royal patronage had been extended to him, he sensed that there were different battles to be fought. The increased prosperity of the 1850s and 1860s seemed to have alleviated the worst economic injustices which he had attacked in 'Yeast' and 'Alton Locke', but he continued to be controversially outspoken on other social and religious issues, supporting sanitary reform, women's education, medical degrees for women, and Darwinian evolution. A proposal to award him an honorary DCL at Oxford in 1863 was successfully blocked by Pusey and his followers, who never forgave him for 'Hypatia'. 
The most damaging controversy of Kingsley's career began with an article in 'Macmillan's Magazine' (January 1864), in which he reviewed volumes 7 and 8 of the new 'History of England' by J. A. Froude, an old friend who had married one of Fanny's sisters. In discussing Froude's treatment of Catholic intrigue in the reign of Elizabeth I, matter he had already dramatized in 'Westward Ho!', Kingsley bluntly opined that 'Truth for its own sake has never been a virtue of the Roman clergy. Father Newman informs us that it need not, and on the whole ought not, to be' ('Charles Kingsley: his Letters', 216), a contention he supported, rather inadequately, by citing Newman's (Anglican) sermon 'Wisdom and innocence' (1844). An exchange of letters and a pamphlet war ensued, culminating in Newman's celebrated 'Apologia pro vita sua' written to vindicate his integrity. Newman had little difficulty in making fun of Kingsley's protestant prejudices and scored easy debating points against his hasty opponent, whose reputation suffered accordingly, but commentators at the time and subsequently disagreed about the merits of the case. Kingsley was in a sense renewing a long-standing debate in moral theology: casuists such as St Alphonsus Liguori had controversially justified equivocation and evasions in particular situations for the greater good of the church. But this was hardly the real issue. Kingsley, the embattled activist, sensed that Catholic spirituality exemplified by Newman could sanction serene, even disdainful, withdrawal from the everyday problems and responsibilities of secular life and from ordinary moral accountability, and he resented and felt threatened by it, especially because it had encouraged Fanny's original sense of a special celibate vocation. Newman chose to respond to his gibes in largely personal terms which did not fully address the more general questions. 
Kingsley's continuing fascination with natural history, particularly marine biology, was less controversial. He gave popular lectures on the subject even when he was in residence at Chester and published enthusiastic works such as 'Glaucus, or, The Wonders of the Shore' (1855) and 'Madam How and Lady Why' (1869). He welcomed the publication of Darwin's 'Origin of Species' in 1859 because it seemed consistent with his own idiosyncratic theory of related moral and physical evolution which he had already illustrated in an evolutionary dream sequence at the end of 'Alton Locke'. His most enduringly popular book, 'The Water-Babies' (1863), began as a story for his own children and an attack on the continuing employment of climbing boys to sweep chimneys. But the story sends little Tom on an evolutionary moral journey and includes incidental satiric commentary on education, fashion, and current affairs, as well as mockery of post-Darwinian controversies about human descent and distinctiveness and the nature of scientific evidence. His main target was the agnostic scientist and polemicist T. H. Huxley, with whom he was, however, on friendly terms. 
Kingsley's last novel, 'Hereward the Wake' (1866), was perhaps his least successful. It set out to be a patriotic narrative of romantically unavailing resistance to William the Conqueror and the Norman yoke, but this was unhelpfully complicated by attacks on degenerate Anglo-Saxon monks and priests and the presence of Danish and Anglo-Danish warriors. The Kingsleys had been guests at the wedding of the prince of Wales to Princess Alexandra of Denmark in 1863, and the Schleswig-Holstein crisis of 1863-4 had briefly kindled interest in Danish affairs, but the Danish elements in the novel only added to the confusions endemic in the sources. The narrative was a grim saga with an unattractive hero redeemed only by strength, savage cunning, and military prowess. 
Kingsley, like Carlyle before him, had always rather admired strong men, however bloodthirsty, and had embarrassed his more liberal friends such as J. M. Ludlow by hero-worshipping Raja Brooke of Sarawak, to whom 'Westward Ho!' was dedicated. John Eyre, Australian explorer and subsequently governor of Jamaica, was another of his slightly dubious heroes. Kingsley had been impressed by Harriet Beecher Stowe and the moral fervour of New England abolitionism, but unlike most of his associates from his Christian socialist days he was lukewarm about Abraham Lincoln, sympathetic to the gentlemanly American south during the civil war, and a little distrustful of black people. Descended on his mother's side from West Indian plantation owners, his first sympathies were with the white community in the West Indies. Though he largely avoided the racist hysteria of Carlyle, he joined with him in 1866 to defend Governor Eyre from charges of excessive severity in suppressing an alleged uprising, while friends such as J. M. Ludlow and Thomas Hughes had joined J. S. Mill's Jamaica committee to press for Eyre's prosecution for murder. 
Financial worries until the last few years of his life drove Kingsley to write too much. Though there are some fine essays, such as his introductions to Susan Winkworth's translations from the German of 'Theologia Germanica' (1854) and 'Tauler' (1857), he rushed into print too quickly, attacking Emerson in his quasi-Platonic dialogue 'Phaethon, or, Loose Thoughts for Loose Thinkers' (1852), dashing off rather unsympathetic sketches of 'The Hermits' for 'Macmillan's Sunday Library' (1868), and freely airing his religious and aesthetic prejudices in often opinionated essays and reviews injudiciously collected as 'Miscellanies' (1859) and 'Plays and Puritans' (1873). But Kingsley's love of outdoor life, his eye for landscape, and his fascination with the natural and human history of particular places gave rise to vivid, quirky occasional essays such as 'North Devon' and 'Chalk stream studies', originally written for 'Fraser's Magazine', which he collected as 'Prose Idylls' (1873). He had written poetry all his life and, while his output was very uneven, the best poems have worn well. These range from songs and ballads such as 'The Sands of Dee' and 'The Last Buccanier' to more ambitious narrative poems such as 'Andromeda', one of the few more or less successful English experiments in quantitative hexameters. In poems such as 'Elegiacs' there is a strong melancholy strain at odds with the boisterous vigour of much of his prose. He kept faith with his Christian socialist past to the extent of reprinting various poems 'connected with 1848-9' in a collected volume, 'Poems' (1871). His sense of poetry as essentially musical attracted composers, and there are song settings of some of his lyrics by Charles Gounod, John Hullah, and the young Gustav Holst. He collaborated very successfully and amicably with Sterndale Bennett, composer and professor of music at Cambridge, in a light-hearted formal ode performed at the installation of the duke of Devonshire as chancellor of the university in 1862. 
In his later years, dogged by ill health and recurring periods of exhaustion and depression, Kingsley seems to have seen himself as a spent force. A lifelong ambition was realized in the winter of 1869-70 when he had the opportunity to visit the West Indies, described enthusiastically in 'At Last' (1871). A lecture tour in the United States in 1874, which took him as far west as Colorado Springs, was undertaken as much to consolidate his improved finances as to see the country, and it proved not only exhilarating but exhausting and ultimately fatal. He was seriously ill in Colorado, and ill again with a liver complaint soon after his return. Fanny fell dangerously ill in December 1874 and he neglected his own health to look after her until he had to take to bed himself with inflammation of the right lung. Fanny recovered, but Kingsley died at Eversley on 23 January 1875. Dean Stanley offered Westminster Abbey, but he was buried in Eversley churchyard. The Bramshill hunt servants and the Gypsies of the common, as well as Dean Stanley and a representative of the prince of Wales, attended the funeral. 
The sheer variousness of Kingsley's career affected his reputation in his own time and subsequently. He did many interesting things in a short lifetime, but few of them supremely well and almost none without controversy. His Christian socialism attracted notice in France and Germany as well as in Britain, though his politics have satisfied neither radicals nor conservatives. He was outstanding as a parish clergyman, though increasingly absent from his parish. The popular preacher, the historian, and the scientific popularizer were soon forgotten. The churchman was recalled, rather unfairly, only as Newman's luckless antagonist. Kingsley the novelist has fared better: he is still remembered as a children's writer, mainly for 'The Water-Babies'. 'Westward Ho!' and 'Hereward the Wake', like 'The Water-Babies', have been frequently reprinted and adapted, and have survived, a little precariously, as juvenile classics. 'Alton Locke' has retained a more specialised academic readership as a Victorian 'social-problem' novel. Literary criticism has become more tolerant of Kingsley's eccentricities of form and vivid incoherence, if not of his outlook on race, class, and gender. Historians of literature, sexuality, and social movements continue to be interested in his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 15618


Kingsley, George Henry (1826-1892), physician and traveller, the fourth of the five children of the Revd Charles Kingsley (1781-1860) of Battramsley House in the New Forest, and his wife, Mary (1787-1873), daughter of Nathan Lucas, was born at Barnack rectory, Barnack, Northamptonshire, on 14 February 1826. Charles Kingsley and Henry Kingsley were his brothers. He was educated in London at King's College School and at St George's Hospital, and in Paris, where he was slightly wounded on the barricades of 1848. His work in combating an outbreak of cholera in Flintshire was commemorated by his brother Charles in the portrait of Tom Thurnall in 'Two Years Ago'. He completed his medical education at Heidelberg, and returned to England about 1850. 
Kingsley then became private physician to the marquess of Ailesbury, the duke of Norfolk, the duke of Sutherland, and the first and second earls of Ellesmere. Kingsley also had a keen interest in literature. He produced a translation of Heyse's 'Four Phases of Love' (1857) and 'A Gossip on the Sutherland Hillside' (1861). During his time as physician to the earl of Ellesmere he compiled a catalogue of the Elizabethan drama quartos held in the library at Bridgewater House, and he edited Francis Thynne's 'Animadversions uppon the Annotacions and Corrections of the Impressions of Chaucer's Workes... Reprinted in 1598' (1865). 
Kingsley married Mary Bailey (died 1892) in 1860; they had a daughter, Mary Henrietta Kingsley, and a son, Charles. In 1862 ill health had forced Kingsley to take a cruise on HMS 'St George'; this seems to have been the beginning of more than twenty years' almost continuous travel. He made several trips to the Mediterranean, and one to Egypt with the duke of Rutland. Indeed most of his journeys were undertaken as the medical adviser or travelling companion of members of the aristocracy. In 1866 he accompanied Lady Herbert of Lea and her children on a tour of Spain, and in the following year he travelled with Lady Herbert's eldest son, the earl of Pembroke, to the south seas. A book describing their experiences, 'South Sea Bubbles by the Earl and the Doctor' (1872), proved extremely popular. 
In 1870 Kingsley set off with Lord Dunraven on a visit to the USA and Canada which was to last five years. During this visit Kingsley, who was a fellow of both the Linnean Society and the Royal Microscopical Society, made many contributions as a naturalist to 'The Field' magazine under the pseudonym of 'the Doctor'. Natural history apart, he still found time to shoot 'not only moose in the forest of Arcadia, but almost every other kind of living thing' (Kingsley, 99). During his visit Kingsley met Buffalo Bill, described as belonging 'to the school of Charles I, pale, large eyed and dreamy' (ibid., 135), and treated Rocky Mountain Jim. It seems that only bad weather prevented Kingsley from being with General Custer at the Little Bighorn. After visits to Florida and the southern states in 1888 Kingsley went on to travel even more extensively, with journeys to Newfoundland, Cape Cod, Japan, New Zealand, and Australia. 
Kingsley hated town life and noise. He also possessed a temper which his daughter described as 'volcanic but never vindictive' (Kingsley, 195). This combination made his return to domestic life in England somewhat trying for Kingsley, who 'loved the bright eyes of danger' (ibid., 202), and the rest of the household; his daughter had to remove her fighting cocks out of range of his hearing; the maid had to grease the bearing of the kitchen pump and could never sing more than a line and a half of a hymn. His greatest anger was reserved for 'Mr Gladstone, or any Roman Catholic Priest... the sight of printed reports of Mr Gladstone's observations or any priestly form would rouse [him] from any depths of study or contemplation into a very pretty temper' (ibid., 200). Newspapers reporting Gladstone's speeches would regularly be torn to shreds or thrust into the fire. 
Kingsley moved from his London house in Southwood Lane, Highgate, to Bexleyheath, Kent, in 1879, and from there to Cambridge, where, after suffering from a bout of rheumatic fever, he died peacefully at his home, 7 Mortimer Road, on 5 February 1892. He was buried at Highgate cemetery in London; his wife died six weeks later. 


@@@@@


doc= 15619


Kingsley, Henry (1830-1876), novelist and essayist, was born on 2 January 1830 at Barnack, Northamptonshire, near Stamford, the youngest of the eight children of the Revd Charles Kingsley (1781-1860) and his wife, Mary Lucas (1785-1873), daughter of Nathan Lucas of Rushford Lodge, Norfolk, and Farley Hall, Barbados. He was the brother of Charles Kingsley (1819-1875), the Anglican clergyman and novelist, and George Henry Kingsley (1826-1892), a physician and scholar, and the uncle of Mary St Leger Harrison (1852-1931), who wrote novels under the name of Lucas Malet, and Mary Henrietta Kingsley (1862-1900), the African explorer and writer. 
Reared in Clovelly, Devon, which later would become the setting for several of his novels, and then in 1836 in Chelsea, Kingsley attended King's College School, London, from 1844, and then King's College in 1847. After a two-year stint at Colebrook, studying under the Revd Thomas Drosier, he matriculated at Worcester College, Oxford, on 6 March 1850. According to contemporaneous accounts, his Oxford years were noted more for his addiction to athletics and exuberant social pleasures than to academic pursuits. He won a wager that he could run a mile, row a mile, and trot a mile within fifteen minutes, and he later won the Diamond Sculls at Henley-on-Thames. As to his other overindulgences, he engaged in wine-drinking breakfasts and suppers, pipe-smoking contests, and numerous rags and riots. Along with Edwin Arnold (1833-1904), the future poet and orientalist, he was co-founder of the Fez Club, a short-lived nonsensical secret society of fifty undergraduate men dedicated to misogamy, misogyny, and 'celibate freedom' who donned fezzes and other special accessories and met for breakfast at Dickenson's Hotel and Coffee House in the Turl in Oxford to eat, to smoke oriental tobacco in oriental pipes, and to defend male superiority over 'the gentler sex'. 
Without sitting for a degree and with the benefit of a timely legacy, Kingsley left Oxford in 1853 to seek his fortune in the Australian goldfields. For slightly more than four years (December 1853 to February 1858) and without any communication with his parents, he drifted and struggled in Australia with little financial success, labouring in the goldfields, being employed as an agricultural worker and stock driver, and wandering as a 'sundowner', arriving at outstations at sunset, seeking food and lodging. He made no fortune, but he would later use his experiences and his first-hand information about Australia in several of his novels and some of his essays. A series of nine watercolours that he painted of Australian landscapes that interested him is on record at the Mitchell Library, State Library of New South Wales, Sydney. 
Just as abruptly as he had left England, Kingsley returned to it. In May 1858 he arrived in England and went first to London to his parents' former home at St Luke's in Chelsea. It is said that he was afraid that they might have died during his long absence, and so he paced up and down outside the rectory for over an hour, dreading the news that he might hear. Finally, taking heart, he knocked on the door and was relieved to learn that his parents were living at Eversley, Hampshire. He settled with them and finished a novel begun in Australia, the critically and commercially successful 'Recollections of Geoffry Hamlyn' (1859), a romance set mainly in early nineteenth-century Australia. The nineteenth-century critic Desmond Byrne, writing an appreciative account of Kingsley from an Australian point of view, remarked that he 'was the first to describe in fiction the rural life of the country, to recognize the beginning of an aristocracy of landholders, and to commemorate the pervading spirit of cheerful confidence to which so much of the rapid development of Australia was due. (Byrne, 107)' Kingsley continued his success by publishing his acknowledged masterpiece among his seventeen novels, 'Ravenshoe' (1862), a work this time set mainly in England. Although the novel pits Roman Catholicism against protestantism, the story centres on Charles Ravenshoe, a young, irresponsible man whose character is reminiscent of Kingsley during his Oxford and Australian days. Charles develops from impetuous boyhood to a sobered manhood, through circumstances that include his involvement in the Crimean War, specifically the charge of the light brigade. Like most of Kingsley's romances, 'Ravenshoe' depicts the adventures of heroic-tinged gentry with noble spirits who have difficulties adjusting to the changing Victorian age. As Michael Sadleir has stated, 'No writer of the mid-Victorian age had so delicate a sympathy for splendour in decay, so sensitive an admiration for the forlorn present of a noble past. He is the prose-laureate of wasted beauty' ('EdinR', 330). Kingsley's third novel, 'Austin Elliot' (1863), did not achieve the success of the first two novels. 
On 19 July 1864, at St Luke's Church, Chelsea, London, Kingsley married his second cousin, Sarah Maria Kingsley Hazelwood (1842-1922), a governess, and moved to Hillside House, Wargrave, near Henley-on-Thames, where they lived until late 1869. There he published extensively: numerous essays and reviews in such periodicals as 'Macmillan's Magazine', 'North British Review', and the 'Fortnightly Review'; an edition of 'Robinson Crusoe' with a biographical introduction of Daniel Defoe (1868); 'Tales of Old Travel' (1869), a collection of well-researched essays which retold fourteen different ancient and modern exploration narratives; and five novels, four of which were published in both serialization and volume formats. His major novels during this time include his second Australian one, 'The Hillyars and the Burtons: a Story of Two Families' (1865), an involved saga about two families, one high-born and rich and the other low-born and poor, combining his memories of Chelsea with the fictionalization of some of his Australian experiences. He also wrote 'Leighton Court' (1866), a slight but rather charming tale of country life, and one of his own favourite novels, 'Mademoiselle Mathilde' (1868), a work dealing with the French Revolution which, like Dickens's 'A Tale of Two Cities' (1859), ends with an impersonation at the guillotine. 
During his years at Wargrave, Kingsley unintentionally became involved in the intense Governor Edward Eyre controversy which rocked and bitterly divided Britain's intellectual world. Prior to his becoming governor of Jamaica and being involved in the native rebellion against him, Eyre had been a well-known and respected Australian explorer. Coincidentally, Kingsley had written a very favourable two-part article on Eyre's Australian travels for 'Macmillan's Magazine' (October and November 1865), the first of which had appeared a few weeks before the rebellion. Some of his comments regarding Eyre were reprinted in 'The Times' and set up a public correspondence between Kingsley and a reader who took exception to some of his remarks. Merely on the periphery of the controversy, Kingsley never publicly defended Governor Eyre; rather, he was exalting Eyre in his role as an Australian explorer. 
In the late 1860s Kingsley found himself burdened with debt caused in part by his wife's chronic illness (exacerbated by frequent miscarriages) and in part by poor financial management and extravagance. Suffering from the consequent debilitating pressure of producing one novel after another, on 1 October 1869 he accepted the editorship of the Edinburgh 'Daily Review', a daily penny journal that was the organ of the Free Presbyterian church, and with Sarah moved to Goshen Back, Morningside, in Edinburgh. Kingsley's lack of the journalistic acumen necessary to be an effective editor, combined with tension between him and the Free Church party management on ecclesiastical and civil matters, soon proved that he was not suited to the position. The outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War gave him an opportunity to separate himself from his editorial desk, and on 5 August 1870 he left Edinburgh for Luxembourg. A much better war correspondent than editor, he vividly and at times poetically described the destruction and inhumanity of war as he witnessed the battle of Sedan and visited hospitals with the Red Cross Society. His coverage was published in the 'Daily Review' during September 1870, and he also used his experiences as a basis for his novel 'Valentin: a French Boy's Story of Sedan' (1872), which was also serialized in 'Every Boy's Annual' (1873). Towards the end of his eight weeks as a correspondent he was weakened by an attack of bronchitis and returned to Edinburgh. He resigned as editor of the 'Daily Review' in April 1871. 
The Kingsleys left Edinburgh for London and lived first at 24 Bernard Square, near Russell Square, Bloomsbury, and then at 29 Fortress Terrace, in semi-rural Kentish Town. Desperate for money and at odds with his brother Charles and his wife because of constant pleas for financial assistance, Kingsley feverishly produced one poorly received novel after another, such as 'The Harveys' (1872) and 'Oakshott Castle' (1873), the latter called by the 'Saturday Review' almost the 'worst novel ever written' (26 April 1873, 563). Both the quality of his work and his health deteriorated. In the summer of 1875 the Kingsleys made their final move, to Cuckfield, Sussex, where they lived in an old timbered and gabled cottage called The Attress. Kingsley published the novels 'Number Seventeen' (1875) and 'The Grange Garden' (1876), a few short stories, and 'Fireside Studies' (1876), a collection of seven essays on literary figures such as Addison and Steele, Beaumont and Fletcher, and Ben Jonson, five of which had been published previously in 'Temple Bar' and the 'New Quarterly Magazine'. However, he was seriously ill from cancer of the tongue and trachea. He died at The Attress on 24 May 1876 and was buried on the 29th at Cuckfield; his wife survived him. His last work, 'The Mystery of the Island' (1877), a children's novella, was published posthumously. 
In appearance Kingsley was short and had a plain, undistinguished face. In later years he grew a full, bushy beard. John Cordy Jeaffreson, his friend and fellow student at Worcester College, described him as having a 'weedy frame and curious visage.... Resembling Charles Kingsley (who was far from well looking) in the straight mouth, and deep line, descending on either side of the face from the unshapely nose to the corner of the graceless lips, which distinguished the clergyman's visage. (Jeaffreson, 1.79)' Although overshadowed as a novelist by his brother, Henry Kingsley has always entertained a dedicated coterie. In 1895 Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch, for example, wrote: 'I worshipped his books as a boy; today I find them full of faults -- often preposterous, usually ill-constructed, at times unnatural beyond belief.... And yet each time I read 'Ravenshoe' -- and I must be close upon 'double figures' -- I like it better. Henry did my green unknowing youth engage, and I find it next to impossible to give him up and quite impossible to choose the venerated Charles as a substitute in my riper age. (Quiller-Couch, 67)' Other admirers, such as Clement Shorter, Justin McCarthy, Michael Sadleir, and Angela Thirkell, would agree with the assessment that Kingsley was 'a gifted and spirited storyteller, whose prose at its best has a quiet force and a felicity that make it worthy to be placed beside that of the finest literary craftsmen.... [H]e had the ability to create fresh descriptions of manly and noble action and beautiful Australian and English sea and landscape scenes. And, above all, his own enjoyment of life infuses his best romances with a vigor and joviality that still captivate readers. (Scheuerle, 1)' 



@@@@@


doc= 15620


Kingsley, Mary Henrietta (1862-1900), traveller and writer, born in Islington, London, on 13 October 1862, was the eldest child of George Henry Kingsley (1826-1892), a physician and traveller, and his wife and former housekeeper, Mary Bailey (died 1892). The novelists Charles Kingsley and Henry Kingsley were her uncles. Her parents married only four days before her birth, but she managed to keep this a secret throughout her life, and indeed it remained undisclosed until long after her death. 
In 1863, soon after Mary Kingsley's birth, her parents moved to Highgate, where her only sibling, Charles, was born in 1866. Her father, an enthusiastic traveller, attached himself as private physician to titled families on their world tours, using the opportunity to collect ethnographical information; he was rarely at home. The remaining family led a private, even secluded life, and Mary grew up a rather silent girl, shirking social gatherings. Describing herself as a 'doer of odd jobs' (letter to Matthew Nathan, 12 March 1899, Nathan MSS), as a young woman she supported her mother in household duties and assisted in her father's amateur anthropological work, for which she learned German. She was not sent to school, but read omnivorously, and created a world of her own among the travel, natural history, and science books in her father's library. 
In 1879 the family moved to Bexleyheath in Kent, and in the spring of 1886 to Cambridge, where Mary's brother had entered Christ's College to study law. This change had a great effect on her; she made friends among the academic community, including Francis Burkitt and Agnes Smith Lewis, and began to develop her own academic and social skills. About the spring of 1888, Lucy Toulmin Smith, an old family friend, gave her her first taste of foreign travel when she took her to Paris for a week. 
During the four years that followed, Mary Kingsley devoted herself to nursing her mother, whose health deteriorated to such an extent that she lost the power of speech and was, eventually, paralysed. During the latter part of this period she also had care of her father, who had returned home broken in health after rheumatic fever. Dr Kingsley died in February 1892, and his wife in April. The heavy sense of responsibility which had weighed on Mary was lightened, and after a trip to the Canary Islands in August she returned restored in health and refreshed in mind, full of new possibilities awakened by all she had seen, especially the people and goods from the African continent about which she had so avidly read. 
Mary Kingsley moved with her brother to an attic flat in Addison Road, Kensington. Filled with a passion for travel and bolstered by a desire to further her anthropological studies, she thought first of going to India, but decided eventually on a voyage to west Africa. She acquired a collector's outfit and posted letters of introduction to missionaries, traders, and government officials on the west African coast. With a new-found sense of freedom, she drew up her will and set out alone in August 1893. 
Mary Kingsley first touched African soil in Freetown, Sierra Leone, on 17 August, then headed slowly south to Luanda. After making her way north again, in October she visited Richard Dennett's trading station at Cabinda. Information gathered on this two-week visit was later utilized in an introduction to Dennett's 'Notes on the Folk Lore of the Fjort -- French Congo' (1898). She also collected or purchased scientific specimens along her route. She reached Liverpool again in December 1893. 
The collections which Mary Kingsley brought home were considered valuable by the scientific community, and the voyage had been a foretaste of what she might do with more definite aims and better preparation. Determined to undertake a more rigorous research project in west Africa, she contacted Dr Albert Gunther, keeper of zoology at the British Museum, who gave her a large range of collectors' materials. By the end of the year she had secured a commission from the publisher George Macmillan for a book on west Africa. With increased expertise, resources, and confidence, she sailed from Liverpool on 23 December 1894 in the company of Lady Ethel Macdonald, the wife of the commissioner-general of the Oil Rivers Protectorate, whom she had met in Calabar in 1893. 
Mary Kingsley stayed four months with the Macdonalds at the Calabar residency, nursing the European residents through a smallpox outbreak and, despite the Brass uprising, making brief trips inland, and accompanied the Macdonalds on an official visit to the Spanish governor on Fernando Po. In April she travelled upriver to Ekene to visit the maverick Scottish missionary Mary Slessor, with whom she formed a strong bond of friendship. 
At the beginning of May, Mary Kingsley began her journey south to Gabon, before ascending the Ogooue River and passing through the dangerous rapids above N'Djole. A short though daring journey through a part of the Fang country which had never been reached by a European before, leading her own two-canoe expedition from Lambarene on the Ogooue River to Agonjo on the upper waters of the Ramboe River, established her reputation as an explorer. In August she visited Corisco Island. The last feat of this second African journey was the ascent of Mount Cameroun (13,760 ft) by a route previously unattempted by a European. 
In order to pay her way and make contact with African peoples, Mary Kingsley learned to trade in rubber, ivory, tobacco, and other common trading goods. She brought home a collection of insects, shells, and plants; eighteen species of reptiles; and sixty-five species of fish, of which three were entirely new and were named after her. Careful notes and observations on the spot, combined with the writings of earlier travellers, were afterwards used as the foundation for her lectures, articles, and books. 
Mary Kingsley landed in England on 30 November 1895. There was immediate press interest in her 'surprising and courageous adventures' ('Daily Telegraph', 3 Dec 1895, 3). Angered by the inevitable focus on her achievements as a lone woman, her first venture into print was a letter to the 'Daily Telegraph', countering a report that she was a 'New Woman'. News of her travels was quickly followed by a flood of invitations to write articles and give talks. In February her first lecture, delivered before the Scottish Geographical Society, was read out by a male fellow while she was present on the platform; the following month her paper to the Liverpool Geographical Society was read by the trader James Irvine. Although the Liverpool talk was similar in content to that delivered in Scotland, she added an outline of her proposals for a system of informal economic imperialism in Africa, knowing that her audience would contain members of Liverpool's commercial community. 
In January 1897 Mary Kingsley's first book, 'Travels in West Africa, Congo Francais, Corisco and Cameroons', was published, reflecting her own eclectic interests, as a collection of 'facts, good healthy facts... all hopelessly adrift and mixed up pretty nearly as much as the cargo in a palm oil trader -- missionary intelligence entangled in the Lippoums Genera of beetles -- trade statistics with the habits of fish' (letter to George Macmillan, 18 Dec 1894, Macmillan MSS). Nevertheless, the publicity surrounding publication put her in contact with yet more influential people, including the Liverpool businessman John Holt, the Indian expert Sir Alfred Lyall, and the anthropologist James Frazer. By June 1897 she had engaged a lecture agent, Gerald Christy. 
Mary Kingsley's article in 'The Spectator' of 19 March 1898 on the imposition of a 'hut-tax' in Sierra Leone drew her into another political controversy, and led to her being approached by the colonial secretary, Joseph Chamberlain, who clandestinely courted her advice. With huge work demands and an unfulfilled longing to return to the African continent, that same year she suffered a breakdown. 
During the next two years Mary Kingsley lectured on west Africa throughout the country, speaking to divergent audiences, including nurses, working men, scientists, scholars, and both the Liverpool and Manchester chambers of commerce, where she was the first woman to address the members. Her great desire was that the general public should know the conditions of life and government in the west African colonies. She drew attention to the injustices of the crown colony system of British rule and spoke out in favour of British trading interests in the area, defending the 'liquor traffic' which had been condemned by the missionary societies. 
In private, Mary Kingsley claimed that her understanding of and sympathy for African societies arose from an ability to 'think in black' ('West Africa', 59), owing particularly to the fact that she was a woman. From this position she defended polygamy and even the slave trade. The missionary societies' attempts to Europeanize Africans, she said, was misguided and harmful, immersing Africans in a 'second hand rubbishy white culture' ('Travels in West Africa', 20). In her own writing, she focused on the Fang, Africans who were still 'in the raw state' (letter to E. S. Hartland, 5 Jan 1897, Hartland MSS). 
With such controversial views, and wary of claims that her lone travels and public work were inappropriate activities for a woman, Mary Kingsley always took pains to dress conservatively, usually in black, and to tie back her long hay-coloured hair in a tight bun secured with plenty of pins, giving the impression of a far older woman. She was not conventionally attractive; Lucy Toulmin Smith wrote that 'her fine square brow was her chief beauty' ('DNB'). But this hard appearance was softened by a keen sense of humour, displayed in both her talks and her writing. 
Although publicly denying any political ambitions, in private Mary Kingsley rigorously networked behind the scenes, firing off letters to those in positions of influence, including John Strachey, editor of 'The Spectator', and Sir George Goldie of the Royal Niger Company, cultivating their friendship with what she called 'feminine artfulness' (letter to John Holt, 1 Jan 1898, Holt MSS). 
In February 1899 'West African Studies' appeared. Mary Kingsley's second book was far more ambitious than her first, outlining an 'alternative plan' for west Africa. This would put administrative control in the hands of European trading interests and incorporate African opinion. An arrangement of economic ties under British merchants rather than administrative control through 'pen-pushers and ostrich feathers' was her aim. Only such a system, she claimed, would leave African cultural, legal, and social organizations intact. 
In February 1899, at a dinner party, Mary Kingsley was introduced to Matthew Nathan, the recently appointed acting governor of Sierra Leone, for whom she developed an unrequited attachment. Her relationships with other professional women were often competitive and confrontational; in particular she clashed with Flora Shaw, colonial editor of 'The Times', who refused to review her books. In August 1899 she withheld her support from a petition requesting women's admission to the learned societies. 'These androgynes ['sic'] I have no time for', she complained (letter to John Scott Keltie, 1 Dec 1899, Royal Geographical Society correspondence, 1881-1910). 
Mary Kingsley's health continued to suffer under the strain of being a 'bushman 'and' a drawing-roomer' (letter to Hatty Johnson, 27 Jan 1898, South African Library), and she longed to get away. The South African War of 1899 turned her thoughts to South Africa, from where she hoped to return to her own west coast. She sailed on 11 March 1900. On her arrival at Cape Town she offered her services as a nurse and was posted to the Simon's Town Palace Hospital to tend to Boer prisoners of war. Within two months the typhoid that was killing her patients struck her, and on 3 June 1900 she died. According to her own wishes, she was buried at sea. The coffin was conveyed from Simon's Town harbour on a torpedo boat with full military honours. 
Commentators on Mary Kingsley's life and work have often accredited her with laying the political foundation for the introduction of indirect rule in Northern Nigeria. But it is in the informal sector of political life that she left her legacy. Her appeal for an understanding of African social and legal systems and the importance of commercial interests forged a new pressure group in colonial politics called the Fair Commerce Party, Third Party, or simply 'Kingsleyism' ('Glasgow Herald', 27 Dec 1902). The journalist E. D. Morel, the businessman John Holt, and the historian Alice Stopford Green were central in this movement, and the Congo Reform Association and African Society, founded in Mary Kingsley's memory, were the new forums through which they operated. 
Mary Kingsley's lone travels, her sympathy for African societies, and her unorthodox views suggest a woman with radical opinions on both race and gender. In this spirit her work has been republished ('Travels in West Africa', Virago, 1982), and biographies have portrayed her as a pioneer (Katherine Frank, 'A Voyager Out', 1987). The Mary Kingsley medal of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine was founded in her honour. But her social conservatism, and in particular her declarations against the widening of women's rights, dog attempts to reclaim her as a proto-feminist. At the same time the seriousness of her political programme and the tragedy of her death make it impossible for her to be recast successfully as one of the wearisomely sprightly lady travellers discovered in the 1980s and 1990s. Enigmatic and impossible to stereotype, Mary Kingsley established in her lifetime and has retained after her death the reputation as one of the most celebrated of all women travellers and travel writers. Her courage, skill, and adaptability in little-known and difficult terrain were remarkable; her insight into African culture was penetrating, especially in one whose direct contact with the continent stretched over only two years; the skill with which she advanced her ideas in Britain was formidable; her literary talent, despite her self-deprecating description, was conspicuous; and the scope of her intellect was wide. But, unlike other women travellers, even Isabella Bishop, Mary Kingsley's engagement with and her often prescient if idiosyncratic views on social and political questions have ensured that her reputation extends well beyond the confines of travel and travel writing. 


@@@@@


doc= 15621


Kingsley, William (1698/9-1769), army officer, was the son of William Kingsley (1669-1705), army officer and landowner, of St Anne's parish, Westminster, and his wife, Alice, daughter and heir of William Randolph of Maidstone, Kent. He was a direct descendant from William Kingsley, archdeacon of Canterbury (1584-1647), who established the Kingsleys, who were of Lancashire origin, as a Kentish landed family in the mid-seventeenth century; from him Charles Kingsley the novelist also traced his descent. 
Kingsley's father, William, was an ensign in Sir Edward Dering's regiment of foot (later the 24th foot) which was raised in Kent in March 1689 for service in William III's Irish campaign. He remained in service in Ireland and Flanders, latterly in Colonel William Selwyn's regiment of foot, until he retired on half-pay in 1697. Kingsley's mother had brought her husband considerable property in Maidstone including a residence thenceforward known as Kingsley House, as well as an estate in the parish of Kennington, near Ashford, in Kent. 
Kingsley matriculated at St John's, Oxford, on 19 November 1717, aged eighteen, but he did not take a degree. On 24 June 1721 he was commissioned lieutenant and captain in the 3rd foot guards (later the Scots Guards) in the company commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Wolfe, father of General James Wolfe. He was promoted captain-lieutenant in the same regiment in 1743; captain and lieutenant-colonel in 1745; brevet colonel in 1750; and regimental major, with the rank of colonel of foot, on 29 January 1751. He was aide-de-camp to his colonel, John Murray, second earl of Dunmore, at Dettingen, and was present with the 1st battalion of his regiment at the battle of Fontenoy, where a cannon-ball passed between his legs and killed four men behind him, on 11 May 1745. When the collected grenadier companies of the several regiments of guards marched from London for the north in the following December (the 'march to Finchley'), he was one of the officers sent ahead into Northamptonshire by the duke of Cumberland to obtain information of the enemy's movements. He was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the Scots guards in 1752. On 22 May 1756 Kingsley was made colonel of the Lancashire Fusiliers. James Wolfe, then lieutenant-colonel of the regiment at Devizes, wrote of him: 'Our new colonel is a sensible man, and very sociable and polite' (Smyth, 37n.). 
Kingsley was with his regiment in the Rochefort expedition of 1757, and afterwards went to Germany as major-general (commission dated 20 January 1758). He greatly distinguished himself at the battle of Minden on 1 August 1759, at the head of a brigade composed of the 20th (Kingsley's), 25th (Home's), and 51st (Brudenell's) foot, which was very prominently engaged. 'Kingsley's grenadiers', as the 20th was popularly called, is said to have marched through some gardens or hedges where the men put roses in their buttonholes, a circumstance subsequently commemorated by the regimental custom of wearing 'Minden roses' in the caps on each anniversary of the day. The successful advance of the 'Minden battalions' is still regarded as a feat of bravery and endurance without parallel in the campaigns of the British army in the eighteenth century. The regiment had six officers and eighty men killed and eleven officers and 224 men wounded, and was excused from all further duty on account of its losses. In his general order of 2 August, Prince Ferdinand complimented both Kingsley and Waldegrave, his fellow commander, 'for their great courage, and the good order in which they conducted their brigades' (Smyth, 57). On 4 August a countermanding order announced: 'Kingsley's regiment of the British line will resume its share of the duty at its own request'. Kingsley was afterwards engaged at Ziezenberg and elsewhere. He was appointed governor of Fort William on 22 March 1760 but did not reside there. He became a lieutenant-general in December 1760, and was appointed to the command of a secret expedition, with William Draper as his quartermaster-general. The force was at first destined for eastward of the Cape, but was afterwards ordered to rendezvous at Quiberon for an attempt on Belle Ile on the coast of Brittany. The death of George II and other circumstances delayed the expedition, and Kingsley's orders were eventually countermanded. He was not actively employed again. 
Kingsley was an outspoken, independent Englishman, extremely popular with his soldiers, and an active freemason. He was over seventy years of age and unmarried at the time of his death at Kingsley House, Stone Street, Maidstone, on 9 October 1769. He was buried in the family vault at St Mary's Church, Kennington, near Ashford, Kent. Upon inheriting the family estates he had bequeathed most of the property, for life, to his sister, Alicia, who married Stephen Otway, of Maidstone. However, she died before him in 1761. His other sister, Caroline, a spinster, died in 1756. By his will of 16 March 1764 (proved on 26 October 1769) Kingsley House and his estates in Kennington, Patricksbourne, and elsewhere, passed to his first cousin, Charles Kingsley, of London. The mansion remained in the family's possession until sold for building sites in the mid-nineteenth century. It was demolished in 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 15622


Kingsmill, Andrew (1537/8-1569), civil lawyer and religious activist, was the second son of Sir John Kingsmill (c.1497-1556) ['see under 'Kingsmill family (per. c.1480-1698)] of Sidmontan, Hampshire, and Constance Goring (died 1580/81) of Burton, Sussex; he was the fourth of their thirteen children. The Kingsmills were a family of common lawyers that had been prominent in the local politics of Hampshire only since the later 1530s. Both the Kingsmill and Goring families had supported Thomas Cromwell and his policies during the 1530s, along with the incipient cause of protestantism. 
Andrew Kingsmill shared his parents' commitment to protestantism and followed his father in studying the law, although in his case it was the civil law. On 23 August 1553 he matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and in 1558 All Souls College elected him a fellow. At the beginning of 1562 he earned the degree of BCL, and with it a reputation for great legal learning which propelled him into the position of dean of law at All Souls College. But during that same time his interests shifted to studying the 'Bible' and theology. Francis Mills, his friend and contemporary at All Souls, reported that Kingsmill wrote his 'A View of Man's Estate; wherein the Great Mercy of God in Man's Free Justification is Showed' (posthumously published in London, 1574; reprinted 1576 and 1577) when he was twenty-two years old. According to that statement composition would have taken place some time between 1559 and 1561, but a printed note at the end of the book reads 'By M. A. K. The yeare of our Lorde 1562'. It was also said that Kingsmill could recite from memory in Greek the epistles to the 'Romans' and 'Galatians', the first epistle of 'St John', various other chapters from the 'Old' and 'New' testaments, and certain psalms. 
According to Wood, at the beginning of Elizabeth's reign Kingsmill was sometimes engaged in preaching protestantism, albeit informally, in an Oxford still dominated by Marian Catholics. During the vestiarian controversy he took up a position opposed to the use of vestments, and wrote to Archbishop Matthew Parker urging tolerance of nonconformity in that matter, which he defined as an indifferent practice. He discussed the same issue with his brother-in-law, Bishop James Pilkington of Durham. In 1566 an anti-vestiarian delegation, including Kingsmill, was sent to Theodore Beza of Geneva but failed to obtain his full support. Kingsmill never returned to England. Instead he remained in Geneva, where he was well regarded. After studying Greek, Hebrew, and theology there for three years as preparation for becoming a minister of religion, he moved on to Lausanne, where he died during September 1569, aged only thirty-one. In his will he left $5 to All Souls to buy the works of Calvin and Peter Martyr for the college library; they were purchased in 1576. Kingsmill published nothing during his short life, but two of his writings were posthumously seen through to publication by Francis Mills, his literary executor and a fellow protestant. Like 'A View of Man's Estate', his other work, 'A most excellent and comfortable treatise, for all such as are any maner of way either troubled in minde or afflicted in bodie' (1577; repr. 1578, 1585), was theological and devotional in nature. Mills assessed Andrew Kingsmill as 'a Phoenix among Lawyers, a rare example of godlynesse amongst gentlemen' ('A View of Man's Estate', preface, sig. A iii). 


@@@@@


doc= 15623


Kingsmill, Sir Robert Brice, first baronet (1730-1805), naval officer, was the second of the two sons of Charles Brice (1683/4-1748) of Castle Chichester, Island Magee, co. Antrim, a captain in the army, and Jane, daughter of William Robinson of Newtownards, co. Down. Robert Brice was made a lieutenant on 29 April 1756, appointed commander of the sloop 'Swallow' in February 1761, and confirmed in the rank on 3 July as a result of his capture of the French privateer 'Sultan' (10 guns). In 1762 he commanded the bomb-vessel 'Basilisk' at Sir George Rodney's capture of Martinique and St Lucia, where he was wounded. On 26 May he was posted to the 'Crescent' (28 guns), and in 1764 returned to England. Some time between 1762 and 1764 he married Elizabeth (1716-1783), only surviving daughter of Hugh Corry of Newtownards, co. Down, and his wife, Frances Kingsmill (1682-1721), of Sydmonton, Hampshire. On the death, on 8 January 1766, of her last surviving maternal uncle, William Kingsmill, a bachelor, Elizabeth Brice succeeded to the Kingsmill estates and her husband assumed the surname Kingsmill by act of parliament. 
Kingsmill commanded the 'Vigilant' (64 guns) in the battle of Ushant on 27 July 1778. In November of that year Lord Sandwich thought Kingsmill 'a good officer but rather discontented and complaining' though he had not 'shewn any violence' (HoP, 'Commons', 3.12) in the controversy which followed the battle. Yet after the courts martial Kingsmill resigned his command. He sat as the MP for Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, between 1779 and 1780, and he considered standing for the county in 1780, but withdrew before the poll. He voted consistently against Lord North's administration and, unsurprisingly, was not employed at sea again until the change of ministry in 1782, when he was appointed to the 'Elizabeth' (74 guns), part of a small squadron ordered to the East Indies. Violent storms in the Bay of Biscay forced the dismasted 'Elizabeth' to return to Portsmouth where she remained as a guardship after the peace in 1783. Kingsmill commanded her until 1786, and the 'Duke' (90 guns) in the Spanish armament of 1790. From 5 April 1784 to 1790 he represented Tregony, Cornwall, in the government interest. Though there is no record of his having spoken in the Commons, Kingsmill voted for Pitt's parliamentary reform bill in 1785, but against Richmond's fortification plans in 1786 and against Pitt in the Regency crisis of 1788/89. 
On 1 February 1793 he was promoted rear-admiral of the white and on 31 August he was appointed commander-in-chief on the Irish station. Further promotions were to rear-admiral of the red on 12 April 1794, vice-admiral of the white (4 July), and vice-admiral of the red (1 June 1795). Such rapid promotion perhaps compensated for the difficulties of an admiral who was required, with limited means, to protect the Irish trade and counter the potential threat to Ireland of a French invasion. In 1795 Kingsmill commanded two ships of the line, seven frigates, and four smaller vessels. Such numbers prevented him from confronting French invasion forces at Bantry Bay in December 1796. In the autumn of 1797 his force was increased to between twenty and twenty-five ships, but thereafter it was again reduced to twelve ships. 
Kingsmill's post was arduous. In February 1798 he wished to retire but Lord Spencer hoped he would not think 'of quitting a situation in which he had been of such essential service' (Kingsmill MSS, 19M61/4203), and in October that year his ships defeated a French invasion force at Lough Swilly. For this Kingsmill received the freedom and thanks of the cities of Cork, Dublin, Bristol, Liverpool, and London and was made admiral of the blue on 14 February 1799. On 9 September 1800, just before he left Ireland, he gave 'a splendid entertainment' ('Naval Chronicle', 4.247) for the merchants, mayor, and corporation of the city of Cork. Numerous toasts praised Kingsmill's attention to their interests and his ability and vigilance in protecting trade. Kingsmill struck his flag on 23 November and was created a baronet on 24 November 1800. Having been promoted admiral of the white on 23 April 1804 and admiral of the red on 9 November 1805, he saw no further service and died at his home, Sydmonton House, Hampshire, on 23 November 1805; he was buried at St Mary's, Kingsclere, Hampshire. His brother Edward (died 1796), principal surveyor of revenue at Belfast, assumed the surname Kingsmill in January 1788. Edward's son, Major Robert Kingsmill (1772-1825), succeeded his uncle as second baronet. On his death the title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 15624


Thomas Kingsmill (d. in or after 1605?) was a demy of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1558. A strong protestant, he and his brother John were disciplined on 2 May 1559 for expressing heretical views and for shaving their heads in mockery of the tonsure. Nevertheless he became a fellow of Magdalen in that year, and graduated BA on 27 November. Reader in natural philosophy 1563-5 and public orator 1565-9, he proceeded MA in 1564. In 1569 he resigned his fellowship and became the university's first regius professor of Hebrew on the recommendation of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. Unlike his immediate successors he was appointed for life, but mental illness blighted his career; in the words of Anthony Wood, he became 'distempered in brain with too much lucubration' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.758). In 1579 Richard Hooker began serving as his deputy, but Kingsmill later recovered and retained his chair until 1591. Whether he died in that year or later is unclear, as books by him were published in 1602 and 1605, the latter dedicated to James I. 
Sir John and Constance Kingsmill also had five daughters, four of whom married well. The eldest daughter, Catherine, married Sir Richard Norton of Hampshire, so bringing the head of a hitherto strongly Catholic family into the protestant camp; Margaret married John Thornborough of Shotesden, Hampshire; Jane married John Cupper, whose premature death in 1566 furnished the inspiration for some of Andrew Kingsmill's devotional writing; Alice married James Pilkington (1520-1576), a Marian exile and the first protestant bishop of Durham -- a relationship which her brother Richard exploited to advance his career. 
By the time Constance Kingsmill died, between April 1580 and June 1581, the fortunes of her late husband's family were starting to go into decline. Her sons Andrew and Henry had predeceased her; Thomas was insane, at least intermittently. Her eldest son Sir William [i] was not the man his father and grandfather had been, while the achievements of Richard, George, and John would be stillborn owing to their failure to produce male heirs. The fortunes of the Kingsmill family lay in the hands of her grandson William. 



@@@@@


doc= 15625


Kingsnorth, Richard (d. 1677), General Baptist minister, was almost certainly born in Kent. No details survive of his birth, parents, or indeed his career before 1640, although it has been suggested that he was either a mercer or a farmer ('DNB'). Indeed, the home where he spent his adult life has been described as a 'farm house' (Ivimey, 2.233). 
By 1640 Kingsnorth was apparently living at Spilshill House in Staplehurst, Kent, and seems to have held pastoral responsibilities extending to outlying villages including, according to a local chapel book, Smarden, Frittenden, and Headcorn. In 1640 he was a founding elder of a congregation in Smarden -- a gathered church which seems to have met in one or more private houses. This gathering was almost certainly connected with a congregational centre in Staplehurst; its precise denomination at this time is unclear. 
In 1644 Kingsnorth was among a number of 'churchmen' before whom Francis Cornwell, a Baptist minister from Marden, preached a controversial and influential visitation sermon in Cranbrook. Won over by Cornwell's doctrine of believers' baptism, Kingsnorth was subsequently baptized by William Jeffery, a Sevenoaks minister who had defended Cornwell in the dispute arising from his sermon. Having undertaken to publish a confutation of Cornwell's views, Christopher Blackwood, vicar of Staplehurst, similarly became converted; he and Kingsnorth then proceeded to gather together a Baptist congregation in the latter's home, Spilshill House. In common with the majority of the congregation, Kingsnorth subscribed to the doctrine of universal atonement, and was thereupon elected and ordained pastor; Blackwood, doctrinally isolated in his belief in particular election, occupied an ancillary position and subsequently left the church. Around 1656 the congregation, by now 100 strong, expanded to adjacent villages including Headcorn and Smarden. In 1672 Kingsnorth and three of his sons were granted licences to preach at private houses in Charing and Frittenden in addition to Staplehurst and Smarden. Kingsnorth remained the church's pastor until his death at Spilshill House in 1677. 
Author of 'The True Tything of the Gospel Ministers' (1657), Kingsnorth is also credited with the authorship of two other works which are no longer extant. In 'The Pearl of Truth, Found out between Two Rocks of Error' (1670) and 'Gospel Certainty of Everlasting Felicity' (date unknown), he appears to have consolidated his spiritual and pastoral position by attacking directly the doctrine of particular election. 
Nothing is known about Kingsnorth's personal life. We can infer, however, that he married, since five sons followed him into the ministry. In the absence of either information or anecdote about his character, it nevertheless appears that latent doctrinal differences within the church were neutralized by a collective attitude of forbearance under Kingsnorth's leadership. The church continued to expand widely during his lifetime, and it was not until after Kingsnorth's death in 1677 that a definitive secession occurred -- a division reflected in the factionalized leadership of his sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 15626


Kingston, Sir Anthony (c.1508-1556), landowner and conspirator, was the only son of Sir William Kingston (died 1540) of Elmore and Painswick, Gloucestershire. Since he began to acquire stewardships and other minor offices in Gloucestershire in 1528, Anthony was probably born about 1508, or perhaps a little earlier. Nothing is known of his upbringing, but the conventional education of the son of a substantial gentleman and courtier can be assumed. His first significant preferment was as keeper of Berkeley Castle and steward of the lordship, in 1531, an appointment that must be attributable to his father's influence at court. He was also sheriff of Gloucestershire for the first time in 1533-4, three years before he was appointed to the commission of the peace. In 1536 he secured the relatively minor court position of sergeant of the hawks, and by 1539 had been promoted to esquire of the body. Since the rise of the privy chamber this was no longer an influential position close to the king's person, but it indicated a promising career. He had accompanied the court to Calais as early as 1532, attended Prince Edward's baptism in 1537, and assisted at the reception of Anne of Cleves in 1540. Apart from his father's influence, part of the secret of his success seems to have been that he was a skilled jouster, a quality that always appealed to Henry, even after he had given up the lists himself. In 1536 he raised 100 of his own men against the Pilgrimage of Grace, and was placed in command of the whole Gloucestershire contingent, numbering about 1000. He is alleged to have been involved in a skirmish at Louth in October 1536, but there was no serious fighting, and this experience can hardly count as a campaign. He served in France in 1544, along with many other members of the royal household, but was in no sense a professional soldier. 
Kingston was knighted on 2 May 1540, which was an acknowledgement of his service at court rather than in the field, and probably a recognition of his standing in Gloucestershire; he sat in the Commons for the county in 1539, 1542, and 1545. His father died on 14 September 1540, and Sir Anthony succeeded to his substantial estates. By 1546 he was 'custos rotulorum' and thereafter he served on numerous local commissions, for musters, chantries, and church goods. He sympathized with the protestant policies adopted after 1547. In 1549 he served as provost marshal under Lord Russell in the suppression of the south-western rebellion, a position in which he behaved with considerable brutality, and in 1551 became a member of the council in the marches of Wales. He sat again in the Commons for Gloucestershire in 1547 and in March 1553. He received a number of minor grants of monastic land, and was sheriff for a second time in 1550-51, and also a vice-admiral. 
Kingston married twice. His first wife was Dorothy, the daughter of Robert Harpur. As he had married her before October 1524, this match had probably been arranged by his father to cement a connection with the Staffords, of whom Harpur had been a retainer. The marriage was not a success, and by 1533 Anthony was petitioning Cranmer to arrange a divorce. However, subjects did not have the benefit of the king's options, and he was unsuccessful. Within two years Dorothy was dead, but if there were any suspicious circumstances, they were never alluded to. His second wife, whom he had married by 1537, was Mary, daughter of Sir John Gainsford of Crowhurst, Surrey, and widow of Sir William Courtenay (died 1535) of Powderham, Devon. Again a business arrangement may be suspected, and the marriage was a personal failure. By 1552 Kingston was estranged from his wife, and openly keeping a mistress. When John Hooper, the bishop of Gloucester, upbraided him for this adultery, he abused the bishop and struck him a blow, an offence for which he was fined the large sum of $500. 
When Edward VI died in July 1553, Kingston was ordered, like many others, to raise men to support Jane Grey's claim. He did not do so, but whether because of lack of sympathy or shortness of time is not apparent. He was regarded with suspicion by Mary's council, and in spite of his position did not sit in the parliaments of October 1553, March 1554, or November 1554. However, in February 1555 he was named to the commission that was established to carry out the death sentence against Hooper for heresy. According to Foxe, Sir Anthony claimed that the bishop had converted him from his sins: 'God did appoynt you to call me beyng a lost child' (Foxe, 1509), presumably as a result of their clash in 1552. He took a tearful farewell of Hooper, but felt constrained to do his duty as a commissioner, and perhaps as a result resumed his county seat in parliament in October 1555, a session for which he was also named knight marshal. 
There Kingston played a leading role in frustrating the council's attempt to confiscate the property of the religious exiles, forcing a division at a favourable moment by locking the doors of the house. For this he was briefly in the Tower after the session closed, but was released upon his humble submission. At the same time, however, he was deeply involved in a conspiracy initiated by Henry Dudley and supported by the French ambassador, to launch an invasion by English exiles from France, backed by French arms and money. His plan appears to have been to raise a force in the south-west to support the invasion, and one of the ambassador's agents wrote that he could 'assuredly raise more than six thousand men in his district' (Harbison, 280). This was probably a major exaggeration, but it was never put to the test. The plot was broken up in February and March 1556. Kingston was arrested at the beginning of April, and questioned in Gloucestershire on the 8th and 9th. There was little hard evidence against him, but it was decided to bring him to London. He died on the way, at Cirencester, on 14 April 1556. There is no reason to suppose that the causes were other than natural. He had settled part of his estate on his illegitimate sons, Anthony and Edmund, by a deed of feoffment in 1547, and seems to have left no will. His estranged wife appears to have predeceased him, because, after an inquisition post mortem in October 1556, the residue of his estate passed to a niece, Frances, the wife of Sir Henry Jerningham. 


@@@@@


doc= 15627


Kingston, Richard (b. c.1635, d. 1710?), political writer, was the son of a farmer in Northamptonshire, and apprenticed to a tailor. According to his own statements he was an MA of both Oxford and Cambridge -- there is no record of him at either -- and was ordained by the bishop of Galloway on 17 July 1662 at Westminster. Bishop Jonathan Trelawny told the House of Lords in 1708 that Kingston had worked as a tailor in London until the great plague of 1665, when he found some sermons and began preaching. He was chosen minister at St James's, Clerkenwell, that year by the congregation, as his loud preaching impressed them, after the incumbent had fled from the plague. His successor there was licensed on 17 September 1666. From 1666 to about 1670 Kingston was vicar of St Peter's, Irthlingborough, Northamptonshire, through the patronage of Nicholas Knollys, third earl of Banbury. Kingston married first Elizabeth Webb at St James's, Clerkenwell, on 28 January 1668; she gave birth to twin girls in Irthlingborough that November. After separating from his first wife, in 1671 he eloped with a daughter of Arthur Leonard (died 1671), rector of Boughton, Northamptonshire. She may have been his bigamous second wife, also called Elizabeth. In 1699 he claimed to be the father of nine children, mainly daughters. In 1680 he received the living of Henbury in Gloucestershire, worth $50 a year, perhaps by having bought the right to present one incumbent. In 1700 he printed letters supposedly showing that on 6 February 1682 he was made chaplain-in-ordinary to Charles II, but he does not appear in Edward Chamberlayne's list of royal chaplains for that year. He also later claimed to have graduated DD, hence his subsequent style of 'Dr Kingston'. He also claimed that a prebend and a rectory were added to Henbury. He was not 'R. K.', rector of Raydon in Suffolk, who published a sermon in 1688, as this was Roger Kelsall. Kingston also states that he suffered for preaching against Roman Catholics. By his own account he remained at Henbury, where he had a small estate, until the revolution of 1688, when he sold his property and moved to London. He then ceased to wear clerical dress, probably because Trelawny had discovered he was an impostor and expelled him from the diocese of Bristol. 
Kingston became active in the London Jacobite movement, writing letters to the court of James II on behalf of several aristocrats and political clubs, and probably composing treasonable pamphlets for the press. However, in May 1692 he was exposed by the government spy John Macky, and began to work for the government. On 1 June he gave the earl of Portland an account of English plotting for the projected French and Jacobite invasion, and was the single secret witness on whose oath the government continued to detain several Jacobites after the crisis was over. Kingston became a trusted and valued government spy. His reports were generally unsensational, in contrast to other informers, avoiding the accusations against tory ministers which characterized other reports, and in 1692-3 warning the secretary of state, Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham, of plots against him. He temporarily had access to disaffected circles as high as that of Princess Anne of Denmark and John Churchill, earl of Marlborough, to add to his encyclopaedic knowledge of lesser-ranking plotters. He passed on information about Jacobite activities, noting journeys and correspondence between Jacobites in England and France, and the plans of the Jacobite press in London. He was promised ecclesiastical preferment by Archbishop John Tillotson as a reward for his spying, but Archbishop Thomas Tenison discovered he was an impostor. By the time he was reporting to Sir William Trumbull, secretary of state, from mid-1695 to 1697, few leading Jacobites trusted him; although he was still well-regarded by enough minor Jacobites to remain valuable to the government, his espionage ended when the government ordered him to testify in three successful minor treason trials. 
In 1698 Kingston published 'A True History of the Several Designs Against his Majesties Sacred Person and Government from 1688 to 1697'. This semi-official history of Jacobite conspiracies was intended to influence the controversy over disbanding the army, and prove that the perjurer John Lunt's 'Lancashire plot' of 1694 was genuine. The most valuable part of the book consists of the state papers provided to Kingston by Charles Talbot, duke of Shrewsbury, and never returned. Despite these propaganda services his government pension fell into arrears and he suffered extreme poverty. A petition from him dated 14 July 1699 states that $600 was due to him, that he had assisted as a witness at the conviction of three traitors, had brought $1225 into the Treasury by the seizure of French silks, and that he had printed thirteen books on behalf of the government at his own expense. He received $200 royal bounty in 1700. 
In his 'Modest Answer to Captain Smith's Immodest Memorial of Secret Service' (1700) Kingston attacked Matthew Smith, another former spy, who had just published his 'Memoirs of Secret Service' (1699), which falsely implied that Shrewsbury had betrayed William III, and a violent controversy ensued. Kingston attributed Smith's work to the satirist Tom Brown (1663-1704), whom he described as 'a rank prostituted Jacobite' ('Modest Answer', 7). Smith responded by charging Kingston with having forged his letters of orders and with various immoral activities. Kingston countered these allegations in a rejoinder by publishing an account of his life, 'Impudence, Lying and Forgery Detected and Chastiz'd' (1700), with letters of support and testimonials and a certificate signed by one Thomas Beesly, asserting that he had been ordained with Kingston. However, his testimony was not wholly plausible on account of there being a discrepancy over the name of the ordaining bishop, and the fact that by 1700 Beesly had been dead for three years. 
In 1707 Kingston published an attack on John Freind's vindication of the conduct of Smith's former patron, Charles Mordaunt, third earl of Peterborough, in Spain, and he was promptly arrested by an order of the House of Lords. He was released on 19 January 1708, but the attorney-general was instructed to prosecute him. He also intervened in the controversy which raged in 1707-9 about the so-called French Prophets, a millenarian group, complaining in his book 'Enthusiastic Imposters No Divinely Inspired Prophets' that, like hell, the French Prophets sect refused no one. Kingston published three sermons, one on the plague, and ten other religious and political works. He may have been the Richard Kingston 'late of Chelsea College', who died in 1710 (TNA: PRO, PROB 6/86). 


@@@@@


doc= 15628


Kingston, Sir William (c.1476-1540), courtier and administrator, is of uncertain origins, but was probably a member of a Gloucestershire family related to the barons Berkeley of Berkeley Castle; he also had some connection with the third duke of Buckingham. His marriages are uncertain as well: his first two wives (the order is unclear) were Anne, widow of Sir John Guise (died 1501), and Elizabeth (surname unknown). By 1534 he had wed Mary, daughter of Richard Scrope and widow of Edward Jerningham (died 1515) of Somerleighton, Suffolk. He had one son, Anthony Kingston, and one or two daughters. A brother, George, was left $40 in Sir William's will. 
William's career as a courtier probably began in his early twenties. He was a yeoman of the chamber from 1497 to 1509 and was present at Henry VII's funeral as a gentleman usher. He served in Henry VIII's early military campaigns: in 1511 he received ordnance for the army and in 1512 he was named under-marshal. He travelled to Spain with Dr William Knight but had to report that their embassy to Charles V was not going well and that the English forces led by Thomas Grey, second marquess of Dorset, were disheartened. At the end of the year he was paid for his expenses after returning to England with a small entourage. In 1513 he fought at Flodden on 9 September, was knighted in October, and received conduct money for his men when the army was disbanded in November. 
In 1510 Kingston and Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, were licensed to export 2000 woollen kerseys without paying duty. A JP for Gloucestershire since 1506, in 1514 he was named one of the king's sewers with a stipend of 40 marks a year and was also pricked sheriff of Gloucestershire, in which capacity he was instructed to assist in apprehending heretics and Lollards. During these years he often took part in jousts, tournaments, and other courtly entertainments, in some of which the king himself participated. He was also sufficiently in favour with Cardinal Wolsey to be chosen one of the four 'knights of the body in the privy chamber', with a salary of $100, when in May 1519 Henry was persuaded to dismiss his younger 'minions' and replace them with more sober middle-aged knights. The minions were soon back at court, but Kingston's career did not suffer. Subsequent memoranda frequently list him among the king's attendants and as keeper of jewels and plate. In 1521 he was named one of the king's carvers. 
On 20 April 1520 the English ambassador Sir Richard Wingfield reported from Blois how the three-year-old dauphin had taken 'a marvellous pleasure in young Kyngston, whom, after he had seen once, he called him 'beau fils'' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 3, pt 1, no. 752). Probably this was Sir William's son, Anthony, who was then about twelve; it is not recorded whether Sir William was present, but he certainly attended Henry VIII at the Field of Cloth of Gold in June and at his meeting with Charles V in July. Evidently in appreciation of his services, the king gave him a costly bay horse with cut ears, purchased from a French courtier. 
Kingston was a member of the grand jury which indicted the third duke of Buckingham for treason in 1521 and subsequently profited from the duke's fall; Henry made him steward and bailiff of Buckingham's possessions in Gloucestershire as well as constable of Thornbury Castle and master of all the hunts in the county. At about the same time Kingston, who together with several other courtiers had lodgings in the Blackfriars, was granted three tenements with shops, cellars, and gardens in the parish of St Martin near Ludgate, to be held for the annual rent of a red rose. 
In 1521 Henry VIII wished Kingston to attend him regularly in the privy chamber, as he had few other companions. Nevertheless in the following year he was charged with raising 300 'pioneers' in the Forest of Dean for service in France, and in 1523 he served in the army sent into Scotland, leading thirty men in the rearguard during a short campaign in which the earl of Surrey captured and burnt Kelso. Later in the year he left to serve in France under the duke of Suffolk, to Surrey's regret. 
Kingston was a knight of the shire for Gloucestershire in the parliaments of 1529 and 1536. Between sessions he accompanied the king and Anne Boleyn to Calais in October 1532. Since he was a friend of the lord deputy, Viscount Lisle, he took a close interest in affairs there. In 1536 he wrote to Lisle concerning a book of ordinances for Calais that would shortly pass the Commons, 'but at the reading there was one that would have had it committed (as the manner is)', thereby providing interesting evidence for the growing use of parliamentary committees; Kingston assured Lisle that it would shortly pass and was 'a good book' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 10, no. 336). In the parliament of 1536 Kingston frequently acted as a liaison between the two houses. He spoke on the conservative side in the debate about the 'Act of Six Articles' in 1539, rebuking the position taken on the eucharist by the evangelical Thomas Broke and even saying that if Broke repeated his arguments before the council after the act had passed, 'I will bring a fagot to help to burn you withal' ('Acts and Monuments', 5.504-5). Sir Nicholas Hare, the speaker, said that he found Kingston's remarks more offensive than Broke's. 
As constable of the Tower from 28 May 1524 Kingston was responsible for the custody of a number of state prisoners. In November 1529 he was sent from London to Yorkshire to take charge of Wolsey and, according to the cardinal's biographer George Cavendish, treated his prisoner with consideration. He had several conversations with the dying minister, in one of which the latter advised him how to deal with the king if he ever became a privy councillor. Kingston, who subsequently told Henry how his mission had fared, was a councillor by 1533. In 1536 he similarly treated Anne Boleyn with respect during her imprisonment in the Tower, assuring her that she would be taken to the royal lodgings she had occupied before her coronation rather than to a dungeon, as she feared. It is possible, however, that his reports were the basis for some of the charges against Anne at her trial. His wife Mary was one of the queen's attendants before her execution, to which Kingston escorted her. In 1540 it was his duty to inform Thomas Cromwell of the charges against him, and presumably to carry the fallen minister's response to the king. 
During the last years of his life Kingston received additional offices and lands. In 1539 he was named comptroller of the king's household and was installed as a knight of the Garter. He profited from the dissolution of the monasteries, in March 1537 receiving the site and possessions of the Cistercian abbey of Flaxley, Gloucestershire. He was granted a number of wardships, including that of Edmund Jerningham, his wife's son from her first marriage. After Cromwell's fall he acquired, for $1000, the manors of Painswick and Morton Valence, both in Gloucestershire, which Cromwell had purchased from the Lisles for $1400. 
Kingston died at Painswick on 14 September 1540 and was buried there. In his will, drawn up on 26 June 1539, he made a traditional bequest of his soul to God, the Virgin, and the heavenly host. Among numerous bequests of money, plate, and clothes, he left to his son and heir, Anthony, six great silver-gilt bowls given him by the king of France. His wife, William Fitzwilliam, earl of Southampton, and Sir Anthony Browne were named as his executors. 


@@@@@


doc= 15629


Kingston, William Henry Giles (1814-1880), children's writer, born in Harley Street, London, on 28 February 1814, was eldest son of Lucy Henry Kingston and Frances Sophia Rooke. His maternal grandfather was Sir Giles Rooke, justice of the common pleas. He was educated at Eagle House, Hammersmith, Middlesex, and by private tutors. As a child he frequently travelled to the family residence in Portugal, thereby developing a lifelong affection for the sea. Unable to follow a career in the navy, he entered his father's wine business in Porto in 1833, and soon began writing newspaper articles on Portugal, which were translated into Portuguese. He was instrumental in the successful conclusion of the 1842 trade treaty with Portugal, for which he was awarded the honour of knight of the military order of Christ and a pension from the queen of Portugal. 
Kingston's first book, 'The Circassian Chief', was published in 1843, and while still living in Porto he wrote 'The Prime Minister' (1845), a historical novel, and 'Lusitanian Sketches' (1845), descriptions of travels in Portugal. After settling in England, he interested himself in the emigration movement. He became organizing secretary of the Colonisation Society, lectured on colonization in 1849, and visited the western highlands on behalf of the emigration commissioners. He edited two journals: 'The Colonist' (1844), and the 'Colonial Magazine and East India Review' (1849-52), as well as writing a number of pamphlets on emigration and emigrants' welfare. These included 'Some Suggestions for a System of General Emigration' (1848); 'The Emigrant Voyagers' Manual' (1850), and 'How to Emigrate, or, The British Colonists: a Tale' (1850). A man of strong evangelical convictions, he became a founding member and organizing secretary of the Society for Promoting Missions to Seamen. He afterwards took an active part in the volunteer movement, recalling some of his experiences in 'Our Soldiers' (1863). 
From 1850 Kingston's chief occupation was writing books for boys, and editing boys' annuals and weekly periodicals. His best-known stories, are: 'Peter the Whaler' (1851); 'The Three Midshipmen' (1873); and its sequels 'The Three Lieutenants' (1875), 'The Three Commanders' (1876), and 'The Three Admirals' (1878). In all, he wrote over 130 stories for boys, many of which had a nautical theme, as for example, 'Blue Jackets' (1854), 'The Cruise of the Frolic' (1860), and 'Our Sailors' (1863), which were based on his own cruising and yachting experiences. 
Kingston travelled widely and described his experiences in 'My Travels in Many Lands' (1862), 'The Western World' (1874), and 'A Yacht Voyage Round England' (1879). Following his marriage in 1853 to Agnes Kinloch (died 1913), his honeymoon was spent in Canada. 'Western Wanderings, or, A Pleasure Tour in Canada' (1856) recounts his journey. He wrote popular records of travel and adventure in America, Africa, India, and Australia; a biography of Captain Cook; and a history of the navy. He also wrote many historical tales dealing with almost all periods and countries, from 'Eldol the Druid' (1874) and 'Jovinian: a Tale of Early Papal Rome' (1877) onwards, and undertook some popular historical compilations like 'Half-Hours with the Kings and Queens of England' (1876). At the time his stories were very popular; his tales were quite innocuous, but most of them proved ephemeral. In addition to writing books, Kingston founded two boys' periodicals: 'Kingston's Magazine for Boys' (1859-62) and 'Union Jack', which he started only a few months before his death in 1880. The former was a didactic journal full of instructional articles, most of which were written by Kingston himself. It also contained a number of translations, and although these bore Kingston's name, they were actually the work of his wife, Agnes, a competent linguist. She translated 'The Swiss Family Robinson' from the German and a number of separately published stories by Jules Verne, all of which cite her husband as the translator. 
Despite his prolific literary output of some five or six books a year, Kingston suffered serious financial difficulties with a family of eight children to support. In 1868 he applied for, and was awarded, grants of $50 and $100, from the Royal Literary Fund. His poor health and reduced circumstances caused him to become a recluse in later life. Realizing he had not long to live, he wrote a touching valedictory letter to 'Union Jack' readers on 2 August 1880. He died three days later at his home, Stormont Lodge, 3 Brondesbury Park Villas, Willesden Lane, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 15630


Kinloch, George Ritchie (1797/8-1877), lawyer and antiquary, was born probably in Jamaica, one of at least seven children of George Kinloch (1741-1802), deputy judge advocate and master in chancery in Jamaica, and his wife, Susannah, 'nee' Wigglesworth (1759-1841), of Edinburgh. Named after his father and in memory of a dead elder brother, Kinloch returned from Jamaica as a young boy and was educated in Edinburgh, where he qualified as a writer to the signet. His early and not unsuccessful career as a clerk to several advocates depute must have been somewhat blighted by the death of his first wife, Mary Stewart. They married on 8 September 1817, and their only child, Susan Janet, was born on 6 August 1819. Mary Stewart evidently died not long afterwards, because on 29 July 1822 he married Helen Tod (1799-1879). 
A successful professional of wide literary interests, Kinloch is best known for his genuine and informed interest in Scottish song, particularly in that from his family's ancestral homelands in the north east of Scotland. Between 1827 and 1848 he edited or contributed to nine works. These ranged from his 'Ballad Book' (1827), recounting the life and songs of 'Mussel mou'd Charlie... a celebrated peripatetick ballad singer in the town and county of Aberdeen', to 'Nugea Scoticae', a jointly edited work preserving 'fugitive pieces' illustrative of Scottish affairs from 1535 to 1781. His most important work, however, was his studious, informative, and original 'Ancient Scottish Ballads' (1827), intended to redress the preponderance of such text as Scott's 'Border Minstrelsy', drawn from southern Scotland. The glowing acknowledgement paid to Kinloch by Dr John Jamieson in his preface to the supplement to the Scottish dictionary of 1824 also bears testimony to his enthusiasm for and knowledge of the Scots language; it is a pity that his projected work on Scottish proverbs never appeared. 
Between 1842 and 1869 Kinloch held the office of principal keeper of the register of deeds and probative writs. During this time he was a member of the Maitland and other literary societies, and 'devoted much time to the work that fell to him as treasurer and one of the trustees, of the Paterson and Pape fund for the relief of decayed old men and women' ('The Scotsman'). Kinloch died at his family home, West Coates Villa, Edinburgh, on 21 April 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 15631


Kinnaird, Arthur Fitzgerald, tenth Lord Kinnaird of Inchture and second Baron Kinnaird of Rossie (1814-1887), philanthropist, the third son of Charles Kinnaird, eighth Lord Kinnaird of Inchture (1780-1826), and his wife, Lady Olivia Letitia Catherine Fitzgerald (1787-1858), the youngest daughter of William Robert Fitzgerald, second duke of Leinster, was born at Rossie Priory, Inchture, Perthshire, on 8 July 1814. He was educated at Eton College (1829-35) and afterwards received an appointment in the Foreign Office. From July 1835 to September 1837 he was posted to St Petersburg, where he served for a time as private secretary to the ambassador, the earl of Durham. In 1837 he became a partner in the banking house of Ransom & Co., Pall Mall East, in succession to his uncle the Hon. Douglas James William Kinnaird. Eventually he became head of the firm, which took the name Ransom, Bouverie & Co. 
Kinnaird sat in the House of Commons for Perth as a Liberal (1837-9), was re-elected for that city in 1852, and continued to represent it until January 1878, when he succeeded his brother George William Fox Kinnaird as Lord Kinnaird. In the House of Commons he supported free trade and spoke frequently on Indian questions. In 1857, in response to information given to him by protestant missionaries, he called for an inquiry into social conditions in Bengal. A devout evangelical (he underwent a conversion experience in Paris as a young man), he had an abiding interest in measures affecting religion and was a strong opponent of the bill for legalizing marriage with a deceased wife's sister. Like Lord Shaftesbury, with whom he worked on several charitable campaigns (including the education of ragged children), he also took a keen interest in all matters concerning the well-being of the working classes. 
Kinnaird married Mary Jane (died 1888), the daughter of the London banker William Henry Hoare, on 28 June 1843 at Hornsey ['see 'Kinnaird, Mary Jane]. Well matched, they worked in fruitful religious and social partnership. Their home at 2 Pall Mall East was a meeting place for social reformers and served as a clearing house of information for a host of evangelical causes, from district nursing and female education to foreign missions and temperance. As a leading light of the Gospel temperance movement, Kinnaird was instrumental in setting up coffee houses in working-class neighbourhoods. He was a man of considerable wealth, and contributed large sums of money to his favoured charities. 
A familiar figure at the May meetings of the evangelical societies at Exeter Hall, Kinnaird sat on innumerable charitable committees. Among the public institutions with which he was more especially connected were the Church Missionary Society, the London City Mission, the Ragged School Union, the Ranyard Mission, the Destitute Children's Dinner Society, the Lock Hospital, Dr Barnardo's, the National Temperance League, and the Royal Society for Discharged Prisoners. Meanwhile, on his Scottish estates, he took a paternal interest in his tenants. He was, as one of his contemporaries put it, an example of 'the preserving salt of the British aristocracy' (Fraser, 141), a high-minded paternalist who helped to give Victorian Britain its reputation for moral seriousness. He died, after a long illness, at his London home on 26 April 1887, leaving one son, Arthur Fitzgerald Kinnaird, the eleventh Lord Kinnaird of Inchture, and five daughters. He was buried in the churchyard at Rossie, Perthshire. 


