@@@@@


doc= 1052


Bailey, John (1644-1697), nonconformist minister, was born on 24 February 1644, probably at Altham, near Blackburn, Lancashire, the son of Thomas Bailey (died 1673). His father was notorious for his drunkenness and profligacy but the young Bailey acquired both his mother's piety and her strength of character. An Independent congregation led by the Revd Thomas Jolly met at Altham; its churchbook recorded in 1657 that Bailey was 'a wonderful child for a spirit of prayer, experimental discourse, and being the occasion of good to his father and a school-fellow'. Cotton Mather reported independently that by this time the boy was already conducting family worship; either out of admiration or humiliation, Thomas Bailey abandoned his old habits and became a reformed character, and joined Jolly's congregation. John attended Blackburn grammar school, then under the mastership of Charles Sagar (1636-1698). Later he studied theology under Dr Thomas Harrison, a nonconformist minister at Chester. 
John Bailey began his career as a lay preacher at the age of twenty-two. In February 1665 he was arrested with Thomas Jolly and imprisoned, perhaps not for the last time, in Lancaster gaol. He was released after three months, perhaps following intervention by the Houghton family of Houghton Cross; it seems, however, that he lost the favour of Sarah, Lady Houghton after criticizing the breach between herself and her husband, Sir Richard. In 1670 Bailey was 'formally set apart for the ministry', but later in the year he emigrated to Dublin, and there married his first wife, Lydia (died 1690). In Dublin too, despite his own dislike of the ceremony, he appears to have undergone formal presbyterian ordination with the laying on of hands; as he later wrote to his congregation in Limerick: 'For you (tho it was a great act of self denial) I was ordained' (Bailey, 'Man's Chief End', 2nd pagination, 2). At Limerick there was among Bailey's auditory a relation of the duke of Ormond. When this came to the notice of the bishop he protested to the duke against the impunity which his connection thus encouraged among dissenters. Ormond's response was to invite Bailey to be his chaplain; but neither this, nor the offers of a deanery, or even the next vacant Irish bishopric, which reputedly followed, were sufficient to induce him to conform. Later Bailey's preaching activities led to his arraignment. It is reported that he protested before the judges of assize that: 'If I had been drinking, gaming and carousing at a tavern, with company, my lords, I presume that I would not have procured my being thus treated as an offender. Must prayers to God and preaching Christ with a company of Christians who are peaceable, inoffensive, and serviceable to his majesty and the government, as any of his subjects -- must this be considered a greater crime?' to which the answer came that it was (Palmer, 1.331). He was imprisoned, and was released on promising to leave Ireland within a specified period without making further contact with his congregation, which he had by now served for twelve years. 
Bailey emigrated to New England, probably in the spring of 1684, for it was surely not long after his arrival in Boston that he framed a letter, dated 8 May, to his congregation in Limerick. Nathaniel Mather thought Bailey had been encouraged to undertake the voyage by Samuel Willard, the minister at the Old South Church in Boston, and indeed the newcomer was soon appointed as his assistant; on 2 March 1685, Samuel Sewall recorded that Bailey 'preached from 'Amos' 4.12 and Mr Willard from '2 Cor'... both sermons and prayers excellent' ('Diary of Samuel Sewall', 59). Soon after the Independent congregation at Watertown, Connecticut, invited Bailey to fill the vacancy caused by the death of its pastor, John Sherman; Bailey accepted, preaching his farewell sermon in Boston on 25 July 1686, and leaving the town in the same week. As he records, 'Upon the 6th October 1686 I was solemnly set apart for the pastoral work at Watertown without the imposition of hands' (Francis, 51). Sewall recorded that on 'Wednesday Oct 6: Mr Bayly is ordained at Watertown but not as congregational men are' ('Diary of Samuel Sewall', 123). It seems clear that Bailey accepted the need to be 'set apart' to his new pastorate, but that he retained his dislike (shared by many Independents) of the ceremony to which he had reluctantly submitted in 1670. 
Within a month or so of Bailey's ordination Thomas, his younger brother, was appointed as his assistant. It seems that John was already in poor health, for on 25 March 1686, before his departure for Watertown, Sewall recorded that 'Mr Willard exerciseth all day, Mr Bayly being constrained to keep house by reason of the gout' ('Diary of Samuel Sewall', 101). Thomas Bailey died on 31 January 1689 aged only thirty-five; the church's anxiety to secure the services of a new assistant (Henry Gibbs) must surely reflect the continued ill health of their pastor. John Bailey's illness was compounded by bouts of depression, perhaps exacerbated by sadness at the death on 12 April 1690 of his wife, Lydia. Bailey for many years kept a diary, using it to keep an account of his lonely spiritual struggles. Later, Cotton Mather published extensive extracts, in which the demands of his conscience sometimes appear almost comically excessive -- 'I was too forgetful of God, and exceeding in tobacco. The Lord pardon that, and all other sins, and heal this nature, and humble this heart' -- and in which the author occasionally approaches despair at his own weakness: 'I am oppressed unto death, and filled with the angry arrows of God: it ariseth not from any particular cause, but the sense of my woeful estate in general' (Mather, 234, 236). 
In 1692 Bailey resigned his charge at Watertown and bid farewell to the town, its churches, and people: 'saints but sinners also, old but young also, all my children which grieved me most, friends and foes, the sweet singers of Israel, all widows and fatherless families, all moralized persons, all that heard me not now, the pulpit, pew seats and galleries (the cushion I left as a token of my love), all my administrations, him that digs the graves, neighbouring towns and churches. (Sprague, 1.203)' He returned to Boston, where in July 1693 he was accepted as an assistant to the pastor of the First Church. There on 26 December 1695 he married Susannah Wilkins (who on 28 December 1699, after Bailey's death, became the wife of the Revd Peter Thatcher). It was Burgess's practice to preach at the First Church once a month and at the Old South Church every other Sunday. But on Sunday 12 December 1697 'about 3 am just the time he should have stood up to preach for Mr Willard, Mr John Bayly dieth, after much pain and illness by the Gout and other distempers' ('Diary of Samuel Sewall', 384). According to Francis, he 'was honourably interred on the 16th day in the tomb of Mr Thomas Deane' in Boston (Francis, 52). Cotton Mather preached his funeral sermon. An oil painting, representing his 'pensive and somewhat feminine face and long flowing hair' ('DNB') is in the possession of the Massachusetts Historical Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 1053


Bailey, John (bap. 1751, d. 1819), mathematician and land surveyor, was born at Blades Field, near Bowes, Yorkshire, and baptized there on 11 July 1751, the son of William Bailey. At an early age he showed strong artistic tendencies, and while employed as tutor to the children of his uncle, George Dixon of Cockfield, he devoted his spare time to engraving various pieces, which he afterwards published. Both in his artistic and mathematical studies he received valuable assistance from his uncle who was also versed in mineralogy, chemistry, hydraulics, pneumatics, and surveying. After completing the education of his uncle's children Bailey became mathematical teacher at Witton-le-Wear, and began work as a land surveyor, making surveys in Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Northumberland, Nottinghamshire, and Wiltshire. Shortly after his marriage, to the daughter of Nicholas Greenwell of Witton, he was appointed land agent to Lord Tankerville at Chillingham, a situation he retained until his death. 
Bailey engraved several of the plates for the works of William Hutchinson, the topographer of Cumberland, Durham, and Northumberland. He also devoted much of his attention to the natural sciences, and his scientific acquirements were turned to practical use in promoting improvements in rural economy. In 1795 he published 'Essay on the Construction of the Plough', in which he employed mathematical calculations to demonstrate the advantages of the alterations he proposed. He was also the joint author of the reports on the counties of Cumberland and Northumberland, drawn up for the board of agriculture, and sole author for that on co. Durham. He died at Chillingham on 4 June 1819. 


@@@@@


doc= 1054


Bailey, John Eglington (1840-1888), antiquary, born at Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 13 February 1840, was the son of Charles Bailey and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, daughter of John Eglington of Ashbourne. His parents moved during his childhood to Lancashire. Educated at Boteler's Grammar School, Warrington, he entered in his teens the counting-house of Ralli Brothers of Manchester, and continued there until 1886. He completed his education by attending evening classes at Owens College, and learned Pitman's shorthand. In 1866 he married Emma Mills, the second daughter of Samuel Mills of Ardwick. They had four children. 
Bailey became interested at an early age in Thomas Fuller (1608-1661), the ecclesiastical historian, and delivered a lecture on him to the Manchester Phonographic Union, of which he was a founder member. This was printed in Henry Pitman's 'Popular Lecturer' (new ser., 9, 1864). He devoted his holidays to visiting Fuller's various places of residence and in 1874, as the fruit of much research, Bailey published a life of Fuller, his most important work, and one which gained him admission into the Society of Antiquaries. He also became honorary secretary to the Chetham Society, Manchester, and was a contributor to the earliest volumes of the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. A prolific writer, he published 420 articles and books on such diverse subjects as shorthand, local topography, and seventeenth-century divines. In 1881 he started a monthly antiquarian magazine, the 'Palatine Note-Book', which ran for just over four years. He collected many works on stenography with a view to writing a history of the subject, and he possessed a large library of antiquarian and general literature. 
In 1886 illness put an end to Bailey's studies and projects. He died at Etchells, Stockport, Cheshire, on 23 August 1888, and was buried at Stretford church on 27 August. His collection of Fuller's sermons, completed and edited by W. E. A. Axon, was published in 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 1055


Bailey, Nathan (bap. 1691, d. 1742), lexicographer and schoolmaster, was baptized on 7 October 1691 in Mill Yard church, a Seventh Day Baptist congregation in Goodman's Fields, Whitechapel, just east of the City of London. His church was opposed to infant baptism and Bailey signed a church document as early as 1692. In 1711 he was censured by the church for having indulged in: 'frequent light and late conversation with two single women, he being a single man and a high professor [that is, one who has openly professed his religion], and they in principle and practice being so unfit company for his diversion and pleasure. (Mill Church minute book, quoted in Ball, 94)' He seems to have been dropped from the membership of the congregation by 1718. From as early as 1721 and until as late as 1736 he boarded and instructed youths in 'the 'Latin', 'Greek', and 'Hebrew' Languages, 'Writing', 'Accounts', and other Parts of School Learning, in a Method more easy and expeditious than common... at his House in Stepney, near the Church' (N. Bailey, 'Dictionarium Britannicum', 1736). Whitley credits Bailey with an LLD degree -- an honorary degree, according to 'Transactions of the Baptist Historical Society' -- but it is not known which institution awarded him this degree. He married by February 1733 (the date of the burial of his mother-in-law at Mill Yard); the couple had at least one son, who was buried in March 1750. Two further references in the Mill Yard burial register to 'Mrs Bayley' on 8 January 1738 and 18 June 1744 probably mark the death dates of his mother and wife respectively (TNA: PRO, RG 4/4505). 
Bailey's first dictionary, 'An universal etymological English dictionary: comprehending the derivations of the generality of words in the English tongue, either ancient or modern' (1721), was followed by what claimed to be a second volume in 1727, which included an 'orthographical dictionary, shewing both the orthography and orthoepia of the English tongue' (title-page). 'Volume II', as the 1727 volume is generally known, introduced accentuation markings for the first time in a general English dictionary -- perhaps following the precedent of Thomas Dyche's 'Spelling Dictionary' (1723) -- to compensate for the presumed inexperience of the reader: 'forasmuch as many Persons of a small Share of Literature and not very conversant in Books, are frequently apt to accent Words wrong' (preface). The two octavos were soon succeeded by the folio 'Dictionarium Britannicum' (1730; 2nd edn, 1736). Dozens of editions of the first octavo work were published during the eighteenth century and after; they formed the basis for a number of English-German dictionaries, which began to appear in Germany from 1736 onwards. 
Bailey's English dictionaries gave a new prominence to etymology and to lexical comprehensiveness, including dialect terms, scientific terms, common words, and even vulgar ones; they also (in the second octavo volume and in the folios) made the first extensive use of pictorial illustration, inserting some 500 small woodcuts 'for the more easy and clear apprehending' of the terms defined according to the title-page of 'Volume II'. Most depicted heraldic elements and scientific and military equipment. Additional encyclopaedic materials included iconological and mythological information, and proverbs explained in homely English and paralleled in Greek, Latin, French, and Italian. 
Samuel Johnson used the second edition of Bailey's folio as a basis for developing his own dictionary, which competed with Bailey's for decades. Though Johnson's dictionary achieved the prestige of literary authority, Bailey's long remained popular, especially among autodidacts. Even William Pitt, the first earl of Chatham, though schooled at Eton, honed his celebrated parliamentary rhetoric by reading one of Bailey's dictionaries 'twice... from beginning to end' ('N&Q', 5th ser., 1, 1874, 448). Thomas Chatterton may have mined the antique diction for his forged Rowley poems from Bailey. Notable fictional devotees of Bailey include the inexperienced but confident Mrs Western in 'Tom Jones', the ten-year-old Lydgate in 'Middlemarch', and the carpenter hero of 'Adam Bede', who 'had read... a great deal of Bailey's Dictionary' (Eliot, 1.320). Abraham Lincoln is said to have used a copy of the fourteenth edition (1751) of Bailey's first octavo dictionary. On the title-page of the first edition Bailey had invited those readers who lacked a thorough literary education: 'the Ignorant, and... young Students, Artificers, Tradesmen and Foreigners' (here, as elsewhere, he followed the precedent and even the phrasing of John Kersey's 'Dictionarium Anglo-Britannicum', 1708). The success of Bailey's dictionaries contributed to the diffusion of literacy in the eighteenth century -- even to the global diffusion of English, which, by virtue of its mixed lineage and lexical inheritances, Bailey reckoned to be 'the most Copious and Significant Language in Europe, if not in the World' (1721, preface). 
Aside from another dictionary, the 'Dictionarium domesticum' (1736) -- actually an alphabetized farmhouse manual -- and 'The Antiquities of London and Westminster' (1722; 2nd edn, 1734), a duodecimo guidebook abridged from books 'voluminous and dear' to convey local knowledge to 'the Generality' (preface, 'To the reader'), Bailey wrote several textbooks for grammar schools; these appeared in numerous editions, and were apparently informed by his own experience as a schoolmaster. They include a translation of Erasmus's 'Colloquies' (1725, reprinted occasionally until 1900), editions of selections from Ovid, Phaedrus, and Justin, an English spelling book, and an English translation of a Latin exercise book. The 'Colloquies', a collection of exemplary dialogues in Latin, had long been an obligatory school text; Bailey provided the student with a sinewy translation meant to ease his understanding of the Latin original. (He also shows sympathy with Erasmus's anti-clericalism.) Bailey's editions of selected classics resort to various devices to ease the student's task: these devices range from a numerical 'clavis' in the margin, signalling the grammatical order underlying the rhetorical order of a line of verse (apparently an innovation), to a fully articulated reordering of the Latin, to supplying an outright translation. In emphasizing grammatical order, Bailey tacitly adopted and extended a pedagogical approach that had been associated with John Brinsley and, before him, Martin Crusius. In emphasizing easiness for the student generally, even to the point of providing translations, Bailey professed himself a disciple of John Locke -- 'the great Mr. 'Lock'', who had urged, 'If the 'Latin' Tongue is to be learn'd, let it be done the easiest way' (N. Bailey, ed., 'M. J. Justini ex Trogi Pompeii historiis externis', 1732, iii). Bailey's English dictionaries gained much of their lasting popularity from a similar pragmatic expediency or concern for the reader. 
Bailey died on 27 June 1742 and was buried on 4 July 1742 at Mill Yard church at the price rated for a member of the congregation. His death was noticed by the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. An engraved head-and-shoulders portrait in three-quarters profile, captioned 'N. Bailey, 'Philologos'' (which is how he was styled on several title-pages), appeared as the frontispiece to Bailey's 'Introduction to the English Tongue' in 1726 -- the year in which his first octavo dictionary reached its third edition, and the year after his translation of Erasmus appeared. That portrait probably served as the model for a later frontispiece published in Germany, signed by the engraver Christoph Sysang (1736). In the original engraving Bailey looks well fed and amiable, if somewhat upstaged by his periwig, neck cloth, and what may be an academic gown; the Sysang engraving makes him look yet more august. 


@@@@@


doc= 1056


Bailey, Samuel (bap. 1791, d. 1870), economist and philosopher, was baptized on 8 July 1791 at St Peter's Church (later the cathedral), Sheffield, the second son and fifth of the eleven children of Joseph Bailey, of Burngreave, and Mary Eaden. His father, originally an artisan, had become wealthy in the cutlery business (he was master cutler in 1801) and as a merchant. Samuel was educated in the free school at Sheffield, where his maternal grandfather was a master, and later at the Moravian school in Fulneck. A reserved boy, his only known recreation was that of riding on a schoolfellow's back. 
Having left school, Samuel joined his father in the family firm, and he was one of the first Sheffield merchants to visit the United States, so as to establish business connections there. However, his real interest lay in writing and in public affairs. In 1821 he published 'Essays on the Formation and Publication of Opinions and other Subjects'; a third edition appeared in 1831, the year in which he helped to found the Sheffield Banking Company, of which he was the first chairman. In his 'Essays' Bailey argued that people were not responsible for their opinions because those are independent of the will; hence opinions should not be met with censure or punishment. 
In his work on economics Bailey's main achievement was to take on the Ricardian establishment, in the years when David Ricardo's theories were at their most influential. In 'A Critical Dissertation on the Nature, Measure and Causes of Value', published in 1825, he challenged the basic assumption of Ricardo that value was determined by labour. To him, value was a relative concept, springing from subjective causes; the degree of 'esteem' or 'mental affection', much like the later utility, governed the intensity of demand. Supply conditions, such as output under constant or variable cost, could also affect relative values. Thus value could vary, especially from one period to another. 
Bailey also exposed what he saw as the weaknesses of Ricardo's subsistence theory of wages, for example by means of applying the analysis of rent to wage differentials so as to reflect labour scarcity or variations in skill. Despite these perceptive insights, however, he did not go on to create an alternative and less rigid model of the economic system. Having immersed himself in too broad a range of intellectual interests, he had limited knowledge of the economic literature, and his work bore all the hallmarks of a self-taught and reclusive thinker. Not surprisingly, his writings provoked a range of conflicting reactions from economists. James Mill in 1826 (in an anonymous article in the 'Westminster Review', rebuffed that same year by Bailey), Malthus in 1827, and McCulloch in 1845 all claimed that he was playing with definitions rather than undermining the Ricardian edifice. He tended to receive more sympathetic treatment in the twentieth century. J. A. Schumpeter, in his idiosyncratic 'History of Economic Analysis', judged that Bailey's work of 1825 'must rank among the masterpieces of criticism in our field' and should 'suffice to secure to its author a place in or near front rank in the history of scientific economics' (Schumpeter, 486). 
Bailey's other writings were mainly noted for their terseness and vigour of style. They included an extension of his work on opinions in 1829, and pamphlets on political representation and on the fluctuating value of money in the 1830s. The politics displayed in these works are those of a moderate utilitarian radical with a strong objection to state interference. His forays into philosophy clearly showed up his imperfect grasp of the subject. Thus his 'Review of Berkeley's Theory of Vision' (1842) sought to demonstrate that Berkeley missed the point by assuming that space in a direct line from the eye was not directly visible. When taken to task by John Stuart Mill, Bailey's riposte was that people have a direct perception of external objects, which cannot be analysed into a complex operation. His 'Theory of Reasoning' (1851) and three series of 'Letters on the Philosophy of the Human Mind' (1855-63) caused less stir among fellow philosophers, being more fragmentary and discursive but with occasional flashes of insight. The latter sustains Bailey's criticism of Berkeley but also enlists Berkeley's nominalism in an attack on the theory of 'abstract ideas'. He criticizes German philosophers, especially Kant, and makes a defence of utilitarianism and determinism. His poetic works and two unscholarly volumes of textual amendments to Shakespeare's plays (1861-2) were soon forgotten, and his many manuscripts were not preserved. 
In 1828 Bailey was elected one of the town trustees of Sheffield, and he later retired from his firm to embark on a political career. That was a total failure, as the voters of Sheffield had no time for his radical schemes of triennial parliaments, the secret ballot, and the abolition of tithes and taxes on knowledge; he came bottom of the poll in the general elections of 1831 and 1834 and never again entered the fray. He was several times president of the Sheffield Literary and Philosophical Society. Being unmarried, he adopted a lifestyle of quiet seclusion, admitting no intimate friends and few acquaintances, and of clockwork regularity. He attended board meetings of his bank with absolute punctuality to the last. His only break from routine was an annual visit to his sister-in-law at Cheltenham for a change of air. He died suddenly as he left his bath on 18 January 1870, at his home at Norbury, Sheffield. Of his $120,000 fortune, he left over $80,000 to the town trust. 


@@@@@


doc= 1057


Bailey, Thomas (1785-1856), newspaper editor and author, was born at Nottingham on 31 July 1785. His education was received partly in a day school in his native town, and partly in a boarding-school at Gilling, Yorkshire. Afterwards he was for some time engaged in his father's trade of silk hosier at Nottingham, and then as a wine merchant. A liberal in politics, though not a radical, he contested Nottingham, unsuccessfully, at the general election in 1830. From December 1835 to 1843 he was a member of the town council. In 1845-6 he became proprietor and editor of the 'Nottingham Mercury', but his opinions were too moderate for his readers, and the circulation of the paper declined. Bailey's leaders on the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Bill' of 1851 -- he expected the bill to fail -- caused further loss of circulation, and in 1852 the paper closed. Before this, in 1830, he had purchased a mansion at Basford, Nottingham, where he spent the later years of his life, writing and collecting books and engravings. Bailey published several collections of his poems, and 'A Sermon on the Death of Byron' (1824). He wrote books about Nottinghamshire, of which 'Annals of Nottinghamshire' (4 vols., 1852-5) is the most substantial. He also published 'Village Reform: the Great Social Necessity of Britain' (1854), and 'Records of Longevity; with an Introductory Discourse on Vital Statistics' (1857). 
Bailey was an independent in religion, and was twice married. His first wife, who died about 1818, aged twenty-seven, was Marie-Anne, 'nee' Taylor. About 1825 he married Katherina, 'nee' Carver, of Broughton Astley, Leicestershire, who died in 1860. Philip James Bailey was one of his four children from his first marriage. Bailey died from cancer of the stomach at Basford on 23 October 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 1058


Baillie, Charles (c.1541-1625), conspirator and informer, was probably born in the Low Countries of Scottish descent. He was a good linguist, and from about 1564 found employment in the household of Mary, queen of Scots. By 1571 he was in the service of John Leslie, bishop of Ross, who was the representative in London of the now imprisoned queen. Early in that year he was seized at Dover carrying a package of books and some letters, the latter tied close under his clothing against his back. It emerged that he had been sent by Leslie to the Spanish Netherlands, to pick up some copies of Leslie's seditious pamphlet 'A Treatise Concerning Defence of the Honour of... Mary, Queen of Scotland', which had been reprinted secretly at Liege, and that he had also carried abroad letters for various of the Catholic exiles there. When arrested he was returning from Brussels with a number of letters, including three highly dangerous ones from the Florentine banker and plotter Roberto Ridolfi, who was attempting to interest the duke of Alva in a plan to invade England, depose the queen, free Mary Stewart, and marry her to the duke of Norfolk. The three letters were addressed to Leslie, Norfolk, and Lord Lumley, and implicated them all in this plot. 
The details of the events surrounding Baillie's arrest are controversial. Francis Edwards has argued that Lord Burghley knew in advance of this 'plot', and that Ridolfi was in the government's pay to entrap Norfolk and Queen Mary. The more straightforward and conventional interpretation (that of J. A. Froude and his successors) sees Ridolfi and Leslie as genuine, if foolish, conspirators, whose doings were uncovered first by Baillie's arrest, and then by some excellent detective work by Burghley. Initially Baillie's packet of letters was confiscated by Lord Cobham, lord warden of the Cinque Ports, who was minded to conceal this evidence which might harm his own brother and two important members of the nobility, and who passed the packet straight on to Leslie. Burghley set to work to discover the truth from Baillie, who was at first placed in the Marshalsea and then in the Tower. Burghley used well-tried techniques to break down the young Baillie, first by introducing informers into his prisons, one of whom set up lines of communication between Baillie and Leslie, which allowed Burghley to read all the letters between them. The rack was also employed, and confinement in Little Ease, a cell 4 feet square. As a result Baillie confessed as much as he knew, which was sufficient to see Leslie and Norfolk imprisoned, and which began the process that eventually led the latter to the block and threatened the life of Queen Mary. While he was in the Tower Baillie incised two inscriptions in the walls, signed with his name and dated 10 April and 10 September 1571 respectively. His use of the IHS monogram underlines his allegiance to Catholicism, while his use of French and Italian phrases points to his linguistic skills. Both graffiti moralize upon the predicament of their maker. In November 1572, however, Baillie was released, and was soon back in the Netherlands. He died at Hulpe, near Brussels, on 27 December 1625, in his eighty-fifth year, and was buried in the churchyard of Hulpe, where his gravestone was still visible in the nineteenth century, describing him as a secretary to the queen of Scots and a martyr for the Catholic faith. 


@@@@@


doc= 1059


Baillie, Charles, Lord Jerviswoode (1804-1879), lawyer and politician, was born at Mellerstain, Berwickshire, on 3 November 1804, the second son of George Baillie of Mellerstain, Berwickshire, and of Jerviswoode, Lanarkshire, and his wife, Mary, the youngest daughter of Sir James Pringle, baronet, of Stichill, Roxburghshire. He studied at St Andrews University, matriculating in 1823, and at Edinburgh University from 1826. Baillie married the Hon. Anne Hepburn Scott (died 1880), daughter of the fourth Baron Polwarth, on 27 December 1831. They had a son and two daughters who survived to maturity. 
Baillie was admitted as an advocate to the Scottish bar in 1830 and the influence of his family connections now helped secure his rapid rise in his chosen profession. One of his sisters was marchioness of Breadalbane, another was countess of Aberdeen, a third was Lady Polwarth, and a fourth was countess of Ashburton. Baillie was described as linked more completely to the Scottish nobility than any other lawyer of his generation. 
Baillie was advocate-depute from 1844 to 1846, in Sir Robert Peel's second ministry, and again in 1852 in Lord Derby's short-lived first administration. He was appointed sheriff of Stirlingshire, on the recommendation of Lord Advocate James Moncreiff, a political opponent, on 2 March 1853, and he acted in that capacity until, on the re-accession of Lord Derby to power, he was made solicitor-general for Scotland in February 1858. Later, in July of that year, he was appointed lord advocate of Scotland in succession to John Inglis, who had been raised to the bench. This necessitated finding a seat in the House of Commons and Baillie was returned unopposed as Conservative member for Linlithgowshire in early February 1859. He had, however, represented this constituency for little more than two months when, in April 1859, he also was raised to the Scottish bench as a judge of the court of session. He held this position, under the courtesy title of Lord Jerviswoode, for the following fifteen years, from 1872 serving in the first division of the court. For twelve of these years he also sat in the supreme criminal court, having been appointed, in June 1862, a lord of justiciary. 
As a counsel, Baillie had a fair but quiet practice. He was distinguished more for his deliberation than for his forensic ability, and he discouraged lengthy, contentious litigation. As a judge he had a reputation for courtesy, sagacity, patient and painstaking investigation, competent learning, and probity. He was held, however, to lack originality and to be so habitually laconic in his explanations that one commentator described him as 'deficient in the arts of expression'. In 1859 his elder brother, George, became tenth earl of Haddington. Together with his two younger brothers, Baillie was raised at the same time by royal warrant to the rank and precedence of an earl's son. 
Jerviswoode officiated as convenor of the acting committee of the Wallace monument, a symbol of the mid-century revival of interest in Scottish national identity, erected on the Abbey Craig, Stirling. In 1861 he was elected assessor of the University of St Andrews. He was a trustee of the Board of Manufactures of Scotland. For a number of years he was the president of the Edinburgh Border Counties Association and in that capacity took an active part in the movements to celebrate the centenary of the birth of Sir Walter Scott. 
Owing to ill health, in 1874 Jerviswoode retired with a pension from the bench and from public life to his country residence, Dryburgh House, near St Boswells, Roxburghshire. Here he lived in some seclusion until his death on 23 July 1879. His wife died the following summer. 
Jerviswoode's more general significance as a political and judicial figure lies in his being one of a number of Scottish tories whose political careers were very much limited by the dominance of the Liberal Party in Scottish politics at this time, but who found an alternative prominence and influence on the Scottish bench. David Mure, whose career Jerviswoode's closely parallels, was another such figure, as were John Inglis and, from a slightly older generation, Duncan McNeill and John Hope. 


@@@@@


doc= 1060


Baillie, Cuthbert (d. 1513), administrator, was a son of Sir William Baillie of Lamington. He was a determinant in the faculty of arts at the University of St Andrews in March 1490 and licentiate in 1491. Having held the benefice of Thankerton, by 1501 he was parson of Sanquhar, a prebend of Glasgow Cathedral. On 12 July 1512 Julius II received him as an apostolic notary. At that time he was involved in negotiations with Cardinal Dominico Grimani, whereby the cardinal would resign as commendator of Glenluce in Baillie's favour in return for a pension from the abbey. These must have been completed by March 1513, when Baillie brought an action before the council as commendator. 
Baillie was chamberlain of Galloway from late 1498 to January 1500, while Sir Patrick Hume of Polwarth was comptroller, and was subsequently Hume's executor. Although he made several gifts of horses to James IV between 1505 and 1508, he did not re-enter royal service until 1511. In 1511-12 he seems to have had responsibility for the earl of Sutherland, who was under the king's wardship because of mental incapacity. He served as an auditor of exchequer (1511-12) and commissioner for leasing crown lands (1512-13). On 29 October 1512 James IV appointed him lord treasurer in succession to Andrew Stewart, bishop of Caithness. He was still acting in that capacity in September 1513, during the Flodden campaign, but Stewart was reappointed on 15 October 1513 and Baillie was certainly dead by the end of 1513. 
Baillie's son Bernard, legitimated in 1529, is described as parson of Lamington and servant of David Beaton (died 1546) between 1533 and 1541. Beaton later presented Bernard to the parsonage of Kirkbean, and he still held it when he died at the battle of Pinkie in 1547. 


@@@@@


doc= 1061


Baillie, Lady Grisell (1665-1746), heroine and business woman, was born on 25 December 1665 at Redbraes Castle, Berwickshire, the eldest survivor of the eighteen children of Sir Patrick Hume (or Home) of Polwarth, later first earl of Marchmont (1641-1724), and Grisell Kerr (died 1703), daughter of Sir Thomas Kerr of Cavers. The daughter of staunch Presbyterians, she occupies a prominent place in the martyrology of the covenanting movement. Her father's opposition to Lauderdale's policies led to his imprisonment in the 1670s; his close friend Robert Baillie of Jerviswood suffered similar treatment. In 1676 the young Grisell was entrusted by her father with the delivery of a letter to Baillie, at that time in custody in Edinburgh. She not only gained admittance to his cell, but also smuggled out a message. It was probably on this occasion, too, that she met the prisoner's son, George Baillie (1664-1738), whom she was later to marry. 
Grisell had shown intelligence, courage, and initiative, and thereafter her parents placed increasing reliance on her. In the early 1680s both Robert Baillie and Hume were caught up in the aftermath of the Rye House plot. Baillie was hanged for treason; Hume, fearing similar treatment, concealed himself in the family vault at Polwarth church. For a month Grisell kept him supplied with food and drink, putting food from her own plate at dinner into her lap in case the servants should suspect. When it was thought best to move Sir Patrick's place of concealment, it was Grisell who, with the assistance of a trusted servant, excavated a hiding place beneath the family house. It was actions of this sort that led Henry Grey Graham to bracket Grisell Baillie with Flora Macdonald in his pantheon of Scottish heroines. 
Hume escaped to the continent and eventually, after a return to Scotland in the abortive Argyll rebellion, made his way to Utrecht, whence he sent for his ailing wife and ten surviving children. In the Netherlands Grisell displayed her burgeoning managerial abilities in organizing a large household bereft of servants except for 'a little girl to wash the dishes' and frequented by emigre Scots (including George Baillie) and other 'well-wishers to the Revolution' (Murray, 46-7). When the revolution came in 1688, Hume accompanied William of Orange's expedition; its success assured his family's prosperity. Grisell, who went over to England with the Princess Mary, was offered the post of maid of honour. However, this 'well made, clever... very handsome' person, with 'life and sweetness in her eyes... and great delicacy in all her features', with chestnut hair and 'the finest complexion' (ibid., 56), preferred to return home to Scotland and to marry, on 17 September 1691, her childhood love, George Baillie, now restored to the Jerviswood estates. 
It was a long and happy marriage. Three children were born: a son, who died in infancy, and two daughters, Grisell (1692-1759), who married Sir Alexander Murray of Stanhope, and Rachel (1696-1773), who married Charles, Lord Binning. George Baillie followed a successful career, becoming a lord of the Treasury in 1717. His wife provided shrewd political assistance to him and to her father, lobbying for support on their behalf and keeping them apprised of the situation in Scotland when they were at court. The business skills acquired in Utrecht were now applied in a broader context. George Baillie gave her a free hand; the only question he ever asked was 'if his debt was paid' (Murray, 72). On hearing of the selection of a certain politician, of whom he disapproved, for a Treasury post, he suggested to the earl of Roxburghe, perhaps only half in jest, that the government should rather have 'put my Lady there' ('Correspondence', 109). As her father aged, Grisell took over the management of his estates, once spending two months, working from five in the morning to twelve at night, sorting out the accounts. She also managed her brother's affairs while he was abroad and supervised the education of his children and of her own grandchildren, living some years at Oxford for the purpose. 
Grisell's 'Household Book' shows her hard at work. Servants were either diligent or dismissed; eight cooks came and went in 1715. She did not bear incompetence patiently, as when she noted the price paid for young trees by her gardener, 'which was a perfit cheat' ('Household Book', 253). When the family removed temporarily to Italy for the sake of Lord Binning's health, Grisell learned Italian, the better to bargain with the tradespeople. As the inscription on her monument noted, 'unwearied application' and 'happy economy' went hand in hand in her management of affairs; she amassed an immense fortune. In her rare leisure moments she wrote poems and songs; the most famous is 'Werena my heart licht I wad dee'. 
'Full of years and of good works' (monument), Grisell died in London on 6 December 1746, after a brief illness. On her deathbed she had asked for the last chapter of 'Proverbs' to be read to her. It was an accurate description of this remarkable woman, who most certainly had never eaten 'the bread of idleness' ('Proverbs' 31: 27) and whose worth was indeed 'above rubies' (ibid., 31: 10). According to her own instructions she was buried (on 25 December 1746) beside her husband at Mellerstain, whose modest buildings were soon to be enlarged by the hand of Robert Adam and which came into the possession of her descendants the earls of Haddington. 


@@@@@


doc= 1062


Baillie, Joanna (1762-1851), playwright and poet, was born in the manse of Bothwell, Lanarkshire, on 11 September 1762, the daughter of the Revd James Baillie ('c'.1722-1778), who had recently been appointed minister at Bothwell, and his wife, Dorothea Hunter ('c'.1721-1806). The Baillies traced their lineage back to the Scottish patriot William Wallace, and Joanna's mother was a sister of the physician William Hunter and the surgeon John Hunter. Joanna was the youngest of three children; she had had a twin sister, but this child had died unnamed a few hours after her birth. 
Joanna Baillie grew up in close companionship with her sister, Agnes (1760-1861), and brother, Matthew Baillie (1761-1823). Her early years, which she recalled in an unpublished memoir written for her nephew, were marked by a passion for the outdoors: running in the garden, splashing in the River Clyde. Uninterested in books or in learning to read, she preferred staging impromptu amateur dramatics on a wagon in the schoolyard. She and her sister adored listening to ghost stories, sitting by the fire of a winter's evening enthralled by the sexton's supernatural tales and too frightened to go upstairs afterwards. Her own gift for narrative invention revealed itself early in stories told to her companions or acted out for her own pleasure. She was 'addicted to clambering on the roof of the house, to act over her scenes alone and in secret' (Le Breton, 9). In 1769 the Baillies moved from Bothwell to Hamilton, where Dr Baillie had been appointed to the collegiate church, and a few years later, at the age of ten, Joanna Baillie was sent to Miss McDonald's boarding-school in Glasgow. Her intellectual and artistic faculties were here stimulated, and the strength of her powers of reasoning and argument recognized. She had a talent for drawing, considerable musical ability, and a love of mathematics. Above all, however, was her facility in the writing and acting of plays. She visited the theatre for the first time: 'I had seen nothing of the kind before but a puppet show in a poor little outhouse when I was a mere child. But now I beheld a lighted up theatre with fine painted scenes and gay dressed Gentlemen and Ladies acting a story on the stage, like busy agitated people in their own dwellings, and my attention was rivetted with delight. (Baillie, 'Memoirs')' Her passion for theatre continued throughout her life.In 1776 Joanna's father took up a post as professor of divinity at Glasgow University. In 1778 he died. Matthew Baillie went to Balliol College, Oxford, planning to follow in his uncles' footsteps and study medicine. With little inheritance, Mrs Baillie and her daughters retired to Long Calderwood, her family home, and lived the lives of quiet country gentlewomen. In 1783 Dr William Hunter died, leaving Matthew Baillie his house and museum collection in Windmill Street, London. The following year Joanna, Agnes, and their mother moved to Windmill Street to keep house for Matthew. In London, Joanna Baillie had access to literary society through her aunt Anne Hunter, the wife of John Hunter, who was a poet of some renown and hosted a regular salon. Frances Burney, Elizabeth Carter, and Elizabeth Montagu were among those whom Agnes Baillie recalled meeting. Anne Hunter's example encouraged Joanna to write poetry. Her first poem, 'Winter Day', was evocative of the winter sights and sounds in the neighbourhood of Long Calderwood. Like her later tragedies it was written in blank verse: 'Thomson had written in blank verse, but I must confess I would much rather have written in rhime; only rhimes with me in those days were not easily found and I had not industry enough to toil for them. Ballads in rhime followed afterwards, and when I found I could write them with some degree of ease, I began to be proud of myself and to believe that I possessed some genius. (Baillie, 'Memoirs')' While at Windmill Street she also began seriously writing drama, 'following simply my own notions of real nature' and discovering that it was 'an occupation that suited me' (ibid.). She had a ready supply of books and studied the French authors Corneille, Racine, Moliere, and Voltaire, as well as Shakespeare and the older English dramatists. She completed a tragedy, 'Arnold', which was never published, and 'a serious comedy' which was later burnt. 'Rayner' was also written at this time, though it was heavily revised before it was published in 'Miscellaneous Plays' (1804). Her first publication, 'Poems: Wherein it is Attempted to Describe Certain Views of Nature and of Rustic Manners', appeared in 1790. Baillie later revised a selection of these early poems which were reprinted in her 'Fugitive Verses' (1840); a facsimile of the 1790 volume, thought lost until the 1980s, was published in 1994. 
In 1791 Matthew Baillie married Sophia Denman, and moved to Grosvenor Street. Mrs Baillie and her daughters settled, after two or three moves, in Colchester. There, Joanna Baillie conceived the idea of her 'Plays on the Passions' and began by writing 'Basil', a tragedy on love, 'The Tryal', a comedy on love, and 'De Monfort', a tragedy on hatred. The scheme of the 'Plays on the Passions', as announced in volume 1, published anonymously in 1798, was ambitious: there were to be further volumes, a whole 'series of Plays; in which it is attempted to delineate the stronger passions of the mind, each passion being the subject of a tragedy and a comedy'. A long introductory discourse defended and explained this novel approach to the drama. The plays, the author explained, were part of an 'extensive design' and were a completely original concept. They arose from a particular view of human nature in which sympathetic curiosity and observation of the movement of feeling in others were paramount. Real passion, 'genuine and true to nature', was to be the subject; each play was to focus on the growth of one master passion; while what was dramatized were the often hidden psychological processes giving rise to passionate action. This unusually analytic approach generated much discussion and controversy. The author's identity remained secret. In 1800 'De Monfort' was produced at Drury Lane with John Philip Kemble and Sarah Siddons in the leading parts. Splendidly staged, the play ran for eleven nights but was not a theatrical success. In 1802, a second volume of 'Plays on the Passions' was published under Joanna Baillie's name, with a preface which acknowledged the reception given to volume one: 'praise mixed with a considerable portion of censure'. Volume 2 consisted of 'The Election', a comedy on hatred, 'Ethwald', a tragedy in two parts on ambition, and 'The Second Marriage', a comedy on ambition. Joanna Baillie considered that these plays, especially 'Ethwald', were written when she was at the height of her powers. Soon afterwards, in 1803, Francis Jeffrey published a long condemnatory review of the 'Plays on the Passions' as a leading article in the 'Edinburgh Review'. He attacked the theory, practice, and purpose of the plays; and though he also praised her 'pleasing and powerful genius' Joanna Baillie marked him down as her literary enemy and refused a personal introduction. It was not until 1820 that she agreed to meet him; characteristically, they then became warm friends. 
By 1802 Joanna Baillie had moved from Colchester to Hampstead, where she was to live with her sister for the next half-century. In 1806 Mrs Baillie died. Neither sister married. They were sociable, hospitable, and much admired and visited, being on intimate terms of friendship with many eminent figures in the arts and sciences. Anna Barbauld and Lucy Aikin were neighbours and close friends, and Walter Scott was a regular correspondent with whom Joanna Baillie stayed in Scotland and who visited her whenever he was in London. In 1804 she published a volume entitled 'Miscellaneous Plays': the tragedies 'Rayner' and 'Constantine Paleologus', and a comedy, 'The Country Inn'. In a prefatory address to the reader she defended her plays as acting plays. Her ambition, she insisted, was to write plays that could be acted, 'to add a few pieces to the stock of what may be called our national or permanently acting plays'. The criticism that she had no understanding of practical stagecraft and that her plays were torpid and dull in performance rankled throughout her life, and she was always delighted to hear of a production being mounted, no matter how humble it might be. She believed that critics had unfairly labelled her a closet dramatist, partly because she was a woman and partly because they had failed to read her prefaces with care. She pointed also to the conventions of the theatre in her time, when lavish spectacle on huge stages was the order of the day. Her own plays, with their attention to psychological detail, worked best, she argued, in well-lit small theatres where facial expressions could clearly be seen. 'Constantine Paleologus', though written with John Kemble and Mrs Siddons in mind, was declined by Drury Lane. It was produced at the Surrey Theatre as a melodrama, 'Constantine and Valeria', and, in its original form, at Liverpool, Dublin, and Edinburgh. In 1810 Joanna Baillie took a Scottish theme for a new play, 'The Family Legend', which was performed at Edinburgh with a prologue by Walter Scott and an epilogue by Henry Mackenzie. This was a success and encouraged the managers of the Edinburgh theatre to revive 'De Monfort', which was also well received. 'The Family Legend' was produced at Drury Lane in 1815 and 'De Monfort' in 1821 with Edmund Kean in the title role. 
In 1812 the third and final volume of Joanna Baillie's 'Plays on the Passions' appeared. It consisted of two tragedies, 'Orra' and 'The Siege', a comedy, 'The Alienated Manor', and a serious musical drama, 'The Beacon'. One passion only was represented in the tragedies and comedy: Fear; and in the musical drama, Hope. Introducing what she described as 'probably the last volume of plays I shall ever publish' she went on to explain that it was her intention to complete her project by writing further dramas on the passions of Remorse, Jealousy, and Revenge, but she did not intend to publish them since publication had discouraged stage production. Her next published work did not appear until 1821, 'Metrical Legends of Exalted Characters', which told in verse the heroic stories of such historical figures as William Wallace, Christopher Columbus, and Lady Grisell Baillie. These were inspired in part by the huge popularity of Walter Scott's heroic ballads, her own enthusiasm for which had, she admitted, 'made the drama less interesting for a time' (Baillie, 'Memoirs'). In 1823 she edited and published by subscription a collection of poems by many of the leading writers of the day, in support of a widowed old school friend with a family of daughters to support. Financially secure herself, Joanna Baillie customarily gave half her earnings from her writings to charity, and engaged in many philanthropic activities. In the early 1820s she corresponded with the Sheffield campaigner James Montgomery in support of his efforts on behalf of chimney sweeps. She declined to send a poem, fearing that was 'just the very way to have the whole matter considered by the sober pot-boilers over the whole kingdom as a fanciful and visionary thing' whereas 'a plain statement of their miserable lot in prose, accompanied with a simple, reasonable plan for sweeping chimneys without them' was far better strategically. Better still was to win over the master bricklayers and get them to stop building crooked chimneys (letter, 5 Feb 1824, Wellcome L.). 
Such pragmatism was regularly in evidence where literary matters were concerned. Joanna Baillie had a shrewd understanding of publishing as a trade marked by gender and class distinctions and driven by the profit motive. Authors down on their luck, women writers, and working-class poets like the shoemaker poet, John Struthers, applied to her for assistance. She took seriously the power her eminence gave her. She wrote letters, drew on all her contacts, and used her knowledge of the literary world either to advise or to further a less well-connected writer. She advised one aspiring author not to publish at his own expense because then publishers would not take the trouble to promote his book as they would if they were publishing at their own risk. 
In 1823, Joanna Baillie's much-loved brother Matthew died. His children and grandchildren continued to display the affectionate closeness and pride in their aunt's achievements which had always marked the family. Religion had always been important to her. In 1826 she published 'The Martyr', a tragedy on religion, intended for reading only; and in 1831 she entered publicly into theological debate with a pamphlet, 'A view of the general tenour of the New Testament regarding the nature and dignity of Jesus Christ', in which she analysed the doctrines of the Trinitarians, the Arians, and the Socinians. In the years 1831-2 she experienced a period of unusual ill health which left her too weak to keep up her correspondence. However, she recovered and set about preparing three volumes of 'Miscellaneous Plays' for the press. These included, along with nine other new plays, the continuation of 'Plays on the Passions' promised earlier: a tragedy and comedy on jealousy and a tragedy on remorse. Their publication in 1836 created a furore. Critics were almost universally enthusiastic and welcoming. 'Fraser's Magazine' declared: 'Had we heard that a MS play of Shakespeare's, or an early, but missing, novel of Scott's, had been discovered, and was already in the press, the information could not have been more welcome.' ('Fraser's Magazine', 236) In 1840, urged on by her old friend the banker poet Samuel Rogers, she issued a new collection, 'Fugitive Verses', some of which were recently written. It was generally agreed that her popular songs, especially those in Scots dialect, would live on. In 1849 she published for private circulation the poem 'Ahalya Baee'. She was anxious that all her works (with the exception of the theological pamphlet) be collected in a single volume, and had the satisfaction of seeing this 'great monster book' as she called it, which appeared in 1851, shortly before she died. Though no longer robust -- 'Ladies of four score and upwards cannot expect to be robust, and need not be gay. We sit by the fireside with our books' (Carhart, 62) -- she had remained in good health until the end. She died on 23 February 1851 in Hampstead, having almost reached her ninetieth year. Her sister, Agnes, lived on to be 100. Both sisters were buried alongside their mother in Hampstead parish churchyard, and in 1899 a 16 foot high memorial was erected in Joanna Baillie's memory in the churchyard of her birthplace at Bothwell. 
Few women writers have received such universal commendation for their personal qualities and literary powers as Joanna Baillie. Her intelligence and integrity were allied to a modest demeanour which made her, for many, the epitome of a Christian gentlewoman. She was also shrewd, observant of human nature, and persistent to the point of obstinacy in developing her own views and opinions. What Francis Jeffrey called her 'narrow and peculiar views of dramatic excellence' ('EdinR', 261) remained essentially unchanged throughout her life, and she took pride in having carried out her major work, the 'Plays on the Passions', more or less in the form she had originally conceived. Her inventive faculties were widely remarked upon. She was on friendly terms with all the leading women writers of her time. Maria Edgeworth, recording a visit in 1818, summed up her appeal for many: 'Both Joanna and her sister have most agreeable and new conversation, not old, trumpery literature over again and reviews, but new circumstances worth telling, apropos to every subject that is touched upon; frank observations on character, without either ill-nature or the fear of committing themselves; no blue-stocking tittle-tattle, or habits of worshipping or being worshipped. (Hare, 268)' Joanna Baillie's contemporaries placed her above all women poets except Sappho. According to Harriet Martineau she had 'enjoyed a fame almost without parallel, and... been told every day for years, through every possible channel, that she was second only to Shakespeare' (H. Martineau, 'Autobiography', 1, 1983, 358). But even when Martineau met her, in the 1830s, that fame seemed to belong to a bygone era. There were no revivals of her plays in the nineteenth or twentieth centuries; and yet, as psychological studies, her tragedies would seem very suited to the intimacy of television or film. Twentieth-century scholars have recognized her importance as an innovator on the stage and as a dramatic theorist, and revisionary critics and literary historians of the Romantic period concerned to reassess the place of women writers are acknowledging her significance. 


@@@@@


doc= 1063


Baillie, John (1741-1806), minister of the Secession church, was trained for the ministry by John Swanston of Kinross and became minister to the Carliol Street congregation in Newcastle upon Tyne about 1769. He was a popular preacher, but his convivial habits resulted in behaviour inappropriate for a minister and led eventually to his suspension in 1784. He drifted into debtor's prison but managed to escape to Scotland, where from 1786 to 1789 he was minister at the Crief Relief Presbyterian Chapel. He married about 1776, but nothing is known of his wife. 
After clearing his debts and returning to Newcastle in 1789, Baillie for a short time assisted William Tinwell, the author of a treatise on arithmetic, in running a school in the Dog Bank. Afterwards he returned to preaching, first in a schoolroom in St Nicholas's churchyard at Newcastle, then at Malling's Rigg Chapel, Sunderland (1791-6), and from 1797 at the old Postern Chapel, Newcastle, which his friends had refurbished for his use. 
During his second period in Newcastle, Baillie was obliged to supplement his ministerial income by writing and by assisting his daughter, Frances, who kept a school in Pilgrim Street, Newcastle, and later at Gateshead. Among his published works are several religious treatises and sermons, including one occasioned by the death of Frances in 1801. He also wrote several historical works, such as 'An Impartial History of the Town and County of Newcastle-upon-Tyne' (1801) and 'A History of the French Wars' (1802). He was considered to be a scholar of some ability and was a member of the prestigious Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society. Baillie died at Gateshead on 12 December 1806 and was buried in the nonconformist necropolis at Ballast Hills, Newcastle. 


@@@@@


doc= 1064


Baillie, John (1772-1833), army officer in the East India Company and orientalist, younger son of George Baillie of Leys Castle, Inverness, and his wife, Anne ('nee' Baillie), was born at Inverness on 10 May 1772, and entered the East India Company's service in 1790, arriving in India in 1791. He became ensign in 1793 and lieutenant in 1794, devoting his leisure largely to the study of oriental languages, with such success that on the foundation of the new college of Fort William, Calcutta, in 1800 he was appointed professor of Arabic and Persian languages and of Islamic law. In 1803, on the outbreak of the Second Anglo-Maratha War, he joined in the siege of Agra with the rank of captain, and soon after was appointed to the sensitive post of political agent at Bundelkhand. Disaffection was rife there, and the chiefs were forming threatening combinations. Baillie, however, succeeded in splitting their alliance and re-establishing control. For this service he was publicly thanked by the governor-general: he had transferred to the company a territory with a revenue of $225,000 a year. He resigned his professorship in 1807 for the position of resident at Lucknow, which he held until 1815. 
In 1818 Baillie retired from East India Company service, and on his return to England was MP for the borough of Hedon from 1820 to 1831, and from 1832 until his death for the burghs of Inverness. He was a moderate whig, supporting Catholic emancipation but opposing the 'Reform Bill', and after 1832 a Conservative. He was elected a director of the East India Company on 28 May 1823. While at Fort William College, Baillie published highly regarded works on Arabic grammar. He also translated from Arabic part (relating to commercial transactions) of a digest of Islamic law in 1797, at the request of Sir John Shore (Lord Teignmouth) the governor-general. Baillie died at his home in Devonshire Place, London, on 20 April 1833. His collection of oriental works was presented by his heirs to Edinburgh University. 


@@@@@


doc= 1065


Baillie, Marianne (1795?-1831), travel writer and versifier, whose maiden name appears to have been Wathen, married before 1817 Alexander Baillie, who printed privately at Kingsbury her first known work, 'Guy of Warwick, a Legende, and other Poems' (1817). This collection of undistinguished verse reached a second edition probably through the indulgence of friends. A period of financial difficulty appears to have followed soon after: in 1818 the Baillies went to live at Sion Cottage, Twickenham, possibly the property of Sophia Charlotte, Baroness Howe, whose second husband, Sir Wathen Waller, was probably a distant relative of Marianne Baillie. In the summer of 1818 the Baillies, accompanied by a male friend, set out on a tour through France, Italy, Austria, and Germany which Marianne Baillie described in her first travel book, 'First Impressions of a Tour upon the Continent' (1819), one of the earliest accounts of the grand tour written by a woman. It was published by John Murray and dedicated to the Honourable John Hampden Trevor, the British diplomatic minister in Turin and, apparently, a family friend. 'First Impressions' received a favourable, if condescending, review in the 'London Literary Gazette', where it was described as 'at once useful and agreeable' for travellers ('London Literary Gazette', 17 July 1819, 453-4). The critic rightly noted Marianne Baillie's 'turn for observation': homely reflections on bed bugs and the inferior quality of French cutlery interrupt the often conventionally picturesque and romantic commentary on scenery and costumes. By January 1821 she had written another work, the subject of which is unknown, but Murray declined to publish it. 
In June of that year the Baillies left for Portugal, accompanied by their first child, a son; they remained there until September 1823, living mainly in Lisbon. It appears probable that Trevor had secured a diplomatic appointment for Alexander Baillie. Marianne Baillie's letters to her mother during these years formed the substance for her best work, 'Lisbon in the Years 1821, 1822, and 1823' (1824), published by Murray. In her letters the trials of the new constitutional government of Portugal and its eventual overthrow by the royalist party contend for space with descriptions of the beauties of rural Cintra, an account of a visit to a local convent, and praise for delicacies such as roasted chestnuts. She found the climate overpowering and the streets of Lisbon disgusting, but, despite constant nostalgic allusions to England, she was open-minded enough to appreciate the superiority of Portuguese courtesy and to be touched by the affectionate ways of her servants. Shortly after the birth of her second child, a daughter, in late 1822, she heard with relief that a post in London had been found for her husband; but she admitted to leaving Portugal 'almost with regret' ('Lisbon', 2.250). Shortly after the publication of 'Lisbon' a second edition was called for, which surprised even the author; in the same year the work received a favourable notice in the 'Quarterly Review'. Her only other known work -- a collection of old and new poems entitled 'Trifles in Verse' -- was printed privately in the same year. The Baillies do not appear to have travelled abroad again; in 1827 they were living in Stanley Cottage on Richmond Hill. By 1830 Marianne Baillie was in poor health, and she died in 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 1066


Baillie, Matthew (1761-1823), morbid anatomist and physician, was born on 27 October 1761 at Shotts manse, Lanarkshire, the second but only surviving son of James Baillie ('c'.1722-1778) and his wife, Dorothea ('c'.1721-1806). They had an elder daughter, and also one younger, Joanna Baillie the poet. James Baillie was successively minister of Shotts, Bothwell, and Hamilton; ultimately he was professor of divinity at the University of Glasgow. Dorothea Baillie's father was John Hunter of Long Calderwood, near East Kilbride, Lanarkshire; the anatomists William Hunter and John Hunter were her brothers. 
Baillie was educated at the English school (1766-8) and the Latin school (1768-74) in Hamilton and at the University of Glasgow (1774-9), which nominated him to a Snell exhibition at Balliol College, Oxford, where he was also appointed to a Warner exhibition through the interest of his uncle William Hunter. He matriculated at Oxford in April 1779, and lived there full time for eighteen months reading classics and English history. Balliol was then at its nadir, but Baillie's tutor, Richard Prosser, later archdeacon of Durham, was a reformer for whom Baillie had great respect; Baillie and Prosser together were the college's elder statesmen as it rose to dominance forty years on. Late in 1780 Baillie went to live with William Hunter in London, thereafter keeping only minimal terms at Oxford, graduating BA in 1783 (MA, 1786). Hunter had established an anatomy school and museum in Great Windmill Street. Baillie attended dissections and lectures there, teaching in the dissecting room himself after one session. He also went to courses in chemistry, medicine, surgery, and obstetrics given by George Fordyce, William Hunter's estranged younger brother John, Thomas Denman, and William Osborne. When William Hunter died in 1783 he left Baillie control of the anatomy school, the eventual freehold of the premises, thirty years use of the museum, and about $5000. The small Hunter family estate of Long Calderwood also passed to Baillie, but he renounced it in favour of John Hunter. 
Baillie soon became an established anatomy lecturer, and continued in that role at Great Windmill Street, working in increasingly uneasy partnership with William Hunter's former partner William Cruikshank, until 1799. But he also completed his broader medical training as a pupil at St George's Hospital, where he was appointed physician in 1787. In mid-1788 he made a four-month tour of France, Germany, Switzerland, Belgium, and the Netherlands, visiting many hospitals and anatomy schools, recording critical observations on conditions in the former and techniques in the latter. He graduated BM at Oxford in 1786 (DM, 1789), and was elected FRCP (London) in 1790. William Hunter's posthumous 'An Anatomical Description of the Human Gravid Uterus and its Contents' (1794) was edited for publication by Baillie. Two papers in 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1788 and 1789 were followed by his election FRS in 1790 (FRSE, 1799); many medical societies gave him the professional accolade of honorary membership. He was Croonian lecturer of the Royal Society (1791), and of the Royal College of Physicians of London (1796-8), for whom he was also Goulstonian lecturer (1794); he gave the Harveian oration in 1798. In 1805 he was a founder member (and second president, 1808-10) of the Medical and Chirurgical Society of London, forerunner of the Royal Society of Medicine. 
As trustee custodian of William Hunter's museum Baillie had free access to a collection containing many pathological specimens, and as physician to a large hospital he had frequent opportunities of examining diseased corpses. He became aware of the inadequacy of the existing literature of morbid anatomy, and, taking the view that the careful observation and description of diseased structures was an essential prerequisite for the understanding of diseases, wrote 'The Morbid Anatomy of some of the most Important Parts of the Human Body' (1793). In the preface he acknowledged the stupendous work 'De sedibus et causis morborum' ('On the sites and causes of disease'), of G. B. Morgagni (1761), which comprised large numbers of case histories and post-mortem investigations, but thought its bulk self-defeating; diseased structures were 'often described too generally' and issues were 'obscured, by taking notice of smaller collateral circumstances, which had no connection with them or the diseases from whence they arose'. Baillie's book was based on an organ by organ system of normal anatomy, giving terse but precise descriptions of disease-induced changes, with practically no reference to cases or speculation about causes, although it contained the first connection of cirrhosis of the liver with alcoholism. The work was limited to the thoracic and abdominal organs and the brain. Significant additions were made for the second (1797) edition, especially notes on symptoms corresponding to pathological change, including some of seminal importance for cardiology (the idea of rheumatism of the heart was introduced, for example, and hardening of the coronary arteries was linked to angina). The first text of its kind, it was very influential, appearing during the author's lifetime in five British and three American editions, two in French, four in German, and three in Italian; there were four later editions in English (1825-33), and one in Russian (1826). A series of superb drawings by William Clift, with commentaries by Baillie, was engraved to illustrate the 'Morbid Anatomy', and it was published in ten parts in 1799-1802. Baillie also wrote numerous journal papers in 1788-1820 (on, for example, pericardial absence, paraplegia, diabetes, and emphysema), which were collected and republished by James Wardrop (1825). In his will Baillie provided for the collection and printing, but not publication, of various writings which were circulated privately as 'Lectures and Observations on Medicine' (1825). 
Baillie's appointment as physician to St George's began a gradual buildup of his practice, and during the following decade it expanded considerably. When his very successful associate David Pitcairn fell ill in 1798 Baillie acquired his patients too, and in 1799 he gave up the teaching of anatomy and his St George's appointment in order to devote all his time to private practice. By 1810 his annual fee income had risen to $10,000, and he was so much in demand that he was regularly working sixteen hours a day. In the same year, following attendance on Princess Amelia, he was appointed physician-extraordinary to George III. He visited the deranged king at Windsor several hundred times during the regency, and was present at his death on 29 January 1820. As physician-in-ordinary to Princess Charlotte, the king's only legitimate grandchild, on whom hopes for the eventual succession were pinned, Baillie had overall responsibility for the management of her confinement in 1817, and was present throughout her fifty-hour labour. His brother-in-law, Sir Richard Croft, sixth baronet (1762-1818), was principal accoucheur. It was a triple obstetric disaster. The child, an apparently healthy boy, was stillborn, the mother died a few hours afterwards, and Croft shot himself while depressed about it all three months later. Baillie's famous patients were not all royalty -- he attended Lord Byron, Sir Walter Scott, and Edward Gibbon, and he examined Samuel Johnson's lungs post mortem. 
Although London remained the base of his professional practice, in 1806 Baillie bought an estate at Duntisbourne Abbots in Gloucestershire, where he lived to an increasing extent in his later years, consulting by correspondence. In 1821 he made a melodramatic dash from there to Queen Caroline's deathbed at Hammersmith. Edward Jenner was a Gloucestershire neighbour and associate; Baillie was an early supporter of vaccination. 
In 1791 Baillie married Sophia Denman (1771-1845), younger twin daughter of the obstetrician Thomas Denman. They had a daughter and two sons. One of the sons died in infancy, but the other, William Hunter Baillie (1797-1894), survived his father as squire of Duntisbourne Abbots for more than sixty years. Baillie was of somewhat less than average height and build, with a round slightly plump face and prominent nose. Though direct and blunt in manner, and inclined to impatience with distractions and silly patients when overworked, he was of a generous disposition, sometimes waiving his fees. His relations with his family, medical colleagues, and patients were usually cordial. He enjoyed good health until early 1823, when a wasting decline, possibly tuberculosis, which was not arrested by a stay in Tunbridge Wells, set in. Baillie died at Duntisbourne Abbots on 23 September 1823, and was buried in Duntisbourne Abbots church a week later. He was commemorated with a bust and inscription in Westminster Abbey. Most of his estate, which was sworn at under $80,000, he left to his family, but his medical books and the copperplates for his 'Morbid Anatomy' were left to the Royal College of Physicians of London. His anatomical specimens he had given to the college, with money for their upkeep, in 1818; they were transferred to the Royal College of Surgeons of England in 1938, but were destroyed by enemy action in 1941. Shortly after his death his widow gave the Royal College of Physicians of London a gold-headed cane which had belonged in turn to John Radcliffe, Richard Mead, Anthony Askew, William Pitcairn, David Pitcairn, and Baillie. It was engraved with all their arms -- a symbol of fame and fortune in medicine which has become legendary. Baillie's arms -- which were used without authority -- were azure nine estoils (variously mullets), three three two and one or, impaling (for Sophia Denman) argent a chevron between three lion's heads erased gules. 


@@@@@


doc= 1067


Baillie, Robert (1602-1662), Church of Scotland minister and author, son of James Baillie (died before 1631), merchant burgess of Glasgow, and Helen Gibson (died 1634), was born in Saltmarket Street, Glasgow, on 30 April 1602. He attended Glasgow grammar school and between 1617 and 1620 the University of Glasgow, graduating MA. At both school and university he was taught by Robert Blair, whom he later acknowledged as having been, after his parents, 'the first and principall instrument' of whatever piety, good letters, and moral virtue that he had. 'I have alwayes found my selfe more in your debt, than in any other man's on earth' ('Letters and Journals', 1.xxiii). 
Baillie's ambition was to spend his life as parish minister in a 'landwarrt kirk' ('Letters and Journals', 1.xxiv), or country church, and from 1625 to 1631 he taught at Glasgow University as a regent while studying divinity in preparation for entering the ministry. In 1631 he was appointed minister of Kilwinning in Ayrshire by the earl of Eglinton, the father of one of his pupils, and now that he had a living he married, on 12 July 1632, in Glasgow, Lilias Fleming (died 1653). Baillie had earned a reputation for outstanding academic ability, but he resisted a suggestion that he move to a more prestigious parish in Edinburgh in 1633 on the grounds that it would break his, and many of his parishioners' hearts if he left Kilwinning. 
An additional motive for Baillie's remaining in rural obscurity was that, though he was willing to conform quietly to the innovations that Charles I was introducing to the Scottish church, he was at heart opposed to them. Moving to a high profile appointment in the capital would have brought him under pressure to declare open support for royal policy. As late as January 1637 he was ready to submit to the new prayer book which was being introduced, though he predicted that it would lead to 'the most pitiful schism that ever poor Kirk has felt' ('Letters and Journals', 1.5). After disturbances provoked by the book broke out in July 1637 Baillie was instructed by the archbishop of Glasgow to preach in favour of it and the book of canons before the synod of Glasgow, but he begged to be excused, declaring that 'my mynde is no wayes satisfied', and that the books had caused him such 'grief, that I am scarce able to preach to my own flock' ('Letters and Journals', 1.12). But, typically, when the order was renewed, Baillie was ready to obey, rather than 'cast my self in needless contests with a troublesome man' (ibid., 1.20), though a change of mind by the archbishop spared him from the ordeal. 
In spite of his forebodings Baillie soon became involved in active opposition to the king's innovations, though he wrote in October 'I think our people possessed with a bloody devill, farr above anything that ever I could have imagined', so that he feared 'a bloudie Civill warr' ('Letters and Journals', 1.23-5). When, in February 1638, the draft for the national covenant was produced, Baillie urged moderating the text at several points, and succeeded in getting an undertaking to abolish episcopacy removed. 'Bishopes I love', he had written before the troubles had begun, 'but pride, greid, luxurie, oppression, immersion in saicular affaires' would destroy them unless they were reformed (ibid., 1.2). In the Glasgow assembly at the end of 1638 Baillie again stood up for moderation, for though now willing to accept the abolition of episcopacy he argued that it should not be declared unlawful, and he opposed persecution of opponents. 
Baillie was reluctant to accept the legitimacy of armed resistance to the king, but again was soon won over. He served as chaplain to Eglinton's regiment in the bishops' wars of 1639 and 1640, and he became an outstanding propagandist for the covenanting cause. 'Laudensium 'autokatakrisis', the Canterburians self-conviction' was published in Edinburgh in 1640, and London and Amsterdam editions quickly followed. Moreover Baillie had for some years been writing about events in Scotland to his cousin, William Spang, minister to the Scottish congregation at Campvere in the Netherlands, and he now expanded these letters (which form the greater part of the published 'Letters and Journals') into detailed, though hasty and informal, narratives and analyses designed to provide Spang with material for justifying the covenanters abroad. From this material Spang published Latin apologias for the covenanters in 1640 and 1641. 
Thus Baillie, in spite of his reservations and anxieties, became a well-known public figure, and in October he was summoned to the camp of the Scottish army occupying northern England. There, on 2 November 1640, he and three other ministers were ordered to go to London to support the Scots commissioners negotiating with the king (NL Scot., Adv. MS 33.4.6, 109-10). While in London he published a further three propaganda tracts, and he was given a leading part in working to secure the downfall of Archbishop Laud and the earl of Strafford, held to be the main authors of the religious and other grievances of both the Scots and the English puritans. 
Pressures on Baillie to leave Kilwinning had by now been renewed. He refused an attempt to move him to the ministry in Glasgow in 1639, after pleading that he was already 'in a place eminent enough for any gifts I have' ('Letters and Journals', 1.229), but in June 1642 he accepted an invitation to become joint professor of divinity (with David Dickson) in Glasgow. Late in 1642 the commission of the general assembly of the church resolved, in response to approaches from the English parliament in favour of religious union between the two countries, to send commissioners to England to help bring about reform there. Baillie was one of the delegates chosen, though it was not until 18 November 1643 that he and his colleagues reached London. They were admitted to the Westminster assembly of divines as observers, and in January 1645 Baillie returned to Scotland and reported optimistically to the general assembly on the progress being made. In spite of his protests that he wanted to return home, he was sent back to London in March, though he was delayed after his ship was blown off course to the Netherlands, and he recorded with pleasure visiting Spang and roaming the bookshops of Rotterdam. On 21 January 1647 Baillie again reported on the Westminster assembly to the commission of the general assembly in Edinburgh, presenting it with the confession of faith that had been approved. 
Though Baillie, like the other Scots commissioners, had not been able to take a direct part in the debates of the Westminster assembly, he had been influential in discussions behind the scenes in the cause of uniformity, as well as preaching to the houses of Lords and Commons and supporting presbyterianism through further published tracts, including 'An Historical Vindication of the Government of the Church of Scotland' (1646). However, initial triumph quickly turned sour. The English parliament, no longer in need of Scottish military help in its war against the king, showed little interest in enforcing uniformity, and in 1644 and 1645 royalists led by the marquess of Montrose won repeated victories over the covenanters' armies. In his letters Baillie expressed his bewilderment as to why God was allowing his people to be scattered -- especially by a force that included so many Roman Catholics. 
An outbreak of bubonic plague prevented Baillie from returning to Glasgow after reporting to the commission of the general assembly in 1647, but some of the classes of Glasgow University assembled at Kilwinning and he joined them and his family there. As plague approached the parish he retreated to Edinburgh, now plague free. Again he was perplexed, but concluded that plague was a gift -- though a mysterious one -- from God. Political events were also demoralizing. In 1648 most covenanters allied with moderate royalists in the engagement to help Charles I against the English parliament. The church opposed the scheme, and Baillie expressed naive horror on finding that the state could defy the church, raise an army, and do what it liked. 
The defeat of the engagers by Cromwell in England brought the kirk party regime, supported by the church, to power, and in March 1649 Baillie was one of a delegation it sent to The Hague to invite the young Charles II to Scotland. But Charles refused the terms offered, and Baillie soon became disillusioned with the kirk party because of its severe persecution of engagers and those who had not been active in opposing them. He bravely refused to vote to depose guilty ministers, and was especially active in support of his friend John Strang, the principal of Glasgow University. But finding that he was himself in danger of being classified as a malignant, Baillie soon retired to his university duties, as advised in July 1650 by his mentor Robert Blair: 'Get yow to your book and your work, and meddle not', for he was destroying his good name ('Letters and Journals', 3.105). 
When, in 1650-51, the church in Scotland tore itself apart over how to react to English invasion and the revival of royalist sentiment that it provoked, Baillie supported the majority resolutioners' party rather than the extremist remonstrants, though he was reluctant to involve himself in the bitter controversy: 'I loved not to appear in contradiction to some violent men' ('Letters and Journals', 3.115). The remonstrants might be a minority party nationally, but in Glasgow they had a majority among ministers, and Baillie feared deposition from his professorship -- his friend Strang was forced to resign as principal of the university in 1650. The remonstrant George Gillespie then became principal, while Baillie supported Strang's right to the post until the latter's death in 1654. 
To professional problems was added personal grief, when on 7 June 1653 Baillie's wife, Lilias, his 'most gracious and vertuous companion', died of 'a languishing disease' ('Letters and Journals', 3.219, 237). When in October 1656 Baillie remarried he chose as his new wife Helen (died 1679), the widowed daughter of John Strang. 
the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 led to Gillespie's deposition, and Baillie was offered promotion to the principalship by the earl of Lauderdale, Charles II's Scottish secretary, but he dithered. On the one hand the post was, 'no lesse than my due and just deserving', and he felt that acceptance would somehow avenge Strang's forced resignation, but he had always been 'farre averse from changes and advancement' and was ageing and ill ('Letters and Journals', 3.418-19). None the less, he eventually accepted the appointment, which was made on 23 January 1661. 
It was to prove an unhappy end to Baillie's career. He was already fearful of the king's intentions for the church, and expressed his opposition to the return of episcopacy, but before the end of the year appointment of bishops began. Baillie was demoralized, realizing that by accepting office as principal he had seemed to endorse this development. His last letter to Spang, in May 1662, reveals that he was ill, and scurvy had been diagnosed. What with physical pain and grief at the Restoration settlement 'It were a favour to me to be gone' ('Letters and Journals', 3.483). Scotland had suffered so much for the covenants, and now all was lost and godly men were being persecuted. He met the new archbishop of Glasgow, but made clear that he was opposed to 'his way' and refused to use formal 'styles' in addressing him (ibid., 3.487). He longed to see his most ambitious academic work, a chronology of the world from the creation to Constantine the Great, published before his death, but he died in late August 1662 and his 'Operis historicum et chronologicum' did not appear until 1663. 
Baillie was a man who had felt his natural home was a country parish (he was still dreaming of returning to one in 1661) but whose talents and enthusiasm led to his half pushing himself, half being dragged, into more public roles in which he never felt entirely at home. He repeatedly expressed fears of the consequences of his actions and hesitated to speak out, but he recognized this vein of timidity in himself and sought to overcome it. He used his skills in favour of the dominant -- and therefore relatively safe -- covenanting cause in the 1640s, and once involved in the movement showed in his propaganda pamphlets and his letters that he could at times be virulent to the point of bloodthirstiness. More creditable were the occasions when he overcame his fears sufficiently to protest against the persecution of colleagues in the ministry. None the less, his protests, though brave, were muted, and it was pliancy, a willingness to be persuaded by prevailing opinion, that shaped his career. The man who was reluctant to accept the abolition of episcopacy in 1638 and 1639 soon became one of its most renowned opponents, but then accepted its reintroduction in 1661. Recognition of his tendency to accept the lead of others is clearly indicated in the judgement that this 'learned and modest man: though he published some very violent Writings' did so at 'the instigation of other persons' (Burnet, 23). 
The distraction of public affairs limited Baillie's achievements as a scholar, but his reputation was high. It was claimed that he was a man of 'profound and universal learning', but the assertion that he understood twelve or thirteen languages (Wodrow, 1.288) is doubtless exaggerated. Only one personal description of Baillie survives. In 1657 Lauderdale referred to him as 'my old acquaintance, the some times litle monk of Kilwining' (Stephen, 2.38), words that conjure up the quiet, scholarly man rather than the strident covenanting propagandist. 


@@@@@


doc= 1068


Baillie, Robert, of Jerviswood (d. 1684), conspirator, was the son of George Baillie of St John's Kirk, Lanarkshire, of the Lamington Baillies, and the nephew of the covenanter leader, Archibald Johnston of Wariston. Of presbyterian principles, he was, according to his cousin, Gilbert Burnet, 'a man of great piety and virtue, learned in the law, in mathematics, and in languages' (Burnet, 2.354). He married Wariston's daughter, Rachel Johnston, with whom he had nine children. He was first in trouble with the Scottish authorities in June 1676, when he was found guilty of riot for helping his brother-in-law, the presbyterian field preacher James Kirkton, escape arrest. An informer named Captain William Carstairs had accosted Kirkton in the High Street in Edinburgh and requested that he go back to Carstairs's lodgings to visit a sick person who had asked to see him. Once Carstairs had Kirkton in his custody, however, he informed his victim he had a warrant against him which he would execute if he did not give him money. When Carstairs proved unable to produce the warrant a scuffle ensued, upon which Baillie and some others, who had heard about the minister's plight and had come to see if they could be of assistance, burst through the door and made Carstairs release his prisoner. The next day, however, Carstairs managed to procure a back-dated warrant, which he then produced when the case came before the council board. Baillie was fined $500 sterling and remanded in custody until payment was made. A review of his case led to his release in December and a remittal of the unpaid portion of the fine, although Carstairs had already managed to collect 3000 merks ($105) from Baillie as his informer's reward. 
Baillie ran foul of the Scottish authorities again following his refusal to take the bond of 1677, requiring all landlords and masters to guarantee that their tenants and servants would not attend conventicles. He was subsequently charged with lawborrows (that is, required to take out a bond himself to keep the peace), and was put to the horn in March 1678 when he refused to comply. Charles II's decision to cancel the bond and lawborrows in April, however, meant that no further action was taken. 
Concern for the security of the people's 'Laws, Liberties, and the Protestant Religion' (Sprat, 93) led to Baillie getting mixed up in the so-called Rye House plot of 1683, the alleged conspiracy involving malcontents in England, Scotland, and Ireland either to assassinate the king and the Catholic heir (the future James II) or to launch an insurrection to force Charles II to accede to their demands. Baillie was among a group of Scottish dissidents who went to London in April 1683, ostensibly to discuss setting up a Scottish colony in Carolina, but in reality to lay plans for co-ordinated uprisings in England and Scotland, to be led by the duke of Monmouth and the earl of Argyll respectively. Burnet recalls that Baillie told him that he believed 'the obligation between prince and subject was so equally mutual, that upon breach on the one side the other was free', and that the recent injustices in London, culminating in the 'quo warranto' proceedings against the charter, were enough to set the people 'at liberty to look for themselves', although he supposedly 'confessed things were not ripe enough yet' (Burnet, 2.354). Nevertheless, he appears to have begun negotiating with the English dissidents for funding for Argyll's invasion force, asking initially for $30,000, though agreeing to the $10,000 which the English claimed was the most they could raise. In the end, no money materialized, and Baillie grew disillusioned by the foot-dragging of the English, exclaiming at a meeting with his fellow Scottish conspirators that they had 'too long been the dupes of a set of men who could do nothing but talk', but that this 'was no reason why the Scots should desist', adding that 'if they were successful, it would not be the first time that England owed its liberty to the imposition of the Scots' (M'Cormick, 14). The consensus of the meeting, however, was that they should tell the English that they would not act in concert with them unless they showed more vigour, and at the same time inform their friends in Scotland to stop any further steps being taken towards an insurrection. 
Baillie was arrested in London on 26 June 1683, following Josiah Keeling's disclosure of the Rye House plot. When examined by the English authorities, Baillie protested his ignorance of any assassination plot, though he refused to answer questions about the insurrection. He was kept in irons in the Gatehouse and grew so physically incapacitated that he was barely able to move. His wife petitioned Charles II to allow him to be released on bail on account of ill health, though to no avail, and at the end of October the king ordered Baillie to be sent to Scotland, where he languished in prison for several more months. When Baillie at last received a citation to appear before the Scottish council in September 1684 to answer charges against him, he protested that he was too sick to be moved, so the clerk-register was sent with a list of questions to put to Baillie on oath in his prison cell. Baillie refused to answer on the grounds that 'he was not bound to accuse himselfe' (Roger Morrice ent'ring book, p. 441) and was fined $6000. As Baillie's health continued to deteriorate, the Scottish authorities deemed it desirable to establish his guilt before he died in custody, and so brought him to trial on 23 December on charges of treason. His conviction was secured only after a confession, which was wrought from William Carstares under torture and should therefore have been inadmissible as evidence, was read in court; the prosecution claimed the confession was read as an 'adminicle of proof', that is, not to serve as evidence against the accused, but merely to convince the jury that the testimony of the witnesses against the accused could be believed. Baillie was sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered the following day, 24 December. Sir John Lauder of Fountainhall, one of the lawyers for the prosecution, recalled that Baillie 'carried all this with much calmenes and composure of mind', only complaining that 'the tyme they had given him to prepare himselfe for death was too short' and huffing a little that he should be thought 'guilty of any designe against the life of the King, or his Brother' or the monarchical government; he failed to purge himself, however, of that part of the indictment relating to the planned uprising, which 'looked like a tacit confession and acknowledgement theirof' ('Historical Notices', 593). Baillie's estate, worth some 8000-9000 merks per year and unencumbered by any debts, was forfeited to the crown, but subsequently transferred by act of parliament in June 1686 to the duke of Gordon (whose predecessors had previously owned the lands in question). Baillie's son George Baillie (1664-1738) fled to the Netherlands following his father's execution, only to return with William of Orange in 1688. He was restored to the family estates following the revolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 1069


Baillie, Thomas (c.1725-1802), naval officer, probably from Dublin, entered the navy about 1740, and became a lieutenant on 29 March 1745, in which rank he served in the 'Mars', 'Gloucester', 'Scorpion', 'Culloden', and, from 3 June 1752, the 'Deptford' (50 guns), in which he was present at Byng's action near Minorca on 20 May 1756. He was subsequently one of the witnesses at Byng's trial. 
Baillie was promoted to the command of the sloop 'Alderney' on 10 November 1756, but soon joined the frigate 'Tartar' (28 guns) as first lieutenant. With her captain, John Lockhart, ashore recovering from illness or wounds, Baillie took the 'Tartar' out on a cruise, and captured a French privateer of 24 guns and 240 men, the 'Victoire' of Le Havre, or possibly the 'St Marie'; this ship was purchased into the service as the 'Tartar's Prize', and the command of her, with post rank, was given to Captain Baillie on 30 March 1757. 
Having used his Dublin connections to recruit seamen for the 'Tartar's Prize', Baillie was present at the action off Lagos on 18 and 19 August 1759 under Admiral Boscawen. His days of command at sea, however, came to an end the following year when the 'Tartar's Prize' 'sprang a plank' and was lost in the Mediterranean. In January 1761 he was appointed a captain of Greenwich Hospital, through the interest of the earl of Bute; in 1774 he became lieutenant-governor of the hospital. 
In March 1778 Baillie published 'The Case of the Royal Hospital for Seamen at Greenwich', which sought to expose 'the several abuses that have been introduced into that great national establishment'. Baillie listed in his catalogue of errors the appointment of non-naval men to offices, profligate expenditure on official apartments, poor treatment of pensioners resident at the hospital, and the reappointment of fraudulent contractors. 
These charges were not calculated to endear Baillie -- who was basically an honest man -- to his colleagues or to promote his career, and they resulted in his dismissal, and a libel action brought against him by 'the inferior officers' at Greenwich in November 1778. Magnificently defended by Thomas Erskine (who was later to become lord chancellor), Baillie won the case, but he was not reinstated, and a motion in the House of Lords to set up an inquiry into the management of Greenwich Hospital was defeated. 
Sandwich, the first lord of the Admiralty, now seems less culpable in this affair than was once thought, and indeed had sided with Baillie against his colleagues in an earlier episode in 1771. But while he publicly declared that he knew nothing against Baillie's character as a naval officer, and also that he did not feel disposed to act vindictively against him, Sandwich was well aware that Baillie had exposed the way in which he had put his own Huntingdonshire voters into Greenwich Hospital in preference to seamen; and so, as a protege of the earl of Bute, the public-spirited captain found himself aligned with Sandwich's enemies. Baillie's persistent applications to be reinstated at Greenwich or to be given a command at sea therefore proved fruitless, and he was left unemployed until, on the change of administration in 1782, the duke of Richmond, who became master-general of the Ordnance (and who had attempted to put Baillie's case in the Lords), appointed him to the lucrative office of clerk of the deliveries. 
Baillie's fortunes further revived two years later, when he received a legacy of $500 from John Barnard, the son of a former lord mayor of London, who left him this money 'as a small token of my approbation of his worthy and disinterested, though ineffectual, endeavours to rescue that noble national charity [Greenwich Hospital] from the rapacious hands of the basest and most wicked of mankind' (Charnock, 6.215n). Baillie's old age was spent in the quiet enjoyment of his office under the Ordnance, which he held until his death on 15 December 1802. 


@@@@@


doc= 1070


Baillie, William, of Provand (d. 1593), judge, was the son of Alexander Baillie of Carfin, Lanarkshire. No siblings are definitely known, though in his testament a legacy was left to James, son of the late Thomas Baillie, the latter having possibly been William's brother. William Baillie married Elizabeth Durham (died 1585) and they had a daughter, Elizabeth. There is also mention of a son, William, who may have predeceased his father, as well as of an illegitimate son, John. 
As a canon of Glasgow Cathedral before the Reformation, Baillie had the rich prebendal lands of Provand, which brought him considerable income, some of which he used to become feuar of valuable lands in north Ayrshire from the dean and chapter of Glasgow. By 15 November 1550 he had become a lord of session. He is recorded as one of twelve judges who were to 'deliver the billis & ressaif writingis in the utter tolbuyth' according to a schedule beginning on 21 January 1555 (NA Scot., CS1/1, fol. 67), and he was nominated to a major commission in 1566 to revise the laws. In May that year he replaced John Sinclair, bishop of Brechin, as lord president of the court of session even though he was by now unqualified, no longer being an ecclesiastic as required by law. This ground of objection caused Baillie to be removed from the presidency when Sir James Balfour of Pittendreich exchanged the office of clerk register for that of lord president on 6 December 1567, but he was recognized as presiding lord during any absence by Balfour. In 1571, after Balfour was forfeited and had absented himself from court, Baillie resumed the presidency on a 'de facto' basis, until his legal disqualification was removed in 1579; thereafter he acted 'de jure'. In 1577 he was granted a pension of $100. At his death, on 26 May 1593, he left an estate of $5118 Scots, of which $1300 was in ready money. Most of it went to his daughter, who had married Robert Hamilton of Newton. 


@@@@@


doc= 1071


Baillie, William (d. 1653), army officer, was the son of Sir William Baillie of Lamington, an adherent of Mary, queen of Scots. His mother was a daughter of Sir Alexander Hume, lord provost of Edinburgh, and he was born illegitimate while his father's first wife, Margaret Maxwell, countess of Angus (widow of the sixth earl), was still alive. After her death in 1593 Sir William Baillie married his mistress, but the son was not thereby legitimized, and the estates were inherited by Margaret Baillie, the eldest daughter of the first marriage. In 1641 Baillie was to make an unsuccessful attempt to have the settlement of the Lamington estates reversed in his favour. 
In early life, therefore, Baillie became a soldier. He has plausibly been suggested to be the Captain William Baily who went over to the Netherlands in 1625 in the earl of Essex's regiment and under whom the young Sydenham Poyntz served at the attempted relief of Breda. He must already have been a man of some military significance when early in 1629 he went to Sweden to serve under Gustavus Adolphus; his first commission was as lieutenant-colonel of Sir Alexander Hamilton's regiment of recruited infantry. In a 'list of Scottish officers that served his majesty of Sweden' at the time of the king's death in 1632, he is styled 'William Baily, colonel to a regiment of foote of Dutch' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 3.465). He left Swedish service at the end of 1633, presumably to return to Scotland. By October 1629, when his son and heir James was born, Baillie had married Janet Bruce, daughter of Sir William Bruce of Glenhouse and granddaughter of John Baillie of Letham, Stirlingshire. 
Back in Scotland in 1638, Baillie was employed on many important services by the covenanters. In his army commission, ratified by parliament on 11 June 1640, he is designated 'William Baillie of Lethem, Stirlingshire', from the Letham estate which marriage had brought him. Under Alexander Leslie, earl of Leven, he was present with the army which in 1639 encamped on Duns Law, and the following year he took part as a major-general in the incursion into England. As lieutenant-general of foot he also distinguished himself under Leven at Marston Moor, the siege of York, and the capture of Newcastle. At the first he played a prominent role with Major-General Sir James Lumsden in rallying the Scottish foot. As a reward he received command of the Angus (Forfarshire) foot, whose colonel had died from his wounds. 
In late November Baillie was appointed to command of an army, with Sir John Urry (or Hurry) as assistant general, intended to check the raids of Montrose and his highlanders in the north of Scotland. In March 1645 he confronted Montrose in Forfarshire. Following the latter's storming of Dundee on 4 April, Baillie mounted a speedy response which could have destroyed the royalist army had his subordinate Urry pursued the plunder-laden enemy aggressively. Despite his failure, Urry became a major-general of foot and horse, but he earned the covenanters a stunning defeat at Auldearn. Through the spring and early summer Baillie devastated royalist lands until he was defeated by Montrose at Alford on 2 July. Having lost a third of his 2000-man army, he retreated to Stirling. Attributing his defeat to the fact that his forces had been unnecessarily weakened by the drawing off of recruits, he resigned his commission; but after receiving from the authorities formal approbation of his conduct, he agreed to continue in command until an effective substitute could be found. The result fully justified his scruples. For the first half of August he protected Fife from Montrose's largest army, 5000 strong. On 15 August the opposing forces again came in sight of each other at Kilsyth. The committee of estates resolved to give battle, a determination so strongly disapproved of by Baillie that he declined to undertake the disposition of the troops, and consented to be present merely that he might lessen the disastrous results of a defeat which he felt to be inevitable. The covenanters lost 3000 men out of an army of 7000, and with that the last army in Scotland to oppose the royalists. So overwhelming was Montrose's victory that Scotland for a time was at his feet. 
In a change from his military career, Baillie served as an MP for Lanarkshire in 1645-7 and 1648. For all his undoubted bravery and skill, he seemed fated to be thwarted by the incompetence and blunders of those whom he served. When the Scots, after the engagement with Charles I, resolved on an expedition into England to deliver the 'king from the power of sectaries', Baillie was appointed lieutenant-general of foot and colonel of Walter Scott's foot in the army raised by the duke of Hamilton. In July he argued successfully for the army to march through Lancashire. The loose order kept by the duke rendered the English royalist disaster at Preston on 17 August 1648 a foregone conclusion. In the grounds of Walton House, south of the town, Baillie mustered most of the Scottish infantry in case Cromwell tried to cross the Ribble. That night he led the council of war in deciding on a night march to join the engager cavalry under John Middleton. Baillie rallied his forces near Winwick, 3 miles from Warrington, 'maintaining the pass', according to Cromwell, 'with great resolution for many hours' (Cromwell, 1.637). On receiving an order from the earl of Callendar and Middleton to make as good conditions as he could, Baillie refused to surrender, but only 250 foot followed him to hold the bridge; the remaining men threw down their arms and fled to the moor. In despair, Baillie threatened suicide, before his officers persuaded him to surrender by promising to sign a document exonerating his conduct; he very reluctantly sent in a capitulation to Cromwell, which was accepted. 
By 1651 Baillie had returned to Scotland. He satisfied the kirk over his repentance for his part in the engagement in June 1651. He died at Letham in 1653 and was survived by at least two sons. Both James and William ('b'. 1632) succeeded George Forrester, first Lord Forrester of Corstorphine, owing to that lord's resignation of 1650-51. A contemporary Scottish historian observed of Baillie that he was 'a wyse and vallient souldier, expert in militairie affaires, whereof he had given a good proofe, at home and abroad' (Gordon, 114). 


@@@@@


doc= 1072


Baillie, William, of Dunain (1739-1782), army officer in the East India Company, was born in October 1739, probably at Dunain, Inverness-shire, the eldest son of Alexander Baillie of Dunain (died 1771) and his wife, Anne (died 1776), third daughter of Sir Archibald Campbell of Clunes. He had two brothers and two sisters. He was educated at King's College, Aberdeen, and at the University of Edinburgh, but does not appear to have graduated at either place. He was commissioned lieutenant in Lieutenant-Colonel Staats Long Morris's highland battalion of foot, the 89th regiment, or Gordon highlanders, on 18 October 1759, which was subsequently ordered to India, arriving at Pondicherry in August 1761, where the regiment assisted in the relief of the siege. He was promoted brevet-captain on 5 September 1763. His regiment was ordered home at the end of 1763 but Baillie was one of several officers and men who chose to join the army of the East India Company, being commissioned as captain on 2 April 1764, commanding the fifth battalion (from May 1770 renumbered the fourth regiment) of native infantry. He was subsequently promoted major (12 April 1772) and lieutenant-colonel (29 December 1775). Lieutenant-Colonel Mark Wilks, in 'Historical Sketches of the South of India', identified him with the Captain Baillie who did good service as commander of one of the three 'English' battalions in the pay of the company, employed under Colonel Joseph Smith, in the operations against Haidar Ali (died 1782), the ruler of Mysore, in 1767-8. He inherited Dunain in 1771 but, although he sent money to his family before and after his father's death, he never returned to Scotland. He commanded at Pondicherry during the demolition of the French fortifications there in 1779. 
The government of the Madras presidency was notoriously corrupt and incompetent. Though knowing Haidar Ali's hostility, and warned that he intended war, it failed to prepare militarily, its forces being dispersed in different parts of the country. Haidar knew from his spies that the Madras government was unprepared for war. He, by contrast, much improved his army, with many of his infantry trained on European lines and commanded by European mercenaries; he also employed a force of French mercenaries under Lally 'fils'. In July 1780 Haidar, with an army of about 100,000 fighting men, burst into the Carnatic through the Changama Pass. Baillie then commanded a detached brigade -- two companies of European infantry, two artillery batteries, and five sepoy battalions -- totalling about 2800 men, his first independent command in war, in the Guntor Circars. Baillie was ordered to unite his force with the army assembling near Madras under Lord Macleod, who was immediately afterwards succeeded by Sir Hector Munro (1726-1805), who was honest, but uninspiring and irresolute. Moving slowly with the huge camp-following then customary, hindered by heavy rain, and, some writers have alleged, with many needless delays, Baillie's force (with Baillie carried in a palanquin) marched southward, nearer to Madras. On 25 August he reached the Cortelar River and foolishly camped before crossing it. The river then rose, and was not crossed until 3 September. Hearing that Haidar was besieging Arcot, Munro set out for Conjeeveram (about 40 miles west of Madras on the road to Arcot) and ordered Baillie to meet him there. When Munro left Madras on 26 August, Baillie was only 25 miles away, and several officers suggested to Munro that it would be safest for him to join Baillie at Madras. However, Munro refused. Haidar, who knew the British movements, raised the siege of Arcot and led his army towards Munro's force; at the same time he detached his son Tipu with some 11,000 men to attack Baillie's contingent. On 6 September Baillie repulsed Tipu's attack near the village of Perambakam. From there he sent a message to Munro, who was camped at Conjeeveram, 14 miles away, that his losses prevented his further movement. Munro apparently feared leaving his supplies exposed at Conjeeveram, and, instead of bringing the help Baillie expected, merely sent a small reinforcement of highlanders and sepoys under Colonel Fletcher. Both commanders apparently lacked judgement and energy. Baillie, moving forward from the village of Polillur towards Conjeeveram, on the morning of 10 September 1780 was attacked by Haidar Ali's entire army: surrounded, outnumbered, and outgunned. In the battle the explosion of two ammunition tumbrils within the oblong into which Baillie had formed his troops nullified the artillery and was followed by a stampede of camp-followers through his ranks, producing irretrievable confusion. Despite the heroic efforts of their officers, the sepoys, panic-stricken, could not be rallied; but the Europeans, numbering about 500, formed a square under Baillie, who was wounded and on foot, and, on a rising bank of sand, fought with stubborn determination. They withstood the fierce charges of fresh bodies of Haidar's cavalry, supported by masses of infantry in the intervals, until all the officers were killed or wounded, and only sixteen soldiers remained unhurt. Baillie surrendered. It was the worst British defeat in south India, and part of one of the 'most discreditable campaigns in British military history' (Thornton, 66). The survivors, including those wounded thought worth removing, were taken prisoner. Among those seriously wounded was Baillie, whose personal courage in the battle and in the subsequent captivity was admitted alike by friends and foes. Reportedly he defiantly told Haidar the victory was due to British ill fortune, not Mysorean military prowess. Imprisoned at Seringapatam, and most of the time in heavy chains, the officers rejected Haidar's offers of high pay, horses, and women if they joined his service. They remained until 1784, when the survivors were returned to Madras. A few, like Captain David Baird, 73rd (afterwards 71st) highlanders, witnessed the long-deferred retribution when the British captured the fortress on 4 May 1799. However, Baillie was not of their number. Although ill, he was denied medical treatment, and, reportedly still in irons, died in captivity at Seringapatam, Mysore, on 13 November 1782. He was succeeded at Dunain by his younger brother John, also an officer of the East India Company, who returned to Inverness-shire in 1785. 


@@@@@


doc= 1073


Baillie, William (1723-1810), art dealer and printmaker, was born on 5 June 1723 at Kilbride, co. Carlow, Ireland, the second son of Robert Baillie of Celbridge. He was educated in Dublin by Dr Thomas Sheridan, who kept a school at King's Mint House, Capel Street; he then went to London and entered the Middle Temple on 10 May 1742. Baillie soon exchanged his study of law for a commission in the army; he fought with the 13th foot at Culloden and in several engagements in Germany. In 1756 he was captain of grenadiers in the 51st foot at Minden. In 1761 he exchanged into the cavalry, but retired in 1761 with the rank of captain in the 18th light dragoons. In 1773 he was appointed a commissioner of stamps, probably a sinecure with light duties. 
Both before and after leaving the army Baillie bought, sold, collected, and created art. With the Irish painter Nathaniel Hone he assisted in the formation of Lord Bute's collection and he himself owned a number of old-master paintings that were engraved by various artists, including himself. Baillie had made prints from at least 1753, when he etched his own painting of a grenadier, one of several military portraits and scenes, and he devoted more time to printmaking after leaving the army. In May 1769, when bound sets were advertised for sale, his output extended to forty-seven prints with three more in hand. Only thirty-five complete sets were available because the early plates had been destroyed after a small edition had been printed. The sets were bought by the printseller Walter Shropshire, who advertised in June a list of about thirty prints by Baillie that he had for sale singly. Baillie's specialization was the imitation of old-master drawings and prints, and through the intimate knowledge of the style and techniques of the masters that he proved in this way he acquired a reputation as a connoisseur. He employed a variety of printmaking techniques and, like other printmakers of the day, improvised when attempting to imitate drawings. He exhibited with the Society of Artists as an honorary exhibitor from 1762 until 1776, and was elected an honorary fellow, although his status as an amateur was not universally acknowledged. Both Horace Walpole and Richard Bull excluded his work from their collections of amateur productions because they considered him a professional, and it is true that when marketing his prints he missed very few tricks. He worked after a variety of Italian, Flemish, and Dutch masters but preferred Ostade, Douw, and especially the highly fashionable Rembrandt. One habit that he copied from Rembrandt was that master's trick of altering his plates each time that he retouched them so as to produce different effects. Baillie liked also to add a touch of drama so that his imitation of Rembrandt's 'Three Trees', only slightly caricatured in the first two versions, has a fork of lightning added to the stormy sky in the third and a second fork for good measure in the last. He even managed to acquire three of Rembrandt's original plates: 'Cornelis Anslo, Preacher', 'Jan Uytenbogaert, Goldweigher', and 'The Hundred Guilder Print'. His most famous, or notorious, achievement was his 'improvement' of 'The Hundred Guilder Print', which he bought from the American auctioneer John Greenwood, who had acquired it in Holland. As Baillie demonstrated by exhibiting an impression that he had printed, the plate was so badly worn as to be a pale ghost of its former self. In 1775 Baillie reworked the print and then launched a subscription, proposing to sell impressions to subscribers for 4 guineas each, double what Thomas Worlidge had charged for his copy of the 'Hundred Guilder Print' (1757) and the highest price yet asked in England for any new publication. 
By 1803 Boydell was selling Baillie's complete works as 113 prints in two volumes, with impressions from the three Rembrandt plates thrown in. Opinions of Baillie's work varied dramatically. J. T. Smith, who considered Baillie and his friend Hone both 'swaggering fellows' (Smith, 'Nollekens', 2nd edn, 1.119), thought his 'Hundred Guilder Print' 'execrable' and wrote that for years Baillie 'amused himself in what he called 'etching'; but in what Rembrandt, as well as every true artist, would call scratching. He could not draw, nor had he an eye for effect' (Smith, 'Book for a Rainy Day', 115). This was harsh criticism, for much of Baillie's work was innovative and skilful and caught the spirit of the original, but it was stimulated by contemporary adulation for Baillie's work that was equally exaggerated. Baillie died at his home in Lisson Grove, Paddington, Middlesex, on 22 December 1810. His sizeable estate, with houses in London at Lisson Grove, Berkeley Street, the New Road, and Queen Anne Street East, was distributed among his wife, Elizabeth, and four children: George, Thomas, Phillippa, and Caroline. His own collections of pictures, engravings, drawings, and books were sold at Christies on 15-16 March 1811. 


@@@@@


doc= 1074


Baillie, William, Lord Polkemmet (c.1736-1816), judge, was the eldest son of Thomas Baillie (died 1785), writer to the signet, and his wife, Isobel Walker (died 1777). Descended from an ancient Linlithgowshire family, he was educated for the bar and was admitted as an advocate in 1758. Baillie served as sheriff-depute of Linlithgowshire for more than twenty years. In 1793, as Lord Polkemmet, he was promoted to the bench and became a senator of the college of justice. He was said to have owed his preferment to Lord Braxfield. 
A great favourite with Scottish lawyers, Baillie was liked for his good humour and use of Scottish dialect. After listening to an over-long speech by Henry Erskine he was said to have reserved his judgment to the following day, saying: 'I'll just mak'it play wimble-wamble in my wame o'er my toddy till the morrow' (Paterson). His remarkably long fingers also led to his being dubbed 'the judicial fugleman' (ibid.). Baillie was twice married. His first wife, with whom he had a large family, was a daughter of Sir James Colquhoun of Luss. After her death he married Janet Sinclair (died 1834), a sister of Sir John Sinclair; there were no children from the second marriage. 
Although Lord Polkemmet was 'not considered as a first-rate lawyer, or at all fitted to solve difficult legal questions, he had a fund of good sense, which, in the great mass of cases enabled him to discharge his judicial duties with propriety' (Paterson). He died on 14 March 1816, aged about eighty; his second wife survived him. The baronetcy which was about to be conferred on him was given instead to his son Sir William Baillie (died 1854). 


@@@@@


doc= 1075


Baily, Charles (1815-1878), architect and archaeologist, was born at 71 Gracechurch Street, London, on 10 April 1815, the third son of William Baily, of Gracechurch Street, East Dulwich, and Standon, Dorking, Surrey, and his wife, Susanna. John Walker Baily was one of his brothers. He was a pupil of William Adams Nicholson and then from 1843 to 1846 of Henry Goddard of Lincoln, with whom he remained as assistant. He subsequently assisted Robert Hesketh (1817-1880) and William John Donthorn and was for some years principal assistant to the city architect of London, William Mountague, in which capacity he took a leading part in constructing the new roofing of the Guildhall and in the building of the corporation library. His independent architectural work included the building of St John's Church, East Dulwich, and the restoration of Barnard's Inn Hall, and of Leigh church (with new tower), near Tunbridge Wells, Kent. He also worked on St George's Hall and the assize courts, Liverpool. 
In January 1844 Baily was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and he was also a prominent member of various archaeological societies. His 'Remarks on timber houses', illustrated with his own drawings, was published in 'Surrey Archaeological Collections' (1862). He also assisted George Russell French, editor of 'A Catalogue of the Antiquities and Works of Art Exhibited at Ironmongers' Hall, London, 1861' (2 vols., 1869), and was master of the Ironmongers' Company in 1874-5. After a violent illness of several weeks Baily committed suicide by jumping from an upper window only 14 inches wide, at his home, Eastleigh House, in Reigate, Surrey, on 2 October 1878. He left a widow, Frances. 


@@@@@


doc= 1076


Baily, Edward Hodges (1788-1867), sculptor and designer and modeller of silver, was born on 10 March 1788 at Bristol, the son of William Baily, a ship's carver, and his wife, Martha. After leaving school at the age of fourteen Baily was placed in a merchant's counting house where he remained for two years. He formed an acquaintance with a local artist called Weekes, a modeller of portraits in wax, and began himself to model likenesses in this medium. After seeing John Bacon's monument to Mrs Draper (Sterne's Eliza), Baily began to model in clay. He was recommended to John Flaxman by Dr Leigh of Bristol, for whom he had copied Flaxman's illustrations to 'The Iliad', and spent seven years in the sculptor's studio, where he was acknowledged as his favourite and most devoted pupil. Before leaving Bristol, Baily had married, on 21 April 1806, at the age of eighteen, Elizabeth Wadley, who later joined him in London. Their first son, Edward Hodges Baily, was baptized on 7 February 1824 at St Anne's, Soho, and a second son, Alfred, was baptized on 3 November 1825 in the Old Church, St Pancras. A daughter, Caroline, was baptized on 12 January 1812 in St Marylebone Church, Middlesex. They had another daughter, Aurelia. 
Baily was admitted a student of the Royal Academy Schools on 8 March 1809, aged almost twenty-one, in which year he won the silver medal for models. Two years later he won the gold medal for sculpture. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy on 3 November 1817, beating the painter John Constable after three ballots, and being the only sculptor elected that year. Election as Royal Academician came on the death of Sir Benjamin West when on 10 February 1821 he beat the engraver William Daniell in two ballots. While still a student at the Academy Schools, Baily had begun to work for the firm of Rundell, Bridge, and Rundell, goldsmiths to the royal family. He rose to become the firm's chief modeller and designer on Flaxman's death in 1826. He was also chief designer for the silversmith Paul Storr, and continued to work with him for the company which became Hunt and Roskell. The role of interpreter of artists' designs for 'art manufacture' continued throughout his career, often with the approbation of the queen and Prince Albert. Year after year the 'Illustrated London News' and the 'Art Journal' illustrated the silver and silver-gilt racing cups for Ascot, Doncaster, and Goodwood, and testimonials and presentation plate designed by Baily. In 1857, the year of his retirement, he designed the Turner gold medal for landscape painting for the Royal Academy. 
While still working for Flaxman, Baily provided the models of the stone figures for the pediments of Nash's enlargement of Buckingham House in 1826. He also executed the statues, trophies, spandrels, and keystones for the archway (removed to Marble Arch, 1851) and the throne room frieze 'Britannia Rewarding Arts and Science'. The statues 'Britannia' and 'Victory' now adorn facades of the National Gallery, London. In 1833 the 'Literary Gazette' reported questions in the house as to the delays in payment of 'this eminent sculptor, whose productions do immortal honour to himself and country' (27 July 1833, no. 862, 477). 
Major works by Baily include the seated figure of George O'Brien Wyndham, third earl of Egremont (1840; St Mary's, Petworth, Sussex), and numerous subject groups including 'Maternal Affection' (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge) and 'Maternal Love' (Petworth House, Sussex). His 'Eve at the Fountain' (1822; Bristol Museum and Art Gallery) was one of the most famous pieces of British sculpture in the nineteenth century. It was editioned in bronze by the French foundry Bardedienne as late as 1886. Baily executed numerous classicizing portrait busts of the leading scientists, politicians, poets, and painters of the day, creating excellent likenesses. Among them were Thomas Bewick, for the Literary and Philosophical Society of Newcastle upon Tyne (1825), a posthumous bust of the poet Lord Byron (1826; marble versions at Harrow School and Newstead Abbey, Nottinghamshire), Michael Faraday (1830; University Museum, Oxford), Sir John Herschel (1850; St John's College, Cambridge), and Richard Owen (1846; Royal College of Surgeons). In an age of public statuary, his output was prodigious: his 'Charles, Second Earl Grey' (1838; Grey Street, Newcastle upon Tyne), 'Sir Robert Peel' (1852; Market Place, Bury), and the colossal granite 'Horatio, Viscount Nelson' (1843; Trafalgar Square, London), have become icons for their age. At the time, however, they elicited inevitable controversy. Following his award of second prize in the Nelson memorial competition in 1839 Baily was allocated the figure of Nelson which formed part of William Railton's design that won first prize. Baily had gained permission for the public 'to view this stupendous work' as announced in the 'Standard' (25 Oct 1843), before Nelson was raised in two pieces to the top of William Railton's 170 foot column, on 6 November 1843. Among his private patrons were George O'Brien Wyndham, third earl of Egremont, the collector Elhanan Bicknell, whose gallery at Herne Hill, Surrey, included four subject groups, and Joseph Neeld MP of Grittleton House, Wiltshire, great-nephew of the jeweller Philip Rundell. 
Baily, described by Lady Eastlake as 'a shrewd looking man of humour and sagacity' (E. Eastlake, 'Journals and Correspondence', 1895, 1.265), was held in high critical esteem by contemporaries for his powers of composition and for the exquisite finish of his work. His statue of Turner, exhibited at the Manchester Art Treasures Exhibition, was described as being 'from the chisel of the greatest of modern sculptors' ('Evening Star', 13 May 1858). His influence on his numerous pupils, such as William Calder Marshall and John Henry Foley, was considerable. He was the acknowledged exponent of ideal or poetical sculpture, and his retirement coincided with a reaction against ideal and literary-inspired subjects, from which his reputation has never recovered. The obituarist of the 'Art Journal' described Baily as 'one of the most successful and accomplished British sculptors of the nineteenth century' ('Art Journal', 1 July 1867), a view which has remained unrefuted. Baily was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 13 January 1842, and in 1858 he was elected to the Belgian Royal Academy of Fine Arts in Antwerp, both marks of the esteem in which he was held by contemporaries. Financial insecurity was a recurring theme throughout his life. His first declared bankruptcy in 1831 ('The Times', 11 Nov 1831) coincided with his attempts to gain payment for the work commissioned for Buckingham House, and he was bankrupted again in 1838 ('The Times', 3 March 1838). On both occasions he appealed to the Royal Academy for assistance, something he was to do again in 1858 and 1862. In 1857 Baily ceased to work for Hunt and Roskell and resigned as an active member of the Royal Academy in 1862. He spent his last years 'being in circumstances of much difficulty' on a pension of $200 p.a., as an honorary retired academician from 1863 (RA council minutes). He died at his home, 99 Devonshire Road, Holloway, London, on 22 May 1867 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. His wife predeceased him. His daughter Caroline married into the Papworth dynasty of architects and his grandson was the sculptor E. G. Papworth. A volume of Baily's designs for silversmiths is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; examples of his sculpture in marble and plaster are in Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery; the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge; Manchester City Galleries; Petworth House, Sussex; and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 1077


Baily, Francis (1774-1844), stockbroker and astronomer, was born at Newbury, Berkshire, on 28 April 1774, the third son of Richard Baily (1744-1814), a banker, and his wife, Sarah Head (1745-1823). At the age of fourteen, following his education at the old grammar school in Newbury, he embarked upon an apprenticeship in a mercantile house based in the City of London. When he was seventeen he became 'intimately acquainted' with the natural philosopher and radical dissenter Joseph Priestley, of whom 'he always continued a warm admirer' (Herschel, 3). Baily both appreciated Priestley's natural philosophy and sympathized with his political views. In 1796 he embarked on a journey to North America with the official aim of forming or extending the commercial interests of a mercantile house in England. However, he was also fuelled by his republican tendencies, and while 'en route' he announced his intention to take up United States citizenship. 
Baily kept a detailed account of his tour, which was published a few years after his death as 'Journal of a Tour in Unsettled Parts of North America in 1796 and 1797' (1856). He admired the North American ideals of individualism, commercial spirit, liberty, and equal rights (Baily, 93-4). The journal also reveals his views on education and strong repulsion to slavery. He claimed, 'had they [negroes] the same advantages of education, they would equal white people in the improvement of their mental faculties' (Baily, 93). On returning to England in March 1798 he almost immediately began to make plans for another exploratory trip, and volunteered to travel in the service of the African Association, having formed a route of exploration to the Niger. However, the association was unable to raise the necessary funds, and soon afterwards Baily became a partner with one of his father's friends -- 'the eminent Mr. Whitmore of the Stock Exchange'. 
During his long career on the stock exchange Baily became a powerful figure in defining financial practices -- in particular those appropriate for annuities and assurance societies. In 1802 he published 'Tables for the Purchasing and Renewing of Leases' (a second edition appeared in 1807 and a third in 1812), in which he attempted to standardize the calculating base for the rules deducing the true value of a property lease via demonstrable principles. His objective was to obtain the true sum for the purpose or renewal of a lease of such estate accordingly. This depended on finding the clear annual rent of the property via a set of rules and tables he gave for its calculation. 
Baily's early works on annuity tables and assurance societies reveal that he drew strongly upon the eighteenth-century radical dissenter Richard Price. His work on life annuities and insurances attempted systematically to algebraize the subject and represent various cases of annuities and assurances by symbols. He was also one of the first not to rely on Price's Northampton mortality tables, since, he claimed, the duration of human life was in fact longer than these tables suggested. In 1808 he published his highly successful and authoritative 'Doctrine of Interest and Annuities Analytically Investigated and Explained'. This was followed in 1810 by his sequel, 'Doctrine of Life-Annuities and Assurances Analytically Investigated and Practically Explained'. The latter also contained a critical guide to the several life-assurance companies in London, which later that year was published separately as a very popular pamphlet. 
Baily's overriding concern was to establish a system to facilitate the buying and selling of annuities and leases with the object of alleviating the state of the national debt. The prevailing funding system had begun well managed -- the money required for the service of government was borrowed for only a short duration (five to seven years). However, as the exigencies of the state increased, the term of the loan was lengthened to a period of 99 years and finally to the prevailing system of borrowing money on perpetuities. For Baily each change was more disastrous than the former. Baily's solution to the national debt, drawing heavily on Price, was simply to exchange the perpetuities for terminable annuities. The difference would then be paid through the sinking fund -- 'the very purpose for which that fund was established'. 
In 1806 Baily talked at length in his 'The Rights of the Stock Brokers Defended Against the Attacks of the City of London' of the dangers of seemingly plausible projects devised to make money on the stock exchange during the eighteenth century. For Baily, speculative projects and theories had to be effectively expelled from the financial and intellectual market. This meant a careful policing of information. The question centred upon what information was acceptable and what was not. This is highlighted in his vigilance on the stock exchange, which culminated in his central role exposing the fraud of De Beranger in 1814. De Beranger had been employed to supply intelligence from the scene of the war abroad with the purpose of influencing the price of British funds. Baily epitomized sound, thorough, precise thinking: 'everything to which he turned his thoughts', wrote John Herschel, was 'reduced to number, weight, and measure' (Herschel, 8). Baily presented himself and indeed was represented by others as the perfect citizen, reliable and uncorrupted by interests. 
In 1812 Baily tried his hand at history and published 'A New Chart of History', accompanied by a 'Description' -- of which five editions were sold in three years. The work attempted to exhibit the chief revolutions of empire during the history of mankind. This was followed in 1813 by his popular two-volume work 'An epitome of universal history, ancient and modern; from the earliest authentic records to the commencement of the present year'. Baily's approach was directly inspired by Priestley's 'Chart of History'. He argued fiercely that, unless history was pursued systematically without the seemingly judgemental hand of human interests, 'the whole mass of historical records become confused; the transactions of various countries are divested of their two most essential qualities, 'time' and 'place'' (Baily, 'An Epitome of Universal History', 1813, 1.i-ii). History, like the position of the planets or information on the stock exchange, should be protected from deliberate or accidental distortion. 
During the 1830s Baily applied his historical skills in an attempt to rejuvenate the reputation of John Flamsteed, the first astronomer royal, after his neighbour Edward Giles lent him a large collection of hitherto unknown correspondence between Flamsteed and Abraham Sharp, his assistant at the Royal Greenwich Observatory. Baily concluded that the letters implied that Flamsteed's adverse reputation was totally unjustified, and that he had been made the dupe of Isaac Newton and Edmond Halley. His sensational findings, 'An account of the Rev. John Flamsteed, the first astronomer royal; compiled from his own manuscripts and other authentic documents, never before published', were printed in 1835 at the public expense. For Baily the Flamsteed and Newton controversy provided a means to raise the profile and importance of methodical and practical work in the scientific labour process. 
Baily was also concerned that British science was falling behind developments on the continent. The state-sponsored 'Nautical Almanac', prepared by the board of longitude superintended by Thomas Young, represented a good target for him to promote his case. In a devastating onslaught he condemned the board's almanac for not keeping pace with improvements in astronomy. His first offensive against the board was launched in 1819, and it was here that he deliberately first suggested the utility of forming an astronomical society, which he co-founded with several others, including Charles Babbage and Herschel in 1820. Baily's attack continued with greater fervour after the society was set up, and in 1822 he privately printed 'Astronomical Tables and Remarks for the Year 1822'. The main thrust of his argument revolved around the necessity of a set of tables suitable for both the observatory astronomer and the navigator, coupled with itemizing the numerous mistakes he apparently detected in many of the 'Nautical Almanac''s calculations. By the close of the 1820s the credibility of the board of longitude had been successfully challenged, culminating in its closure, and the Admiralty had no choice but to turn to the Astronomical Society for advice on a new set of astronomical tables. 
Baily laboured extremely hard to systematize mathematical tables in both assurance and astronomy. During the early 1820s he was very concerned with the need to remedy the prevailing confusion regarding the corrections for aberration, nutation, and refraction. In 1822, in collaboration with the actuary, mathematician, and stockbroker Benjamin Gompertz, he devised a means of simplifying their application. However, on learning that the Prussian astronomer Friedrich Bessel had devised and printed a similar scheme, he proceeded to publish and recommend Bessel's method instead. He accomplished this in the Astronomical Society's catalogue of 2881 stars (epoch 1 January 1830), which was accompanied by tables for reduction constructed on the new system. It was printed as an appendix to the second volume of the society's 'Memoirs' in 1827, and Baily received the Astronomical Society's gold medal as a reward for his labours. 
Baily relentlessly applied his tabular and calculating skills in revising former important star catalogues. His aim was to bridge the gap between the observations of past astronomers with those of the present: as Herschel put it, 'to ascertain 'all' that 'has really been' recorded of the stars, and to make that totality of knowledge the common property of astronomers' (Herschel, 41). Baily re-edited and published at his own expense the catalogues of Ptolemy, Ulugh Beigh, Tycho Brahe, Halley, Hevelius, Flamsteed, Lacaille, and Mayer in volume 13 of the 'Memoirs' of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1843. He also produced most of the catalogue of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, which contained 8377 stars (reduced to 1 January 1850) of the sixth and higher magnitudes. The value of this catalogue, along with those he did for Lalande and Lacaille (the latter being reduced by Thomas Henderson), was greatly increased by the fact that he used a uniform system of reduction and nomenclature. Through Baily's labours the boundaries of the constellations were also revised and the stars composing them were arranged into a recognizable order. A paper on this subject was read to the Royal Astronomical Society on 12 May 1843 and was subsequently appended to the report of a committee (consisting of Herschel, William Whewell, and Baily) appointed by the British Association in 1840 to consider the subject. 
In response to a proposed expedition by Captain Foster, Baily devised in 1828 a simplified kind of convertible pendulum of which two specimens, of iron and copper respectively, formed part of the scientific equipment of the 'Chanticleer'. The accidental death of the ship's commander in February 1831 threw Baily into the role of completing the numerous observations in both hemispheres by swinging the pendulums in London. He produced a report for the Admiralty which was later published by the government. His results took up the entire seventh volume of the Royal Astronomical Society's 'Memoirs'. The general result of 20,000 experiments gave 1/289.48 for the ellipticity of the earth, showing a satisfactory agreement with Edward Sabine's result of 1/288.40. 
Baily had also independently set to work on determining the length of the seconds pendulum. Bessel had pointed out in 1828 that to date the resistance of the air had not been included as a factor of resistance in the measurement. Consequently, Baily had a vacuum apparatus erected in his house, and there carried out between 1831 and 1832 a series of experiments on eighty-six pendulums of every variety of form and material, of which the details were communicated to the Royal Society in May 1832. It appeared thence that the value of the new correction, while varying very sensibly with the shape and size of the pendulum, was in many cases more than double the old. 
The subject of the length of the seconds pendulum led naturally to that of the national unit of length defined by statute ('5 George IV'), which now proved to be of an uncertain quantity. As a result, Baily obtained in 1833 from the Royal Astronomical Society authority to construct for them a tubular scale of 5 feet, the accuracy of which had been ascertained by repeated comparisons with the standard yard. The issue became particularly urgent with the burning of the houses of parliament in October 1834, and with it the destruction of the national standard. Thus a commission of seven, including Baily, was appointed in May 1838 to consider the best means of replacing it. It was decided in 1843 that Baily should be entrusted with the actual reconstruction of the standards of length. However, he died the following year before he was able to complete the task. 
In 1835 a committee was appointed at the Royal Astronomical Society to repeat Henry Cavendish's experiment to measure the earth's density. However, nothing actually happened until, in 1837, Baily offered his services and was awarded a grant of $500 towards expenses. Between October 1838 and May 1842 he devoted his time to this task in the upper room of his house. He concluded that the earth was composed of materials on average 5.66 times as heavy as water, but an unknown error was detected in his results. The Scottish experimental philosopher James Forbes suggested that the anomalies in question might be due to the radiation of heat from the leaden masses employed to deflect the pendulum, and proposed gilding both them and the torsion box. The remedy was successful and Baily began the process afresh in January 1841. The printed observations published in the fourteenth volume of the 'Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society' numbered 2153 (including a thousand observations deemed untrustworthy). The society awarded Baily his second gold medal in 1843 for his labours. 
Baily also spent a great deal of time diffusing astronomical developments and methods of calculation into the sphere of the general public, with numerous of his articles appearing in the 'Philosophical Magazine'. He is celebrated for his detection of a phenomenon known as 'Baily's beads'. While observing an annular eclipse in May 1836, he noted the breaking up of the fine solar crescent visible at the beginning and end of central eclipses into a row of lucid points, or beads, the intervals separating which at times appear to be drawn out, as the moon advances, into dark lines or belts -- the whole being the combined effect of irradiation and the inequalities of the moon's edge. 
As well as his work in founding and administering the Astronomical Society, Baily served on numerous scientific committees and held an array of positions in scientific societies. For example, from 1839 he was permanent trustee of the British Association, and on various occasions he was vice-president and treasurer of the Royal Society. He helped establish the Royal Geographical Society in 1830 and became its vice-president ['see 'Founders of the Royal Geographical Society of London]. He was also a fellow of the Linnean Society and the Society of Civil Engineers, was a corresponding member of the Institute of France and the academies of Berlin, Naples, and Palermo, and was enrolled on the lists of the American and Royal Irish academies. 
Baily never married and lived for much of his life with his sister Elizabeth Baily, at 37 Tavistock Place, London. In June 1841 he was knocked senseless by a speeding rider while crossing Wellington Street, and was unconscious for a week. He died at home of kidney disease shortly after receiving an honorary degree from Oxford University, at the age of seventy, on 30 August 1844, and was buried at Thatcham church, Berkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 1078


Baily, John Walker (1809-1873), collector of antiquities, was born on 9 January 1809 in Kent Road, London, the second son of William Baily, an ironmonger, of 71 Gracechurch Street, London, and his wife, Susanna. He was educated at an academy in Walcot Place Road, Lambeth, and he succeeded his father in running the business. In 1862-3 he was master of the Ironmongers' Company. He married Marianne Marriot ('b'. 'c'.1809) of Chertsey, Surrey, and had two sons, Walker and William Henry, and four daughters. 
Baily shared his interest in collecting with both of his brothers (the younger, Charles Baily, became an antiquary). In 1825 he purchased some archaeological finds from workmen excavating in Walworth Road, although from 1830 to 1840 he collected mostly arms and armour. In 1840 he built a Jacobean-style house in Camberwell named Champion Park, where he arranged his collection around the hall, stairs, and breakfast room. In May 1861 he loaned various items for the exhibition at Ironmongers' Hall, London, which he also helped to organize. 
From 1863 Baily began collecting the Roman and medieval antiquities that were being unearthed on building sites and railway excavations in the City of London and Southwark. His principal acquisitions came from the Walbrook, from Roman cemeteries around the City perimeter, and from reclaimed land in Thames Street. Like his predecessor Charles Roach Smith, Baily made his purchases from touts who haunted the building sites, who always visited him first because he paid for seeing what they had to sell. Before long Champion Park was overcrowded with exhibits, for which Baily added a northern wing in 1869. 
As well as pottery, coins, glass, and leatherwork, Baily's collection was remarkable for the weapons, which included a Roman trident, a Viking battleaxe, and a two-handed medieval sword. Among other notable acquisitions were a 'Tudor green' lobed cup decorated with a small clay model of a stag and a twelfth-century Romanesque hanging lamp (which Baily mistook for Roman). The collection's importance is enhanced by the beautiful manuscript catalogue that he prepared, which contains nearly 400 pages of accomplished watercolour drawings, together with the dimensions and find spot of every object. 
Unlike Roach Smith's collection, Baily's did not acquire national significance, and at 2100 items was less than half the size. Baily also did not study his finds, although he regularly exhibited them to the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society and the British Archaeological Association. Some were published in records of exhibits and in articles by J. E. Price. Baily was elected to the British Archaeological Association in 1865 and to its council in 1869. 
Towards the end of 1871 Baily contracted cancer of the rectum, and he died at 9 Champion Park on 4 March 1873. He was survived by his wife. His collections were sold by his executors in 1881. The arms and armour were purchased by Baron de Cosson, of Chertsey, and the collection of London antiquities was purchased by the corporation of London for $650 -- the same amount that Baily had paid. It became the foundation of the corporation's museum of City antiquities and is now incorporated within the Museum of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 1079


Baily, Thomas (c.1527-1591), Roman Catholic priest and college head, was born in Yorkshire. On 3 June 1543, in his sixteenth year, he entered Clare College, Cambridge, as a scholar. He graduated BA in 1546. Wardale's 'Clare College' says that the master and fellows of Clare resisted the king's wishes in 1549: 'In no college of the university can the flames of religious faction have blazed more fiercely than they did in Clare Hall.' John Maden, master 1549-53, was reconciled to the Roman Catholic church in 1555. It was during his mastership or just after that Baily was elected a fellow, on 16 December 1553; he became a proctor in 1554. At the beginning of Queen Mary's reign Baily was ordained a priest, and on 20 September 1557 he was elected master of the college. On Elizabeth's accession a change in the mastership took place in several Cambridge colleges and Baily was deprived of his mastership for refusing to comply with the royal injunctions. The last document he signed as master was dated 14 May 1560. His successor, Edward Leeds, signed the next extant document on 12 October 1560. 
Baily fled, along with many other university men, to Louvain, where he became a doctor of divinity. At Louvain the exiles lived in two houses called Oxford and Cambridge. He remained until 30 January 1576, when he went to the English College, Douai, at the invitation of William Allen, the president of the college. Baily was vice-president and acted as president in Allen's absence. The college was administered by a triumvirate consisting of Allen, Baily, and Richard Bristow (one time fellow of Exeter College, Oxford). Baily was considered successful in carrying out his duties and commanded universal respect. 
A Calvinist take-over in Douai led to the removal of the college to Rheims in 1578. On 17 January 1585 Baily visited Rome and returned in September the same year. In Rome there was a visitors' entry for Baily in the English Hospice pilgrims' book on 1 March 1585. On 27 January 1589 Baily left Rheims to return to Douai, where he spent the rest of his life with his fellow countrymen. He died at the English College, Douai, on 7 October 1591, 'much lamented by all the English' (Dodd, vol. 2, art. 4). He was buried in the chapel of St Nicholas in St James's Church, Douai, where some other English exiles were buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 1080


Bain, Alexander (1810-1877), clockmaker and inventor, was born in October 1810 at Houstry, in the parish of Watten, Caithness, the fifth of eleven children of John Bain, a crofter, and his wife, Isobel Waiter. After a basic education at the local village school, Bain was apprenticed to John Sellar, a watchmaker, of Wick. Subsequently, in 1837, he travelled to London, found employment as a journeyman clockmaker in Clerkenwell, and began to attend lectures, exhibitions, and demonstrations on the principles and practices of electrical science. In 1838 he began to consider how a clock could be driven by electricity. His original ideas led to five important patents, dating from 1841 to 1852, and containing a wealth of innovative principles. Bain was the first person, anywhere, to devise an electromagnetically maintained pendulum clock. For this priority, and for his other achievements, he has been called the 'father of electrical horology'. In 1843 Bain patented transmitting and receiving apparatus, based on the use of synchronized pendulums and scanning styli, which would enable 'copies of surfaces', such as drawings, to be sent electrically from one place to another. This patent was the first in the world in the field of picture telegraphy. In 1846 Bain opposed the formation of the Electric Telegraph Company, on the grounds that some of his patents would be infringed, and gave evidence to select committees of both houses of parliament. Following an agreement with the company's sponsors, he was awarded $7500. 
Bain married Matilda Bowie, 'nee' Davis (died 1856), a widow, on 15 May 1844. They had two sons and two daughters, and for a few years (from the late 1840s) the family lived in Beevor Lodge, a large house in Hammersmith. 
At the Great Exhibition of 1851 Bain was awarded the exhibition medal, in class 10, for his clocks, and at about this time he established a showroom and manufactory at 43 Old Bond Street, London. 
Bain's ideas, patents, and inventions were numerous and varied. In addition to those relating to printing telegraphs, chemical telegraphs, and automatic telegraphs, and electric clocks, he contributed to the development of an electric log to record the speed of a ship underway; an electric alarm to give warning of fires in the holds of vessels; an apparatus to take soundings at sea; an electrical signalling instrument for use on railways; an effective (though incomplete) fire and police telegraph apparatus; an apparatus for communicating between the carriages of railway trains; another to enable the playing of musical instruments at a distance; a device for copying documents; apparatus for drawing off liquids; unspillable inkwells; propelling pencils; and repeating firearms. 'The Times' (April 1844) described Bain as 'a most ingenious and meritorious inventor', and Schaffner wrote: 'He was not a commercial man but his inventive powers were most wonderful. He has given the world some invaluable inventions.' 
For a short period, from 1850 to 1852, Bain's electrochemical telegraph system was operated by several companies in the USA, but litigation against Bain and others by Morse led to their closure. Bain lost his earlier fortune in court actions, and by 1872 was reduced to repairing clocks for a living. In 1873, through the good offices of William Thomson (Lord Kelvin), for whom he had done some repairs, Bain received a memorial of $80 per annum, and in the same year he was awarded a grant of $150 by the Royal Society. 
About 1876 Bain was admitted, on Thomson's recommendation, to the Broomhill Home for Incurables, Kirkintilloch, and there he died on 2 January 1877. He was buried in Old Aisle cemetery, Kirkintilloch, Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 1081


Bainbridge, Christopher (1462/3-1514), ambassador, archbishop of York, and cardinal, was born at Hilton, near Appleby, Westmorland, the eldest of six children of Reginald Bainbridge and Isobel Langton; he owed much in his education and early advancement to his maternal uncle Thomas Langton, bishop of Winchester. In 1479 he held a papal dispensation to hold any benefice with or without cure on reaching the age of sixteen, and obtained another in 1482, where he is described as about twenty, to hold an additional benefice. He was rector of St Leonard Eastcheap, London, from 26 October 1478 and a canon of Salisbury from 1486. A 'magister' by 1486, probably of Oxford, he was soon afterwards at Ferrara, where he witnessed the degrees of two German students in May 1487 and May 1488 respectively, and at Bologna, where he was admitted DCL on 24 October 1492 (later he is also recorded as DCnL); he was in Rome in 1492-4, becoming in January 1493 a chamberlain of the English Hospice, from which he rented a house. Provost of Queen's College, Oxford (confirmed on 22 June 1496), he also served as a judge in the court of requests (1498-9) and as master of the rolls (from 13 November 1504); he was incorporated at Lincoln's Inn on 20 January 1505. A chaplain of Henry VII by 1497, he rose steadily in the ecclesiastical hierarchy; he was dean of York (21 December 1503) and of St George's Chapel, Windsor (28 November 1505) until provided to the see of Durham on 27 August 1507. He resigned Durham on being translated to York on 22 September 1508, where his archiepiscopal register survives. He was an executor of Henry VII's will and attended the coronation of Henry VIII. 
Bainbridge's appointment on 24 September 1509 as Henry VIII's ambassador to Pope Julius II initiated the final and most significant stage of his career. His main job was to embolden the papacy against France and in favour of England; he remained inflexibly tied to this purpose, in spite of set-backs. When he arrived in Rome on 24 November 1509 the Venetian cardinals and ambassadors sought his support in persuading the pope to break up the League of Cambrai against Venice and to lift the interdict from that state; they found him over-cautious and suspected that his main purpose was to get the red hat, but by February 1510 they were appreciative of the help he had given. Julius II's change of policy and breach with the duke of Ferrara, an ally of Louis XII of France, was advantageous to Bainbridge, who accompanied the pope in August 1510 on his long military campaign against the duke in Romagna and on 17 March 1511 was raised to the cardinalate at Ravenna (with the title of San Pietro e Marcellino); the appointment expressed Julius II's own need to count upon Henry VIII's support against France. In November 1511 England joined the Holy League and by March 1512 a papal brief was drawn up transferring Louis XII's title as 'Most Christian King' to Henry VIII; this would be released to Bainbridge when Louis XII had been defeated, but that prospect became more remote in the summer when the English military expedition to Guyenne proved disastrous. 
Bainbridge continued his belligerent policy after Leo X's election in March 1513; he strenuously opposed the readmission of the French and other cardinals who had called a council at Pisa against Julius II, and celebrated the Swiss victory against the French at Novara in June and Henry VIII's victories at Therouanne in August and Flodden in October. Throughout the winter of 1513-14 he was counting on the formation of a decisive Anglo-imperial alliance against France, and the conferment of the French crown and titles upon Henry VIII; he hoped to accompany Maximilian to a summit meeting at Calais and then to return to England with legatine powers. All this came to nothing, thanks in part to the secret counter-diplomacy of Wolsey, Cardinal Adriano Castellesi, and Silvestro Gigli, bishop of Worcester, who had become ambassador of Henry VIII in Rome in 1512. Bainbridge was nevertheless acclaimed shortly after his death for his steadfastness, his exceptional loyalty, and his vehement defence of the king's interests, in a letter of Richard Pace to Henry VIII on 25 September 1514. As well as his energetic diplomacy, Bainbridge's duties in Rome on behalf of the English crown and clergy had also included taking charge of the English Hospice (from 1510 it was governed by his proteges, particularly his secretaries William Burbank and Pace), sponsoring in the papal consistory candidates for major benefices, and defending cases in the rota, the papal court of appeal. He also made some efforts to look after the affairs of his own diocese. Before he left England he had set up a commission to manage its administration, and subsequently reinforced its workings by instructions and favours sent from Rome, for instance granting an indulgence for contributions to the repair of St Wilfrid's Church, Ripon, on 1 June 1512. 
As a curial cardinal Bainbridge had additional duties. He was immediately made legate to the papal army in the campaign against Ferrara, and on 22 March 1511 left Ravenna to join the forces assembling near Lugo with a plan of attack on a key fortress, the Bastia del Fossato Zaniolo. Because of bad weather and floods the campaign was abandoned at the end of April; Bainbridge then joined the army defending Bologna from the north. In mid-May he warned the city's administration of the worsening situation because of the army's lack of food and supplies; on 21 May Bologna fell, owing to an internal coup and the perfidy of Cardinal Alidosi, but this military failure was no fault of Bainbridge's. He received from Julius II the governorship of Vetralla, near Viterbo (15 October 1511), where a plaque survives bearing the papal and royal arms with those of Bainbridge; he was also given the presbyteral title church of Santa Prassede (22 December 1511) and the priory of Sant'Antonio, Reggio Emilia (19 June 1512). Bainbridge took part in the papal election in March 1513, receiving two votes in the first scrutiny and casting his own vote for Fabrizio del Carretto (not a member of the Sacred College); soon after being elected, Leo X conferred upon him the monastery of San Stefano, Bologna, and in July 1513 several benefices near Vicenza. He attended the first session of the Fifth Lateran Council (3 June 1513), being appointed to serve on two of its committees concerned with reform of the papal court. He was made protector of the Cistercian order (November 1513), in which capacity he tried to resolve a scandal at Sant'Ambrogio, Milan. In 1514 he was elected chamberlain (finance officer for one year) of the College of Cardinals. 
In spite of living in the heyday of Renaissance Rome, Bainbridge appears to have been little interested in humanist scholarship or contemporary Italian art, though he was highly praised as a generous patron by his secretary and executor Richard Pace, who dedicated to him his translations of essays by Plutarch, and he took over the sponsorship of 'Pasquino' from 1512 to 1514, paying for the annual publication of topical verses attached to a battered antique statue outside his Roman residence (on the site of the later Palazzo Braschi, near piazza Navona). There is no evidence to support the anecdotal account of Bainbridge's violent cruelty by Girolamo Garimberto, accepted by later writers, although he may well have been a belligerent negotiator and over-forceful advocate. In his English will he made benefactions to Queen's College, Oxford, and there is evidence he planned to found a school partly from the revenues of San Stefano, Bologna; but the Roman will which he had papal permission to make has not been found. It is known that he possessed silver plate, rich vestments and tapestries, and a large sum in cash at his death (a fellow cardinal reported it to be about 9000 scudi), but his only surviving tangible items of property are an incomplete archiepiscopal service book according to English use, with musical notation (Cambridge University Library, MS ff.vi.1), and a pair of silver candle snuffers decorated with Henry VIII's arms and his own arms surmounted by the cardinal's hat (British Museum, MLA 1878, 112-30 633). Whether his death on 14 July 1514 was the direct result of poison, administered by a servant, Raimondo da Modena, at the instigation of Silvestro Gigli, has not been clearly established; there may have been other contributory causes, though Raimondo confessed his guilt under torture and later committed suicide. Bainbridge's funeral was celebrated lavishly on 31 July 1514 in the chapel of the English Hospice, now the English College at Rome, via Monserrato, where his marble tomb, with a recumbent effigy, remains. His career stands out as that of the only English prelate to become a resident cardinal of the curia, with an insider's understanding of its practices and acquaintance with many of its members, in the century and a half before the breach with Rome. 


@@@@@


doc= 1082


Bainbridge, John (1582-1643), astronomer and physician, was born in Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire, the son of Robert Bainbridge and his wife, Anne, daughter of Richard Everard. He was educated first at the grammar school there, and then at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a pensioner in the Lent term, 1600. His tutor is said to have been a distant relative, Joseph Hall. He proceeded BA in 1603-4 and MA in 1607. He received his MD in 1614. He returned to Ashby, where, for a while, he practised medicine, but eventually moved to London, near the church of All Hallows, London Wall, where he was licensed by the College of Physicians on 6 November 1618. 
It is evident that Bainbridge had also been studying astronomy and some geometry, for the year after the great comet of 1618 there appeared his first book, 'An Astronomicall Description of the Late Comet', dedicated to King James. This was a semi-popular work, Bainbridge leaving the technical details of his observations to his 'Latine cosmography', which was never published and does not survive. There are indications, in the sophistication of his work and correspondence immediately following publication of the former book, that by itself it does not do justice to the level of understanding he had already attained. Bainbridge had become acquainted with Henry Briggs and Henry Savile by late 1618, even before the book was published. Perhaps Briggs, already a noted mathematician, helped to bring Bainbridge to the notice of Savile, who had him appointed the first Savilian professor of astronomy at Oxford (and Briggs the first Savilian professor of geometry), in 1620; the two men went up to Merton College that year, and remained there until their deaths. Bainbridge became well established as a teacher and practitioner in his old profession as well, for, having been incorporated MD at Oxford in 1620, he was appointed junior, and then senior, reader of Linacre's lecture, in 1631 and 1635, and medical prescriptions survive among his later papers. It seems that he remained in Merton Street in Oxford for the remainder of his life, moving, on his marriage, from the college to lodgings across the street. His remaining publications, though small and few, reveal an acute intellect and deep learning. 
His surviving work, in print and manuscript, provides evidence of Bainbridge's opinions on various matters: he clearly accepted the modern view that comets were supra-lunar, and condemned 'Those Philosophers, who still walke in the way of the Gentiles, are afraide to induce generation, or any other mutation into the heavens, rather choosing to follow their blinde guide [Aristotle]' (Bainbridge, 24); he was not a proponent of Ptolemy's geocentric universe; and he maintained an ambivalent view of astrology, for the early book contains certain 'Morall prognosticks of applications of the late comet or blazing-starre'. Yet he later also wrote 'Antiprognosticks, in which is briefly detected the vanity of Astrological predictions', which remained in manuscript. 
At Oxford, Bainbridge prepared lectures in astronomy, as required by the Savilian statutes, and the surviving notes record his expressions of the latest developments in astronomy, including the theoretical work of Johannes Kepler. He prepared the 'editio princeps' of (most of) Ptolemy's 'Planetary Hypotheses', published in 1620 in a volume that also contained Proclus's 'Sphaira'. The textual reconstructions of the former have been highly praised by modern scholars. In the mid-1620s he took up the study of Arabic, with a view to the recovery, from medieval Arabic sources, of ancient astronomical observations. He made close and perceptive study of the contents of several Arabic astronomical books. This was not an isolated effort; he sought assistance from others, especially scholars in the Low Countries. 
Applying his astronomical knowledge to chronology, a major field of scholarly endeavour in the period, Bainbridge made manifest numerous errors in Joseph Scaliger's explanation of the origins of the Julian calendar in the ancient Egyptian observations of the rising of Sirius, the dog star. His work on this subject was posthumously published, as 'Canicularia' (1648), by his old student, colleague, and friend John Greaves, who succeeded him as Savilian professor of astronomy. The matrix of scholars that included Bainbridge, Briggs, and Savile also included Sir Christopher Heydon and James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh, with whom Bainbridge formed a close friendship and to whom, upon his death, he left his papers. 
Bainbridge and his wife, Mary, had a son and a daughter who survived to maturity. He died at his home on 3 November 1643 and was buried in Merton College chapel. The college erected a large monument to him, with a long inscription composed by Greaves, who there memorialized Bainbridge's refutation of Scaliger. Mary Bainbridge had died, intestate, by 1646, in which year Greaves was deeply entangled in legal wrangling over the estate. 
Bainbridge's character can be known only from his writings and the kind of life that he led. His legacy to a succeeding generation of astronomers lay in his skilful reconstruction of important astronomical texts from antiquity and his inspiring others, in particular Greaves, to extend his own efforts of recovery of astronomical texts from Arabic sources. An anecdote in Walter Pope's life of Seth Ward pokes fun at Bainbridge's command of Latin, but this, if true, evidently alludes to a mere slip of the pen in a lecture notice concerning Proclus's 'Sphaira'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1083


Reginald Bainbrigg (c.1489-1554), probably an uncle or cousin of the schoolmaster and antiquary, was born at Middleton, Westmorland, the son of John Bainbrigg ('c'.1464-1542) and Margaret (died 1551), his wife. He took the degree of BA at Cambridge in 1506, of MA in 1509, and of BTh in 1526. He was proctor of the university in 1517, a fellow of St Catharine's College, Cambridge, and master from 1529 to 1547. He held a succession of livings in Essex, being instituted to the rectory of Downham on 27 June 1525 and to that of Stambourne on 1 December 1526. He was made vicar of Bricklesea on 19 May 1530, of Steeple Bumpstead on 13 May 1532 (where he was living in 1554), and of Great Oakley on 11 January 1538. In 1537 he was appointed to a prebend stall at Wells. He appears to have died in November 1554. A third Reginald Bainbrigg (died 1606), who matriculated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1573, graduated BA in 1576-7, and was vicar of Steeple Bumpstead from 1582 to 1606, may have been a member of the same family. 


@@@@@


doc= 1084


Bainbrigg, Reginald (1544/5-1612/13), schoolmaster and antiquary, born at Hilton, near Appleby, Westmorland, was probably a younger son of Christopher Bainbrigg ('c'.1505-1569), a member of a minor gentry family which had been at Hilton from the fifteenth century. Reginald Bainbrigg matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, in 1572, and graduated BA in 1576 and MA in 1579. 
In 1580 Bainbrigg was appointed headmaster of the grammar school at Appleby, founded by Robert Langton ('c'.1460-1524), his grandfather's cousin, and reconstituted by royal charter in 1574. There he combined his school work with antiquarian and archaeological research. He was one of the first to record the remains along Hadrian's Wall and has been described as 'the ablest of all the northern antiquaries' of his generation (Birley, 7). With considerable care and skill Bainbrigg recorded stones bearing ancient inscriptions from Cumberland, Westmorland, and neighbouring parts of Northumberland. He made two journeys, in 1599 and 1601, along Hadrian's Wall and into Tynedale and Redesdale, his notes being the earliest known record, and a key source, for several of the sites he visited. His antiquarian interests brought him into contact with William Camden and other contemporary scholars, such as John Denton of Cardew, who wrote the first historical account of Cumberland. Bainbrigg sent Camden copies of the inscriptions, which Camden printed in the 1607 edition of 'Britannia', acknowledging his indebtedness to him, but altering some of his readings in a cavalier fashion. Bainbrigg took some original Roman inscriptions back to Appleby, made copies of others, and added several 'jeux d'esprit' of his own. In 1602 he built a small house in his garden for their preservation, carving an inscription stating that he had been teaching at Appleby for twenty-two years and was fifty-seven years old. In 1722 twelve Roman stones remained at the school, but by 1911 only four Roman inscriptions survived, along with others of Bainbrigg's own devising. 
Bainbrigg was a major benefactor to his school at Appleby. The existing school house proving too small, he purchased land nearby, on which he began to build. By his will, traditionally but perhaps erroneously dated 1606, he bequeathed almost all his possessions, including the building materials he had gathered, to his successors as masters of the grammar school, and a new school was completed after his death. Bainbrigg's personal library, which he also left to the school, was deposited in the library of the University of Newcastle upon Tyne in 1966. Of 295 volumes, 158 survive, providing a rare insight into the interests of an Elizabethan schoolmaster. In Appleby, Bainbrigg's reputation remained vivid in the later seventeenth century. He was remembered as a 'learn'd ingenious person', who was 'look'd upon as a Conjuror' who had cast spells to prevent the deciphering of the inscriptions in his collection (Machel MS, vol. 6, 189, 195-6). In his will Reginald Bainbrigg asked to be buried with his parents and siblings in St Michael's Church, Appleby. The absence of a record of his burial there suggests that his death, between April 1612 and September 1613, took place elsewhere. 
Another 


@@@@@


doc= 1085


Bainbridge, Thomas (bap. 1574, d. 1646), college head, was the son of Edward Bainbrig ('c'.1508-1584), clothier of Hawkin Hall, Middleton, in Kirkby Lonsdale, Westmorland. Thomas, the younger son of his father's marriage to his second wife, Elizabeth Hodgson (died 1590), was baptized on 18 February 1574 at Kirkby Lonsdale. Several members of the family attended Christ's, including Thomas's half-brother Christopher (fellow, 1574-84), who appears later to have bought out Thomas's share of their father's properties. Bainbridge matriculated pensioner from Christ's College in 1593; he graduated BA in 1597 and by Michaelmas 1599 was a fellow of his college. He proceeded MA in 1600, and he or a namesake incorporated at Oxford in 1603. His BD is not recorded, but he was made DD in 1617. From 1618 he was rector of Icklesham, Sussex, where he never lived. At Cambridge he attracted no attention save when in 1602 he was accused by two of his colleagues of immorality, a charge they were unable to substantiate. Despite, or because of, his unobtrusive character, he was elected master of Christ's on 26 May 1622; there was apparently no contest, and his promotion may have been owed simply to his seniority. Nevertheless, on acquiring authority he developed a taste for its exercise, and would be reckoned a martinet for insisting on a rigorous performance by the fellows of their statutory duties. 
Bainbridge has received most notice from the biographers of Milton, who was an undergraduate of Christ's during his mastership. Milton's rustication in Lent term 1626 would certainly have had the master's sanction, but the story that the delinquent was personally thrashed by the head of house is a fanciful elaboration, incompatible with the realities of discipline. Nor is there any evidence that Bainbridge directly impeded Milton's candidacy for a fellowship, thereby (as some have alleged) turning him against the Anglican establishment. But Bainbridge was certainly no friend of the radical young man, and on a later occasion was said to be ready to 'remove a couple of lawless persons' to find room in the college for young men of the better sort (Masson, 1.183n.). He also cultivated contacts at court. He had voted for the duke of Buckingham in the chancellorship election of 1626, and when the new chancellor duly went to Cambridge in March 1627 it was reported by Joseph Meade of Christ's that 'somebody' (presumed to be the master) 'will scarce worship any other God, as long as [the duke] is in town' (Williams, 1.202). In 1627/8 Bainbridge served as vice-chancellor, and so had the even more congenial duty of hosting the king himself on a visit in the Lent term. Later in 1628 he was involved in the controversy over the subversive lectures given, at the instigation of Lord Brooke, by Isaac Dorislaus. 
Following Buckingham's assassination on 23 August 1628 Bainbridge wrote a personal letter to Charles I in which he described the university as 'so stownded' by the 'unexpressable disaster' that it would be a lifeless body until the king resurrected it with the nomination of a new chancellor (TNA: PRO, SP 16/114, no. 60). Despite seeming so well affected to the crown, Bainbridge was judged one of Cambridge's 'learned neutrals' in the 1640s, and was able to retain his place when most other heads of houses were ejected (Peile, 'Christ's', 131-2). His mastership was distinguished by the erection of the Fellows' Building and other works. He died in office, and was buried in the church of St Andrew the Great, opposite the college, on 9 September 1646. 
Bainbridge's widow, Mary, lived until February 1671. He was also survived by sons Thomas and Edward (the latter an undergraduate at Christ's in his father's last years), and unmarried daughters Elizabeth, Mary, and Susan. He made careful arrangements to ensure that lands he held from the college in the Cambridgeshire villages of Bourn, Impington, and Cottenham would remain vested in his family, appointing the bishop of Exeter (Ralph Brownrigg), the masters of Corpus and Emmanuel (Richard Love and Richard Holdsworth), and Thomas Buick, one of the university bedells, as his feoffees. To the college itself, his 'best nurse and mother', he bequeathed $50, equivalent to the sum which had been spent on bringing a new cut of the river to the college grounds. His books were to be divided between his two sons. Other children died before he made his will, but the colourful story that he married at the age of sixty and then fathered an extensive family seems rather to attach to his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 1086


Bainbrigg, Thomas (1636-1703), religious controversialist, was born in Cambridge on 26 June 1636, the son of Richard Bainbrigg and his wife, Rose (probably Rose Wilson, whom a Richard Bainbrigg married in 1631). Bainbrigg was admitted as a sizar to Trinity College, Cambridge, on 26 March 1651, was elected scholar in that year, and graduated BA in 1654-5 and became a fellow in 1656. He proceeded MA in 1661 by royal mandate. He was ordained deacon and priest in March 1664 and that year he became vicar of Barrington, Cambridgeshire. He was incorporated at Oxford in 1669. He served as proctor at Cambridge in 1678-9 and vicar of Chesterton near Cambridge in 1679. He was made DD by royal mandate in 1684. 
The reign of James II saw Bainbrigg publish 'An answer to a book entitled 'Reason and Authority', or, The motives of a late protestant's reconciliation to the Catholic church' (1687), which attacked a pamphlet by Joshua Basset, 'Reason and Authority', which was itself a reply to John Tillotson's discourse against transubstantiation. Several other tracts have been attributed to Bainbrigg, written in the early years of William III's reign in response to pamphlets by Abednego Seller concerning passive obedience. In 1700 Bainbrigg became vice-master of Trinity and rector of Orwell, Cambridgeshire. He died suddenly at Cambridge on 16 August 1703 and was buried in Trinity College chapel. His will was proved in the vice-chancellor's court of the university in 1703. 


@@@@@


doc= 1087


Bainbrigge, Sir Philip (1786-1862), army officer, was descended from an ancient family long resident in Leicestershire and Derbyshire. He was the eldest son of Lieutenant-Colonel Philip Bainbrigge, of Ashbourne, Derbyshire, and Rachel, daughter of Peter Dobree of Beauregard, Guernsey, and was born in London. He entered the navy aged thirteen as a midshipman in the 'Caesar', under Admiral Sir James Saumarez, in 1799, but left because of ill health. His father, who served under the duke of York in the expedition to the Netherlands, was killed in the attack on Egmont op Zoom on 2 October 1799, and the next year the duke appointed young Bainbrigge to an ensigncy in the 20th regiment. 
On 13 November 1800 Bainbrigge became a lieutenant, but being then only fourteen years of age, he obtained a year's leave, which he spent at Green's military academy at Deptford, and joined his regiment at Malta in 1801. At the peace of Amiens his regiment was reduced and he was placed on half pay, but was brought on full pay into the 7th fusiliers. After returning to England in 1803, he was employed in obtaining volunteers from the militia to form the 2nd battalion of the 7th, which when completed was moved to Colchester. Here the troops were reviewed by the duke of York, and Bainbrigge, who had come to notice by his zeal and diligence, was gazetted, on 17 October 1805, to a company in the 18th Royal Irish, and joined the 1st battalion in the West Indies. After the taking of Curacao from the Dutch in 1807, he was appointed inspector of fortifications there, and made plans of the forts and defences, which subsequently recommended him to the authorities at the Horse Guards. 
Bainbrigge transferred into the 93rd, and, on returning to England, laid his plans and surveys before the duke of York, who advised him to qualify himself for the staff by studying at the senior department of the Royal Military College at High Wycombe. He entered the college in 1809, and studied so diligently that in a year and a half he passed his examination with distinction. While there he invented a protracting pocket sextant, which was favourably noticed by the board of examiners, and enabled him to make surveys with remarkable accuracy and rapidity. 
On leaving the college Bainbrigge was appointed deputy assistant quartermaster-general in the British army in Portugal. On arriving at Wellington's headquarters he was posted to the 4th division, commanded by Major-General Cole, and stationed near Torres Vedras. He was then brought to headquarters, where for some time he was employed in sketching ground and reporting on positions, thereby risking capture by the enemy who occupied the country. His aptitude was acknowledged, for in a letter to Marshal Beresford, dated Cartaxo, 4 January 1811, Wellington said he was appointed to the staff of the army because of the ability he showed at High Wycombe. 
Bainbrigge was present at the sieges and storming of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz. As soon as Badajoz was taken he was ordered to join the 6th division, under Sir Henry Clinton, at Albuera, and take charge of the quartermaster-general's department. On the advance of the army into Spain in 1812, Bainbrigge, who had examined the country which was to become the scene of operations, was brought to headquarters. He was present at the siege of the forts of Salamanca, at the actions of Costillegos and Costrejon, and at the crossing of the Guarena, his duties being to carry orders and make sketches of the country and positions, an important but risky role. On one occasion he was ordered to conduct a column of the army, at Pareda, through difficult country and in face of the enemy to Vallesa. He did so successfully, and brought the column in the middle of the night safely to its destination. On the day of the battle of Salamanca he was constantly with Wellington, and at a critical moment he carried the order for the advance of General Leith's division. 
After this decisive victory Bainbrigge accompanied the army in the advance to Madrid, and from there to Valladolid and Burgos. He was present at part of the siege of Burgos, and soon after was appointed permanent assistant quartermaster-general with the rank of major. In the retreat from Burgos he rendered important services through his knowledge of the country, which was considered of so much value that Sir Henry Clinton asked for his return to the 6th division, but it was decided that he should remain at headquarters. Bainbrigge held the same position until the end of the war in 1814, and surveyed and sketched the country through which the army passed before entering France. He was present at the battles of Vitoria and Pyrenees, at the last siege of San Sebastian, and at the battles of Nive and Toulouse. He received no honours, and through some strange omission was not recommended for brevet rank, but on 21 January 1817 this was rectified, and he was promoted to the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
In 1815 Bainbrigge applied for employment abroad, and joined the British army in its advance to Paris. He married in 1816 the eldest daughter of Joseph Fletcher; they had at least two sons. When he returned home after the peace, he continued to hold the appointment of permanent assistant quartermaster-general until 1841, when he was made deputy quartermaster-general in Dublin. Having attained the rank of major-general, 9 November 1846, he was appointed by Wellington to the command of the Belfast district. In 1852 the duke selected him to command the forces in Ceylon. There his exertions for the welfare of the troops under his command made him popular and widely respected, and his departure, when promoted lieutenant-general on 20 June 1854, was much regretted. 
In 1838 Bainbrigge was made a CB, and subsequently received the 'grant for distinguished service'. On 31 March 1854 he was appointed colonel of the 26th regiment (Cameronians), and in May 1860 was created KCB. 
In his military career Bainbrigge showed the advantage of scientific knowledge, and much of his success was a result of his diligent application of this knowledge in the field; he was greatly valued as an officer. He died at St Margaret's, near Titchfield, Hampshire, on 20 December 1862, at the age of seventy-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 1088


Baine, James (1710-1790), minister of the Relief church, was born at Bonhill, Dunbartonshire, the son of the Revd James Baine (1676-1755) and Grizel, 'nee' Semple (died 1756). He was educated at the parish school, then at the grammar school in Dumbarton before studying at the universities of Glasgow and Edinburgh. He gained his MA at Glasgow on 4 May 1725. Baine was ordained to the ministry of Killearn parish church in 1732 and became involved in the evangelical awakening associated with the preaching of George Whitefield in 1742. On 22 May 1740 he married Margaret Potter, daughter of Michael Potter, professor of divinity at Glasgow University; they had three sons and three daughters. As an opponent of patronage in 1752 he opposed the deposition of Thomas Gillespie over his refusal to be involved in the induction of the new minister of Inverkeithing and identified himself with the popular party within the established church, 'one well known for his Ministerial Abilities and particularly eminent for his constant struggle for Christian and ministerial liberty' (South College Relief church minutes, NA Scot., CH3/433.1, fol. 10'r'). 
In 1756 Baine was translated to the charge of first minister of the high kirk in Paisley, although by the 1760s he had become disenchanted with the established church. When he had come to Paisley a general kirk session administered the affairs of the high kirk as well as those of the Lairgh kirk parish where John Witherspoon was the minister. Baine asked the presbytery of Paisley to allow him to have a separate kirk session but they refused. Baine may have felt that his own position and prestige as a parish minister had been undermined. When Baine resigned his charge in Paisley he claimed that the major reason was that he was now 'advanced in life' and the 'high church' was 'commonly so crowded' and was 'much beyond his strength' (Dickson, 8). 
Between August 1762 and August 1764 there was controversy within Edinburgh over the settlement of a minister of Lady Yester's Church. The moderate party within the Edinburgh presbytery believed that they had an opportunity to end the dominance which the popular party exercised over settlements within the city. When the moderates eventually triumphed Thomas Gillespie, founder of the Relief church, received a letter from a group who were determined to leave Lady Yester's Church and asked for Gillespie's advice. On 15 January 1765 a group of ninety-two subscribers indicated that they would form a Relief congregation and issued a call to Baine. Baine accepted their invitation and was inducted as the minister of the new Relief congregation by Thomas Gillespie in February 1766. 
That his new church could seat up to 1200 and that he played an active part in its affairs gives the lie to his claim that he left his former position because of pressures of work. Although Baine left the Church of Scotland with feelings of resentment, he retained his commitment to Presbyterianism. His letter of resignation clearly stated that 'this change of my condition, and charge I have accepted, makes no change in my creed or Christian belief; none in my principles of Christian and ministerial communion; nay, none in my cordial regard to the constitution and interests of the Church of Scotland... at the same time, I abhor... that abuse of Church power of late, which to me appears... destructive of the ends of our office as ministers of Christ.' Baine denied that the presbytery of Relief had any separating principles because they 'dare not decline communion with any who have the knowledge, the visible uncorrupted profession of real Christianity' (Dickson, 9-10). 
Baine was one of the ablest and most influential ministers within the early years of the Relief church. He championed the cause of congregations to call the minister of their own choice, even in the case of Blairlogie in 1769 when doubts were raised by Thomas Gillespie over the orthodoxy of Alexander Pirie. Gillespie believed that the only constraint to the free choice of any congregation was the suitability of the candidate, which the presbytery had the right to oversee. Baine believed that such a responsibility lay in the local congregation who should be able to exercise a free choice over the election of their minister. In the 1770s he became involved in two controversies, one in which he opposed the influence of James Cowan, minister of Colinsburgh, who held stricter views regarding the open communion than the founders of the Relief church, and the other in which he published a sermon against the theatre, 'The Theatre Licentious and Perverted' (1770). Baine was especially critical of the portrayal by Samuel Foote of the preaching of George Whitefield and addressed further criticisms in his 'Letter to Samuel Foote' published the following year. He died on 17 January 1790, aged eighty, maintaining to the end of his life his commitment to the principles of religious liberty and catholicity which characterized the Relief church from its earliest days. An earlier collection of sermons published in 1778 was followed by a posthumously published volume of 'Select Sermons' (1850). 


@@@@@


doc= 1089


Baines, Edward (1774-1848), newspaper proprietor, politician, and historian, was born at Walton-le-Dale, near Preston, Lancashire, on 5 February 1774, the second son of Richard Baines (died 1811) and his wife, Jane ('nee' Chew). Richard Baines, who was born near Ripon and came from a farming family, had moved to Preston and there married the daughter of a local merchant. He became a grocer, but Preston corporation took court proceedings against him as he was not a member of the Guild Merchant and so was not legally entitled to trade in the town. His son recorded that 'he resisted the vexatious interferences but was obliged to leave... and he removed to the village of Walton-le-Dale where he carried on his business' (Baines, 'Life', 14). This episode was said by Edward Baines to have been the last instance of the application of the medieval trading restrictions. Although that was not quite the case, it is clear that the symbolic significance of this demonstration of unreformed privilege helped to shape the markedly radical political views of the Baines family. 
At the age of two Edward Baines was sent to live with his maternal uncle, Thomas Rigg, a slate merchant of Hawkshead in the southern Lake District, and for two years he attended the grammar school there. Wordsworth was a fellow pupil. When he was eight years old he returned to Preston to live with his family, and continued his education at the town's grammar school until the age of sixteen. He was then apprenticed to Thomas Walker, a printer and stationer of Church Street, Preston, who was also well known locally as a radical politician. His influence probably helped to develop further in Edward Baines the reformist political views which he already had in mind. 
In 1795, with the approval of his parents and master, Baines moved to Leeds to complete his apprenticeship with Binns and Brown, printers and booksellers who were also proprietors of the 'Leeds Mercury'. This was a crucial event in Baines's life, for although he remained a printer it was from this experience that he acquired his knowledge of, and taste for, journalism and newspapers. Two years later, in 1797, he set up in business as a printer at Briggate, Leeds, and on 2 July 1798 married Charlotte, daughter of Matthew Talbot, a prosperous Leeds currier. His printing business had not initially prospered -- partly because of a partner who proved unsatisfactory -- but by 1800 it enjoyed good fortunes, and Baines was financially more secure. This had been assisted by his marriage into a moneyed family, and the changed circumstances allowed him to contemplate an ambitious change of career. In 1801, with the help and encouragement of a group of reformist Liberals from the Leeds area, he bought the 'Leeds Mercury', with all its printing stock, from his erstwhile employers for $1552. 
Baines then determinedly set about transforming what had become a semi-moribund venture, with a circulation of only 700-800 copies, into one of the most influential and respected provincial newspapers in the country. By the late 1820s the regular sale was in excess of 5000, and the 'Leeds Mercury' had gained a wide reputation as a prominent mouthpiece for moderate and responsible social and political reform. The strongly held views of its owner-editor were directly reflected in its espousal of such causes as parliamentary reform, the abolition of the slave trade, Catholic emancipation, the extension of civil liberties, and the introduction of public education for all. 
In his position as owner and editor of the town's most important newspaper, Baines inevitably began to play a significant role in the public affairs of Leeds. He promoted local improvements and encouraged and sponsored social projects such as the establishment of the Leeds Mechanics' Institution. His political views were expressed in his support for, and involvement in, the election of MPs for the West Riding, and in the late 1820s and early 1830s Baines was in regular correspondence with leading reformist politicians in London, informing them of opinion in Yorkshire. 
While developing his newspaper Baines also engaged in historical research and writing. In 1815 he published his 'History of the Wars of the French Revolution from 1792 to 1815', which was later expanded to become a four-volume 'History of the Reign of George III' (1823), while in 1822-3 appeared his important 'History, Directory and Gazetteer of the County of York'. In 1824-5 the companion volumes, the 'History, Directory and Gazetteer of the County Palatine of Lancaster', were published, and the latter formed the basis of an ambitious four-volume 'History of the County Palatine of Lancaster' (1836). 
It is now known that most of the research and a sizeable proportion of the writing of these books was undertaken by others, notably the Oldham local historian Edwin Butterworth, and that therefore Baines's role was primarily that of enabler and publisher. However, the works have permanent value because of the quality of their research, the breadth of their scope, and their innovative style: as a liberal reformer of comparatively humble origins, interested in contemporary social and economic issues, Baines paid close attention to industrialization, recent history, and the local economic and social circumstances of Lancashire and Yorkshire. This was in very marked contrast to the backward-looking and elitist antiquarian approach which was so characteristic of most county histories at this time. That the Yorkshire and Lancashire topographical histories were published in revised and updated form later in the century, and that they were still highly valued and extensively used by local and regional historians at the end of the twentieth century, reflects the high and progressive standards which Baines set himself and those who worked for him. 
Firmly established as an important reformist figure in local and, increasingly, in national political circles, Baines made the logical progression into parliamentary politics after the passing of the 1832 'Reform Bill'. At a by-election in February 1834 he was elected a whig MP for Leeds, and retained his seat in the 1835 and 1837 elections. In this period he gained a reputation at Westminster as a fluent speaker in the cause of continuing social reform, campaigning for legislation to regulate factory employment and conditions, for the abolition of tithes, and on behalf of the Anti-Corn Law Association. In Yorkshire he served as a JP for the West Riding of Yorkshire, and in this work, too, his reformist and liberal instincts were applied -- he was a 'benevolent, just, and liberal-minded man' ('DNB'). In 1841, after seven years in parliament, he retired because his health was beginning to fail, and he spent his last few years in semi-retirement in Leeds, where he died on 3 August 1848, survived by his wife. 
Edward and Charlotte Baines had eleven children, of whom several became significant public figures in their own right. His eldest son, Matthew Talbot Baines, was a lawyer who went into politics, serving as MP for Kingston upon Hull, as president of the poor-law board, and eventually as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. Another son, Edward Baines, succeeded his father as proprietor of the 'Leeds Mercury' and maintained its place as one of the most important voices of liberal politics in the north of England. He was also the author of a biography of his father, and the important 'History of the Cotton Manufacture', to which his father contributed a chapter. Thomas Baines, a younger son, became a newspaper proprietor in Liverpool and wrote a commercial history of Liverpool. The powerful moral, social, and entrepreneurial influence of their father is apparent in the careers of all three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 1090


Baines, Sir Edward (1800-1890), journalist, politician, and educationist, was born in Leeds on 28 May 1800, the second son of Edward Baines (1774-1848), editor of the 'Leeds Mercury', and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of Matthew Talbot, a Leeds currier. Matthew Talbot Baines and Thomas Baines were his brothers. Known until his father's death as Edward Baines junior, he was first educated at a private school in Leeds, then sent to New College, Manchester, a leading grammar school for protestant dissenters, where John Dalton, the eminent chemist, taught mathematics. There, aged fourteen, he started to teach in Independent (later Congregational) Sunday schools, which he continued to do until elected to parliament in 1859; his dissenting faith underpinned all his public actions. In 1815 he began to work for his father's newspaper, travelling widely as a reporter, and working as an editor from 1818. In 1827 his father took him into partnership, and in 1829 he married Martha (died 1881), the only daughter of Thomas Blackburn of Liverpool. They had three sons and four daughters. 
As a journalist, Baines covered the considerable unrest in the north after the end of the Napoleonic wars, exposing the government 'agent-provocateur' Oliver the Spy -- the first public example of his personal courage and sense of justice. They emerged again when he reported from the speakers' platform at the Peterloo massacre of 16 August 1819 in Manchester, taking the side of the peaceful demonstrators against local magistrates. For the rest of his life he played an ambivalent and frequently controversial role in popular demands for political reform; his more inflammatory writings often encouraged these demands among working-class groups, which pressure he used to foster middle-class radical programmes as a prophylactic against 'democracy'. For decades he trod an uneasy path between the various groups, excoriated as the mouthpiece of 'Bainesocracy' by working-class radicals and distrusted by other middle-class reformers, such as the leaders of the Manchester school of political and economic liberalism. As such he reinforced provincial divisions as well as serving as a major protester against a political world dominated by London and landed Anglicans; the tension was only partly abated when his elder brother, Matthew, who had become an Anglican, served as Palmerston's chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster from 1855 to 1858. 
Baines's espousal of a limited extension of the franchise to those with a stake in property, and the creation of new industrial constituencies, underpinned his support for the 1832 'Reform Act' and the subsequent programme of Liberal reforms, although he was disappointed by their limited extent. He supported the new poor law of 1834 and then turned to attack protectionism in the form of the corn laws. In 1835 he published a 'History of the Cotton Manufacture in Great Britain'. His attempts to seek compromise with the great Yorkshire landowners brought him into frequent conflict with the more radical Lancashire spokesmen, Cobden and Bright, but he gave support to Sir Robert Peel's dismantling of the corn laws in 1846. His advocacy of economic change also brought him into conflict with gentry and working-class leaders demanding factory reform and limited working hours in the Ten Hours Movement. This antipathy continued with the emergence of the more generalized demands of Chartism and mass demonstrations in Yorkshire. Baines deplored any state-imposed limits on individual economic freedom and began in his twenties to produce accounts of material progress, which made him one of the first 'scientific' polemicists of the industrial revolution and its rapidly growing towns. The collation of statistical trends remained a feature of his writings, most noticeably in 'The Social, Educational and Religious State of the Manufacturing Districts' (1843). His approach left him open to criticism that he ignored present miseries, to which he argued always that the answer to these lay in economic progress and moral change rooted in individual responsibility. 
This outworking of Baines's 'nonconformist conscience' was accompanied by a passionate belief in the need for widespread education. Characteristically, he avoided any suggestion of state involvement in this until he was in his late sixties. Instead, he became a leading proponent of educational voluntarism for learners of all ages. A founder member of the Leeds Literary and Philosophical Society for his own class, he turned his attention to working-class adult education after attending Dr George Birkbeck's first mechanics' institute in London in 1824. Baines was instrumental in founding several similar bodies in Yorkshire during the 1820s, bringing them together in 1837 in the West Riding (subsequently Yorkshire) Union of Mechanics' Institutes, of which he was president for forty-four years. Later, he was a leading figure in the setting up of the Yorkshire Village Library, which provided 27,000 volumes to some 144 villages. His concern to provide an educated workforce for the new industrial society extended eventually into schools, where his advocacy was much more controversial. Central to his beliefs was the assumption that people valued most that for which they paid and which they controlled. After a visit to the model factory system at New Lanark, although he disliked many of Robert Owen's views, Baines emphasized the duty of employers to support education for their workers' children. When limited state aid for schools, together with inspection, was introduced in the 1830s he opposed it on the grounds that it would remove individual responsibility for self-improvement and enhance the power of the Church of England -- particularly of its high-church wing which he opposed vociferously as 'papist', despite his having supported Catholic emancipation in 1829. On this he differed sharply from some other nonconformist apologists but his editorials and prolific pamphleteering, with titles such as 'An alarm to the nation, on the unjust, unconstitutional and dangerous measure of state education proposed by the government' (1847), served to sustain an extra-parliamentary voluntarist opposition which hindered repeated government attempts to extend publicly funded education. In the late 1860s he underwent a volte-face when his membership of the Taunton commission on endowed schools convinced him that, if the education of the middle classes was so inadequately served, then that of the working classes needed stronger support than voluntarism had so far provided. Thus he supported W. E. Forster's 'Elementary Education Act' of 1870, but only because it was essentially permissive. After that he became instrumental in founding the Yorkshire College of Science, the forerunner of the University of Leeds, whose Victorian Gothic Baines wing is a memorial to his serving as chairman of its council from 1880 until 1887. 
Baines followed in his father and elder brother's footsteps when he was elected MP for Leeds in 1859, after which he remained a firmly independent member of the Liberal groupings. From supporting Cobden's negotiation of a commercial treaty with France in 1860, an outcome of his free trade principles, he turned his attention to demanding an extended franchise. His view was that the growing respectability of many artisans justified an extension in the borough voting qualification from the $10 requirement of the 1832 act to $6. When the government refused to initiate legislation, he introduced private members' bills in 1861, 1864, and 1865. All were rejected but they served to feed the growing demand for reform. Even so, Disraeli's 'leap in the dark' 'Reform Act' of 1867 went much further than Baines thought prudent. His ambivalent attitude to the new working-class electorate showed in his handling of his Leeds constituency and he was voted out of parliament in the 1874 election. W. E. Gladstone sent him an emollient letter of praise for his 'single-minded devotion, courage of purpose, perfect integrity and ability' in servicing the Liberal cause and it marked the effective end of his party political career ('DNB'). The remainder of his life was spent in local campaigns for sabbatarianism and teetotalism, which he had first espoused in 1837, in active journalism (which he only gave up in 1888), and as a continued champion of industrial Yorkshire's identity. In 1875 he provided a chapter on the history of the county's woollen trade for his brother Thomas's 'Yorkshire Past and Present', in which the first of the four volumes contained an engraving of a photograph of him. 
Baines's own literary works included accounts of foreign travel, such as 'A Visit to the Vaudois of Piedmont' (1855), and a biography of his father (1851), as well as numerous pamphlets on the causes he espoused so strongly. On his eightieth birthday a presentation was made to him in recognition of his service to the town in the Albert Hall in Leeds; he gave the $3000 raised to the Yorkshire College of Science. At various times he served as a justice of the peace and a deputy lieutenant for the West Riding of Yorkshire. In 1881 he was knighted. He died on 2 March 1890 at his house, St Ann's Hill, Burley, Yorkshire. In his will he left estate valued at $165,818 gross, including a controlling interest in the 'Leeds Mercury', to be divided among his children, with minor gifts to friends and servants. He was buried near Woodhouse Moor in the Leeds municipal cemetery, now a landscaped garden surrounded by the University of Leeds. 


@@@@@


doc= 1091


Baines, John (1787-1838), mathematician, was born at Westfield Farm, Horbury, near Wakefield. He showed early a strong mathematical bias and became proficient also in natural science (especially botany), Latin, and Greek. His teaching career took him from Horbury Bridge ('c'.1810-1813) to Reading ('c'.1816) as a mathematics master, then to Nottingham ('c'.1818), Dewsbury ('c'.1819), and finally ('c'.1829) Thornhill, near Wakefield. 
From 1810 at least, Baines sent mathematical contributions to periodicals, including the 'Ladies' Diary', the 'Gentleman's Diary', 'The Enquirer', and 'York Miscellany'. He wrote to the 'Northern Star' from Nottingham. The 'Ladies' Diary' for 1833 carried a more substantial article on Cuvier's 'Theory of the Earth', written to prove its confirmation of the Mosaic account. Most of Baines's work shows considerable talent. He was an early friend of the mathematician T. S. Davies (1794-1851). Baines died at Thornhill on 1 May 1838, after nine years as master of the grammar school, and was buried at Horbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 1092


Baines, Matthew Talbot (1799-1860), politician, the eldest son of Edward Baines (1774-1848), journalist and politician, and his wife, Charlotte Talbot, was born on 17 February 1799. Sir Edward Baines and Thomas Baines were his younger brothers. He was educated at the Protestant Dissenters' and Richmond grammar schools and obtained a scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge. He was president of the union in 1818, and graduated in 1820 as a senior optime, being converted to the Church of England. He was called to the bar in 1825, and, after practising with success on the northern circuit, was, in 1837, appointed recorder of Hull, and in 1841 became a queen's counsel. In 1847 he entered parliament as Liberal member for Hull, which he continued to represent until 1852, when he was chosen for Leeds. In Lord John Russell's administration he became, in 1849, president of the poor law board, and he held the same appointment in Lord Aberdeen's ministry. After Lord Palmerston acceded to power in 1855, he was appointed chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, with a seat in the cabinet. 
Though not a brilliant debater, Baines's solid talents won for him considerable respect, and his firmness, impartiality, and special knowledge of the forms of the house pointed him out as a probable occupant of the speaker's chair; he never achieved such an appointment, however, because ill health caused his retirement from public life in April 1859. He was married on 19 September 1833 to Anne, daughter of Lazarus Threlfall, with whom he had at least one child, a son. Baines died at his home, 13 Queen Square, Westminster, on 22 January 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 1093


Baines, Peter (1786-1843), vicar apostolic of the western district, was born on 25 June 1786 at Pear Tree Farm, Kirkby, near Liverpool, the elder son of James Baines, 'farmer and yeoman' ('will', proved 1809, TNA: PRO), and his second wife, Catherine. He had a younger brother, Thomas. This Lancashire family was legendary for its steadfastness in the old faith (Baines file, Preston City Archives). At twelve years old Baines went on a scholarship as a boarder to the English Benedictine school at Lambspring in Hanover. After the suppression of the house by Prussia in April 1803, Baines and his schoolmates returned to England to join the sister Benedictine community of St Laurence, newly settled at Ampleforth in Yorkshire; there he was professed a monk in 1804, taking the name Augustine, and was ordained priest in 1810. He became a leading member of the small Ampleforth community, serving as procurator and then prefect of studies. In 1817 the president of the English Benedictine congregation appointed him chief missioner (parish priest) of the busy and fashionable city of Bath. A graphic picture of his daily round during the six years he spent there can be seen in his diary of 1817-19, which has been transcribed and published by the Catholic Record Society. He had by this time built a reputation he was never to lose as an outstanding and eloquent preacher. 
At the general chapter of the English Benedictine congregation in 1822 Baines was elected first definitor of the regimen. His talents and his energy were recognized outside the congregation as well as within it, and in 1823 the vicar apostolic of the western district, Bishop Peter Bernardine Collingridge, chose (as was then the custom) Baines as his coadjutor with right of succession (the bishop for this extensive and poor district had traditionally been selected from the regular clergy). 
Once consecrated, Baines began to prepare for the establishment of a seminary for the district. At first he looked to his Benedictine confreres to assist in this (Bishop Brown of Wales was to initiate a similar plan in 1850). In August 1826 Baines invited both the community of St Gregory, then at nearby Downside, which refused, and his own community of St Laurence at Ampleforth, from which he received an encouraging response. A measure of disagreement over these plans led him to put them aside until 1829, when he succeeded to the vicariate. 
The intervening years were spent in Rome, whither Baines had travelled to recover from a serious illness. The experience was a formative one. As he later declared: 'In the Western District all that concerns the exterior of Religion is rigorously fashioned upon the Roman model... infinitely better suited for a country like England' (P. A. Baines, 'A History of the Pastoral', 1841, 17-18). He made many friends and was especially favoured by Leo XII, who, according to many sources, intended to name him cardinal. He was appointed bishop assistant to the pontifical throne, and in that capacity attended the conclave electing Pius VIII in April 1829. This year, which had seen the death of Leo XII and of Bishop Collingridge, was also the year of the 'Catholic Emancipation Act' in England. Baines was eager for the Roman Catholic church in England to move into the open, to build churches and schools which were now no longer illegal, and to take a place in public life. 
Soon after his return to England, in December 1829, Baines bought the mansion of Prior Park, on one of the hills of Bath; he planned to make of it, like Oscott, a school, a seminary, and the bishop's residence. Using stone from the quarries at Combe Down above Prior Park, he adapted harmoniously the wings of the building to form the two colleges of St Peter (opened 1830) and St Paul (opened 1837). His most striking addition was the great flight after flight of steps leading from the Corinthian portico, with terraces laid out below. Finding an appropriate teaching faculty for these colleges caused headaches. For a while (1835-42) a small group of men from the newly formed Institute of Charity came from Italy, but their style proved unsuitable for an English school. In 1835 Nicholas Wiseman responded to Baines's proposal that he should become president of Prior Park. In the event Wiseman chose to settle in the midland district, at Oscott. Baines's original preference for his Benedictine confreres (he had hoped for a helpful reshuffle of personnel) had been disappointed. Dispute over this had involved, too, uncertainty about the canonical status of the Benedictine houses, and their consequent exemption -- or otherwise -- from the jurisdiction of the bishop while working on the district mission. The matter of episcopal jurisdiction exercised both Bishop Challoner (1691-1781) and Bishop Vaughan (1832-1903) and even the papal ruling secured by the latter, the bull 'Romanos pontifices' (1881), did not finally clear up the matter of episcopal authority, based on edicts of the Council of Trent. The hostility engendered between the Benedictine factions was technically resolved by an official arbitration overseen by Bishop Scott of Glasgow in July 1835 in which all were cleared of blame. But the poor relations engendered grew into a legend. 
All the same, despite such ups and downs, Prior Park blossomed, and St Peter's College 'in Bishop Baines's hands at once became the most advanced and progressive of the catholic schools' (C. Butler, 'Downside Review', 1931, 333). Another tribute was paid by a young monk of the community of St Gregory of that time (1811-32): W. P. Morris, later speaking as a bishop at the golden jubilee of Downside in 1864, called Baines 'the ornament and pride of the Benedictine body in modern times' (W. P. Morris to J. Bonomi, n.d., Clifton Diocesan Archives). Had Baines not died suddenly at a comparatively young age Prior Park would no doubt have financially secured itself. In 1840 the University of London presented a charter to St Paul's College warranting it to issue certificates to candidates for degrees. 
The College of St Peter was run on original, creative, humane lines. Many records testify to Baines as far in advance of his time as an educator. His very individual views can be found in his book 'A Course of Studies' (1838), in which he encouraged children 'to form their own ideas', and teachers to avoid 'teasings and scoldings', 'a cross and surly tone', and 'irksome drudgery' in lessons. 'The more children can learn whilst in motion and in the open air the better', he continued. The result was a style of practical involvement -- a far cry from other schools of the period. This can be seen in the lengthy press reports of the yearly public examinations and exhibitions, and is evident too from the reminiscences of pupils such as Louis Guibara, who recalled not only the joys of fives in the Ball Place, skating and swimming at the Ponds, birdwatching, picnics, and 'building houses' in the Rainbow Wood and the Wilderness, but also the musical tradition at the school with the bishop watching rehearsals from a gallery: 'It is impossible to exaggerate the influence which that training had upon our lives.' 
At Prior Park, T. J. Brindle, Baines's loyal vicar-general, later received into the church many of the most distinguished of the Oxford converts, including Ambrose St John, F. and J. M. Capes, and Robert Aston Coffin. J. H. Newman recommended Prior Park to his close friends the Bowdens as being likely to suit their son 'better than any other college' ('The Letters and Diaries of John Henry Newman', ed. C. S. Dessain and others, 31 vols., 1-10, 2nd edn, 1978-, vol. 9). Records also testify to Baines's social conscience: from his letter to the 'Bath and Cheltenham Gazette' in 1817, when he was chief missioner there, 'in favour of a poor black imprisoned for begging' to his last Lenten pastoral letter in 1843, in which he chided 'a great empire of which a large proportion are paupers in the midst of overflowing plenty; we are oppressors of the poor who have a claim in justice upon us' ('The Tablet', 18 March 1843). 
In 1839 Baines had had a census taken of his district, and his Lenten pastoral letter of February 1840 reflected on the subject of the civil position of Catholics in England and dwelt on the duty in charity of not provoking their 'separated brethren' -- as he was criticized for calling the Anglican majority. The pastoral letter, and the twenty charges against it by anonymous 'converts', exemplify the changes which had taken place in Catholic life since the election of Gregory XVI in 1831. Baines was not happy either with the crusade for the conversion of England, initiated by Spencer, or with the Italianate devotional style and practices becoming popular: a contrast to the minimized tone and dry piety which English Catholics had hitherto preferred both by temperament and by precedent. 
A Particular Sacred Congregation of eight cardinals in Rome considered the pastoral letter, together with Baines's written defence of it, to which lengthy comments were appended. There was no question of doctrinal error, but Baines was criticized for a 'caustic tone' (vol. 156, Anglia file, Archives of the Collegio di Propaganda Fide, Rome). During the months thus spent in Rome, Baines had several meetings with Gregory XVI (who as Cardinal Capellari, a Camaldolese monk and fellow regular, was a friend of ten years' standing). Required to clarify certain points, Baines stated 'I approve whatever the Church or its organ the Holy See approves.' He complained that not one of his accusers had come forward ('Letter to Sir Charles Wolseley', 1841 [privately printed]). This lack of openness was alien to his own temperament, which was characteristically candid and ready to square up to a challenge. The petty intrigues continued, though his fellow bishops presented a loyally united front. Bishop John Briggs of the northern district wrote to Bishop Brown of Lancashire, then in Rome, about rumours that Baines might be superseded: 'How astonished and indignant would the catholic body throughout England be to find themselves dragged in the train of Phillipps's and Spencer's war of Enthusiasm' (to Bishop Brown, 15 Feb 1842, Clifton Diocesan Archives). 
In March 1842 Baines suffered a stroke; he recovered, but on 6 July 1843 he died in his sleep. Portraits of Baines show a dark-haired man with a dignified bearing, a forceful countenance, and a smile of great felicity. Mary Russell Mitford, describing her one meeting with him, at Prior Park, gave her impression of his humour and intellect: 'The little tinct he retained from his rustic origin', as she recalled, gave him 'the finishing grace of truth'. While some had been at odds with him, Baines also inspired an ardent and stubborn loyalty. Bernard Ward described the reaction to his sudden death: 'The consternation was beyond description, and can only be imagined by recalling the enthusiastic devotion to his person which reigned among those who were nearest to him -- a fact which should never be forgotten' ('Sequel to Catholic Emancipation', 2.57). Within ten years Prior Park was closed and its contents sold. The body of Baines, which had been buried in accordance with his wishes in the chapel, was taken to Downside. William Clifford, a one-time pupil at Prior Park, on becoming bishop of Clifton in 1866, bought back the premises, and re-established a school. While he was missioner at Bath, Baines had become guardian of a young girl, Anna Mendoza y Rios. She married in 1829 Sir Patrick Bellew of Barmeath, later MP for co. Louth and the first Baron Bellew of the second creation. 


@@@@@


doc= 1094


Sir Thomas Baines (1622x4-1680), physician, was one of the seven children of Richard Baines. Educated at Bishop's Stortford School, Hertfordshire, he was admitted pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge, on 5 October 1638. He studied first with Robert Gell and later with Henry More, proceeding BA in 1643 and MA 1649. Thereafter his biography coincides with that of Finch. Like Finch, he qualified MD at Padua in 1657, and took his MD at Cambridge by proxy (his proxy being Johannes Gostlin) in 1660. He, too, supported moves to found the Royal Society and was elected extraordinary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1661. He was appointed professor of music at Gresham College in 1660, and held this post until his death. Baines does not appear to have practised as a physician, though he was consulted on a personal basis by members of the Finch and Conway families. Like Sir John Finch, he appears to have led the life of a virtuoso. He published nothing, but left a number of unpublished papers, which are preserved in the Finch family archive. He accompanied Finch as physician on his diplomatic missions to Tuscany and Turkey. He was knighted some time before 1672. He died of a 'malignant feaver' at Constantinople on 5 September 1680. His vitals were interred in the English cemetery there, and his embalmed body was taken back to England for burial in Christ's College chapel. Finch was buried in the same grave two years later. Finch and Baines jointly founded two fellowships and two scholarships at Christ's College, Cambridge, each contributing $2000 for this purpose. A memorial commissioned from Joseph Cattens was erected there in 1684, with an encomium from Henry More celebrating the lifelong friendship of the two men. 


@@@@@


doc= 1095


Baines, (John) Thomas (1820-1875), artist and explorer, was born on 27 November 1820 at King's Lynn, Norfolk, the second son and one of three surviving children of Mary Ann Watson and John Thomas Baines, a master mariner. His father and maternal grandfather were amateur artists, his brother Henry a professional. His mother strongly encouraged his artistic endeavours and was his chief publicist in his lifetime and after his death. After education at private schools in King's Lynn he was apprenticed to a painter of heraldic arms on coach panels, also in King's Lynn, but began sketching marine subjects. In 1842 he sailed for Cape Town, where he practised his trade until, in 1845, he became a marine and portrait painter. In 1846 he began his career as a traveller, using his writing and painting to finance his explorations. In the late 1840s he started to sketch the battlefield scenes which some regard as his most memorable work, and between 1851 and 1852 he was the official war artist to the British forces during the Cape Frontier War. 
In 1853 Baines returned to England and worked for the Royal Geographical Society, on whose recommendation, in 1855, he joined Augustus Gregory's expedition to north-west Australia. Many fine paintings and sketches survive from his journey and the Baines River was named after him. His energy and judgement won him special thanks from the colonial government and the freedom of his native town. In 1858, again on the recommendation of the Royal Geographical Society of which he had been elected a fellow in 1857, he was appointed storekeeper and artist to David Livingstone's expedition to open up the Zambezi for trade. It was an unhappy expedition, from which Baines was unjustly dismissed for allegedly misappropriating stores after a disagreement with Livingstone's brother Charles. His paintings from the Zambezi were exhibited in London and Dublin and his manuscript map of the river (D. Middleton, 'The doctor who loved Africa', 'Geographical Magazine', 45/8, 1973, 596) lodged in the Royal Geographical Society. In 1861 he joined James Chapman on an expedition from the south-west coast of Africa to the Victoria Falls; he made a complete route survey, having been taught how to use surveying and astronomical instruments by Sir Thomas Maclear, astronomer royal at the Cape. He also collected scientific information and botanical specimens -- the latter now at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew -- and made many sketches and paintings, which were published as coloured lithographs in 1862. He returned to England to write and lecture before going back to southern Africa to lead an expedition which successfully secured concessions for a gold mining company, although the company failed to take advantage of his achievement. He mapped and wrote a valuable description of the route from the goldfields of the Tati to the capital of the Transvaal republic. In 1873 he was awarded a testimonial gold watch by the Royal Geographical Society. He continued to travel in southern Africa, surveying, drawing, and painting what he saw. On 8 May 1875 he died of dysentery at Durban and was buried in the old cemetery there. 
Baines never married but his pleasant manner and faithful nature secured him many friends. He was energetic and active, despite his limp which resulted from the ill setting of a fractured femur and which earned him the nickname Cripple Thigh. Although largely self-taught and working under very difficult and, in the case of his war sketches, dangerous conditions, he produced technically accomplished and sympathetic sketches, watercolours, and oils, which were highly regarded in his own lifetime and were later much prized, especially in southern Africa and in Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 1096


Baines, Thomas (1806-1881), journalist, newspaper proprietor, and local historian, was born in Leeds, the third son of Edward Baines (1774-1848) and Charlotte Talbot, and younger brother of Matthew Talbot Baines and Sir Edward Baines. Both his father and brother represented Leeds in parliament, and Baines was a liberal in the family tradition, although he was no friend of advanced radicalism. On moving to Liverpool he acquired and transformed 'Billinge's Advertiser' into the 'Liverpool Times', a paper he was to edit for nearly thirty years until 1858, when it finally fell victim to the competition of the new cheap daily press. Having married Fanny Higgins, daughter of councillor Vincent Higgins, Baines developed good local political connections: two of his daughters were to marry prominent members of the council, Edmund Knowles Muspratt and Arthur Bower Forwood. Encouraged by local support, Baines hoped to assume personal responsibility for the Liverpool office in London, an important channel of communication between the booming port and its MPs, proposing to run the office as an independent organization to which individuals, associations, and companies would subscribe. As it was, he was appointed to the vacant secretaryship of the office in 1858 as the paid servant of the corporation of Liverpool and the mercantile associations, and also found himself required to serve as personal secretary for the Liverpool MPs. No other municipality had a London office, a reflection of Liverpool's commercial pre-eminence in the mid-nineteenth century and its aspirations to the status of second metropolis, motifs which informed Baines's encyclopaedic studies 'History of the Commerce and Town of Liverpool' (1852) and 'Liverpool in 1859' (1859). Along with his other main works of local history, 'Lancashire and Cheshire Past and Present' (1868-9) and 'Yorkshire Past and Present' (1875), Baines's writings, as the 'Liverpool Daily Courier' obituary notice aptly commented, were 'more marked by minuteness of research than for tact in compilation'. His liberalism is perhaps most apparent in his response to the flood of Irish immigration into Liverpool. Concern at the costly burden on local poor relief resources was balanced by sympathy for the destitute famine migrants. Irish landlords were taken to task in his study 'Agricultural Resources of Great Britain, Ireland and the Colonies' (1847), which called for Irish poor-law reform and government assistance for overseas emigration. In journalism he had a particular aptitude for reporting military matters with both expert knowledge and clarity. The 'obliged friend and servant' of the corporation of Liverpool and the commercial associations of the port, Baines continued to work for the Liverpool office until his sudden death on 31 October 1881 at Seaforth Hall, near Liverpool, the residence of one of his daughters, Mrs E. K. Muspratt. He was survived by six of his seven children. 


@@@@@


doc= 1097


Bainham, James (d. 1532), lawyer and protestant martyr, was the youngest son of Sir Alexander Bainham and Elizabeth Langley, 'nee' Tracy, of Westbury-on-Severn in Gloucestershire, and nephew through his mother of Sir William Tracy, the evangelical landowner from Toddington in Gloucestershire whose will was refused probate in 1531 because of its heretical content. The source of his early education is unknown, but he probably attended a grammar school for he knew both Latin and Greek; later he was admitted to the inns of court and became a lawyer. However, he did not confine his energies to the law; he also espoused the evangelical faith articulated so eloquently in his uncle's will. Foxe describes him as 'an earnest reader of Scriptures, [and] a great maintainer of the godly' ('Acts and Monuments', 4.697). 
In 1531 Bainham was brought before Sir Thomas More, then lord chancellor, and accused of heresy. He had been linked to the evangelical cause after his marriage to Simon Fish's widow. Fish, a lawyer and evangelical pamphleteer, had previously come to More's attention following the publication of his pamphlet 'The Supplication of Beggars'. He had been charged with heresy, but recanted before his death in 1531. A few months later Bainham married Fish's widow. According to Foxe, when Bainham first appeared before More, the chancellor attempted to persuade him to return to the traditional faith. Meeting with no success, More had him imprisoned in the Tower, where he was tortured. On 15 December 1531 he was brought before John Stokesley, bishop of London, and examined concerning his beliefs. Initially, he held to his evangelical beliefs, but after several re-examinations, he abjured these on 8 February 1532 and was released from prison. 
Bainham soon regretted his decision, however, and publicly reasserted his evangelical beliefs. He was arrested as a result of this relapse and returned to the Tower, and on 19 April 1532 was brought back before the chancellor of the diocese of London. Reminded of his previous abjuration, Bainham rejected it, and went even further by explicitly denying the doctrine of transubstantiation, a clear and unequivocal indication of his heretical beliefs. Next day he was condemned to be burnt by the bishop's vicar-general, and was returned to the Tower, where he was apparently housed in a dark, dungeon-like space. According to Foxe, Hugh Latimer visited him there and found him 'syttyng upon a couche of straw with a boke and a waxe candell in his hand praying and readyng' ('Acts and Monuments', 4.770). On this occasion Bainham asserted that the cause of his condemnation was his rejection of the doctrine of purgatory. On 30 April 1532, just ten days after his condemnation, he was burnt at Smithfield. As the flames consumed his limbs, Bainham allegedly declared, 'O ye papists! Behold... a miracle; for in this fire I feel no more pain than if I were in a bed of down: but it is to me as a bed of roses' (ibid., 4.705). 


@@@@@


doc= 1098


Baird, Sir David, first baronet (1757-1829), army officer, was born on 26 December 1757 at Newbyth, Haddingtonshire, the fifth son of William Baird ('c'.1711-1766), merchant, and Alicia, 'nee' Johnstone, of Hiltown, Berwick (died 'c'.1787). Baird's siblings included five sisters, two older, two younger, and one close in age, and two younger brothers. Within years of his birth the family moved to Gordon House, near the top of Castle Hill, Edinburgh. After William Baird's death the family faced financial hardship and young David gave his mother some difficulty. The commission Baird obtained as an ensign in the 2nd regiment of foot on 14 December 1772 had been purchased by his mother for an older, more promising brother who died suddenly. Before sailing to Gibraltar to join his regiment in April 1773, Baird attended Lewis Lochee's military academy at Chelsea, where, as a 6 feet tall, athletic youth he enjoyed the emphasis on physical activity. He otherwise lacked education, being 'too volatile to attend closely to study' (Hook, 1.2), but proved a brave soldier and a good regimental officer who, over the course of three decades, saw active service on three continents. A comrade recalled him as 'a fine soldier-like man; with such a determined air, that you might draw the inference from his countenance, that he was ready, if ordered, to march into a fiery furnace' ('Recollections of the British army', 191). 
Having returned from Gibraltar with his regiment in 1776, Baird obtained a leave of absence and travelled to Elgin, where, on 26 December 1777, he became a captain in Lord Macleod's new regiment, the 73rd highlanders. The regiment was ordered to India and embarked for Portsmouth on 8 May 1778. They arrived fifteen days later, missing the India-bound fleet's departure, and were sent to the Channel Islands, then subject to French threat. After spending six months on Guernsey, they returned to Portsmouth in November, wintered nearby at Petersfield, departed for India on 7 March 1779, and reached Madras on 20 January 1780. In July 1780 Haidar Ali, ruler of Mysore, attacked Madras and the nawab of Arcot, a British ally. Baird accompanied the force sent to the relief of Arcot when, on 10 September 1780 at Perambaukum, they were surrounded and destroyed by Haidar and his son Tipu Sultan. Baird's corps 'fought with such determination and heroism, that many of them were seen loading their muskets after their legs had been shot away; almost all disdained to accept quarter' (Hildyard, 17). With sabre wounds to the head, a pike wound in the arm, and a ball in the thigh, Baird fell senseless to the ground. Nearly left for dead his pillaged body was found by two comrades; the trio were soon among Haidar's prisoners. Referring to her son's active disposition, a variously quoted apocryphal story credits Baird's mother, upon learning of her son's capture, with the statement 'God help the puir man that's chained to my Davy' ('Investigator', 5). Baird received rudimentary medical treatment before he was carried in a litter to Seringapatam, Mysore's fortified capital, while the other 250 captives made the journey on foot. At Seringapatam the fifty officers were kept in 'small rooms, or rather dungeons' (Lindsay, 3.278), often with 9 lb irons shackled to each leg. The hungry and diseased prisoners manufactured clothing for themselves and, when not chained, grew food. On 11 March 1784, with the signing of the treaty of Mangalore, the survivors were released. After a brief convalescence Baird joined his regiment near Arcot. He became a major on 5 June 1787, obtained a leave of absence, and departed India in October 1787. 
After three years in Britain he became a lieutenant-colonel on 8 December 1790 and returned to India in March 1791 to participate in the Third Anglo-Mysore War, a conflict precipitated in December 1789 by Tipu's attack on Travancore, a British ally. He arrived at Madras during the summer of 1791, and joined Governor-General Cornwallis's army near the recently captured town of Bangalore. Advancing slowly, Cornwallis reached Seringapatam on 5 February 1792, and the following evening attacked the force Tipu had assembled before his capital. During this action Baird successfully led his highland regiment and four Indian battalions against troops entrenched on Carrighaut Hill. Two weeks later peace was settled and Cornwallis's army dispersed. Baird was stationed at Madura when news arrived of the French declaration of war against Britain. He was ordered to Pondicherry and attended when the city surrendered without a fight on 22 August 1793. From Pondicherry Baird was dispatched to Tanjore to command the British force hired by the local raja. He worked against the plans of Lord Hobart, governor of Madras, to obtain greater control over the raja's military and fiscal affairs. Although Governor-General Sir John Shore blocked Hobart's venture, Baird was moved from Tanjore in September 1796. A year later he and his regiment were rotated home. 
Baird sailed from Madras on 17 October 1797 and arrived at Cape Town in December, when Governor George Macartney asked him to remain and train the garrison. With thoughts of succeeding Macartney, he agreed. Promoted to major-general on 18 June 1798, in October he was ordered to lead 1800 men to Madras to counter the threat posed to British India by Napoleon Bonaparte's expedition to Egypt and the reception at Seringapatam of eighty-six French soldiers sent by the governor of Mauritius. Baird reached Madras on 7 January 1799 and on 1 February joined the army gathering at Vellore under General George Harris. Two days later, having determined that Tipu's reception of French soldiers constituted a 'casus belli', Governor-General Richard Wellesley, second earl of Mornington, ordered Harris to mobilize. When the army crossed into Mysore on 5 March, Baird knew 'Our object is Tippoo' (Baird to R. Baird, 13 Feb 1799, Baird MSS, M 1995.51.2). On 5 April Seringapatam was reached. A siege commenced, and once the walls were breached in early May, Harris decided to storm the city. Baird volunteered to lead the assault: he wanted, he said, to 'pay off old scores' (Hook, 1.205). The night before the assault he led men into the forward entrenchments located 1000 yards from the breach. At 1 p.m. on 4 May 1799 Baird rose from his trench yelling 'Come, my brave fellows, follow me, and prove yourselves worthy the name of British soldiers' (Beatson, 126) and in six minutes led 4000 men through heavy rocket and musket fire across the Cauvery River and into Seringapatam. They seized the ramparts and within hours had overcome all opposition. In the palace Baird took custody of royal prisoners and soon discovered Tipu: 'we found a man who being severely threatened said that the Sultan was killed in attempting to escape thru' the northern sally port and offered to conduct us to the body. We accordingly proceeded thither and under a slaughtered heap of several hundreds, many of whom were men of consequence in his service, had the pleasure to discover the body of the Sultan. He had been shot thru the head and body and was quite dead. (Baird to Harris, 6 May 1799, Baird MSS, M 1995.51, fol. 3)' The following morning Baird's breakfast was disrupted by Colonel Arthur Wellesley, the governor-general's brother and the future duke of Wellington, who arrived with orders to supersede Baird to the command of Seringapatam. Maladroitly relieved of his conquest by a junior officer, Baird left Tipu's palace without finishing his meal. Mutual antipathy lingered. 
After the war Baird was stationed at Dinapore, Bengal, from where he wrote that he was 'a soldier whose greatest ambition ever has been and ever will be to endeavour to gain the approbation and applause of his King and Country', but who was 'now heartily sick of this country and wish to get home as soon as I can with propriety' (Baird to R. Baird, 13 June 1800, Baird MSS, M 1995.51, fol. 8). In 1801 he was instructed to lead an expedition to the Red Sea, co-operating with a larger force attacking Egypt from the Mediterranean. He sailed from Bombay in early April 1801 with 5000 men and reached Quseir on 8 June, from where he dispatched parties of engineers and sepoys 100 miles across the desert. After they had established a string of food and water depots between Quseir and the Nile, Baird, wanting to 'get forward' (S. Auchmuty to C. Beresford, 22 June 1801, Baird MSS, M 1995.44), sent the first of five columns to Keneh. The rest followed, and by 8 July all had reached the Nile. From Keneh, Baird floated 400 miles down the Nile, arriving at Alexandria in September, immediately after the French had capitulated to General John Hutchinson. The French removed from Egypt, Baird sailed from Suez in May 1802 and reached Calcutta in August. He left India for good in March 1803, after being superseded once more by Arthur Wellesley. 
In July 1805 Baird, a popular hero due to his exploits in India and Egypt, went to Cork to prepare an army to attack Cape Colony. A soldier who trained at Cork recalled that he appeared to have been 'bitten by a mad adjutant, or rather been inoculated with the pacing-stick drill' as he taught his men 'the mystery of standing on one leg... for two hours' ('Recollections of the British army', 192). On 31 August he left Ireland with 6000 troops. The force reached Table Bay on 4 January 1806 and landed two days later. On 8 January the Dutch made a stand near Cape Town. Baird described the battle of Blauberg: 'on approaching the Enemy our line was formed with much precision & expedition & the left or Highland Brigade advanced with utmost resolution & steadiness under a severe fire of round & grape-shot & musketry... a charge bore down all opposition. (Baird to the duke of York, 12 Jan 1806, Baird MSS, M 199.45, fol. 90)' Cape Town capitulated two days later. Hoping to obtain prize money, Baird, in spring 1806, agreed to lend troops to Admiral Sir Home Popham and Colonel Charles Beresford in an unsanctioned attack on Buenos Aires. Vast wealth never materialized, and Baird left Cape Town on 19 January 1807, recalled and censured by London. He was not in Britain long before sailing to the Baltic, where he led a division during the capture of Copenhagen in September 1807. 
In spring 1808 Baird spoke of 'rural felicity... [as] perhaps... the happiest state of any' (Baird to Young, 27 March 1808, Baird MSS, M 199.47.19) and was considering retiring when he agreed in April 1808 to train and lead an army to northern Spain, where General Sir John Moore was supporting the Seville-based junta opposed to Joseph Bonaparte's rule. He sailed from Cork with 10,000 men in September 1808 and reached Corunna on 13 October. Marching through the Leon mountains, he reached Astorga on 19 November. A week later, before his army had completed the mountain crossing, Moore instructed him to retreat, since the French had defeated the Spanish near Madrid. After re-entering the mountains Baird received countermanding instructions. He was told Madrid had risen against the French and that: 'If the flame catches elsewhere and becomes all general, the best results may be expected. If confined to Madrid, that town will be sacrificed, and it will be as bad, or worse than ever... I mean to proceed bridle in hand; for if the bubble bursts and Madrid falls, we shall have a run for it. (Moore to Baird, 6 Dec 1808, Sorrell, 35)' Baird turned his army around again and met Moore at Mayorga on 20 December, but the Madrid insurgency was broken, French armies approached, and they were compelled to retreat to Corunna. Morale became 'soured by fatigue and hunger' ('Diary of William Gavin', xiii) and the rearguard actions Baird helped to organize were increasingly hampered by supply shortages, a breakdown in discipline, and the harsh Spanish winter. When the army reached the mountains, a 'march of death' began 'up Monte de Cabero... There was nothing to sustain our famished bodies, or shelter them from the rain or snow... The sick and wounded that we had been still enabled to drag with us in the waggons, were left to perish in the snow. The road was one line of bloody-footmarks, from the sore feet of men; and on its side lay the dead and dying. (Pococke, 75-6)' On 13 January 1809 Moore's army reached Corunna, and on 16 January the French attacked. Their weight centred on Baird's division, and early on grapeshot struck his left arm and torso. With his sash keeping his arm attached, he walked 2 miles to the harbour, where, on board a transport, his limb was amputated. The French were repulsed, but Moore was killed, leaving Baird commander. He relinquished his duties on 17 January and sailed home, reaching Portsmouth on 25 January 1809. 
Baird recuperated at Yardleybury, Hertfordshire, and after receiving a baronetcy on 13 April 1809, he journeyed to Scotland, declaring his intention to become 'a 'great' and 'good' farmer' (Baird to Young, 30 May 1809, Baird MSS, M 1995.47, fol. 22). On 4 August 1810 he married Ann Campbell Preston and moved to her house, Ferntower, near Crieff, Perthshire. A devoted husband, Baird jested 'I could command 10,000 men; yet I cannot command one woman' (Haley, 167). His torso remained painful, but he rode daily and claimed to be as good a shot with one arm as two. He was a member of the Melton Mowbray hunt, Leicestershire; it was said of Baird and a friend that except for them 'very few attempted to go strait. The fences were higher then, and no caps were worn, and both of them would have their clothes torn off their backs, and their flesh from their faces, rather then not go every inch of the way with the hounds.' Another Meltonian commented that if Baird 'did get a fall, and you thought he was out of the run, he would always pop up by your side' (Paget, 82). Promoted to general on 8 May 1814, he regularly sought patronage, including the Cape governorship, and perhaps needed money to fund Ferntower's ongoing improvements. In February 1820 he became Ireland's commander-in-chief, but after a riding accident in June 1822 left Dublin without the peerage he expected. Near Ferntower in the early autumn of 1828 he had another, more serious riding accident. He wintered in London and fell ill. At a royal levee in April he was appointed commander of Fort George, but he never reached the highlands. Suffering from fevers and headaches, he travelled to Ferntower and arrived home in debilitating pain on 20 July. Baird's condition deteriorated, and he died at home on 18 August 1829. He was succeeded in his baronetcy by his nephew David Baird. 
As well as building an obelisk commemorating her husband on a summit overlooking the Strath and hiring T. E. Hook, a popular novelist, to write her husband's biography, Lady Baird commissioned David Wilkie to paint 'General Sir David Baird Discovering the Body of the Sultaun Tippoo Sahib' and insisted that her husband be depicted wearing an impressive cape; the finished work was hung in the drawing room at Ferntower. In 1813 Baird reflected on his and Wellington's careers, indicating 'It is the highest pride of my life that anybody should ever have dreamed of my being put in the balance with him... I know both him and myself 'now'' (Edgecumbe, 2.25). The duke meanwhile remembered Baird as 'a gallant, hard-headed, lion-hearted officer, but he had no talent, no 'tact'' (Jennings, 102), yet at the Royal Academy exhibition in 1839, where Wilkie's grand canvas was the centrepiece, he proudly told his lady companion how well he had known Sir David. 


@@@@@


doc= 1099


Baird, George Husband (1761-1840), Church of Scotland minister and university principal, was a native of the parish of Bo'ness on the Forth, Linlithgowshire, where his father, a landed gentleman of Stirlingshire, rented a farm from the duke of Hamilton. Born on 13 July 1761 at Inveravon, Bo'ness, Baird received his primary education at the parish school of Bo'ness, and, on the family's removal to a newly purchased property, named Manuel, in Linlithgowshire, at the parish school of Linlithgow. He was a plodding, persevering, and well-mannered, rather than a brilliant, schoolboy. In 1773, in his thirteenth year, he was entered as a student in humanity (Latin) and Greek at Edinburgh University. He speedily came under the favourable notice of Principal Robertson, the historian, and Professor Dalzel, and others, because of his devotion to his class-work and marked progress. Not content with the tasks of the university classes, he carried on simultaneously philological and philosophical researches, in which he was associated with James Finlayson, afterwards professor of logic at Edinburgh, and Josiah Walker, afterwards professor of humanity at Glasgow. As a result of these extra-collegiate studies he acquired an exceptionally varied and accurate knowledge of nearly all the living languages of Europe. 
In 1784 Baird was recommended by Professor Dalzel as tutor in the family of Colonel Blair, of Blair. In 1786 he received licence as a preacher of the gospel from the presbytery of Linlithgow of the Church of Scotland. In 1787 he was presented to the parish of Dunkeld by the duke of Atholl, through influence brought to bear by his friend Finlayson. Before leaving for his parish he had encountered Robert Burns, and in his old age he delighted to tell of his having repeatedly met with the 'Ayrshire ploughman'; his name was among the subscribers to the poet's first volume, published at Kilmarnock in 1786. Baird was evangelical rather than with the Church of Scotland's 'moderates', but family ties threw him a good deal into the cultivated circle of the Robertsons and Blairs and their school. While he was parish clergyman at Dunkeld he was resident in the duke's family, and superintended the education of the duke's three sons. In 1789-90 he was presented to the large and important parish church of Edinburgh, known as 'Lady Yester's', but the ducal house of Atholl persuaded him to decline the call. 
His marriage in August 1792 to Isabella, eldest daughter of Thomas Elder, lord provost of Edinburgh, was a fortunate one. In November 1792 the town council presented him to New Greyfriars Church, Edinburgh, and also to the chair of Hebrew at Edinburgh University, which was in their gift. The senatus academicus conferred on him the honorary degree of DD in the same year. In 1793, though comparatively youthful and untried, he was elected by the town council principal of Edinburgh University, in succession to William Robertson. As principal he was called upon to punish a breach of the university's discipline committed by three students who subsequently attained to pre-eminent distinction. A challenge had been addressed to one of the professors, and the parties implicated in the misdemeanour were Lord Henry Petty (afterwards marquess of Lansdowne), Henry Brougham, and Francis Horner. These students were summoned before the senatus academicus. Only Brougham appeared, and the rebuke of the principal was so delivered and accepted that a warm friendship ensued, and lasted long after Brougham had entered public life. 
In 1799 Principal Baird was translated to the New North Church. In 1801, on the death of Dr Blair, he was appointed his successor in the High Church, where he remained until his death. Towards the close of his life he vigorously promoted a scheme for the education of the poor in the highlands and islands of Scotland. He submitted his proposal to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in May 1824, and it was sanctioned in the following year. In his sixty-seventh year, when enfeebled in health, he traversed the entire highlands of Argyll, the west of Inverness and Ross, and the western islands, from Lewis to Kintyre. In his sixty-eighth year he similarly visited the north highlands, and the Orkneys and Shetland. Through his influence Dr Andrew Bell, of Madras, bequeathed $5000 for education in the highlands of Scotland. Baird died on 14 January 1840 at Manuel. 


@@@@@


doc= 1100


Baird, James (1802-1876), ironmaster and philanthropist, was born at Kirkwood in Lanarkshire on 5 December 1802, the fourth son of Alexander Baird (died 1833), farmer, and Jean, the daughter of James Moffat. He attended the Old Monkland parish school, and may have attended classes at Anderson College in Glasgow. Alexander Baird was a man of considerable ambition and initiative. He enclosed many of the farms that had been in his family for generations, and seized the opportunity offered by the Napoleonic wars to enlarge his landholdings and broaden his interests, taking over another 250 acres and building a mill. Wishing to provide for his growing family -- by this time numbering seven sons and a daughter -- he began to lease coalfields and to invest in the manufacture of iron. In 1809 he leased the coalworks at Woodside near Dalserf. In 1816 he added the Rochsolloch coalfield near Airdrie, and in 1822 the Merryston coalfield, to his operations. In 1826 James, together with his father and his brothers William and Alexander, leased the coalfields of Sunnyside, Hollandhirst, and New Gartsherrie. Two years later they leased the rights to mine ironstone at Cairnhill, adjoining Gartsherrie, and began to erect blast furnaces there. By 1842 they had sixteen furnaces operating at the Gartsherrie ironworks. 
The Bairds' first furnace was put in blast on 4 May 1830. Alexander Baird retired that year, and four of his sons -- William, Alexander, James, and George -- formed a partnership, William Baird & Co., to continue the business, joined later by their brothers Robert and Douglas. James Baird was responsible for the management of the firm, and took a leading role in the development and improvement of plant. Building on the work of James Beaumont Neilson, the inventor and patentee of the hot-blast furnace, he organized the installation of the first circular furnace in Scotland in 1832, developed improved blast heaters, and introduced other innovations in order to improve efficiency and output. As a result of his endeavours, individual furnace production increased from 60 to 250 tons of iron per week. Attempts made in concert with other Scottish ironmasters to break Neilson's hot-blast patent met with less success -- Bairds finally settled out of court, paying the patent holder over $106,000 in royalties and expenses. 
William Baird & Co. expanded, acquiring coalfields and ironworks in other parts of Lanarkshire and in the counties of Ayr, Stirling, Dumbarton, and Cumberland. A subsidiary, the Eglinton Iron Company, added works at Eglinton in 1846, Blair in 1852, Muirkirk and Lugar in 1856, and Portland in 1864. It has been estimated that by the mid-1860s Bairds was responsible for 25 per cent of Scotland's output of pig iron, with a capacity to produce up to 300,000 tons per annum. It employed 10,000 men and boys, and recent historians agree with the contemporary view that Bairds was probably the largest single producer of pig iron in the world. James Baird practically retired from the business during the early 1860s, leaving its management in the hands of his nephews. His interest in industrial technology was undimmed, however, and he took out a number of patents for improvements to coal-cutting equipment. 
Baird and his brothers were committed supporters of the Conservative Party. William Baird was MP for the Falkirk burghs in 1841-6, and James represented the same constituency in 1851-2 and 1852-7. He remained an active campaigner for the party in later years, and in 1873 chaired a meeting held to celebrate Benjamin Disraeli's being granted the freedom of the city of Glasgow, and his election as rector of the university. The Baird brothers built many churches to serve the communities in which their employees lived, and James Baird campaigned vigorously for the Church of Scotland to make greater efforts to serve the needs of the population in industrial areas. In 1873 he made a gift of $500,000 to the church, to 'assist in providing the means of meeting, or at least as far as possible promoting the mitigation of spiritual destitution among the population of Scotland'. The church set up the Baird Trust to administer the funds and carry out the wishes of the benefactor. 
Baird's brothers all predeceased him, and on Robert's death in 1856 James succeeded to the estate of Auchmedden in Aberdeenshire. Already the owner of small estates in Ayrshire, he acquired Cambusdoon in Ayrshire in 1853, Knoydart in western Inverness-shire in 1857, and Muirkirk in Ayrshire in 1863. He served as a magistrate for Lanarkshire, and a deputy lieutenant for the counties of Ayr and Inverness. 
In 1852 Baird married Charlotte, the daughter of Robert Lockhart of Castlehill, Lanarkshire. Two years after Charlotte's death in 1857, he married Isabella Agnew, daughter of Admiral James Hay of Belton, East Lothian, who survived him. He had no children. In 1876 he fell ill with bronchitis on a trip to London. He returned to Cambusdoon, but died two weeks later, on 20 June. He was buried beside his first wife at Alloway. The gross value of his estate in the United Kingdom was recorded as $1,190,868 14's'. 5died His obituary in the 'Glasgow Herald' recorded that he was: 'a man of great energy and force of character, [who] also possessed a Scotchman's prudence -- not the prudence which never dares, but the fine spirit of caution which, first carefully counting the costs, goes boldly forward, and is seldom taken by surprise. (21 June 1876)' 



@@@@@


doc= 1101


Baird, Sir John, Lord Newbyth (bap. 1620, d. 1698), judge, was baptized in Edinburgh on 10 September 1620, the son of James Baird (died 1655) of Little Fiddes and Byth, Aberdeenshire, advocate, and his wife, Bethia, daughter of John Dempster of Logiealton and Balbougie, advocate. He was admitted advocate on 3 June 1647. Probably about this time he married Margaret ('b'. after 1618, died 1707), daughter of Sir William Hay of Linplum, because a son was born on 4 October 1648; the couple had two further sons and a daughter. By June 1653 Baird had been knighted. 
Like his father, who died in August 1655, Baird was a covenanter, although he was quickly reconciled to the Restoration after 1660. He served as commissary of Edinburgh in 1661. He was excepted out of the Scottish 'Act of Indemnity' in 1662, paying a fine of $2400. On 15 August 1663 he was appointed Lyon-depute. In November 1664 he was made a lord of session; since he had sold the Byth estate, he assumed the title of Lord Newbyth, based on lands he purchased in Haddingtonshire. Elected to the Scottish parliament in 1665 for Aberdeenshire, after taking the oaths on 8 August he was named to prepare a draft of a grant of taxation to the king. Returned again to the parliament in 1667, on 9 January he was appointed to the committee of supply. 
On 9 August 1667 the king granted Baird the barony of Gilmertoun within the sheriffdom of Edinburgh; the grant was ratified by parliament on 23 December 1669. From September to November 1670 Baird was in London attending meetings as a Scottish commissioner for union with England. He was one of those left out of the new commission for lords of session on 1 November 1681, no doubt due to his political opposition to the harsh measures taken against opponents of the government. In 1685 he served as a commissioner of the cess and of supply in Edinburghshire. 
Baird clearly welcomed the revolution of 1688 in Scotland. He was again appointed a commissioner of supply in Edinburghshire in 1689 and 1690. More difficulty seems to have occurred over his reappointment as a lord of session. In June 1689 he wrote to the Scottish secretary of state, the earl of Melville, of his surprise that 'I had not that common measure of justice allowed me, which was given to such of the lords of session who had suffered under the violence of the last government' ('Leven and Melville Papers', 107-8). Evidently his plea for reinstatement was heeded, for on 22 October he was named in the new commission. He retained his place until his death in Edinburgh on 27 April 1698. He was succeeded by his son William, who had been created a baronet in 1680. His daughter apparently died in a coaching accident shortly before she was due to be married. In the Advocates' Library in Edinburgh there survive Lord Newbyth's collections of decisions from 1664 to 1667 and a collection of practiques for 1664 to 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 1102


Baird, John (d. 1804), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster and Church of Ireland clergyman, a native of Paisley, Renfrewshire, was educated at Edinburgh University, and in 1763 was ordained by the Edinburgh presbytery for a congregation in the Isle of Man. In 1766 he resigned this post and moved to Dublin. He was installed by the Dublin presbytery as minister of Capel Street (St Mary's Abbey) on 11 January 1767. Here he ministered for ten years, but not without considerable contention. In June 1769 the General Synod of Ulster suspended him for two weeks, following complaints from some members of his congregation and the local presbytery. Eight years later, in June 1777, synod was called upon to arbitrate between rival parties in the congregation. One group asked synod to dissolve the relation between the congregation and Baird. The other requested that synod interpose its influence to restore peace and continue Baird as minister. After a full debate synod decided, 'nemine contradicente', to dissolve the relation between Baird and the congregation, and declare the pulpit vacant. As a result of further investigation by a committee of synod, Baird was admonished by its moderator 'to act a part in future more suitable to his character as a man, & a Christian, and particularly as a Minister of the Gospel', and instructed not to preach or exercise the function of a minister within the bounds of the synod, unless by appointment of that body, and to vacate the manse within a month. Whereupon Baird 'renounced all subjection and dependence upon the General Synod and all its subordinate parts' ('Records', 3, 5-6). The synod in 1778 reacted by declaring that Baird was deposed and deprived of the 'regium donum' from 25 June 1777. To add to his tribulations, his wife died at the height of the controversy. 
Shortly after his renunciation of the synod Baird brought out his first and only volume of a proposed series on the 'Old Testament', 'Dissertations Chronological, Historical and Critical, of All the Books of the Old Testament', based on Sunday evening lectures given at Capel Street. In the preface he gave his considered opinion of the members of his erstwhile congregation, when he stated that the lectures were 'delivered to a certain sort of people whose temper and behaviour in general, must, necessarily, render it very uncomfortable and dangerous to preside over them, in religious affairs'. On 12 November 1777 he dedicated the volume to James Traill, bishop of Down and Connor. Some time later (the actual date is unknown) he conformed and was ordained in the established Church of Ireland. The fact that he preached at an ordination in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, held by the archbishop on 30 May 1779, indicates that his own ordination was prior to that date. On 7 September 1782 he was appointed by the crown rector of Cloghran, near Swords, co. Dublin, and instituted on 17 December. He memorialized the archbishop for permission to erect a glebe house in 1784, and received a grant of $100 for this purpose from the Board of First Fruits. He died in early 1804. 


@@@@@


doc= 1103


Baird, John (1799-1861), Church of Scotland minister, was born at Eccles, Berwickshire, on 17 February 1799, the eldest son of the Revd James Baird, who was successively minister of Legertwood, Eccles, and Swinton, all in Berwickshire. John Baird was educated at the grammar schools of Whitsome and Kelso, and proceeded to the University of Edinburgh. Here he founded the Plinian Society for the study of natural history in 1823, and was its first president. In 1825 he went to Ireland, where he served for some time as a preacher for the Irish Evangelical Society. In 1829 he was ordained minister of Yetholm in Roxburghshire. Four years later, on 11 June 1833, he married Margaret, the daughter of Robert Oliver of Blakelaw. They had two daughters before her early death in September 1837. His second wife, Elizabeth, whom he married on 14 November 1849, was the daughter of Nathaniel Hughes of Wexford; they had two sons and two daughters. 
During his long ministry at Yetholm, Baird continued to pursue his botanical and geological interests. He was a founder member of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club, of which he was president in 1837. Like many other Scottish ministers, he contributed a description of his parish to 'The New Statistical Account of Scotland'; in 1822 he published 'Geological Remarks on the Rock of Gibraltar'. However, he was better known for his evangelical work among the Gypsies of Kirk Yetholm, who were itinerant hawkers for eight months of the year and spent the winter at Kirk Yetholm, living in separation from the village community. Baird was keen to eradicate what he viewed as their particular vices -- idleness, ignorance, poverty, and fierceness of temper -- and to integrate them back into the God-fearing community. He aimed to persuade the parents to leave their children to be educated under his supervision when they went travelling. Baird was able to implement his ideas after the Society for the Reformation of the Gipsies of Scotland was founded in Edinburgh. In 1838-9 this organization raised sufficient finances to fund education, housing, and apprenticeships for the Gypsy children. Baird enjoyed some initial success, and his successor continued the work, although funds fell off after 1850. When George Smith of Coalville visited Kirk Yetholm in 1882, he found only one Gypsy who attended church, and concluded that the scheme had failed to produce any real improvement. Later opinion, while conceding that the decline of traditional Gypsy trades forced many to become more settled, considered that Baird's missionary activities may have contributed to the later nineteenth-century integration of the Gypsies into the village community. Baird died on 29 November 1861 at Yetholm. His wife survived him, dying in Hanover in April 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 1104


Baird, William (1803-1872), zoologist and physician, was born at Eccles, Berwickshire, on 8 January 1803, a younger son of the Revd James Baird (died 1814), then minister of Eccles, and his wife, Sarah. His older brother was the evangelical preacher John Baird (1799-1861). He was educated at the high school, Edinburgh, and studied medicine at Edinburgh, Dublin, and Paris. In 1823, having already visited the West Indies and South America, Baird became a surgeon with the East India Company. While in that company's service he visited India and China five times, availing himself of every possibility to pursue his interest in natural history. 
Baird was a zoologist of considerable ability, and communicated several papers to the Zoological and Linnean societies. In 1829, following his return to Britain, he helped to establish the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club, which served to extend the pursuit of natural science. After some years in private medical practice, in 1841 he accepted an appointment in the zoological department of the British Museum. There he had charge of the molluscan collection and, though he published little on the group, his curatorial efforts succeeded in making the collection available for study by others. 
In 1850 Baird's important work on the natural history of British entomostraca was published by the Ray Society, and in 1858 he published his 'Cyclopaedia of the Natural Sciences'. In 1862 he brought out a memoir of his brother, John, who died in the previous year. Baird was a contributor to a number of journals, including Loudon's 'Magazine of Natural History', 'The Zoologist', and the 'Proceedings' of the Zoological Society, and he was elected FRS in 1867. He died on 27 January 1872 at his home, 38 Burlington Road, Westbourne Park, London, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. His wife, Mary Baird, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 1105


Baker, Alexander (1582-1638), Jesuit, was born in Norfolk on 25 March 1582. He studied grammar and humanities for five years. Some time before 1600 or 1601 he left England for Spain, where he studied philosophy and theology at a Jesuit college in Seville. As he is not mentioned in Murphy's list of students at the English College in Seville, he may have been at another seminary there. In 1608 he was ordained subdeacon in Seville, deacon in Cadiz, and priest in Malaga. He entered the society at the English noviciate in Louvain on 23 April 1612, pronouncing his first vows on 23 April 1613. He was socius to the vice-prefect of the English mission in Brussels from 1614 to 1617. In Brussels in 1615 he reconciled William Coke (later ordained priest in Rome), a son of Sir Edward Coke, the famous lawyer, to the Catholic church. Baker then served as confessor at the Jesuit college in Douai (1617-18) and procurator and consultor at the English College in St Omer. He returned to Spain about 1621, first to Seville and then to the English College in Valladolid. By 1624 he was serving on the English mission as superior of the residence of Blessed Stanislaus (Devon) until 1626. 
Some time after Baker's return to England, probably in 1625, he was arrested. Through the intercession of the French ambassador Baker and ten other Catholics were pardoned by Charles I on 12 July 1625 to the annoyance of a parliament eager to enforce penal laws against Catholic priests. Under Elizabeth, parliament contended, priests were pardoned only after conviction upon their banishment from a kingdom to which they were not to return under pain of death. On the contrary Baker had not yet been convicted and was not required to leave the kingdom 'and being now at liberty his conversation will be very dangerous to the perverting of many of his Majesty's subjects' ('JHL', quoted in Foley, 1.154). There survives (TNA: PRO, SP 14/189/25, under date 1625) a manuscript by Baker in defence of the doctrine of regeneration by baptism as held by Catholics, showing its difference from the opinion of protestants. 
After a year or two in the house of probation of St Ignatius (London), where he was professed of the four vows on 23 May 1627, Baker returned to Devon in 1629. Henry Foley's quasi-literal translation from the Latin 'Summaria mortuorum' (Rome, Archivum Romanum Societatis Iesu, Anglia 7, 267) that Baker twice journeyed to 'the remotest territories of the Indies' ('ad remotas Indorum terras'; Foley, 7/1.28) was transformed by the author of the 'Dictionary of National Biography' article into the claim that he 'twice visited India as a missionary'. Baker travelled to North America, first to Newfoundland from approximately Easter to Christmas in 1629 and then to the recently founded colony in Maryland in 1634. With the exception of his eight months in Maryland, Baker worked in London throughout the 1630s until his death there on 24 August 1638. 


@@@@@


doc= 1106


Baker, Anne Elizabeth (1786-1861), philologist, was born at Northampton on 16 June 1786, and was baptized on 25 July at the Castle Hill Independent Church, the daughter of Richard Baker and his wife, Ann. She was the younger sister of George Baker (1781-1851), the historian of Northamptonshire. Neither she nor her brother married, and for sixty years they shared a house and were constant companions. She was educated at home. Early on she showed an interest in antiquarian subjects, and it was her removal in 1812 of the whitewash from the carved capitals of St Peter's, Northampton, that led to the church's subsequent restoration. Between about 1815 and 1840 she travelled with her brother as he collected materials for his 'History', acting as his amanuensis, compiling the sections on geology and botany, and making drawings. Some of these she engraved for the published work. 'Provincialisms' which she collected while on these travels formed the basis of her 'Glossary of Northamptonshire Words and Phrases, to which are Added, the Customs of the County' (2 vols., 1854), which was highly regarded by her contemporaries. Anne Elizabeth Baker died at Hazelrigg House, Gold Street, Northampton, on 22 April 1861. 


@@@@@


doc= 1107


Baker, William (1833-1885), heraldic artist and mural painter, was born in Birmingham on 23 January 1833, the son of Thomas Baker, a coach painter. He appears to have worked as a gun-stocker, and he learned to paint and draw at the Hardmans' studios in Birmingham. He became a Cistercian monk at Mount St Bernard's Abbey, near Coalville, Leicestershire, in 1857. The leading heraldic artist in England, nicknamed the Herald Monk, he drew two-thirds of the coats of arms in Joseph Foster's 'Peerage of the British Empire' (1880), signing his work F. A. (Frater Anselmus). 
Anselm also painted the murals in the chapel of St Scholastica's Priory, Atherstone, Warwickshire, in St Winifred's, Sheepshed, in the Temple in Garendon Park, and in the lady and infirmary chapels at Mount St Bernard's Abbey: all show the influence of Fra Angelico. He illustrated editions of the liturgical works 'Hortus animae' and 'Horae diurnae', published in London, and several works published in Mechelen and Tournai. His 'Liber vitae', a record of the benefactors of St Bernard's Abbey, is magnificently illustrated with pictures of the arms and patron saints of the benefactors. Illustrations from 'The armorial bearings of English cardinals' were published in 1988 (M. T. Elvins, 'Cardinals and Heraldry', illustrated by Dom Anselm Baker). His 'The arms of the Cistercian houses of England' was never published. Anselm died at Mount St Bernard's Abbey on 11 February 1885 and was buried there two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 1108


Lewis, David (1617-1679), Jesuit and martyr, was born at Abergavenny in Monmouthshire in 1617. It has previously been argued that he was the son of Henry Baker and his wife, Anne ('nee' Baskerville), of Herefordshire and thereby a great-nephew of Dom Augustine Baker OSB. However, there is more evidence to suggest that he was one of nine children born to the Revd Morgan Lewis (died 'c'.1638), the protestant principal of the Royal Grammar School, Abergavenny, and his wife, Margaret Pritchard (died 'c'.1638), a devout Catholic. He was certainly educated at the Royal Grammar School and in 1633 travelled to Paris with John Savage (later Earl Rivers). While in Paris he met Father William Talbot SJ and converted to Roman Catholicism. 
Upon the outbreak of war in France Lewis returned to Wales in 1636 and 'engaged in the study of law' (Canning, 160) but two years later he was sent by John Pritchard, his uncle and a Jesuit priest, to the English College at Rome. He arrived there on 2 November 1638 and the following day was received at the English College. At the college he stated, 'My name is David Lewis, 'alias' Charles Baker. My father was Morgan Lewis and my mother Margaret Pritchard, both Catholics who lately died of fever' (Canning, 160). In June 1641 he received minor orders and was ordained as a priest on 20 July 1642. On St Stephen's day in this year he gave a short Latin discourse entitled 'Corona Christi pro spinis gemmea' on the martyrdom of St Stephen before Urban VIII and on 19 April 1645 he entered the noviciate of St Andrew's in Rome. After two years probation he went to Wales to conduct missionary work, but he was recalled to Rome to act as confessor and spiritual director at the English College. In 1648 he was sent to Monmouthshire where he acted as a missionary priest for the disparate Roman Catholic population. He was twice superior of the south Wales district and rector of the Cwm Jesuit Seminary, Llanrothal, in Herefordshire, from 1667 to 1672, and again from 1674 to 1679. For thirty years he worked tirelessly visiting the persecuted Roman Catholic communities and, as a consequence of his charitable work, he was commonly known as Tad y Tlodion (Father of the Poor). 
In November 1678 the government, alarmed by news of a popish plot, offered a reward of $20 for the capture of any Roman Catholic priest. This was supplemented by a further $200 by John Arnold, a local magistrate in Monmouthshire, for the conviction and execution of Catholic priests in the counties of Monmouthshire and Herefordshire. Lewis's popularity among Roman Catholics and his charitable deeds meant that he was sheltered from persecution for a brief period as none was 'willing to turn traitor to him, or give evidence against him, or in any way to conspire for his death' (Canning, 160). Nevertheless he soon fell victim to the mass hysteria whipped up by Titus Oates. He was arrested on Sunday 17 November 1678 at St Michael's, Llantarnam parish church, in Monmouthshire, where he was preparing to say mass. He was taken under armed guard to Abergavenny and thereafter committed to Monmouth gaol. He remained there until 13 January 1679 when he was transferred to Usk gaol. While imprisoned rumours spread that he had managed to escape from his captors as well as having poisoned his gaoler. 
On 28 March 1679 Lewis was brought before Monmouth assizes on a charge of high treason and was condemned under the act of '27 Elizabeth' as a traitor. During the trial there was evidence that one of his accusers, Dorothy James, sought revenge against him for an earlier failed chancery suit and sought to wash her hands in his blood and make 'porridge' of his head (Foley, 5.923). He was condemned to death the following day, but was reprieved until the following May by the judge, Sir Robert Atkins, on condition that he supply information to the privy council about the Popish Plot. At his arraignment in London Lord Shaftesbury suggested that Lewis renounce the Roman Catholic religion to save his life. Lewis, as a committed Roman Catholic, would not convert and was unable to offer any details about an alleged plot. He was sent back to Usk gaol, where he remained for a further three months before his execution at Usk on 27 August 1679. On the day of his execution he gave a speech in which he recorded that he had no knowledge of the plot and stated 'discover plot I could not, for I knew of none; and conform I would not for it was against my conscience' ('Speech of David Lewis', 2; O'Keefe, 121). Although he was sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, the assembled crowd took pity upon him and would not allow him to suffer. They thereby ensured that he died upon the scaffold and was not quartered. His disembowelled body was later that day buried in the churchyard of the priory church of St Mary at Usk. He was among the forty martyrs of England and Wales canonized by Paul VI on 25 October 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 1109


Baker, Charles (1803-1874), teacher of deaf people, was born on 31 July 1803, the second son of Thomas Baker, headmaster of the Lancasterian School, Severn Street, Birmingham, and his wife, Charlotte Mould. His elder brother was Franklin Baker (1800-1867); his younger brothers included Sir Thomas Baker (1810-1886), a solicitor in Manchester, and Alfred Baker (1815-1893), a surgeon in Birmingham. His sister Harriet (1805-1850) was the mother of Edward White Benson, archbishop of Canterbury. While a youth he was for a short time an assistant at the Deaf and Dumb Institution at Edgbaston, near Birmingham, a pioneering provincial school for deaf children. He then tried other employment, but his services were again sought by the committee of the institution in 1826, when a difficulty arose because of the failure of the master, who was a Swiss, to control the pupils. Baker had never contemplated teaching as a profession, but without much thought for the future he entered upon his work. He at once gained the affections of the children and he remained at the institution. Three years later he was invited to help in the establishment, at Doncaster, of a deaf and dumb institution for the county of York. The plan had originated with the Revd William Fenton, rector of Cowthorpe, in company with whom he visited all the large towns of the county, and obtained sufficient support to warrant carrying out the scheme. 
Baker then faced a lack of suitable books, for although institutions for the deaf and dumb had existed for forty years, no attempt had been made to provide a suitable course of instruction. He therefore set himself to supply this want. He wrote a graded reading and comprehension course, the 'Circle of Knowledge', consisting of consecutive lessons, with accompanying material for teachers, a graded series of books about 'Bible' characters, events, and history, and many other works of special relevance to the teaching of deaf and deaf mute people. The 'Circle of Knowledge', which sold over 400,000 copies, was used in the education of the royal children, and of the grandchildren of King Louis-Philippe, and was widely used in the colonies and in Russia. The first gradation was translated into Chinese by the London Missionary Society, and was used in the schools of China and Japan. Baker produced many textbooks for 'Bible' classes. He also contributed to the 'Penny Cyclopaedia', the 'Journal of Education', the 'Polytechnic Journal', and the publications of the Central Society of Education, and translated J. C. Amman's 'Dissertatio de loquela' (as 'Dissertation on Speech', 1873). 
Baker was an active worker in connection with the local institutions of Doncaster, and was a member of the committee for the establishment of a free public library for the town. He was held in high regard by teachers of deaf people in England and in America, by whom he was acknowledged to be the leader of the older school of thought, which emphasized written methods of instruction. In June 1870 the Columbian Institution of the Deaf and Dumb conferred on him the degree of doctor of philosophy, an honour which he appreciated, but he never assumed the title. He died at Doncaster on 27 May 1874, leaving a widow, Mary Baker ('b'. 1805/6), who was matron of the Doncaster institution. His will named five daughters and one son. His old pupils erected a mural tablet to his memory in the institution where he had laboured so long. 


@@@@@


doc= 1110


Baker, David (1575-1641), Benedictine monk and mystical writer, was born in Abergavenny, Monmouthshire, on 9 December 1575, the thirteenth and youngest child of William Baker (died 1606), receiver-general of the barony of Abergavenny and recorder of the borough -- two positions which at this time were virtually hereditary in the Baker family -- and his wife, Maud Lewis, daughter of the vicar of Abergavenny and sister to David Lewis, judge of the admiralty and first principal of Jesus College, Oxford. The Bakers, on their part, claimed direct descent from Owain Glyn Dwr and were distant cousins of the earl of Salisbury through the Welsh origins of the Cecil family. Although Monmouthshire was second only to Lancashire as a hotbed of recusancy, the Bakers conformed to the established church while retaining a benevolent attitude towards Catholicism. After some years at the local grammar school David Baker was sent in February 1587 to Christ's Hospital, London, partly in order that this Welsh-speaking boy should acquire fluency in English. On 20 May 1590 he matriculated as a commoner at Broadgates Hall, Oxford, where, although he was under the tutelage of a relative, William Prichard, student of Christ Church, he fell into dissolute company; his father summoned him home in May 1592 without his taking a degree. Two plans of his father for settling his feckless son -- one an advantageous marriage, the other a local church benefice -- came to naught, and he was put to studying law under his brother's guidance until, in November 1596, he was ready to go to London again to become a member first, very briefly, of Clifford's Inn, then of the Inner Temple. Law proved to be a world which captured his enthusiasm: even if he went to the theatre he took a law manual with him in case there were any 'longueurs' in the performance. He retained a lifelong affection for the gardens of the inns of court, and several leading lawyers later testified that he could have reached the summit of their profession. But on 7 October 1598 his brother died and his father recalled him to Abergavenny, procuring for him the recordership, but also counting on his help with the many far-flung courts he was obliged to hold as steward of the barony. 
It was in the course of this business that Baker found his road to Damascus. In 1600, riding home at nightfall, he had what he was convinced was a miraculous escape from drowning while negotiating a narrow bridge across the torrential River Monnow. Previously totally without any faith he now began to reflect upon his religious position and, as always, worked it out by reading many books. He was reconciled to the Roman Catholic church by Father Richard Floyd in May 1603. In January 1605 he took the familiar road to London to seek out some Englishmen who, he heard, were Benedictines, belonging to the Italian reformed congregation of St Justina in Padua, where he entered the noviciate on 27 May, taking the name of Augustine. The superiors treated him with great kindness, even providing him with twenty wines to sample and choose which suited him best, but his health broke down and, though remaining a monk, he returned to England in June 1606 just in time to attend to his dying father, who now also embraced the Catholic religion. 
In 1607 in England Baker was professed as a Benedictine, at first belonging to his Italian congregation. But on 21 November its two leading English members, Vincent Sadler and Edward Maihew, having made contact with the blind and long imprisoned nonagenarian Father Sigebert Buckley, who had been a monk of the Marian refoundation at Westminster Abbey and was the last surviving representative in good standing of the pre-Reformation English Benedictine congregation, were aggregated to that congregation by him, as was also Baker shortly afterwards. This whole episode is rather obscure and scholars dispute whether it was masterminded by Baker whose legal instincts had led him to see the advantages that would accrue to the new wave of Benedictine monks arising in the early seventeenth century if they could claim membership of the same historic corporation as had existed in England since its conversion, as well as the legal right to its properties and privileges in the event of a Catholic restoration. This was a live issue at this time of high hopes for England's conversion under the Stuarts, when Robert Persons was asserting the claims of the Jesuits, as the religious order most attuned to the needs of the times, to some share of the former monastic patrimony. It seems unlikely that Baker himself took the initiative in devising this adroit manoeuvre -- he was hardly in a position to do so -- but he undoubtedly placed his legal expertise at its service. Here is shown the high value he always set on continuity, though he may have been unconsciously straining the evidence in assuming that the former English Benedictine congregation was a legal corporation and a tightly knit entity like the more centralized congregations of his own age. 
In 1608, after some time as a poor man's lawyer, Baker embarked on a life of retirement and prayer at Sir Nicholas Fortescue's house at Cook Hill in Worcestershire. Here he claims to have been granted for a short time the grace of passive contemplation. He also read widely in the mystical writers of Spain, the Rhineland, and fourteenth-century England. In 1610 he was in London again, where he gave legal tuition to Philip Powell, the future Benedictine martyr, also from Abergavenny, and subsequently financed his education at Louvain. In 1613 Baker was ordained priest at Rheims, not out of any missionary or pastoral zeal, but, as he says, to confirm him in his prayerful ways. He does not appear to have received any formal theological training. On 23 August 1619 the three independent groupings of Benedictine Englishmen -- those attached to Italian monasteries, those who had joined monasteries in Spain, and those like Baker who belonged to the revived English congregation -- after many false starts and protracted negotiations, were united into a single body by a papal brief, 'Ex incumbenti', of Paul V. Baker was the first of the monks to accept this union and now affiliated himself to one of its monasteries, the priory of St Lawrence at Dieulouard in Lorraine (later at Ampleforth), though there is no evidence that he ever resided there. 
There remained, however, a coterie of English monks who did not accept this union. One of them, the eccentric John Barnes, attacked the validity of its historical claims in his 'Examen trophaeorum congregationis praetensae Anglicanae ordinis sancti Benedicti' (Rheims, 1622), in which he contended that the only fully formed congregation existing in England before the Reformation was that of Cluny. Baker was commissioned by the president of his congregation, Rudesind Barlow, to collect materials for a refutation of Barnes and embarked on a 'voyage litteraire' of the principal English libraries, particularly that of Sir Robert Cotton, and consulted all the leading antiquaries: Camden, Selden, Spelman, and Bishop Godwin, being readily accepted as one of their circle. These researches, now embodied in four folio volumes in Jesus College, Oxford, provided the historical basis for Clement Reyner's 'Apostolatus Benedictinorum in Anglia' (Douai, 1626). An ecclesiastical history of England was also projected, but never realized. 
In 1624 the negotiations for the royal Spanish marriage broke down, and fearing renewed persecution of Catholics Baker returned to the continent where he was asked to undertake the spiritual formation of a group of young Englishwomen who had just begun a Benedictine nunnery at Cambrai, the ancestor of the modern Stanbrook in Worcestershire. They included four descendants of Sir Thomas More, one of whom, Gertrude More, was to be Baker's most receptive disciple. He took infinite pains over instructing these nuns in the life of prayer, especially as this had to be done more from books than from contact with a living tradition. He translated and copied out for their use whole treatises by the contemplative masters which he borrowed either from Sir Robert Cotton or from the exiled English Carthusians and Bridgettines. Thus he rescued from oblivion the medieval English spiritual tradition represented by Walter Hilton, Richard Rolle, Julian of Norwich, and the 'Cloud of Unknowing', another instance of his zeal for continuity. He also composed many treatises of his own, forty of which would be drawn upon by Serenus Cressy to compile a systematic digest of his teaching, the 'Sancta sophia', in 1657. The distinctive notes of his doctrine were interior freedom and responsiveness to the promptings of the spirit. He discouraged dependence on spiritual directors and stood loosely to external observances. This ran counter to prevalent axioms of spiritual practice and aroused suspicions of illuminism in Father Francis Hull who had come to be chaplain to the nuns in 1629. The controversy was brought before the general chapter of the English congregation on 1 August 1633. The commission there appointed to examine Baker's manuscripts gave unstinted approval to his teaching, but for the sake of harmony removed both protagonists from their posts at Cambrai. Baker thereupon took up residence at St Gregory's Priory, Douai (later Downside), where the prior was Rudesind Barlow. 
Here events repeated themselves. For a man much given to solitariness, who kept to his room and would not join the community even for the choir offices, Baker nevertheless had a talent for attracting a following, not only among the younger monks, but also from many in the seminaries and religious orders of the town. At this time when the English Benedictines were only beginning to find their bearings there were tensions between those who saw the 'raison d'etre' of their life as the mission to England, and those, led by Rudesind Barlow, who gave priority to the establishment of a full monastic observance. Baker had written a treatise on the English mission whose first draft suggested that he was inclined to support the conventual party. But he was annoyed when these began to make partisan use of his writings because he felt that their rigid attachment to external forms was as harmful to spiritual progress as total absorption in the apostolate. He therefore composed a second edition of his treatise in which he held up as a cautionary tale a description of an activist conventual easily recognizable as a portrait of Rudesind Barlow. At first Barlow took the rebuke very edifyingly, thinking it was a private admonition, but he was outraged when he discovered it was being publicly circulated. This was a grave lapse of judgement on Baker's part and revealed a man who, although his writings show him to have a very fine intuition into human psychology, had little sense of what made for community living, especially in a house where he was a guest. 
In 1638 the president was induced to order Baker, aged and infirm as he was, to leave Douai for the English mission. He gently submitted to this harsh decision in spite of the outcry by his followers, and passed the last three years of his life near the inns of court, saved from pursuivants only by the rumour that the plague infested his lodgings. He had to change his lodgings four times and died of a fever on 9 August 1641, while being cared for by Mrs Watson, mother of one of the Cambrai nuns. He was buried in St Andrew's churchyard, Holborn. His teaching on prayer, although written in a crabbed and parenthetical style often attributed to his legal background, has remained a central element in the English Benedictine spiritual patrimony, but it has also attained a far wider audience including the Cambridge Platonists, the Quakers, the nonjurors, German pietists, and the Scottish mystics. So experienced an authority as Evelyn Underhill has rated him 'one of the most lucid and orderly of guides to the contemplative life' (E. Underhill, 'Mysticism', 13th edn, 1960, 559). 


@@@@@


doc= 1111


Baker, David Bristow (1803-1852), religious writer, was born in Newington, Surrey, second son of David Bristow Baker, a merchant in Blackfriars. In 1824 (the same year in which he was admitted to the Middle Temple) he went up to St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1829 and MA in 1832. From 1841 until his death he was incumbent of Claygate, Surrey. His works include 'A Treatise of the Nature of Doubt... in Religious Questions' and 'Discourses and Sacramental Addresses to a Village Congregation', which ran to a second edition within a year of its publication in 1832. He died in Parliament Street, Westminster, on 24 July 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 1112


Baker, David Lionel Erskine (1730-1767?), theatre historian, was born in the parish of St Dunstan in the West, London, on 30 January 1730, the elder son of Henry Baker (1698-1774), a scientific writer, and his wife, Sophia (1701-1762), who was the youngest daughter of the journalist and novelist Daniel Defoe (1660?-1731). Henry Baker, a minor author, was his brother. He was named after his godfather, the ninth earl of Buchan. A studious youth, he was placed by the duke of Montague in the drawing room of the Tower of London to become a royal engineer. In 1747 his proud father gave a lengthy account of his intellectual achievements to the nonconformist minister Philip Doddridge: 'At twelve years old he had translated the whole twenty-four books of 'Telemachus' from the French; before he was fifteen he translated from the Italian, and published, a treatise of physic of Dr Cocchi of Florence concerning the diet and doctrines of Pythagoras, and last year, before he was seventeen, he likewise published a treatise of Sir Isaac Newton's 'Metaphysics' compared with those of Dr Leibnitz, from the French of M. Voltaire. ('Correspondence and Diary', 5.29)' He was, moreover, praised for his mastery of Latin, Greek, and mathematics, and was knowledgeable in natural history. Communications from Baker were published in the 'Transactions of the Royal Society'. But his promise for a scientific career was not to be fulfilled. 
Despite family opposition, Baker repeatedly joined companies of strolling players. (Isaac Reed asserted that he was adopted by an uncle and succeeded to his business as a silk throwster in Spitalfields, but failed in that line; this may have been an attempt by his family to wean him from the stage.) He possibly played in Belfast and Drogheda with Sheriffe's company in the spring of 1758, but it is difficult positively to identify his appearances on the stage as there were several actors named Baker. Before 6 October 1762 Baker married Elizabeth Clendon (died 1778), an actress, who on that date made her debut at Covent Garden (as Roxana in Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens'). Baker too might have appeared at that theatre between 1762 and 1765. Afterwards, Elizabeth Baker was closely identified with the Edinburgh stage. 
In 1764 Baker published 'The Companion to the Play House' in two volumes, containing notices on plays, authors, and actors. A revised version, edited by Isaac Reed, appeared as 'Biographia dramatica' in 1782, and a third edition, by Stephen Jones, appeared in 1812. Baker's work was indebted to that of his predecessor Gerard Langbaine, and adds little concerning early dramatists, but has remained a useful reference work for the history of the early eighteenth-century stage. He wrote a small dramatic piece, 'The Muse of Ossian' (1763), and translated a two-act Italian comedy as 'The Maid and the Mistress' ('La serva padrona'), which was put on in Edinburgh and published in 1763. It is unlikely that he was the 'Mr Baker' who in 1745 wrote a preface to the translation of 'The Continuation of Don Quixote'. 
Baker's later life is obscure. His death is variously recorded as taking place in Edinburgh in 1770, in 1780, and, according to John Nichols's 'Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century' (5.277), on 16 February 1767. His wife retired from the stage in 1774 and became a fashionable teacher of elocution in Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 1113


Baker, Franklin (1800-1867), Unitarian minister, was born in Birmingham, on 27 August 1800, the eldest son and third of ten children of Thomas Baker, headmaster of the Lancasterian School, Birmingham, and his wife, Charlotte Mould. Several of the children attained unusual distinction. In addition to Franklin Baker, they included Charles Baker (1803-1874), famous as an instructor of deaf people; Sir Thomas Baker (1810-1886), Unitarian minister at Sidmouth in 1833-4 and later a solicitor in Manchester where he was active in municipal affairs, lord mayor, and historian of the Unitarian congregation in Cross Street; Alfred Baker (1815-1893), an eminent Birmingham surgeon; and Harriet (1805-1850), who married Edward White Benson (1800-1843) and became mother of a second Edward White Benson (1829-1896), archbishop of Canterbury in 1882-96. 
Encouraged by the Revd John Kentish (1768-1853), minister of New Meeting, the Unitarian congregation attended by the Bakers, Franklin Baker became a schoolmaster in Dudley. There he studied with the Revd James Hews Bransby (1783-1847), entering the University of Glasgow on Dr Williams's foundation in 1820, and graduating MA in 1822. 
Baker accepted the pulpit at Bank Street Chapel, Bolton, and was ordained on 23 September 1824. Circumstances were not auspicious. When the Revd John Holland (1766-1826) had retired in 1820, one faction of the congregation carried the appointment of the Revd Noah Jones (1801-1861) of Walmsley, a recent convert from Congregationalism; the other faction withdrew to establish a new congregation in Moor Lane, where the Revd George Harris (1794-1859), from Renshaw Street, Liverpool, abundantly satisfied the seceders' desire for aggressive Unitarian preaching, and drew in audiences that quickly overshadowed the older congregation. 
The growth did not survive Harris's departure for Glasgow in 1825, and in 1843 Moor Lane reunited with Bank Street, where Baker had steadily rebuilt the congregation; it was further reinforced by amalgamation with a Christian Brethren congregation, influenced by Joseph Barker (1806-1875), in 1855. The next year, a new Gothic church was opened; Baker had commemorated the closing of the old chapel at the end of 1853 by four lectures which, published the next year as 'The History of the Rise and Progress of Nonconformity in Bolton', are a useful contribution to local and denominational history. An initiative in 1862 for an additional Sunday school resulted in the formation of a new congregation, Unity Church, first in Commission Street and after 1893 in Deane Road. Baker gained an impressive reputation as a preacher. He was active in charitable work, notably during the cotton famine of 1862-4, and in liberal politics; but he rejected as inappropriate an invitation to become a justice of the peace. 
On 30 September 1835 Baker had married Mary Crook (1802-1879), daughter of Jeremiah Crook, a Liverpool merchant formerly of Bolton, another of whose daughters married Baker's brother Thomas; there were no children. After retiring in 1864, Baker lived for three years at Caton, near Lancaster. From about 1860 he was troubled by an enlarged prostate gland, and a fall during the removal to Caton hastened his decline. He died on 25 May 1867, from consequences of the prostate condition, at 59 Hagley Road, Edgbaston, where he had gone a few weeks earlier to be cared for by his brother; he was buried in Birmingham on 31 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 1114


Baker, Geoffrey le (fl. 1326-1358), chronicler, was born in Swinbrook in Oxfordshire. He is noteworthy as the author of two chronicles. The smaller of these, the 'Chroniculum', begins 'in primordio temporis' and ends on 20 July 1347, with a colophon revealing Baker's name and Osney as the place where he concluded the lesser work. Stow thought that he was a canon regular, but Baker terms himself 'clericus', so he was probably an unbeneficed clerk, untraced as yet in ordination lists. He is identifiable as the 'Geoffrey Pachon of Swynebrook, chaplain', one of the malefactors pardoned by Edward II in 1326 on condition that they aided him against the incursion of his queen, Isabella. Baker states that he wrote at the behest of Thomas de la More, knight, who also features in the larger chronicle. Significantly, in view of Baker's political views, the 'Chroniculum' is objective, with no derogatory comments about Bishop Adam Orleton or Isabella, 'nobilissima regina Anglie'. 
The larger (anonymous) 'Chronicon' extends from 1303 until 1356, its final words indicating that the author remained alive in 1358. The structure is based on Adam Murimuth's recension of 1341, but whereas the latter is laconic and circumspect, Baker is expansive and opinionated. The basis of E. M. Thompson's edition is provided by items 10 and 11 in the late fourteenth-century Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 761, folios 99'r'-145'v', 149'r'-156'v', a miscellany which belonged to Thomas Walmesford, or to someone else close to the Bohun family, lords of Chadlington hundred in which Swinbrook lay. Thompson considered that the chronicles were not Baker's autograph but the work of an uncritical copyist using an unrevised text. There are, for instance, two consecutive versions of the early years of Edward III's reign, the second of which appears in the charred BL, Cotton MS Appendix lii -- also late fourteenth-century -- the vestige of a copy of the 'Chronicon' confined to that reign. Elizabethan transcripts of the 'Vita et mors Edwardi secundi' -- that part of Baker's chronicle covering Edward II's reign -- fostered the belief that behind the Latin text lay a French original by Sir Thomas de la More, an idea countenanced by Stubbs. But Thompson concluded that More was responsible merely for a specific passage, his eyewitness account of the renunciation of homage to Edward II at Kenilworth. 
In the 'Chronicon' before 1328 Baker interpolates into Murimuth's narrative passages designed to place the responsibility for Edward II's abdication and death upon Orleton, Bishop Henry Burghersh of Lincoln (died 1340), and, under their tutelage, the queen. He regards Isabella's journey to France in 1325, the dispatch of her son to perform homage to Charles IV of France, her invasion, and Edward's murder as elements in a preconceived plan of which Orleton is the principal architect. John Stratford, More's kinsman, who was then bishop of Winchester and later became archbishop of Canterbury, escapes criticism, and Murimuth's subsequent account of the crisis of 1341 is omitted. Mortimer attracts no opprobrium until the Scottish treaty of 1328, while Earl Humphrey (VII) de Bohun is lauded, despite being a rebel who died ignominiously at Boroughbridge in 1322. Edward himself is 'generosus dominus' and 'amicicie cultor fidelissimus'. His queen exhibited 'feminine characteristics' of 'rapidissima ira' and 'avaricia insaciabilis vis-a-vis' the Despensers, and acted towards her imprisoned husband as an iron lady ('ferrea virago'). In short, this part of the chronicle apportions blame for Edward II's fate. It has affinities with the attack on Orleton at the time of his promotion to Winchester in 1333, reading like a counterblast to Robert Reading's virulent condemnation of Edward's rule -- a 'piece justificative' for that of Isabella and Mortimer. 
The editor of Orleton's Hereford register sought to interpret 'de la More's 'Vita et mors'' as a riposte to the 'Libellus famosus' of 1341 -- a tract directed against Stratford and attributed by some to Orleton. The content of the 'Libellus' militates against this. Baker himself claims that the circumstances of Edward's captivity were revealed to him by William Bishop after the black death (1348-9) and Thompson believed that the chronicle (as it has survived) was not begun until after 1341, the concluding date of Murimuth's text. But this would not preclude the possibility that Baker incorporated material he had prepared earlier. William Bishop is not identifiable with certainty, although there was a king's serjeant of that name, also a man in Mortimer's retinue pardoned in 1321 for attacking the Despenser lands. In view of More's authenticity, the attribution cannot be readily dismissed. At the same time it is clear that Baker's 'passion of Edward of Caernarfon' -- the former king's mistreatment in captivity -- owes much to his inventiveness, as, probably, does the deathbed scene in Berkeley Castle, while Orleton's responsibility for ordering Edward's killing is a gratuitous invention. 
Baker's account of Bannockburn (1314), derived from a Carmelite source, is particularly informative, but popular jingoism impairs his treatment of the Scottish treaty of 1328. Following Edward III's assumption of personal rule in 1330, the chronicler, saving a final barb against Orleton, rarely betrays political animus. Indeed, with certain notable exceptions, such as the black death and the inauguration of the Order of the Garter, he has comparatively little to say about domestic events. The Scottish conflict is well reported and there is an independent description of the battle of Halidon Hill (1333). Predominant, however, is his treatment of the Hundred Years' War, about which he is remarkably well informed, despite occasional confusion of dates and a penchant for anti-French gossip. Clearly he had access to eyewitness reports, newsletters, and official documents. The naval engagement of Sluys (1340) is detailed, even to the names of the recaptured English ships. There is a lengthy description of Edward's campaign of 1346-7, concluding with the battle of Crecy and the capture of Calais, while the text of the truce that followed in 1347 is methodically itemized. Baker names the bishops of London and Norwich, Ralph Stratford and John ('recte' William) Bateman, as royal candidates for the cardinalate in 1350, emphasizing papal partiality in the elevation of eleven Frenchmen. The 'chevauchee' of Edward, the Black Prince, from Bordeaux to Narbonne is reliably plotted between 5 October and 2 December 1355, and Baker's description of the prince's subsequent campaign, culminating in the battle of Poitiers (1356), which concludes the chronicle, is indispensable and preferable to that of Froissart. Despite Thompson's excellent notes, the value of the 'Chronicon' for the period 1330-56 continues to be underestimated. Stow translated lengthy passages for his 'Annales' (1601, 1605), thus first introducing Baker to a wider audience. 


@@@@@


doc= 1115


Baker, George (1540-1612), surgeon, was the second son of Christopher Baker of Tenterden, Kent. His grandfather was John Baker of Tenterden and his great-grandfather Simon Baker of Faversham, Kent. He had an elder brother, Peter, who was admiral of the Blue squadron and died a prisoner of war in Spain, and a younger brother William. Baker married twice: first to Anne, daughter of William Swayne of Hacking, Middlesex, with whom he had four children, Alexander, Frances, Dowglas, and Ann; second to Anne, daughter or possibly widow of Paul French, a prebend of Windsor, with whom he had three children, George, Grace, and Elizabeth. His first-born son, Alexander, was a justice of the peace, master of the Barber-Surgeons' Company (1622), and surgeon to James I. He died in 1635 and was buried in Westminster Abbey. 
Baker was admitted to the Company of the Barber-Surgeons in the 1560s about the time he took up his career as professional surgeon in London. He had a considerable practice in his 'house in Bartholmewe lane beside the Royall exchange' (Baker, 'The Newe Iewell of Health', Address to the reader). On 10 May 1573 the College of Arms granted confirmation of his right to bear arms and crest, this right including his father and posterity. A new grant was made on 1 April 1579 'with slight alterations to Crest' (Foster and Rylands). In the college record the new grant is dated May 1579. Before 1574 he entered the service of the young Edward de Vere, earl of Oxford, of whose bounty he 'had experience since it pleased your honor to entertain me... for my profession in the art of Chirurgiry since the which time I haue accounted bothe my self and all my labours whatsoeuer, to be due vnto your honor' (Baker, 'Composition', Dedication). 
Baker reaped the rewards of his professional virtues in the 1590s. Robert Balthorp, master of the company (1565 and 1573), died on 9 December 1591 bequeathing to Baker, 'her maiesties Chirurgion', his 'Syringe of silver gilted and three pypes of silver gilted' (Young, 530). On 4 February 1592 he was appointed sergeant-surgeon to the queen and on the following day was 'liberate on the grant for payment of $40 a year' (private information). In August 1597 he was elected master of the company; on 20 July 1607 he was appointed one of the examiners of surgeons, and on 4 March 1610 he secured a grant, with survivorship, to himself and his eldest son, Alexander, of the office of the king's surgeon on surrender of a former patent. Baker was also a man of property. On 20 April 1597 he and his colleague William Goodrouse were granted a forty-year lease in reversion, without proviso for tenants, of Nunnington Mansion House and divers lands, tenements, and woods in Northfleet, Gravesend, and Milton. They received $63 13's'. 61/2died in respect of their service as the queen's surgeons. 
Baker was quick-tempered and violent. Thus he fell out with his colleague William Clowes, who had been admitted to the Barber-Surgeons' Company on 8 November 1569, and challenged him to a duel. It is on record in the minutes of the court of assistants that on 25 March 1577 there was at 'this Corte... a greate contention and stryffe spoken of and ended betwene George Baker and William Clowes for that they bothe contrary to order and to the good and holesome rules of this howse misused eche other and fought in the Felds together'. The master, wardens, and assistants intervened and, wishing that the two hotspurs 'might be and continewe loving brothers', they 'pardoned this greate offence in hope of amendment' (Young, 428). The two did comply with the company's wish, making up for their gross misdemeanour by each editing a work of the other in 1579. 
Baker considered himself a Galenist who thought it opportune to warn against the harm done by empirics and Paracelsians, but he none the less kept an open mind about chemical medicine. His first publication, entitled 'The Composition or Making of the Moste Excellent and Pretious Oil called Oleum magistrale' (1574) and dedicated to the earl of Oxford, was a translation made through a French intermediary from Aparicio de Zubia's pamphlet on the 'oleum magistrale'. However, the formula of the medicinal oil as revealed by the convert Morisco empiric at his death in 1566 covers only folios 1 to 6. The publication contains 'Also the Third Book of Galen' (fols. 7-11), which Baker translated from the French epitome of Martin Gregoire (1574), 'wherein', as he put it in the address to the reader signed 'From my house in London the XV. of Marche 1574', Galen 'bothe learned & abundantly... teacheth the curing of these wounds'. 
Baker recommended distilled medicaments as exceeding all others in virtue in 'The Newe Iewell of Health', which he dedicated from his house in Bartholomew Lane to Anne Cecil, countess of Oxford, in February 1576. This was a revamped translation of Conrad Gesner's 'Thesaurus Euonymi Philiatri de remediis secretis' (1552). Baker drew on Peter Morwyng's version of Gesner's popular handbook 'The Treasure of Euonymus' (1559, 1565) and probably on Thomas Hill's translation of the augmented edition (1569). In 1599 Baker's text was reprinted by Peter Short under the new significant title 'The Practise of the New and Old Phisicke'. Baker renewed his advocacy of chemical cures in his treatise on 'The Nature and Property of Quicksilver', which William Clowes edited in his treatise on syphilis (1579). Baker responded to his colleague's favour, editing, in his turn, Clowes's 'Antidotary of Select Medicines', which marked Clowes's own shift towards chemical therapy, in his (Baker's) miscellany 'Guydos Questions, Newly Corrected' (1579). It also contained Galen's third and fourth book. With the exception of the 'Antidotary', this was another of those compilations of traditional works taken from the medieval surgeon Guy de Chauliac and from Galen. 
In his last publication Baker again revamped a translation which B. Traheron, in 1543, had made from the medieval surgeon Giovanni de Vigo and brought it out as 'The Whole Worke of the Famous Chirurgion Maister Iohn Vigo: Newly Corrected' (1586). But remaining faithful to his policy of selecting authors who advocated the use of chemical therapy, he added Thomas Gale's volume on surgery which had already appeared in 1563. Gale, who served under Philip II at the siege of St Quentin, is likely to have met there the Morisco practitioner Aparicio de Zubia. In editing the works of Galen and Guy de Chauliac, Baker gave ample evidence that he did not envisage a break with traditional medicine. Yet despite his commitment to the past his new orientation towards chemical medicine seems to have incurred the disapproval of the College of Physicians. He was denounced, together with his colleague John Banister, as a surgeon guilty of illegal medicine. The annals of the College of Physicians for 5 July 1588 record that Baker had been summoned to appear in the college that day but had refused 'because he was in the Queen's house and did not have sufficient leisure to enable him to come easily'. And, even if he had, he would still refuse to obey, saying that 'he marvailed muche how the President dirst be so saucie as to send for him to the College'. 
As newly elected master of the Barber-Surgeons' Company (1597) Baker wrote an eloquent and learned preface to John Gerard's 'The Herball, or, Generall Historie of Plantes' (1597), calling himself 'one of hir Maiesties chiefe Chirurgions in ordinarie'. Gerard, who was appointed junior warden of the Barber-Surgeons' Company in 1597, advocated in his pioneer work the use of the medicinal properties of English herbs for chemical medicine. 
On his death Baker left behind an unpublished translation, 'The Apologie and Treatise, Containing the Voyages Made into Divers Places', which he had rendered from the text of the French surgeon Ambroise Pare. The botanist Thomas Johnson published Baker's translation as book 29 in 'The Workes of the Famous Chirurgion Ambroise Parey' (1634), 1133-73. In his address to the reader Johnson states that 'George Baker, a Surgeon of this City, since that time, as I heare, [is] dead beyond the Seas'. Baker made his will on 25 August 1607; it was proved in London on 1 December 1612. 


@@@@@


doc= 1116


Baker, Sir George, first baronet (bap. 1723, d. 1809), physician, was born at Modbury, Devon, and baptized there on 8 February 1723, the son of George Baker, vicar of Modbury, and his wife, Bridget (died 1734), daughter of Stephen Weston, bishop of Exeter, and his wife, Lucy. He was educated at Eton College and King's College, Cambridge, where he became a fellow and graduated BA in 1744 and MA in 1749. He proceeded MD in 1756 and in the following year was elected a fellow of the College of Physicians. He began to practise at Stamford, Lincolnshire, but settled in London in 1761; among his patients was Sir Joshua Reynolds. He became a fellow of the Royal Society, was four times censor for the College of Physicians, was appointed Harveian orator for 1761, and was physician to George III and Queen Charlotte. In this last capacity he was in attendance on the king during the whole time of his mental illness from 1788, and he recommended a visit to Cheltenham to take the waters in the early stages of the affliction. Created a baronet in 1776, he was elected president of the College of Physicians nine times between 1785 and 1795. Baker married Jane Morris (died 1813), daughter of Roger Morris; they had a son and a daughter. Widely famed for his deep medical knowledge, Baker was also well known for his graceful Latin prose and amusing epigrams. There was a tradition that Gray dedicated his 'Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard' to him, but the earliest extant editions bear no dedication. 
Baker's most important discovery related to the Devonshire colic and 'colica Pictonum' of Poitou. Awareness of the colic was heightened during the great expansion of the cider industry in the eighteenth century, but the cause of it was unknown. John Huxham's earlier theory that excessive acidity caused the colic was disproved by Baker, who showed that it was a form of lead poisoning. As a Devon man, Baker was familiar with the disease, and noticed that while colic was most common in his own county it was almost unknown in Herefordshire, where cider was also produced locally. He inquired into the process of manufacture, and found that in the structure of the Devon presses and vats large pieces of lead were used, whereas in Herefordshire stone, wood, and iron formed all the apparatus. Baker carried out a series of simple but brilliant experiments which demonstrated the presence of lead in Devon cider, and showed that there was none in that of Herefordshire. His findings were published in 'An Essay Concerning the Cause of the Endemical Colic of Devonshire' (1767). This provoked a great storm of protest. Many pamphlets were printed, by Francis Geach and the Revd Thomas Alcock among others, to ridicule Baker's findings and revive Huxham's earlier speculations ('Some observations on Dr Baker's essay on the endemical colic of Devonshire, by Francis Geach, surgeon at Plymouth and F.R.S: in which are added some remarks on the same subject by the Rev. Mr. Alcock', 1767). However, by extending and repeating his experiments, Baker eventually succeeded in convincing his contemporaries, and from that time lead vessels were no longer used, after which colic ceased to be endemic in Devon. In other essays Baker traced further unsuspected ways in which lead poisoning might arise -- for example, from lead water-pipes, from tinned linings of iron vessels, from the glaze of earthenware, and from large doses of medicinal preparations of lead. He examined the subsequent symptoms in detail, corresponding with Benjamin Franklin of Philadelphia, among others, and drew general attention to the wider implications of lead contaminants in food manufacture and water supplies. 
Baker has been fairly characterized as 'a pioneer in the use of chemical analysis to solve an epidemical problem' (McConaghey, 359-60). His other works include 'De catarro et de dysenteria Londinensi epidemicis utrisque an M.DCC.LXII, libellus (1764)', and the preface to the 'Pharmacopeia Londinensis' of 1788; in English he wrote 'An Inquiry into the Merits of a Method of Inoculating the Smallpox' (1766) and 'Medical Tracts, Read at the College of Physicians between the Years 1767 and 1785', collected and republished by his son, Sir Frederick Francis Baker, in 1818. Baker retired from active practice in 1798, and died on 15 June 1809. He was buried at St James's Church, Piccadilly, where a tablet was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 1117


Baker, George (1773?-1847), organist, was born in Exeter, the son of John Baker. At the time of his matriculation at Oxford in 1797 he stated his age to be twenty-four, thus dating his birth at 1773. His first music lessons were from his mother's sister, and he was proficient on the harpsichord at the age of seven. His next teachers were William Jackson, organist of Exeter Cathedral, and Hugh Bond, also of Exeter. He was taught the violin by Ward. At the age of seventeen Baker went to London under the patronage of the earl of Uxbridge, and through his patron became a pupil of J. B. Cramer and J. L. Dussek. While in London he performed his celebrated piece 'The Storm' at the Hanover Square Rooms, meeting with the approval of Dr Burney. 
In 1794 or 1795 Baker was appointed organist of St Mary's Church, Stafford, a new organ by Geib having been purchased five years before. He matriculated in 1797 and took the degree of BMus at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, but he appears not to have taken his doctor's degree while at Stafford, for in the town's corporation books he is called 'Mr Baker'. On 5 March 1795 there is an entry to the effect 'that the organist be placed under restrictions as to the use of the organ, and that the mayor have a master key to prevent him having access thereto', and on 16 July 1795 'it is ordered that Mr George Baker be in future prohibited from playing the piece of music called 'The Storm''. During the following years several entries show that Baker habitually neglected his duties, and on 19 May 1800 the record is 'Resignation of Baker'. In the previous year he had married the eldest daughter of the Revd E. Knight of Milwich. 
In 1810 Baker was appointed to the post of organist at All Saints', Derby, and finally, in 1824, he accepted a position at Rugeley, but from 1839 his duties were undertaken by a deputy. He produced a large number of compositions, including organ voluntaries, piano sonatas, anthems, glees, and violin solos, which were quickly forgotten. He is said to have been very handsome, with a fair complexion. He died on 19 February 1847 at Rugeley. 


@@@@@


doc= 1118


Baker, George (1781-1851), county historian, the son of Richard Baker and his wife, Ann, was born in Northampton and lived there all his life. As a thirteen-year-old schoolboy at Mr Comfield's establishment in Horsemarket, Northampton, he wrote a manuscript history of Northampton and a life of Dr John Hinchcliffe (died 1794), bishop of Peterborough. After leaving school he became a wool-stapler and pursued antiquarian interests in his spare time, notably by assisting John Britton with the Northamptonshire section of 'The Beauties of England and Wales'. That appeared in 1810, as did Baker's first published work, 'A Catalogue of Books, Poems, Tracts, and Small Detached Pieces'; only twenty copies of this work appeared, privately published on the Strawberry Hill Press. Baker's proposals for 'The History and Antiquities of the County of Northampton' were issued in 1815. Correspondence suggests it was conceived originally as a partnership between himself, Britton, and the leading topographical publisher John Bowyer Nichols. The final terms of agreement are unknown, but it was Nichols who published the five parts of Baker's 'History' which appeared in 1822-41. 
The first volume, published in three parts between 1822 and 1830, contained the hundreds of Spelhoe, Newbottle Grove, Fawsley, Chipping Warden, and Kings Sutton. Based on extensive documentary work, excavations, questionnaires, and parochial visits, considerable assistance during the last being provided by Baker's sister and constant companion of sixty years Anne Elizabeth Baker (1786-1861), the volume was well received. Nevertheless, from early as 1822 the exacting standards that Baker set himself had given rise to misgivings about the likelihood of the enterprise being completed. Volume two, intended to complete the southern third of the county, began to appear in 1836 with a part containing Norton and Cleley; a second, in 1841, covered Towcester. By then, however, Baker's health and will were broken and 220 of his subscribers, 400 strong at the outset, had died or resigned. He had also run through most of his fortune, and in 1842 his antiquities, library, and manuscript collections were dispersed in a six-day sale. The last were acquired by Sir Thomas Phillipps and are now part of the Phillipps collection in the Bodleian Library. A place index was published in 1868. 
Baker, who was a Unitarian, took a deep interest in various local institutions, and was a magistrate for the borough of Northampton. He died unmarried at his home, Hazelrigg House, in Gold Street, Northampton, on 12 October 1851, and was buried in the Independent chapel in King Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 1119


Baker, Henry (1734-1766), author, was born on 10 February 1734 at Enfield, Middlesex, the second son of Henry Baker FRS (1698-1774), teacher of deaf people, and Sophia Defoe (1701-1762), the youngest and favourite daughter of Daniel Defoe. The obscurity surrounding Baker's career suggests how little he matched his uncle, father, and brother, David Lionel Erskine Baker (1730-1767?), who is said to have inherited his father's literary talent (Turner, 55). 
His paternal grandfather having been a clerk in chancery, Baker followed family tradition in becoming a lawyer, but, according to John Nichols, 'in no creditable line' (Nichols, 'Bowyer', 416). John Robert Moore states that Baker had a 'brief career as a shabby attorney', his sole claim to fame being that from him descended 'the English family of Defoe Bakers' (Moore, 330-31). Baker's career was not fruitless; he readied for the press 'The clerk to the commission', a collection of statutes about bankruptcy with cases and precedents. This work, which according to George Chalmers was published under another title in 1768 and is possibly not extant, must have addressed topics about the treatment of debtors which Defoe's writings long explored. 
His father's literary pretensions may not have given Baker a sure model. The manuscript of his father's courtship conveys a sentimentality barely concealing mercenary motives. To Chalmers, the elder Henry Baker was 'a person more respectable as a philosopher than a poet' (Chalmers, 63), and George Potter shows that, if he worked briefly with Defoe on the 'Universal Spectator', his poem 'The Universe' is not original because it postdated the first epistle of Alexander Pope's 'Essay on Man' and borrowed from James Thomson's 'Spring' (Potter, 303-4). 
About the younger Henry Baker's authorship, Nichols says that he wrote occasional poetry and essays for periodicals, and he attributes to him 'Essays Pastoral and Elegiac', an anonymous publication of 1756 in two octavo volumes (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 5.277-8). The wording of the title page, 'Essays pastoral and elegiac; containing, Morning, or, The complaint; Noon, or, The contest; Evening, or, The exclamation; Night, or, The wanderer; addressed to the Right Hon. the earl of Chesterfield', voices conventional pretensions in its deference to Philip Stanhope and allusions to poetic modes favoured by Edward Young. 
Baker's only son, William Baker, was born on 17 February 1763. Baker died on 24 August 1766 and was buried near his mother in the churchyard of St Mary-le-Strand, London. To Nichols, Baker's father, 'an intelligent, upright, and benevolent man', was 'unhappy in his children'. His grandson William, his only heir, was a consolation. Not having known his father beyond the age of three, William inherited in 1774 his grandfather's property and papers, including his great-grandfather Defoe's manuscript of 'The Compleat English Gentleman'. He entered the church as rector of Lyndon and South Luffenham, Rutland, and effected the lineal descent of the Defoe Bakers. 


@@@@@


doc= 1120


Baker, Henry (1698-1774), natural philosopher and teacher of deaf people, was born on 8 May 1698 in Quality Court, Chancery Lane, London, to William Baker, a clerk in chancery, and his wife, Mary, the daughter of Aaron Pengry, comptroller of the petty bag office. His father died when he was very young, and he himself recorded that he was brought up by his paternal grandmother. At the age of fifteen he was apprenticed to a bookseller of Pall Mall, John Parker, whose business was later bought by Robert Dodsley, who printed Baker's books on microscopy. In 1720, having completed his apprenticeship, Baker went to Enfield on a visit to John Forster, an attorney and a relative, whose eight-year-old daughter had been born deaf, and was consequently dumb. He undertook the task of teaching this child, as well as her sister and younger brother, also born deaf, to speak and read, with such success that this became his chosen career. He achieved both reputation and a considerable fortune in the teaching of deaf people and those with speech defects, and had many aristocratic clients. 
Baker was certainly aware of the theories of speech training of Dr John Wallis, fellow of the Royal Society and Savilian professor of geometry, whose treatise of speech, 'De loquela', Baker paraphrased into English as 'A Short Essay on Speech' (1723). Wallis had written that for each sound the organ producing it and the position in which it is produced must be minutely studied; for, 'by such Organs, in such Positions, the Breath issuing from the lungs, will form such Sounds, whether the Person do or do not hear himself speak' ('Autobiography', 41). It is likely that Baker applied this laborious process of teaching the production of each individual sound, though he kept his actual methods a close secret. His success is attested by a witness, Louis Dutens, who 'was astonished at the facility with which they [Baker's pupils] understood what I said by observing the motion of my lips; they also answered me, but their voice wanted modulation and so was disagreeable' (Dutens, 101-2). 
While teaching a fourteen-year-old deaf boy in Stoke Newington in 1724, Baker met Daniel Defoe and his family, and began to court Defoe's youngest daughter Sophia (1701-1762). Baker became engaged to Sophia in 1727 but the marriage was delayed while Baker, who was extremely careful with his finances, negotiated a dowry with Defoe. Nevertheless, when Baker established 'The Universal Spectator and Weekly Journal' in 1728 Defoe contributed to the first number. Baker conducted the journal, using the pseudonym Henry Stonecastle, until 1733, and it continued to exist for a further thirteen years. Baker married Sophia in April 1729. They had two sons: the elder, David Lionel Erskine Baker (1730-1767?), continued in the literary tradition of his father and maternal grandfather; the younger, Henry Baker (1734-1766), a lawyer, attempted the same but with less distinction. 
Baker's involvement with a literary journal was in no way surprising for, like his father-in-law, he had strong literary interests. In his youth he produced several volumes of verse, both original and translated, and achieved success with a poem published in 1727 entitled 'The Universe: a Philosophical Poem Intended to Restrain the Pride of Man'. This reached a posthumous third edition in 1805, and contained a short eulogy of the author. The work revealed Baker to be a typical natural philosopher of his time, keenly interested in the wonders of nature, as manifesting the power of the creator. From 1740 Baker's literary skills were used in prose, embodying his scientific discoveries. He became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in that year, and in 1741, a fellow of the Royal Society, to whose 'Philosophical Transactions' he was a frequent contributor. The book that established his name as a scientific writer was 'The Microscope Made Easy', which appeared in 1742, and achieved five editions in the author's lifetime, as well as translation into Dutch and French. Written for the novice, it was divided into two parts, the first describing various types of microscope, how best to use each, and how to prepare specimens, while the second part was concerned with the examination of various natural objects, such as the flea, hairs, and pollen. The particular microscopes that he described and illustrated were all made by John Cuff, who did much business as a result. Eleven years after the publication of what proved to be a best-seller, Baker published a second microscopical work, 'Employment for the Microscope' (1753) that repeated the success of its predecessor. Also written for a popular audience, 'Employment' described Baker's own microscopical discoveries, which had been presented to the Royal Society. 
Baker's most important scientific study, for which he received the Copley medal of the Royal Society in 1744, concerned his observation under the microscope of crystal morphology. For this work, using crystals from solution, he found the then current design of the compound microscope awkward, and had Cuff make him one of completely new design. Baker made this study the first part of 'Employment for the Microscope'. His other main microscopical research involved repeating the experiments on freshwater polyps ('Hydra viridis') of Abraham Trembley. Trembley's discoveries, reported to the Royal Society in January 1743, caused a sensation, since the polyps, when cut in two, grew into two complete specimens, a plant-like property strangely combined with the animal-like ability to move and ingest worms. Baker, in association with Martin Folkes, examined the creatures with the microscope, and, with due acknowledgement to Trembley, published in November 1743 'An Attempt towards a Natural History of the Polype'. He also examined, and made measurements on the twenty-six bead microscopes bequeathed to the Royal Society by the Dutch microscopical pioneer Antoni van Leeuwenhoek. Baker's account of these unique instruments is a valuable historical document. 
A well-known popularizer of science in Britain, Baker also corresponded regularly with members of philosophical societies all over Europe. An important result of these contacts was that he introduced into England two new plants, the alpine strawberry, for which the seeds were sent to him by a correspondent in Turin, and, more importantly, 'Rheum palmatum', a variety of rhubarb with wide-ranging medicinal uses, which was sent from Russia. Baker's interest in the practical applications of scientific knowledge led to his being one of the founders of the Society of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce, established formally in 1755. 
Henry Baker died at lodgings in the Strand on 25 November 1774 and is said to have been buried at St Mary-le-Strand. His two sons predeceased him and he left most of his estate to his grandson, William Baker, a clergyman. In addition he bequeathed to the Royal Society $100 to establish a lecture bearing his name. Among famous Bakerian lecturers in the fifty years following his death were Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday. Baker had amassed a considerable collection of antiquities and natural specimens that was sold at auction during nine days beginning on 13 March 1775. 


@@@@@


doc= 1121


Baker, Henry Aaron (1753-1836), architect, came from an unknown background. Between 1777 and 1779 he was a student at the Dublin Society's School of Architectural Drawing under Thomas Ivory (died 1786); he also served a regular apprenticeship to Ivory, whom he assisted in the school. In 1787 he succeeded Ivory as master of the school, a post which he retained for nearly fifty years. The new premises for the society's three drawing schools, which were opened in Hawkins Street in 1796, were built to his design, and he was much later to be responsible for the drawing school and bust gallery (1823-7) adjoining Leinster House. 
By the end of 1786 Baker had also worked 'sometime' in the office of James Gandon. This association lasted until the end of Gandon's active career: Baker acted as assistant on Gandon's last major commission, a library and hall for the King's Inns in Dublin. Gandon resigned from the undertaking about 1808, leaving Baker in charge of completing the unfinished building. In Dublin Baker also prepared several designs for the wide streets commissioners between 1799 and 1816, including schemes for Westmoreland and D'Olier streets, executed from 1800 onwards; he was architect to the Dublin prisons from 1815. Yet despite his long career and his participation in several major architectural competitions, relatively few surviving buildings by him have been identified. Works outside Dublin include the Bishop's Gate at Londonderry (1789), the Pillar of Lloyd near Kells, co. Meath (1791), the market house at Castlecomer, co. Kilkenny (1809), and the Spring-Rice Column in Pery Square, Limerick (1826-31). His neo-classical architectural style combined a liking for bold forms with an insistence on shallow planar recessions, delicate stone detail, and the tripartite and segment-headed openings characteristic of advanced ideas around 1800. 
Baker was a founder member of the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1823. He served as secretary in 1826-7 and as professor of architecture from 1827 until 1831. He died on 4 June 1836 and was buried in the graveyard of St Thomas's Church, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 1122


Baker, Sir Henry Williams, third baronet (1821-1877), hymn writer, was born in London on 27 May 1821, the eldest of the two sons and five daughters of Vice-Admiral Sir Henry Loraine Baker, second baronet (1787-1859), and his wife, Louisa Anne (died 1861), only daughter of William Williams of Castle Hall, Dorset, sometime MP for Weymouth. His grandfather was Sir Robert Baker of Dunstable House, Surrey, and of Nicholashayne, Culmstock, Devon, on whom a baronetcy was conferred in 1796; his father served with distinction in a naval career of more than fifty years. 
After completing his university education at Trinity College, Cambridge, Baker took his BA degree in 1844, was ordained in 1846, and proceeded MA in 1847. In 1851 he was presented to the vicarage of Monkland near Leominster. On the death of his father, on 2 November 1859, he succeeded him as third baronet. While at Monkland, Sir Henry wrote two devotional books -- 'Daily Prayers for the Use of Those who have to Work Hard' and 'A Daily Textbook' (1854), for a similar readership -- and, more importantly, began his hymn-writing career. His greatest accomplishment was the extraordinarily successful 'Hymns Ancient and Modern', first published in 1860. One of its instigators, he became chair of the proprietors, and it was to his zeal and business sense that the project owed its success. The original edition was strongly influenced by Tractarianism, and intermittently suspected of 'popery', but an appendix in 1868 and a complete revision in 1875 made it a widely acceptable, and even best-selling, hymnal. 
It was Sir Henry's initiative which recruited contributors from different church parties, won over potential competitors, and exploited every opportunity to promote the cause of church music in general, and the sales of 'Ancient and Modern' in particular. For the 1861 music edition, in which a tune was printed for every text, he put up a considerable share of the capital and recruited W. H. Monk as editor. Many ineradicable associations of hymn and tune can be traced to this and subsequent editions. Sir Henry was also largely responsible for an important change in hymn publishing: he insisted that the proprietors claim copyright and exercise it to protect and promote their work. 
Sometimes an irascible and even high-handed man of business, Sir Henry was also a writer of devotional hymns, unflowery translations, and sensitive paraphrases and adaptations. When he died 'Hymns Ancient and Modern' contained more than thirty of his own texts and two melodies, as well as traces of his editing throughout. His chief enduring hymns include 'O praise ye the Lord!', 'We love the place' (with William Bullock), 'Praise, O praise our God and king' (drawing upon Milton), 'O God of love, O king of peace', and 'The king of love my shepherd is'. He died unmarried on 12 February 1877, at the vicarage of Monkland, Horkesley House, and was buried in the parish churchyard. Stained-glass windows were put up to his memory in his own church and in All Saints', Notting Hill. 


@@@@@


doc= 1123


Baker, Humphrey (fl. 1557-1574), writer on astrology and arithmetic, whose origins are unknown, was living in London when his almanac was published in 1557. A small volume, printed in black letter, it was entitled 'The rules and right ample documentes, touchinge the use and practise of the common almanackes, which are named ephemerides: a briefe... introduction upon the iudicall astrologie... with a treatise... touching the coniunction of the planets... the hole faithfully and clerely translated into Englysche by Humprey Baker BL'; its lengthy title reproduced that of the French original by Oronce Fine, 'Les canons & documens tres amples, touchant l'usage et practique des communs almanachz' (1556). 
Baker's enthusiasm for arithmetic pervades his small primer on that subject, likewise printed in black letter. 'The Wellspring of Sciences' (1562) went through many editions, with varying titles. That of 1574 was enlarged as 'The well springe of sciences, which teacheth the perfect works and practice of arithmeticke... augmented and amended... certaine tables of the agreement of measures, and waightes, of divers places in Europe, the one with another, etc', and dedicated 'to the Governor, Consuls, Asistentes, &c. of the Company of Merchentes Adventurers'. In this dedication Baker excused himself for not entering fully into the merits of arithmetic, on the grounds that 'where good wine is to sell, there need no garlande be hanged out'. The tables of weights and measures were those employed in the main European centres of trade. This style continued up to the edition of 1602; Baker was surely dead by the time that Henry Phillippes issued it as 'Baker's arithmetic... newly corrected and enlarged, and made more plain and easie' (1646). This Baker should not be confused with his contemporary, Humphrey Baker (died 1603), eminent in the Joiners' Company. 


@@@@@


doc= 1124


Baker, Sir John (c.1489-1558), administrator and speaker of the House of Commons, was born 'c'.1489, being about sixty-two in 1551, the eldest of four sons of Richard Baker (died 1504), landowner, of Cranbrook, Kent, and his wife, Joan (died in or after 1504). He was bequeathed property in 1496 by his grandfather Thomas Baker of Cranbrook. However, in 1504 his father revoked this legacy and substituted it for an annuity of $10 until the age of twenty-four, in order to have his son educated in the law. 
Baker was in chambers at the Inner Temple by June 1506, and became a bencher in 1517. He somehow managed to contribute to the cost of some chambers under the library in which he was given a perpetual interest in 1506. A series of offices at the inn followed, including frequent service as governor, and he gave his first reading in 1522 and his second in 1530. In the meantime he was subsidy commissioner in Kent in 1514, and JP for the county from 1515 to 1558. By 1547, although the longest-serving JP, he was less active, despite appointment as 'custos rotulorum', because of his commitments in central government. The rising lawyer served as counsel in the court of requests in 1519, and in the following year secured appointment as under-sheriff of London. This led, in 1526, to the post of recorder of London, the principal legal office in the city. In the same year Baker began a career-long relationship with the duchy of Lancaster, being retained of counsel. His first wife was probably called Katherine (died before 1530), and was the daughter of Richard Sackville of Withyham, Sussex. They had no children. By 1530 he had married Elizabeth (died in or before 1558), daughter and heir of Thomas Dingeley of Stanford Dingley, Berkshire, and Middle Aston, Oxfordshire, and widow of his close friend George Barrett of Aveley, Essex. The couple had two sons, Sir Richard Baker ('b'. in or before 1530, died 1594), and John Baker ('b'. in or before 1531, died 1604x6), father of Sir Richard Baker (c.1568-1645), the religious writer and historian, and three daughters. In 1535 Baker surrendered the recordership upon appointment as attorney-general of the duchy of Lancaster on 13 May. However, he only held office for a year, being named attorney-general in 1536, which he remained until 1540. There followed a succession of high offices of state: chancellor of the court of first fruits and tenths (1540-54); chancellor of the exchequer (1540-58); and under-treasurer of England (1543-58). Baker was the first to hold simultaneously the offices of chancellor and under-treasurer, thus beginning a process leading to the eventual rise of the chancellorship. He was a privy councillor from 1540 to 1558. Baker was knighted by 18 June 1540. His parliamentary career was long, active, and distinguished, beginning with representation of London in the Reformation Parliament of 1529, and concluding with service as knight for the shire of Kent in four parliaments (April and November 1554, 1555, 1558). Baker was MP for an unknown constituency in 1536, for Guildford, Surrey, in 1542, Lancaster in 1545, Huntingdonshire in 1547, and Bramber, Sussex, in October 1553. He was one of the most eminent speakers of the House of Commons, filling the post in 1545 and 1547. 
Baker's success can be attributed to a shrewd legal mind, a capacity for hard work, and the ability to form enduring friendships among the prominent and influential men of his day. His legal expertise was much sought after, and he sat on innumerable committees and commissions, keeping in close touch with Kent, the civic authorities in London, and the royal administration. He was on the quorum of the peace in Kent and Middlesex from 1547. Baker's offices were staffed with a growing retinue of dependants, many from the vicinity of Cranbrook, and several were highly capable. His friendships, of which there were many, were drawn exclusively from the religious conservatives of the period, both ecclesiastical and lay. Baker's closest friends and associates were Sir John Gage, of West Firle, Sussex, William Fitzwilliam, earl of Southampton, and Sir William Petre, of Ingatestone, Essex. He was also close to the Sackville family of Sussex. From the affair surrounding Elizabeth Barton (the Holy Maid of Kent), to the Marian martyrdoms he was active in religious affairs. While he demonstrated a remarkable ability to work with those of opposing viewpoints, Baker was, nevertheless, a purposeful politician: he was one of the leading voices on the privy council for religious conservatism in the final years of Henry VIII's reign, and he was one of the first to oppose Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, lord protector to Edward VI. 
Baker's continued service under Henry, Edward, and Mary I is remarkable, especially given that he signed the engagement for the alteration of the succession to Lady Jane Grey, despite his reluctance, and provided legal advice on the subject on 11 June and signed the letters patent for the limitation of the crown on 21 June 1553. He demurred over the whole proceedings. Under Mary, however, he earned an unsavoury reputation for undue zeal in the suppression of heresy, in his capacity as a commissioner for the diocese of Canterbury, and received from John Foxe the unpleasant sobriquet 'Butcher Baker'. In that connection Sir Robert Brooke reported him as having given the opinion in 1555 that a writ 'de haeretico comburendo' was not necessary for the sheriff to burn a heretic if present at the conviction. Like Sir Thomas More, who in the previous generation was equally fond of burning heretics, his ferocity towards those of different beliefs may be contrasted with a generally cultivated character. The Catholic writer Robert Wingfield of Brantham, Suffolk, at any rate, described him as gravely serious and deeply learned in the law. He seems to have been a bibliophile and left to the Inner Temple a unique manuscript year-book, described by John Selden, which contained civilian glosses. It has not been noticed since the seventeenth century; but another manuscript year-book of his is now in the British Library (Harley MS 452). Mary held him in particularly high regard for his services to Katherine of Aragon and, when he retired as chancellor of the court of first fruits and tenths in 1554, he was granted a generous annuity of $233. 
Baker's other talent lay in family aggrandizement. He inherited but a single tenement; at his death he possessed one of the largest estates in the Weald of Kent. He began investing in property well before the dissolution of the monasteries. Planning for the long term, he purchased reversionary interests for relatively modest amounts, and skilfully built up an estate around his residence at Sissinghurst, Kent. By 1547 his annual income from land and fees was $420, making him one of the richer gentlemen in Kent. With talent, resources, and connections, he was ideally suited to benefit from the dissolutions of the monasteries and chantries, and the state confiscations that marked the political turmoil of the mid-sixteenth century. In the parliament of 1539 Baker had his estates disgavelled, the principal beneficiary being his heir. He made his will on 16 October 1555. He died on 23 December 1558 in London and was buried the following month under a monument in Cranbrook church beside his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 1125


Baker, John (1660-1716), naval officer and politician, was a son of James Baker (died before 1666), a mariner of Deal, and his wife, Elizabeth (died after 1715). He was appointed second lieutenant of the 'Woolwich' on 14 November 1688, became captain of the 'Mary Galley' on 12 October 1691, and was noted in the following year as a client of Henry Priestman, a commissioner of the Admiralty. During the remainder of the Nine Years' War (1689-97) he successively commanded the 'Boyne', 'Newcastle', 'Resolution', and 'Falmouth', usually in the Mediterranean, and was captain of the 'Medway' in peacetime, from 1697 to 1700. He commanded the 'Pembroke' in 1701-2 and then the 'Monmouth' from March 1702 to January 1707, fighting in her at Vigo (1702), Gibraltar and Malaga (1704), Barcelona (1705), and Toulon (1707). 
Promoted rear-admiral of the white on 26 January 1708, Baker flew his flag in the 'Monmouth' as second-in-command to Sir George Byng during that year's operations, convoying troops from Dunkirk and then patrolling off Scotland as part of the counter-measures to the attempted Franco-Jacobite invasion. He then carried the new queen of Portugal, the Holy Roman emperor's daughter, from the Netherlands to Spithead, before taking her on to Lisbon in company with Byng. In 1709 he hoisted his flag in the 'Stirling Castle' for an expedition to North America, but after this was cancelled his force was switched to the Mediterranean, where he arrived in October. In November he was detached to Lisbon, flying his flag in the 'Somerset', to protect incoming Portuguese trade from the Indies. Baker remained in the Mediterranean throughout 1711 and 1712, and returned to England at the peace, when he became MP for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis. Despite being unseated on petition in 1714 he was re-elected in the following year. Politically he was closely associated with his naval patron, Byng, and thereby with the whigs and the earl of Orford's Admiralty administration. 
In May 1715 Baker sailed for the Mediterranean once more with orders to check the activities of the North African corsairs. He negotiated treaties with Tripoli and Tunis, and was also involved in building up the infrastructure of the newly acquired naval base at Port Mahon, Minorca. In April 1716 the Jacobite duke of Leeds, whose flag-captain Baker had been, suggested offering him an earldom, $200,000, an admiral's flag, and the position of commander-in-chief, if he would bring his squadron over to James Francis Edward Stuart, the Pretender, but Baker's squadron was recalled before the offer could be made. 
Having only just been relieved, Baker died at Port Mahon on 10 November 1716. He was buried at Westminster Abbey, where his monument describes him as 'a brave, judicious and experienced officer, a sincere friend, and a true lover of his country'. On several occasions during his career he expressed genuine concern for the well-being of his men, and in his will he bequeathed $2000 for the relief of his poor relatives. The diamond rings given him by the queen of Portugal and the Holy Roman empress were bequeathed to Orford and Byng respectively. Having never married, Baker made over all his lands to his nephew Hercules Baker, a captain under him in 1715, MP for Hythe from 1722 to 1744, and treasurer of Greenwich Hospital from 1736 to 1744. 


@@@@@


doc= 1126


Baker, John (1677/8-1745), Church of England clergyman and college administrator, was born in Burley, Rutland, the son of John Baker. He was admitted to Westminster School, on the foundation, in 1691, and thence elected to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1695, aged seventeen. Having matriculated in 1696 he graduated BA in 1699 and proceeded MA (1702), BD (1709), and DD 'comitiis regiis' (1717). He was elected a minor fellow of Trinity on 2 October 1701 and a major fellow on 17 April 1702; in 1722 he was appointed vice-master of the college. He was made vicar of St Mary's in Cambridge in 1725, and in 1731 rector of Dickleburgh in Norfolk. He was a steadfast supporter of the master of Trinity, Richard Bentley, in all his battles both within the college and in the university. His subservience to Bentley is ridiculed in the anonymously published 'Trinity College triumph': '
But Baker alone to the lodge was admitted 

Where he bow'd and he cring'd, and he smil'd and he prated. 

' Baker fell heavily into debt and had to relinquish the vice-mastership; his living of Dickleburgh was sequestrated for the payment of his debts. 'He had been a great beau', wrote William Cole, the Cambridge antiquary, 'but latterly was as much the reverse of it, wearing four or five nightcaps under his wig and square cap, and a black cloak over his cloath gown and cassock, under which were various waistcoats, in the hottest weather' (BL, Add. MS 5804, fol. 81). Baker died in Neville's Court, Trinity College, on 30 October 1745 and was buried in All Saints' Church, Cambridge, according to instructions given a few days before his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 1127


Baker, John (1725/6-1771), flower painter, was, according to Joseph Farington's notebooks, born in Larkners Lane, Holborn, London; his father was a coach-painter who died while he was a child. The family business was maintained by his mother, who entered a partnership with a Mr Brookshead, to whom John was apprenticed. He was later employed as a coach-painter and worked with John Sykes at Little Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields. 
However, Baker was best-known as a flower painter. According to Edward Edwards 'his productions had considerable merit, although they were too much marked by that sharpness of touch, which is peculiar to all those who have been bred coach-painters' (Edwards, 38). He exhibited pictures with the Society of Artists from 1762 to 1768 and he was a founder member of the Royal Academy (1768), where he also exhibited works ['see 'Founders of the Royal Academy of Arts]. With his wife, Elizabeth, Baker had a daughter, Sally, and a son, John, whom he took as an apprentice, and who also trained as a painter at the Royal Academy Schools. The apprenticeship binding of John Baker junior records his father's address as Denmark Street, in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields. According to Farington's notebooks John Baker was short and 'much marked by the small pox. His manners were such as are seen in the inferior ranks of Society', though his 'professional skill caused him to be looked to with respect'. He died in London on 30 April 1771, and soon after an example of his work, 'Still Life with Flowers', was presented to the academy by Charles Catton (Royal Academy). The academy provided charitable financial support for his widow, and helped to pay for her funeral in 1804. 


@@@@@


doc= 1128


Baker, John Wynn (c.1730-1775), agricultural improver and writer, emigrated from England, possibly from Worcester, to Ireland in 1761 after the collapse of a business scheme to convey brine from salt pits to the River Severn by a system of pipes. He published his first experimental treatise in Dublin, 'Some Hints for the Better Improvement of Husbandry', in 1762. In this work Baker proposed that the Dublin Society should establish an experimental farm. The society agreed and voted him $100 to set up the farm and a further $200 to conduct experiments. Baker hired a 354 acre property in Laughlinstown, co. Kildare (9 miles outside Dublin), and published annual reports of his experimental programme from 1764 until 1773. He established a factory for manufacturing agricultural implements in 1765 (again with the financial assistance of the Dublin Society). The factory enjoyed considerable success until it was destroyed by fire two years later. During the 1760s and early 1770s Baker contributed articles to the journal 'Museum Rusticum et Commerciale', and produced pamphlets on agriculture and related matters. The pamphlets include 'A Plan for Instructing Youths in the Knowledge of Husbandry' (1765), in which Baker proposed the establishment of an academy to teach boys to farm scientifically, and 'Considerations upon the Exportation of Corn' (1771), in which he advocated statutory regulation of the price of corn in Ireland. He published a more substantial treatise in 1771, 'Practical Agriculture Epitomised, and Adapted to the Tenantry of Ireland', which contained an extended account of agricultural innovations in France. Baker was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 14 February 1771 in recognition, as his certificate declares, of his contribution 'to polite and philosophical literature'. Despite his considerable reputation Baker suffered in his final years from financial difficulties exacerbated by an increasingly fractious relationship with his sponsors, the Dublin Society. Baker is known to have married and had children. He died at Wynnsfield, co. Kildare, on 5 August 1775, and was buried at Celbridge, co. Kildare. Arthur Young wrote warmly of Baker's publications in a biographical article in 'Annals of Agriculture' (1787), though he also complained of Baker's unsystematic approach to experimentation. 


@@@@@


doc= 1129


Baker, Pacificus (1695-1774), Franciscan friar, was brought up as a protestant, but later converted. He studied at Douai in the Southern Netherlands, and was there professed a Franciscan. After ordination he was sent to the English mission and was attached to the Sardinian chapel in Lincoln's Inn Fields. Baker is known to have attended the execution of Simon, Lord Lovat, on 9 April 1747. During his lifetime he discharged with credit the offices of procurator and definitor of his order, and was twice elected provincial of the English province, first in 1761 and second in 1770. 
An 'eminent spiritualist' (Oliver, 543), with the reputation of being a good preacher, Baker was described as 'my particular acquaintance' by the Revd William Cole, as well as 'a very honest and worthy man' (Gillow, 'Lit. biog. hist.', 1.117). He was the author of numerous devotional works including 'The Devout Christian's Companion for Holy Days' (1757), as well as guides to the mass (1768), and a Lenten guide for Holy Week (1769). Other works included 'The Christian Advent' (1782), and a book about keeping Sundays holy, as well as essays on the Cord of St Francis and the Lord's prayer. According to one authority, these works were without much originality and were 'remarkable for unction, solidity, and moderation; but we wish the style was less diffuse and redundant of words' (Oliver, 543). 
Baker died in London on 16 March 1774. 


@@@@@


doc= 1130


Baker, Philip (1522/3-1590?), college head, was born in Barnstaple, Devon, of a gentry family, and educated at Eton College. Admitted to King's College, Cambridge, in 1540, aged seventeen, he was a fellow in 1543-56, graduated BA in 1544-5, MA in 1548, BTh in 1554, and DTh in 1562. He was a proctor of the university in 1549-50, was appointed provost of King's College by Elizabeth I in 1558, and was vice-chancellor in 1561-2. He was ordained deacon in 1553 and was appointed as rector of Ringwood, Hampshire (1554), rector of St Andrew by the Wardrobe, London (1559-62), prebendary of Stretton, Salisbury (1559), prebendary of Putston Minor, Hereford (1560), rector of Elsworth, Cambridgeshire (1559-70), and possibly rector of Winwick, Lancashire. In 1564 Queen Elizabeth visited Cambridge and stayed in the provost's lodge for five days: Baker was one of those who made a formal speech in her presence. 
The following year, 1565, eleven fellows of King's complained that Baker favoured 'papists' and administered the affairs of the college badly. His opinions must have been widely known, as he had been deprived of the living of St Andrew by the Wardrobe in 1562 for his refusal to subscribe to a confession of faith. The bishop of Lincoln made a visitation in response to the complaints of the fellows and Baker was required to suppress 'popish' ceremonies and ornaments in the college. In 1567 the college granted him leave of absence for two years. In 1569 a Mr Colpots made a further protest to the chancellor, William Cecil, on behalf of the college; Baker 'still kept a great heap of Popish pelf... he never preached, neither at home, nor abroad, weltring in idleness, and wholly serving Mammon... 'Pistori quam Pastori similior': i.e. more like a baker than a shepherd' (Strype, 144). Baker does indeed seem to have been absent from the college a great deal during his period in office. Detailed charges were also made that he had appropriated college funds. 
As a result of these accusations a new visitation was commissioned, led by the bishop of Ely; Baker did not wait to face it but fled abroad. In 1570 he was formally deprived of the provostship and his other preferments. Although one of the charges levelled against him had been that he dishonestly used college resources, Fuller went out of his way to praise the way in which Baker on his departure meticulously returned all college property. He may have returned to England: although Willis states that 'he retired to Louvain, and died there beyond the seas' (Willis, 2.600), two somewhat contradictory pieces of evidence indicate otherwise. Sterry states that it was Philip Baker, the former provost, who made a will in 1585, died in London in 1590, and was buried in St Margaret Moyses on 12 August; the will was certainly made by a former Catholic priest who left a few small bequests, but it makes no reference to Cambridge. However, in Cambridge University Library there is a four-volume collection of commentaries on St Thomas Aquinas by Gregory of Valentia (1549-1603), a Jesuit theologian, in an edition printed in Venice between 1598 and 1601; an inscription records that it was a gift to the university from Philip Baker, formerly provost of King's College. Baker's arms were argent on a saltire engrailed sable, five escallops of the field on a chief of the second a lion passant of the first. 


@@@@@


doc= 1131


Baker, Sir Richard (c.1568-1645), religious writer and historian, was born at Sissinghurst, Kent, the elder son of John Baker ('b'. in or before 1531, died 1604x6), MP in 1554-5 and lawyer, and Catherine, daughter of Reginald Scott, of Scots Hall, Ashford, Kent. His father was the younger son of Sir John Baker (c.1489-1558), of Sissinghurst, by his second marriage, to Elizabeth (died in or before 1558), daughter of Thomas Dingley of Stanford Dingley, Berkshire, and Middle Aston, Oxfordshire. Sir Richard Baker has to be distinguished from his uncle Richard ('b'. in or before 1530, died 1594), also a knight, who was Sir John's elder son and heir. The historian's father, John Baker, had moved to London, where he was a member of the Inner Temple, and in Michaelmas term 1584 Richard Baker, described as a gentleman, of Kent, matriculated at Oxford from Hart Hall. Contemporaries there included John Donne, and Baker shared a room with Henry Wotton, the diplomat, who was then a commoner of New College. Like Donne, Baker left the hall without graduating, and after studying law in London he travelled on the continent, acquiring languages and journeying as far east as Poland; after his return he was granted the degree of MA by decree, in 1594. 
Baker sat in the Commons as member for Arundel in 1593 and East Grinstead in 1597, probably as a nominee of Thomas, Lord Buckhurst, his uncle by marriage. He served and reported on a Commons committee on the weaving trade in 1597. In 1603, when he was knighted by James I at Theobalds, he was living in Highgate in north London. He was a JP for Middlesex, and he also had lands in Essex, Gloucestershire, Kent, and Oxfordshire, where he had inherited the manor of Middle Aston. He served as high sheriff of Oxfordshire in 1620-21. Shortly afterwards he married Margaret ('b'. 'c'.1600), daughter of Sir George Mainwaring of Ightfield, Shropshire. They had at least five children -- two sons and three daughters survived them -- but the alliance proved even more ill-starred than John Aubrey's unlucky contract with Joan Sumner, another paradigm of the age. To the entire ruin of his fortune, Baker gave security for his father-in-law's debts. By 1625 he was a crown debtor, and his Oxfordshire estate was impounded. Within ten years his other lands had followed, and he was reduced to living in the Fleet prison in London for the rest of his life. 
With his lands and offices gone, Baker turned, as his friend Thomas Fuller observed, to the consolations of scholarship. He seems to have kept his books, or some of them, with him in the Fleet, and he manifestly had access to printers. His first published work was an essay in popular moralism: 'Cato variegatus, or, Catoes Morall Distichs, Translated and Paraphrased with Variations of Expressing in English Verse', which appeared in 1636. He followed it with 'Meditations on the Lord's Prayer' in 1637, and a translation of the letters of J.-L. Guez de Balzac (1597-1654) in 1638. The renderings and variations of Cato's themes were only moderately inspired, but Baker's religious writings struck a popular response. He produced a series of meditations on the penitential psalms, beginning with 'Meditations and Disquisitions on the Seven Psalmes of David', published in 1639 and dedicated to Mary, countess of Dorset, with an additional study of 'Psalms' 102, 130, and 143 dedicated to Henry Montagu, earl of Manchester. A further study of 'Psalm 23' followed in 1640, and 'An Apologie for Laymen's Writing in Divinity, with a Short Meditation upon the Fall of Lucifer' in 1641. The 'Apologie' was dedicated to his cousin Sir John Baker of Sissinghurst (died 1661), and 'Motives for Prayer upon the Seaven Dayes of the Weeke' (1642), a meditative work on the creation of the world, to Sir John's wife, Elizabeth. Sir John Baker's adherence to the king in the early years of the civil war began the final decline in the family's fortunes. 
Richard Baker also wrote a rebuttal of Prynne's 'Histrio-Mastix' which remained in manuscript until 1662, when it was published posthumously under the title 'Theatrum redivivum, or, The Theatre Vindicated'. It was characterized by much common sense, and contained notices of Alleyn, Burbage, and Tarlton. It was reprinted in 1670 as 'Theatrum triumphans'. The meditations on the psalms, some of which were reprinted at Leipzig in 1688, were collected and edited by Alexander Balloch Grosart in 1882. 
While his pious and occasional works were appearing in print, Baker was also reflecting on history. He translated a study of Tacitus by Vergilio, marchese di Malvezzi, probably on a commission from Richard and Thomas Whittaker, printers and booksellers, who published it as 'Discourses upon Cornelius Tacitus' in 1642. By that time Baker had almost completed his principal work, 'A Chronicle of the Kings of England from the Time of the Romans' Government unto the Death of King James', which was published in 1643. It was dedicated to Charles, prince of Wales, and contained a commendatory letter from Sir Henry Wotton. In his preface Baker refers to the distinction between histories, which were literary exercises reflecting upon matters of state, and chronicles, which could touch on 'meaner accidents' -- the prosaic detail of everyday life. He made a robust defence of his labours and listed more than ninety authors and texts which he had consulted. His narrative is lively, often but not excessively anecdotal, and he took notice of what would later be called literary, social, and even economic affairs. 
The 'Chronicle' was reprinted posthumously with some revisions in 1653, and a third edition was published in 1660 with a continuation to the end of 1658 by Edward Phillips, John Milton's nephew. Five more editions, with extended continuations, appeared from 1665 to 1684, when an abridgement was also published. The ninth edition was printed in 1696. The later editors were anonymous, though the account of Charles II's restoration, which first appeared in 1665, was attributed to General Monck's brother-in-law, Sir Thomas Clarges. The last edition of the work, extended to the end of the reign of George I, appeared in 1730 and was reprinted in 1733. 
Baker's 'Chronicle' was translated into Dutch as early as 1649, and republished in Amsterdam in 1681. There was evidently a steady demand for it in England, though it was sharply criticized by Thomas Blount, in 'Animadversions upon Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle and its Continuation' (1672). Blount was learned, and given to publishing animadversions. Some of his strictures were merely captious, but Baker's frankly engaging narrative was perhaps already at odds with the emergent historical scholarship evident in the works of Rymer and Madox. Thomas Hearne commented in 1721 that the 'Chronicle' was a slight work but that it had become rare and expensive; he lived to see its tenth edition nine years later. Daines Barrington subsequently observed that Addison had done Baker a disservice by noting that Sir Roger de Coverley thought highly of the 'Chronicle' and kept it close to hand. No doubt it had an old-fashioned air before the middle of the eighteenth century, but even so James Boswell turned to it in 1785 for the epigraph of his 'Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides'. 
Both the 'Chronicle' and its critics have to be seen in a historical context. Baker intended his narrative to be readable, and so it proved. It was vigorous enough to survive successive extensions, and for three-quarters of a century it was effectively unrivalled on its own ground. More specialized studies aside, a new era began only in 1725, with Nicholas Tindal's translation of Rapin's 'History'; it continued from 1752 onwards with Hume's work. In some respects, Baker was closer to his older sources than to the world of his readers. On the one hand he had read law in Elizabeth's London and had spoken in her parliaments. On the other he cites without elaboration a story of Froissart about a knight who knew instantaneously of events occurring at a great distance. He was thoroughly a man of his own time, who wrote in unpromising circumstances, keeping his good humour and wide sympathies, and his work proved surprisingly durable. 
Baker died in the Fleet on 18 February 1645 and was buried in St Bride's Church. His daughters married London tradesmen, one of whom is said to have burned an autograph manuscript of Baker's life, a loss which was regretted by Isaac D'Israeli. Baker's printed books, or a substantial number of them, were acquired by Archbishop John Williams, who gave them to the chapter library of Westminster Abbey as one of his many benefactions there. 


@@@@@


doc= 1132


Baker, Richard (bap. 1741, d. 1818), writer on theology, was baptized on 24 February 1741 in Great Yarmouth, son and heir of Richard Baker (1702-1774), mayor of that town in 1754 and 1769, and collector of the customs, and his wife, Sarah Laws (died 1772). He matriculated on 7 March 1758 at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he was a fellow from 1763 and held various college offices. He took the degrees of BA as seventh senior optime in 1762, MA in 1765, and DD in 1788. He was the friend of Thomas Gray, the poet, at Pembroke, one of three college fellows who witnessed the signing of his will on 2 July 1770. In 1797 he presented the college chapel with a painting formerly belonging to Sir Joshua Reynolds, 'The Entombment' after Barocci. 
After his marriage to Elizabeth Harrison (1747/8-1814) in 1772, Baker, who had been ordained priest in the London diocese on 19 February 1769, moved out of college to become rector of Great Poringland, Norfolk, in 1772, on the presentation of the bishop of Norwich, a post he held until 1779. He was also instituted on 6 April 1772 to the lucrative Pembroke living of Cawston, in the same county, where he remained incumbent until his death. He was a diligent parish priest, took pains 'with a neglected & abandoned people', and had a Sunday school with 100 children by the 1790s (R. Baker to W. W. Bulwer, 23 June 1790, Norfolk RO, BUL 4/118/9). His seniority in the deanery enabled him on occasion to act on behalf of the archdeacon of Norfolk, as during the visitations of 1784 and 1790. His eldest son, Richard, also took holy orders. In 1799 Parson Woodforde was relieved not to appoint this young man his curate at Weston Longueville, 'as of late I heard that Dr. Baker and whole Family are very Violent Democrats indeed' ('Diary', 5.195, 26 May 1799). Baker's second son, John Harrison Baker, major of the 34th regiment, was killed at the battle of Toulouse on 11 April 1814, aged thirty-two. 
Baker's main work was 'The Harmony, or Agreement, of the Four Evangelists, in their Several Relations of the Life and Death of Jesus the Christ' (4 pts, 1783-7), in which he juxtaposed extracts from the gospels with the aim of demonstrating their essential consistency. He aimed at a cheap, plain production, 'To make the Scriptures more level to every capacity, and to put such an explanation within reach of the Poor' (preface). He also published a sermon on 'John' 7: 17, 'How the Knowledge of Salvation is Attainable', dated 1782. In 1811 he completed his output with 'The Psalms of David Evangelized', a characteristic attempt on his part to make the 'Psalms' immediately appealing to the ordinary churchgoer. His 'amiable and pious' (memorial inscription, Cawston church) wife died on 13 August 1814, in her sixty-seventh year, and was buried on 17 August in Cawston church. Baker himself died on 6 April 1818, and was buried in the chancel of the same church on 12 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 1133


Baker, Robert (fl. c.1563), mariner and poet, is known only through his one published writing. Possibly a relative of the Bakers of Sissinghurst who had connections with the London overseas trading community, Robert Baker composed a poem about two English voyages to Guinea, undertaken in the early 1560s, on which he had served as a factor or commercial agent. The poem may have been published when licensed in 1568, but if so, no copy seems to be extant. It eventually appeared, perhaps not in its original entirety, in the first (1589) edition of Hakluyt's 'Voiages' (Hakluyt, 130-42), but was omitted from the second, better-known edition, leading to its being for long overlooked in studies of the period. The poem, in 1384 lines as published, is thin on facts identifying the precise voyages, and certain details in the title and side-notes may have been added by Hakluyt. Nevertheless, it undoubtedly refers to two actual voyages, although these are semi-imaginatively related. It concentrates on adventures -- or rather misadventures -- while trading on the coast of Guinea, on the first voyage an affray with local Africans, on the second voyage the separation of a boat from the mother ship and a desperate journey along the coast, avoiding a Portuguese fort, before Baker and his companions find refuge ashore with an African group. Three survivors are finally rescued by a French ship, and Baker claims to be writing the poem in a prison in France, awaiting ransom. In the poem he sets the misadventures within an extensive but clumsy overall framework of classical mythology, rival gods assisting or otherwise harming the English voyagers. 
Baker's poem, although providing only limited evidence on voyages which were among the earliest to far continents by Englishmen, does throw some light on English attitudes of the period. In particular, his general lack of sympathy with things African, most probably engendered by his unhappy misadventures, extends to a jaundiced view of Africans which has been latterly interpreted as an early manifestation of typical 'racist' disparagement of non-European peoples by the English. Considered as literature, the poem, albeit composed in somewhat clip-clop verse, is not without occasional felicities, while its subject matter and form give it a notable place in English and even European literary history. Among writings in English other than the entirely factual, it is almost the first, in either prose or verse, to take as its theme long-distance sea travel and cultural encounter in distant lands, a theme within the genre of travel literature to which English readers later became much attached. Further, its mythological framework places it firmly within a common style of contemporary European literature, if only as a small leaf on a broad stream. Yet the combination of mythology with an account of genuine distant voyaging gives this minor poem a measure of significant resemblance to a more considerable and subtle work, a masterpiece of European literature of the period, the epic 'Os Lusiadas'. Each of these works sprang out of novel overseas experience, that of a maritime nation and that of an intercontinental traveller, and each celebrated access to worlds new to Europe, while lamenting occasional marine disaster. Camoens published in 1572; Baker wrote a decade earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 1134


Baker, Samuel (d. 1658), Church of England clergyman, matriculated from Christ's College, Cambridge, in July 1612 and graduated BA in 1616. Ordained priest on 14 November 1618 in the diocese of Norwich he proceeded MA the following year. In January 1626 he was presented to the rectory of St Margaret Pattens, London, and in 1627 he proceeded BD. It is possible that he married at St James's, Duke's Place, on 22 May 1632, but the bride's name is unknown. If true it is also possible that the marriage was not to Joan, recorded as his wife in the 1640s, and that it did not last long, for in 1633 Baker was appointed household chaplain to William Juxon, bishop of London. One of his duties in this capacity was to license books for the press, and it was later alleged that a number of theological books licensed by Baker, including William Jones's 'Commentary upon the Epistles to Philemon and to the Hebrewes' (1635) and Richard Clerke's 'Sermons' (1637), had been heavily censored to make them appear less anti-Catholic. The clerical convert Richard Carpenter, who had defected to the Church of Rome but subsequently returned to the Church of England, complained that Baker had permitted him to preach at Paul's Cross only on condition that he did not speak 'revengefully and ungratefully against the church of Rome, as having had my breeding from them', and that he attributed his conversion to 'the sight and love of the orders and ceremonies newly begun in the church of England, a thing which (the Lord knowes) had not entred into my thoughts before this admonishment' (Kent Archives Office, U350 C2/53). Carpenter also complained that when he submitted his sermon for licensing, 'Mr Baker answered by noe meanes, and gave this reason, because now the Church of Rome and we were in a faire and quiet way, and it was not fitt to multiply Controversies' (Kent Archives Office, U350 Q5). 
Baker was generously rewarded with ecclesiastical preferment. In June 1636 he became minister of St Christopher-le-Stocks, London, in October he was collated to a prebendal stall in St Paul's, London, and in July 1637 he resigned St Margaret Pattens to become rector of St Mary-at-Hill. In August 1638 he was appointed a canon of Windsor, resigning in May 1639 to become a canon of Canterbury; that year he proceeded DD. He may have been the Samuel Baker who married Joan Bray at Canterbury on 25 June 1642. On 15 January 1640 he had been appointed a chaplain-in-ordinary to the king. In April he resigned St Christopher-le-Stocks to become rector of South Weald, Essex. He kept St Mary-at-Hill, but in June his dispensation to hold it in plurality was found to be legally invalid. However, he was unanimously reappointed to St Mary by the trustees (acting on behalf of the parishioners), and remained in possession of both until the civil war. None the less, his rapid promotion provoked some adverse comment: one hostile account later claimed that 'Baker, the Bishop of London's chaplaine, being one morning desired to present a Petition from a Minister to his Lord for a Prebend's place, carried the matter so craftily, that he had it for himselfe'. According to the same account 'this Baker was so over-joyed with the death of some good Divines, and the going away of others, that he made verses of them, and the same day hee made them hee broke his legge' ('The Scots Scouts Discoveries', E1'v'). While the reliability of these stories is dubious it is clear that Baker was widely regarded as an enemy of the puritan clergy and a loyal servant of the Laudian regime. Sir Edward Dering remarked in his 'Discourse of Proper Sacrifice' (1644) that he had always regarded Baker as more extreme in his views than his fellow licenser William Bray. 
On 24 April 1643 the House of Commons ordered Baker to be sequestrated from the living of South Weald on the grounds that 'he hath indeavoured to corrupt his People at such times as he hath preached there with the leaven of Popish doctrine'; that 'he beleeved not the Pope to be Anti-Christ, because his Mother the Church whom he would not outrun had not yet revealed it'; that he had licensed 'divers Popish Bookes pleading for Auricular Confession and other points of Popery'; that he had bowed to the altar when administering the sacrament, and had knelt down on the altar steps 'with his hands lift up'; and that he had 'expressed ill affection to the Parliament' (Parl. Arch., Main MSS). On 16 May the House of Lords confirmed the order of the Commons, despite a personal appearance by Baker to confess that he had two livings and two prebendaries and 'hath had some Misfortune in licensing Books, which he is sorry for'. On 26 May the committee for sequestrations ordered the seizure of Baker's house and goods, valued at $80 12's'., and on 27 July the Commons ordered Baker to be sequestrated from the living of St Mary-at-Hill, although his wife, Joan, was later granted one-fifth of the living by the committee for plundered ministers. On 19 June 1647 the parishioners of St Michael Royal, London, petitioned the committee to appoint Baker as their minister. The petition was rejected, but Baker was brought in 'by force and in a tumultuous waie' by a group of parishioners, and the committee finally referred the matter to the parish vestry to settle among themselves (Liu, 137, citing BL, Add. MS 15671, fols. 59, 87). 
Baker is said to have assisted Brian Walton in the preparation of the polyglot 'Bible'; and when Walton borrowed the 'Codex Alexandrinus' in 1653, Baker was one of the five persons who stood surety for its safe return. On 16 March 1658 the vestry of St Mary-at-Hill granted Baker $10 out of the parish funds 'for his releefe in his great necessitie and sicknes', and he must have died before 25 May 1658, when the vestry minutes recorded that the living was vacant (Guildhall Library, MS 1240/1). 


@@@@@


doc= 1135


Baker, Sir Samuel White (1821-1893), traveller and explorer in Africa, was born on 8 June 1821 in London, the second of the eight children of Samuel Baker (died 1862) of Lypiatt Park, Gloucestershire, and his first wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Dobson of Enfield, Middlesex. His father was a wealthy shipowner who had sugar plantations in Mauritius and Jamaica and had served as a director of the Great Western Railway and chairman of the Gloucester Bank. His elder brother died in childhood and Baker eventually inherited his father's wealth. 
Baker, who had a fair complexion, light hair, and piercing blue eyes, lived most of his early years in Enfield. When he was twelve his family rented a house from Sir John Guise, at Highnam Court, about 2 miles from Gloucester. He first studied in a private school at Rottingdean, and from 1833 to 1835 he attended College School, Gloucester. He benefited little from these schools, possibly because he refused to accept the discipline and conformity required by the public school system. In 1838, however, his attitude towards learning changed: the Revd Henry Peter Dunster, a private tutor in Tottenham, accepted Baker as a pupil and interested him in history, geography, and the classics. In 1840 Baker departed for Germany to finish his education. Although he attended lectures and learned the German language, he devoted most of his eighteen months in Germany to hunting. He also perfected his knowledge of the rifle and devised a massive charge of 16 drams of powder for use against larger game. 
After returning to England, Baker and his brother John, in a double ceremony on 3 August 1843, married sisters, Henrietta Biddulph (died 1855) and Elizabeth, daughters of Charles Martin, rector of Maisemore. After a brief, unsuccessful, stint in his father's London office in Fenchurch Street, Baker travelled to Mauritius in early 1845, where he and John managed Fairfund, the family estate on the island. However, he spent only a few months on the island, which he found too restricting and utterly boring. 
In late 1845 Baker relocated to Ceylon, ostensibly to establish a coffee plantation and an English colony at Nuwera Eliya, a station 6000 feet above sea level and 115 miles from Colombo by road. It was a sad reunion when his wife joined him the following year. His son Charles had died in Mauritius, and in September 1846 his daughter Jane succumbed to fever at sea off the Maldive Islands. Despite these tragedies, Baker continued with his colonization scheme. He purchased land from the government and persuaded his brothers John and Valentine Baker (1827-1887) to join the enterprise. In September 1848 the 'Earl of Hardwicke' set sail from London with a party of eighteen adults and a cargo of stock, machinery, seeds, and hounds. Initially the struggling colony suffered as poor soil conditions restricted farming and wild animals often ate the crops. Eventually, however, the settlers overcame these difficulties and established a relatively prosperous estate which remained in the Baker family throughout the century. 
In his nine years in Ceylon, Baker explored much of the island and established an impressive reputation as a big game hunter. During his many elephant- and stag-hunting expeditions, he experimented with new rifles, stalking methods, and ballistic techniques. He recounted his experiences in 'The Rifle and Hound in Ceylon' (1853), and in 'Eight Years' Wanderings in Ceylon', which appeared two years later. In 1855 a fever-stricken Baker returned with his family to England. After the unexpected death of his wife from typhus fever on 29 December 1855 at Bagneres-de-Bigorre, France, Baker sought consolation and solace by volunteering for the Crimean War; unfortunately, he arrived at the front just as Britain and Russia had concluded a peace agreement. Baker then spent time hunting in the Balkans. Afterwards, he contemplated becoming an unofficial spy to report on Russian military designs against India. After returning to England, Baker also considered entering the service of the Anglican church. 
Finally, in November 1858, Baker decided to resolve his personal problems by embarking on a hunting trip down the Danube River with Maharaja Duleep Singh, the hereditary ruler of the Punjab, who had been living in England since his dispossession. After the boat in which they were travelling collided with an ice floe, Baker and the maharaja abandoned the vessel and took refuge in the Danube town of Widden. While in the town they attended a slave auction where Baker unexpectedly bought a young woman named Florence Barbara Maria Finnian von Sass (1841-1916) ['see 'Baker, Florence Barbara Maria]. Shortly thereafter they travelled to Bucharest and eventually both ended up in the Black Sea port of Constanza. In March 1859 Baker accepted a position as manager-general with the Danube and Black Sea Railway which planned to build a line from Constanza to the Danube east of Bucharest. After this project was completed in October 1860, Baker and Florence journeyed through Asia Minor, spending several months hunting in the Sapanca region. 
During his time in eastern Europe and Asia Minor, Baker became increasingly intrigued by the prospect of exploring Africa. After John Hanning Speke and James Augustus Grant departed from Bagamoyo for Lake Victoria and the White Nile on 2 October 1860, Baker decided to launch his own expedition to discover the sources of the Nile River. He then planned to link up with Speke and Grant. The journey, which ultimately would take four and a half years, would bring him fame and fortune. More importantly, the expedition enabled Baker and Florence, who were not married, to escape the harsh moral strictures of Victorian England. 
On 15 April 1861 Baker and Florence left Cairo in a 'dahabia' -- a vessel similar to a dhow -- for a twenty-six-day trip up the Nile to Korosko. The couple then went by camel caravan from Kassala to the Sudanese-Abyssinian border to explore the eastern tributaries of the Nile. Baker -- who established his headquarters at Sofi, a village along the banks of the Atbara River -- spent five months exploring the Setit River, a tributary of the Atbara, and hunting big game, often with the Hamran Arabs. He also explored other tributaries of the Atbara, including the Bahr Salamat and the Angareb, and then travelled along the Rehad to its confluence with the Blue Nile. After completing this phase of the expedition, Baker and Florence marched to Khartoum, where they arrived on 11 June 1862. The results of this fourteen-month journey, while not overly significant, were nevertheless impressive. Sir Roderick Murchison, president of the Royal Geographical Society, acknowledged the importance of Baker's explorations and his discovery that the Nile sediment was due to the Abyssinian tributaries. Additionally, Baker gained experience as an African explorer, mastered Arabic, and learned to use the astronomical instruments which were vital for determining geographical locations. 
For the next six months Baker remained in Khartoum, waiting for the end of the rainy season and preparing for the next phase of his expedition. On 18 December 1862 he started up the Nile with a 'dahabia', two sailing barges (known as 'nuggars'), twenty-nine transport animals, and a party of ninety-six, including forty-five armed men and forty sailors. On 2 February 1863 this expedition reached Gondokoro, an important headquarters for the Arab slave trade. Baker immediately clashed with Arab slave traders and the local Bari people, both of whom considered him a spy of the British government. Additionally, the Arabs feared that the Englishman would try to end the lucrative slave trade. Consequently, they encouraged two mutinies among Baker's men, the second of which resulted in several desertions. On 15 February 1863 Speke and Grant arrived in Gondokoro, after more than two years of exploration work in east Africa. Baker provided them with his surplus supplies and three vessels for the trip down the Nile. In return, Speke informed Baker of a second unexplored lake, the Luta N'zige, west of Bunyoro, and urged him to complete the discovery of the Nile source. Speke also gave him his own maps. Lastly, the two explorers promised to keep Baker's relationship with Florence a secret after they reached England. 
Preparing for the next phase of his trip, Baker had to contend with Arab slave traders who were determined to prevent him from travelling to the south. To break free of Gondokoro, Baker, who experienced difficulty getting provisions and persuading porters to march through hostile territory, attached his small party to a large ivory- and slave-trading caravan commanded by Khurshid Agha. He hoped to make his own way after he reached Faloro. Therefore, on 26 March 1863, Baker and Florence left Gondokoro on the first leg of what proved to be an arduous two-year journey through some of east Africa's more remote areas. 
After reaching the country of the Latuka and neighbouring Madi, east of Gondokoro, there was a delay of eleven months because of the onset of the rainy season and the refusal of local slave traders to give Baker the provisions necessary for him to continue his southward march. During this period he visited Latome, where he suppressed a mutiny by his porters, and Tirangole, the capital of Lutuka country. By the end of 1863 Baker and Florence had not moved beyond Obbo, which was only about 150 miles from Gondokoro. Finally, on 3 January 1864, they persuaded Ibrahim, a freebooter who worked for Khurshid Agha, to turn the caravan southwards to Bunyoro. Baker arrived at the White Nile on 22 January 1864, marched east to Karuma Falls the following day, and then crossed into the kingdom of Bunyoro. 
Once again further travel became difficult as Kamrasi, the king ('omukama') of Bunyoro, kept his visitors in the capital, Kisuna, for several weeks under virtual house arrest. After depleting Baker's caravan of numerous 'gifts', the king announced that he wanted to exchange several of his wives for Florence. Baker responded to this outrage by threatening to shoot him if he persisted in making advances toward her. Shortly afterwards Kamrasi grudgingly gave his permission for the couple to leave his kingdom. In late February 1864 they left with a 300-man escort provided by Kamrasi and made their way along the right bank of the Kafa River. The march was especially demanding as Florence was in a coma caused by sunstroke. Nevertheless, on 14 March 1864, the determined couple reached Mbakovia, a village on the south-eastern shore of Luta N'zige. For the next thirteen days they travelled in a north-easterly direction along the lake's shore before reaching Magungo, the entrance of the Victoria Nile. Owing to unsettled conditions in Madi and Koshi districts, Baker cancelled plans to travel by boat from Fashoro northwards to trace the White Nile; instead, he went east along the Victoria Nile until he came upon the falls which he named after his friend Sir Roderick Murchison. He also gave Luta N'zige the appellation Albert Nyanza, after Prince Albert, Victoria's consort. Baker remained for two months at Patooan Island, suffering from fever. King Kamrasi, who was being threatened by a neighbour, Chief Rionga, eventually arranged for fifty of his men to transport Baker and Florence to Kisuna. For the next few months the king detained the couple, repeatedly asking for more gifts and help against Rionga. On 17 November 1864 Baker finally started his return journey north, arriving in Gondokoro on 15 March 1865 and in Khartoum on 5 May 1865. After spending almost two months in the Sudanese capital he left for England on 1 July 1865, via Berber, Suakin, Cairo, Alexandria, Marseilles, and Paris. On arrival in England on 14 October 1865 Baker finalized arrangements for his marriage to Florence, which took place on 4 November 1865. 
The discovery of the Albert Nyanza marked the pinnacle of Baker's career as an African explorer in so far as it helped to resolve the mystery of the source of the Nile. Soon after his return to England in 1865 he learned that he had been awarded the Royal Geographical Society's prestigious gold medal for his work in Africa. Numerous other awards soon followed. In August 1866 Baker received a knighthood; in the same year he became an honorary MA of Cambridge, and also published his account of the expedition, entitled 'The Albert Ny'anza, Great Basin of the Nile, and Explorations of the Nile Sources'. The work, which went through several editions, remains one of the most important narratives of African exploration during the Victorian era. In 1867 the Paris Geographical Society conferred on him its 'grande medaille d'or', and on 3 June 1869 he was elected FRS. He also became an honorary member of the geographical societies of Paris, Berlin, Italy, and the United States. 
For the next few years Baker and his wife lived at Hedenham Hall, Norfolk. It was at this manor house that he wrote 'The Nile Tributaries of Abyssinia, and the Sword Hunters of the Hamran Arabs', and a boys' adventure story, 'Cast up by the Sea', which were published in 1867 and 1868 respectively. 
In 1869 the prince of Wales invited Baker to accompany him on his visit to Egypt and journey up the Nile, despite the disapproval of Queen Victoria. The same year, on 1 April, the Khedive Isma'il appointed Baker to a four-year term as governor-general of the equatorial Nile basin, with the rank of pasha and major-general in the Ottoman army. It was the most senior post a European ever received under an Egyptian administration. According to the khedive's firman, Baker's duties included annexing the equatorial Nile basin, establishing Egyptian authority over the region south of Gondokoro, suppressing the slave trade, introducing cotton cultivation, organizing a network of trading stations throughout the annexed territories, and opening the great lakes near the equator to navigation. To carry out the mission, the khedive provided Baker with a flotilla of ten steamers and fifty-five sailing ships, and about 1700 officers and men. On 5 December 1869 he and Lady Baker departed Cairo for Suakin; a month later they were in Khartoum. However, because of unfavourable conditions on the Nile and an inability to penetrate the sudd it was not until April 1871 that the party arrived in Gondokoro. On 26 May 1871 Baker annexed Gondokoro -- which he renamed Isma'iliyyah -- and the surrounding country in the name of the khedive. The local Bari people, however, refused to recognize Egyptian authority. After seizing some of their cattle to feed his men, Baker had to defend his expedition against attacks by the Bari. On 22 January 1872 Baker left a garrison of troops at Gondokoro to prevent a resurgence of Bari hostility and started on a southward journey with 212 officers and men. When he reached Fatick, a village north of the Victoria Nile and the Bunyoro frontier, Baker had to contend with yet another crisis. The local Arab community opposed his efforts to establish Egyptian authority and to end the slave trade. However, unlike the situation in Gondokoro, where the Bari had formed an alliance with the Arab traders, the Acholi looked upon the Fatick Arabs as enemies. As a result, they welcomed Baker's expedition and placed themselves under its protection. On 14 May 1872 while at Masindi -- which became the Bunyoro capital after the death of Kamrasi Baker declared that the kingdom was under Egyptian protection. This development forced the hand of Abou Saood, a local slave and ivory trader. He perceived Baker's action as a threat to his commercial interests and therefore encouraged the Bunyoro king, Kabarega, to attack Baker's men. On 14 June 1872 Baker withdrew to Fatick, where he clashed with Abou Saood's irregulars. He easily defeated the slave trader's retainers, many of whom subsequently deserted and joined Baker's entourage. With their help Baker built a fort at Fatick which represented the southernmost outpost of Egyptian influence in eastern Africa. The expedition produced mixed results. Although he had suppressed the slave trade in some areas and had extended the khedive's authority to Gondokoro and Fatick, he had failed to pacify the lawless region between these two places. Moreover, he was unable to annex the wealthy kingdoms of Bunyoro and Buganda. Despite Baker's dubious performance, the khedive bestowed on him the imperial order of the Osmanieh, second class. 
Baker received a hero's welcome on his return to England. Apart from various glowing newspaper accounts of his travels, the prince of Wales met him to learn first hand of his experiences in Africa. On 8 December 1873 he received an enthusiastic reception at the Royal Geographical Society, and the following year he published a two-volume account of his expedition entitled 'Ismailia: a narrative of the expedition to central Africa for the suppression of the slave trade', which further enhanced his popularity. 
Baker and his wife eventually moved into Sandford Orleigh, Highweek, a forty-room mansion in south Devon, near Newton Abbot. This estate remained Baker's home for the rest of his life. He regularly wrote books and newspaper and magazine articles about a variety of political and sporting subjects. Additionally, he was elected president of the Devonshire Association, and served as a town councillor in Newton Abbot. Every autumn he undertook a hunting expedition to Scotland, or travelled abroad: in 1879, for example, Baker spent nearly a year in Cyprus; between 1879 and 1892 he visited India seven times, killing a total of twenty-two tigers. There were other hunting expeditions to Japan, to the Rocky Mountains, and to virtually every European country. The Bakers also visited Egypt regularly and, in the late 1870s, made a protracted round-the-world voyage. Baker died of a heart attack at Sandford Orleigh on 30 December 1893. His body was cremated and his ashes buried at Grimley, near Worcester, on 5 January 1894. He was survived by his second wife, and by three daughters of the seven children of his first marriage. 
Sir Samuel Baker was typical of many Victorian explorers and adventurers in as much as he was a strong-willed, unconventional, intolerant, and self-reliant individual, often insensitive to social norms and to those around him. Post-colonial scholars have emphasized Baker's deep-seated contempt for non-European peoples and cultures, a facet of his personality and career that has been profoundly unattractive to posterity. But it is important not to see Baker as exceptional in this regard: in his own time, the idealization of British civilization and the refusal to acknowledge any worth in non-European societies were commonplace. Moreover, this emphasis tends to overlook Baker's genuine concerns for the welfare of the people of Africa as evinced in his suppression of the slave trade along the White Nile. Despite his personal shortcomings, Baker's reputation as one of the most important British explorers of the nineteenth century is assured. 


@@@@@


doc= 1136


Baker, Thomas (bap. 1623, d. 1689), mathematician, son of James Baker of Ilton, Somerset, steward to the Strangeways family, was baptized there on 21 December 1623. He matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1640, became a scholar at Wadham College in 1645, and graduated BA in 1647. According to Wood, Baker, though educated on puritanical lines, performed some small service for the royalist garrison at Oxford, through which he became in 1660 minister, and in 1681 vicar, of Bishop's Nympton, in Devon. 
Outside his curatorial and family duties, Baker occupied himself with mathematical studies. His 'Geometrical Key, or, Gate of Equations Unlocked' came to the notice of the Royal Society who in 1682 discussed and approved its publication, but dallied, until Robert Clavell FRS and publisher, saw it into print in 1684. Baker was elected to the Royal Society in November 1684, but was never admitted in person. The 'Key' was a polyglot Latin and English work which attempted to do without arithmetic in the solution of equations by means of construction. Baker's other mathematical works were noted by the Royal Society but remained unpublished. They did, however, send him various mathematical questions, to which he gave such satisfactory answers that the society awarded him an engraved medal, which his son James preserved. Nothing is known of Baker's wife but he had at least one son and several married daughters. His son James and daughter Joane inherited at his death in May 1689. He was buried at Bishop's Nympton on 22 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 1137


Baker, Thomas (b. 1680/81), playwright and journalist, was said to have been 'the Son of an eminent Attorney in 'King-street', near 'Guildhall', in the City of 'London'' (Mottley, 166). His comedy 'The Humour of the Age' was premiered at Drury Lane on 1 March 1701 and in his dedicatory letter the young author owned himself 'oblig'd to the Town for the extraordinary Reception this Rough Draught met with'. In February 1702 the Drury Lane actors were prosecuted for immoral expressions in three plays, including Baker's, but were acquitted. Baker's very successful 'Tunbridge-Walks, or, The Yeoman of Kent', was premiered in January 1703. It received regular performances throughout the first half of the century and was revived by Kitty Clive for her benefit in 1764. 'Biographia dramatica' claimed that Baker, realizing that he had acquired effeminate mannerisms, wrote the part of the fop Maiden (played by William Bullock) to parody himself and then reformed his behaviour. 
Baker was apparently working as a lawyer by November 1703, when the prologue to Mary Pix's 'The Different Widows' refers to his attending a judge at Westminster Hall. This was a period of puritan attacks on theatrical immorality and Baker's next play, the racy 'An Act at Oxford', was banned. The dedicatory letter of the 1704 text speaks of the 'favourable Reception and happy agreeable Conversation' Baker had had at Oxford, but it is not clear whether he was ever a student there. The play was reworked as 'Hampstead Heath', which seems to have achieved only three performances, at Drury Lane in autumn 1705. In the 'Long Vacation Prologue', spoken by Richard Estcourt at Drury Lane in September 1708, Baker deplored the union of London's two theatre companies, which had taken place that January and reduced opportunities for actors and playwrights. Baker claimed that his last play, 'The Fine Lady's Airs' (premiered on 14 December 1708), was well received, but it proved too satirical for the taste of the time, as did Thomas D'Urfey's 'The Modern Prophets' a few months later. Baker referred to the failure of D'Urfey's play in the prologue he wrote for Susanna Centlivre's 'The Busybody' (first performed on 12 May 1709) and D'Urfey responded with a full-scale attack, in which he claimed 'The Fine Lady's Airs' had been 'deservedly hist' (D'Urfey, 'Preface' to 'The Modern Prophets', 1709). Baker was by now disenchanted with the business of playwrighting and was considering abandoning it for 'something which may prove more serviceable to the Publick, and beneficial to my self' (Baker, 'Dedication', 'The Fine Lady's Airs'). 
Baker turned to journalism and on 8 July 1709, writing under the pseudonym of Phoebe Crackenthorpe, 'a Lady that knows every thing', inaugurated the 'Female Tatler'. This entertaining tri-weekly periodical, with its satirical portraits, theatrical gossip, and mock advertisements, was published first by Benjamin Bragge and from number 19 by Anne Baldwin. The 'Female Tatler' aroused the wrath of a rival journal, the 'British Apollo', which repeatedly attacked the supposed Mrs Crackenthorpe: '
this wise Undertaker, 

By Trade's an 'At -- ney', by Name is a 'B -- r.'

(14 Sept 1709)' It wrote (more than once) of the thrashing 'B -- r' received for his satirical attack on a city deputy, of the damning of his play, of his poverty, and of his being cast off by his nearest relations. In number 51 of the 'Female Tatler' (2 November 1709) Mrs Crackenthorpe announced that 'she' was resigning in favour of 'a Society of Modest Ladies' and Baker's connection with the journal ceased. According to Mottley, Baker left London for Worcestershire, 'being under Disgrace with his Father, who allow'd him but a very scanty Income' and died there 'the Death of the great 'Sylla', the 'Roman' Dictator, of that loathsome distemper the 'Morbus Pediculosus'' (Mottley, 167). 


@@@@@


doc= 1138


Baker, Thomas (1656-1740), nonjuring Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was born at Crook Hall, Lanchester, co. Durham, on 14 September 1656, the second of the six children of George Baker (died 1677), of Crook, and his wife, Margaret Forster, of Edderstone. He was educated at the free school in Durham under the Revd Thomas Battersby, and in June 1674, at the age of seventeen, he went up to St John's College, Cambridge, which, but for a three-year period in the north-east in the late 1680s, was to be his home for the rest of his life. He graduated BA in 1678 and proceeded MA in 1681, and in 1680 he was elected Ashton fellow. Early in 1685, like Joshua Barnes and Matthew Prior, he contributed to a collection of poems by members of the University of Cambridge on the occasion of the death of Charles II and the accession of James II, 'Moestissimae ac laetissimae academiae Cantabrigiensis'. Ordained deacon on 20 December 1685, he was ordained priest on 9 December 1686. In June 1687 he was appointed rector of Long Newton in the diocese of Durham by Bishop Nathaniel Crewe, a living he had to relinquish on 1 August 1690 because he refused to take the oaths to the new king, holding that his oath to James II was sacred and demanded unconditional loyalty. However, while at Long Newton he had resented what he felt to be Bishop Crewe's opportunism, and had strongly disapproved of James's attempts at Catholicizing England; although a nonjuror he continued to hold communion with the established church and was certainly not a Jacobite. 
As he had acquired his BD degree in 1688, just before the revolution, Baker did not simultaneously lose his fellowship. He lived on as a full and regular member of the college, but the prospect of a career in the church was over. Apart from being personally disappointed, over the next decade Baker came to be increasingly alarmed at the growth of latitudinarianism and deism, clearly connected with the developments in science and philosophy. He was a conservative Anglican clergyman who felt that this dangerous spirit of modernity of the post-revolution era had to be opposed. To this end he thoroughly prepared himself to write a book that would bring out the essential inadequacy of human knowledge and the fatal consequences of an overvaluing of human reason, emphasizing instead the need for a humble and reverent belief in revelation as our only certainty. He was a well-informed amateur, not a scientist or a philosopher, and his 'Reflections upon Learning' (1699), while evidently touching a chord with the general reader -- it went through eight editions before 1760 -- met with severe criticism from specialists. Although the book was published anonymously Baker became involved in an acrimonious controversy over it with the geologist and physician John Woodward, and this unpleasant experience clearly played a part in his decision to turn his attention to more congenial subjects. 
In the first decade of the eighteenth century Baker began a thorough study of the past, especially that of his college and of his university. For a nonjuror and antiquarian scholar at that period Cambridge was not the most congenial environment, yet Baker came to be one of the best informed historical and antiquarian scholars of his day. Not only was he the expert on St John's College, he was also familiar with the holdings of the other college libraries and the university library. He was sent material by scholars and friends from all over England, and he had access to books and manuscripts from some of the best collections in the country, including those of Harley, Thomas and Richard Rawlinson, John Bagford, John Strype, Thomas Hearne, White Kennett, Francis Peck, Humfrey Wanley, and the library of Bishop John Moore of Ely, which came to Cambridge in 1715. In the course of the years he transcribed many original documents, printed and manuscript, which he saw as an indispensable research tool for his work. Although he had completed the first draft of a history of St John's College by the end of 1705, he refrained from publishing it, fearful of adverse reactions in his own circle. Similarly in the early 1730s he abandoned the 'Athenae Cantabrigienses', a comprehensive history of Cambridge University like Anthony Wood's work on Oxford, because, cautious and perfectionist as he was, he had become daunted by the extent and the difficulty of the task. None the less, he continued to collect material, and ultimately there were forty-two volumes of transcripts. He also accumulated a valuable library of some 5000 printed books and manuscripts. Apart from works by and about St John's and Cambridge men, and an impressive number of bibliographical reference works, emphases in his library were early printed books, and the history of the church and the state, especially in the sixteenth century. Baker was a bibliophile, but a utilitarian one. He spent much time carefully correcting, repairing, and supplementing the defective and incomplete books and manuscripts that he, as a book collector of modest means, often had to be contented with. His letters, the preliminary pages and margins of his books and manuscripts, and his interleaved copy of Andrew Maunsell's 1595 catalogue abundantly illustrate his expertise as a bibliographer. 
Baker's extensive correspondence makes clear that he was at the centre of a network of some forty scholars and book collectors from many different backgrounds, and that in this way he played a very important role in the world of historical and antiquarian scholarship. Eirenical and undogmatic, unlike his fellow nonjuror and Oxford friend Thomas Hearne, he was naturally moderate and had a gift for nuance unusual in the ideologically polarized climate of the time. In his communications with other scholars Baker was a public-spirited man with a lofty ideal of serving the cause of learning, alongside the practical consideration of obtaining information for his own work. He had a deep reverence for the past and he came to idealize certain parts of it. Yet as a historian he also had a great respect for facts. Hence the openness and fairness in his accounts of such -- for most nonjurors -- 'suspect' figures as William Prynne and Gilbert Burnet and hence also his constant insistence on the need for original documents as the basis of history writing. He hated frivolousness, inaccuracy, and speculation in a historian, and for that reason he dismissed such foreign writers as Gregorio Leti and the historical writings of such English authors as Francis Bacon and Sir William Temple as insufficiently based on authentic material. 
Baker's only publication as a historical and antiquarian scholar, a reprint of Bishop John Fisher's 'Funeral Sermon of Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby', appeared in 1708, with a long and interesting preface. Both here and in his college history, his treatment of the founders and early benefactors of the college reveals his admiration for their orthodoxy, firmness, and integrity, and there is a clear element of identification on his part with these heroes of a glorious past, and also of justification of his own nonjuring position. Baker himself was a benefactor of the college. After the death of his eldest brother, George, in 1699 he had become actively involved in the management of the leasehold collieries of the Baker family in the Durham area, and mainly with the proceeds from this family business he founded the six Baker exhibitions at St John's in 1710. 
On 21 January 1717 Baker was officially deprived of his fellowship because he refused to take the oath of abjuration. Baker, for whom loyalty to the college had always been a major driving force and who was by now sixty, experienced this as a disgrace, and the event had a traumatic effect on him. Between 1717 and his death in 1740 he went through all his books and manuscripts and branded them with the words 'Thomas Baker Collegii Johannis Socius Ejectus'. Although in practical terms the change was not so great, as he was allowed to keep his rooms in the college, he was so bitter and disillusioned that he seriously considered leaving St John's and Cambridge for good. However, both had become too much part of his life for him to be able to take that drastic step. He had not been away from Cambridge very often, in spite of pressing invitations from several of his friends to visit them in London, Oxford, or elsewhere. There had been the necessary business visits to the north-east, which he always tried to combine with work among the Durham collections. In 1709 he had spent some time transcribing material in the state paper office in London, and occasionally he went over to Ely to search the episcopal registers there, but from 1717 onward he led a more and more retired life, spending his days among his books and manuscripts, copying material from the collections of others, and writing letters to his many friends and acquaintances. As more of his Cambridge friends dropped away he kept to his rooms, going out only sporadically for a walk in the garden or a visit to the coffee house. On 2 July 1740 he died of a stroke, at St John's, at the age of eighty-three, and three days later he was buried in the ante-chapel of St John's College next to the tomb of Hugh Ashton, one of the earliest benefactors of the college; he had never married. His library, preserved at St John's and at Cambridge University Library, stands as an impressive monument to the piety and learning of this modest and conscientious scholar. 


@@@@@


doc= 1139


Baker, Sir Thomas (1771?-1845), naval officer, of an old Kentish family, was a descendant, direct or collateral, of Vice-Admiral John Baker (1660-1716). He entered the navy in August 1781 on the storeship 'Dromedary' and was on her books until 1785. He was then three years in the East India Company service, but in 1788 he returned to the navy. After serving on the home, Halifax, and East India stations, he was promoted lieutenant on 13 October 1792. In 1793 he commanded the cutter 'Lion', in 1794 the lugger 'Valiant', and on 24 November 1795 he was promoted commander for good service in carrying dispatches to the West Indies. In 1796-7 he commanded the sloop 'Fairy' in the North Sea, and on 13 June 1797 he reached captain's rank, commanding the 'Princess Royal'. 
In January 1799 Baker was appointed to the 28-gun frigate 'Nemesis' in which, on 25 July 1800, when in command of a small squadron off Ostend, he met a number of Danish merchant vessels under convoy of the frigate 'Freya'. Neutral powers argued that the convoy of a ship of war was a guarantee that none of the vessels carried contraband, and that they were therefore exempt from search. This the British government had never admitted, and in accordance with his instructions Baker insisted on searching the Danish ships. The 'Freya' resisted but was quickly overpowered, and together with her convoy was brought into the Downs. After some negotiations the affair seemed to be amicably arranged, and the 'Freya' and her convoy were restored; but the tsar of Russia made it a pretext for renewing the 'armed neutrality', which he induced Denmark to join. This led to the dispatch of the fleet under Sir Hyde Parker, and the battle of Copenhagen. Baker's conduct was approved by the Admiralty, and in January 1801 he was appointed to the 36-gun frigate 'Phoebe', which he commanded on the Irish station until the peace of Amiens in October 1801. 
On the renewal of the war in 1803 Baker commissioned the 'Phoenix' (42 guns), attached to the Channel Fleet under William Cornwallis off Ushant and in the Bay of Biscay. On 10 August 1805, being then to the north-west of Cape Finisterre, he fell in with and, after a brilliant and well-fought action of rather more than three hours' duration, captured the French 46-gun frigate 'Didon'. The 'Didon' had been sent off from Ferrol on the 6th with important dispatches from Villeneuve to Admiral Allemand, who was on his way to join him with five sail of the line. In consequence of this capture, Allemand never joined Villeneuve, and his ships had no further part in the campaign. On 14 August the 'Phoenix' with her prize joined the British 74-gun 'Dragon', and the next day the three ships were sighted by Villeneuve, who took for granted that they were a part of the British fleet under Cornwallis looking for him. Not caring to risk an encounter, he turned south to Cadiz, and the fate that befell him off Cape Trafalgar. Baker in the mean-time took his prize to Plymouth and, returning to his former station, on 2 November sighted the French squadron of four ships of the line under Dumanoir, escaping from Trafalgar. Knowing that Sir Richard John Strachan was off Ferrol, he at once sailed thither, and the same night joined Strachan, to whom he gave the news which directly led to the capture of the four French ships on 4 November, the 'Phoenix' with the other frigates having an important part in the action. In the space of four months Baker had the opportunity, and ability, to exercise a major influence on the naval campaign of 1805. His performance was exemplary. 
A fortnight later Baker was appointed to the 'Didon' from which, in May 1806, he was moved to the 'Tribune', which he commanded for the next two years in the Bay of Biscay with distinguished success. In May 1808 he joined the 'Vanguard' as flag-captain to Rear-Admiral Thomas Bertie in the Baltic. On leaving her in 1811, he spent some time in Sweden, where he married the daughter of Count Routh, a Swedish noble; they had several children. From 1812 to 1815 he commanded the 74-gun 'Cumberland' in the West Indies, in the North Sea, and in charge of a convoy of East Indiamen to the Cape. In 1814 the prince of Orange conferred on him the order of William of the Netherlands, and on 4 June 1815 he was made a CB. He was appointed colonel of marines on 12 August 1819, was promoted rear-admiral on 19 July 1821, and was commander-in-chief on the coast of South America from 1829 to 1833. He was nominated KCB on 8 January 1831, became vice-admiral on 10 January 1837, and was awarded a good-service pension of $300 a year on 19 February 1842. He died at his residence, The Shrubbery, Walmer, Kent, on 26 February 1845. His second son, Horace Mann Baker, died a lieutenant, RN, in 1848. 


@@@@@


doc= 1140


Baker, Thomas Barwick Lloyd (1807-1886), promoter of reformatory schools, was born at the family seat, Hardwicke Court, the only son of Thomas John Lloyd Baker and his wife, Mary, daughter of William Sharp of Fulham. Like his father, Baker went to Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1826 but did not graduate. He entered Lincoln's Inn in 1828 and in 1833 became a magistrate for Gloucestershire, where Hardwicke Court was located. Shortly afterwards he became a visiting magistrate at the county gaol and house of correction at Gloucester. In 1841, on the death of his father, a noted innovator in local poor-law administration, Baker inherited Hardwicke Court. A high-church Anglican, Baker contributed substantially to the restoration of Hardwicke, Uley, and other churches, and urged the different skeins of Anglicanism to rejoice in diversity and tolerance of one another. He was a staunch tory all his life, and was president of the Gloucestershire chamber of commerce, a captain in the county yeomanry cavalry, a deputy lieutenant of Gloucestershire, and high sheriff of Gloucester in 1847-8. Baker was well known locally as an ornithologist and, indeed, his first published work in 1835 was an index of birds. On 10 March 1840 he married Mary, daughter of Nicholas Lewis Fenwick of Besford Court, Worcestershire; they had two sons, Granville Edwin Lloyd Baker ('b'. 1841), high sheriff of Gloucestershire in 1898, and Henry Orde Lloyd Baker ('b'. 1842). 
Baker became internationally known for two things: his pioneering work in reformatory schools and his writings on crime and punishment. He first encountered reformatories for young offenders in London in 1837 and was also in close touch with the well-known pioneer of these institutions, the Revd Sydney Turner. Following a large conference on the subject at Birmingham in 1851 attended by Turner and the other doyen of the movement, Mary Carpenter, Baker knocked two farm cottages in the grounds of Hardwicke Court into one and opened Hardwicke Reformatory. A close associate and co-manager at the beginning of the project was George Henry Bengough (1829-1865), a local landowner and theorist about crime and punishment who, for the first two years, spent long periods living and teaching at the reformatory. With a permanent staff of four and an average of forty young males up to 1870, the institution was certified under the 1854 'Reformatory Schools Act', which regulated and encouraged the spread of these institutions; after 1870 the number of inmates rose to an average of seventy. 
Baker was leader of one of two schools of thought about reformatories. On one side, Mary Carpenter and her supporters propounded a model for reformatories in which staff were viewed as substitute parents and agents of holistic personal transformation of the individual offender, and in which individualized treatment and long periods of education and patient, careful nurturing characterized by disciplined but warm engagement between staff and inmates would serve to rescue the young offenders from the delinquency formerly fostered by their corrupting social environment. Baker took the reverse view: reformatories were to be reserved only for recidivistic youth and should deter further delinquency by severity. At Hardwicke, therefore, the inmates were compelled to carry out heavy spade work on the clay soil of the farm and were punished by beating or confinement in cells for any disobedience. Baker was sure that hard labour in the countryside away from the corruption of cities would condition minds and bodies to habitual labour, induce mental tranquillity, and (incidentally) roughen and callous hands deliberately kept tender and nimble for pickpocketing or till raiding. There were night classes in reading, writing, and arithmetic, but classroom education took second place to labour, and the inmates slept in hammocks in dormitories. Baker kept the young offenders for much shorter periods than reformatories run on the nurturing/interactive model, only two years on average, and always released them on licence, often to work for local farmers. The regime depended on a marks system, whereby compliance earned amelioration of severity; it was this model, of deterrent, rigidly routinized, total institutions, which prevailed in the reformatories that spread across Britain following these pioneering projects, rather than that of Mary Carpenter. Baker was convinced that his severe model hugely reduced crime by general deterrence and the habituation of the inmates themselves to labour and obedience. 
Baker wrote about 200 journal and newspaper articles (in both the local and the national press) on crime and punishment. In all his writings he advanced the view that an effective system of criminal justice administration rested on the double foundations of the criminal's cognition of punishment and of motivation for good behaviour. He believed that to deter crime there must be very widespread knowledge of the punishment for criminal behaviour, and that this punishment should operate not on the basis of maximum retributive severity to all offenders, nor yet on what he viewed as unsuccessful individualized reformatory programmes, but on the basis of an accumulation of punishment in accordance with the known convictions and proven antecedent behaviour of the offender. A first conviction for the majority of offenders would carry a very short prison sentence to achieve the maximum shock; each subsequent conviction would carry a higher penalty until the fourth, which would automatically carry a sentence of life imprisonment to secure the maximum incapacitation from crime of the individual offender and the maximum of deterrence to others. 
Allied to this 'cumulative system' of deterrence, Baker demanded a prison system which enlisted the offender's motivation and energy in his own reformation. The initial regime would be extremely severe but, as the prisoner demonstrated compliance and commitment to the programmes of the institution, would progressively allow greater freedom and comfort until eventually the prisoner would secure conditional release on licence supervised by the police. In 1871 a version of this system was introduced by Baker in Gloucestershire following work on similar lines pioneered by Sir Walter Crofton in Ireland. 
Baker also designed a system, known as 'The Berkshire system', to test the veracity of those claiming relief at workhouses on the basis that they were travelling to a place of employment. This was experimentally tried in Gloucestershire from 1868 onwards. Baker was regularly cited by internationally known theorists of crime and punishment of his time, such as the fourth earl of Carnarvon, William Tallack, E. C. Wines, and Professor Von Holtzendorff. He was also a founder of the highly influential National Association for the Promotion of Social Science. A selection of his writings was published by Herbert Philips and Edmund Verney in 1889 as 'War with Crime'. 
Baker suffered ill health from 1882 onwards and thereafter took a lesser part in local public affairs, although he continued to publish up to 1885. He died at Hardwicke Court on 10 December 1886, and was buried at Hardwicke church. 


@@@@@


doc= 1141


Baker, Sir Thomas Durand (1837-1893), army officer, was born at Court of Hill, Shropshire, on 23 March 1837, son of John Durand Baker (1803/4-1866), vicar of Bishop's Tawton, north Devon, and his wife, Sarah Georgiana, 'nee' Fowler (died 1848). He was educated at Cheltenham College. Baker was commissioned an ensign in the 18th (Royal Irish) regiment on 18 August 1854, served with his regiment at the siege of Sevastopol from 30 December 1854, and was mentioned in dispatches for gallantry on 18 June 1855 during the attack on the Redan redoubt. He was promoted lieutenant on 12 January 1855. He was present when the fortress fell on 8 September, and returned to England in July 1856. For his success during the war he received the campaign medal with clasp and the Turkish and Sardinian medals. In November 1857 he embarked with his regiment for India, to help suppress the Indian mutiny which had begun in May 1857. He served during 1858 with the field force operating in central India in pursuit of Tantia Topi. Baker was promoted captain on 26 October 1858, and successfully obtained admission to the Staff College at Camberley, from which he passed out in 1862. 
In 1863 Baker accompanied the 2nd battalion, Royal Irish regiment to New Zealand; there he served as deputy assistant adjutant-general to the forces between 20 March 1864 and 31 March 1866, and then as assistant adjutant-general until the end of April 1867. He served as assistant military secretary to Lieutenant-General Sir Duncan Cameron in the engagement at Rangiriri on 20 November 1863, and participated in the Waikato and Wanganui campaigns in 1864-6. Baker was a staff officer with Major-General Carey's force during the unsuccessful assault on Orakau on 31 March 1864 when he led one of the assault columns, and was also present when it was finally captured on 2 April. For his bravery, untiring energy, and zeal in New Zealand he was mentioned in dispatches and received the campaign medal, and on 21 March 1865 was given distriction a brevet majority. After the completion of his service in New Zealand in April 1867, he was stationed in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, where he became a prominent figure in horse-racing circles, briefly owning the champion steeplechaser Babbler, ridden by his acquaintance from Cheltenham schooldays Adam Lindsay Gordon. 
On 2 October 1873 Baker was appointed assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general of the Asante expedition, and accompanied Sir Garnet Wolseley to the Gold Coast. He served throughout the campaign, participated in the engagement at Esaman (14 October), the relief of Abrakampa (5 and 6 November), the battle of Amoaful (31 January 1874), and the battle of Ordahsu and the capture of Kumasi (4 February). In addition to his duties as quartermaster-general, from 14 October 1873 to 17 December 1874 he also performed those of chief of staff. For his services in the Asante kingdom he was mentioned in dispatches by Wolseley, who attributed to Baker's untiring energy much of the success that had attended the operations, and expressed the view that he possessed 'every quality that is valuable to a staff officer'. Baker was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 1 April 1874, received the medal with clasp, and was made a CB. 
Following his return from the Gold Coast, on 22 May 1874 Baker was appointed a deputy assistant quartermaster-general on the headquarters staff in London, and on 10 November 1875 an assistant adjutant-general. On 21 April 1877 he was made an aide-de-camp to the queen, with rank of colonel in the army. During the 1877 Russo-Turkish War he was attached to the Russian army, and was present at the principal operations in the Balkans. In November 1878 he accompanied Lord Lytton, the new viceroy, to India, as his military secretary. Baker was serving as a member of the army reform commission -- appointed to examine reductions in the Indian army without impairing its efficiency -- when, in September 1879, news of the murder at Kabul of Sir Louis Cavagnari reached Simla. When Sir Frederick Roberts was ordered to advance on Kabul to seek retribution he requested that Baker should command the 2nd infantry brigade. 
Baker accompanied Roberts when he rejoined his division in the Kurram valley and on 19 September was present when Afghan troops attacked entrenchments occupied by his brigade at the Shutar Gardan Pass. By 1 October 1879 the whole of the Kabul field force was concentrated in the Logar valley in Afghanistan. On 6 October Baker commanded his brigade during the successful battle of Charasia and was present when Kabul was reoccupied three days later. In November Baker led a force to Maidan, on the Kabul-Ghazni Road, where he repulsed an Afghan attack before returning to Kabul. On 8 November he commanded a force co-operating with other columns, between Arghandeh and Maidan, attempting to destroy a large gathering of Afghans. However, on hearing news of the failure of Massey's column he returned to Kabul. Baker attacked an Afghan force occupying the Takht-i-Shah Hill on 13 December and the following day attacked the Asmai heights, although on this occasion he was forced by superior numbers to withdraw. On 23 December Baker took part in the complete defeat and dispersion of the Afghan force which had attacked the Sherpur entrenchments. Shortly afterwards he commanded an expedition which advanced into Kohistan and destroyed a fortified post. He commanded an infantry brigade of the force with which Roberts left Kabul for Kandahar on 9 August 1880, following the arrival of Sir Donald Stewart and news of the defeat of Maiwand, to relieve the beleaguered garrison. Following a three-week march Baker took a prominent part during the battle of Kandahar on 1 September, after which the city was relieved. He then returned to England. For his services in Afghanistan he was mentioned in dispatches, received the campaign medal with three clasps and a bronze star, and on 22 February 1881 was promoted KCB. 
On 30 March 1881 Baker was appointed a brigadier-general under Sir Frederick Roberts, to command the base and line of communications in Natal in operations being planned against the Boers of the Transvaal following the earlier disastrous defeat at Majuba Hill. However, an armistice was concluded and Baker returned home the following September without having seen any active service. On 1 April 1882 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel, appointed deputy quartermaster-general in Ireland, and, on 3 September, deputy adjutant-general in Ireland. 
Baker returned to India on 10 October 1884 when he was nominated adjutant-general in the East Indies, with the local rank of major-general. He served during the 1886-7 Burmese expedition and was mentioned in dispatches. He was promoted major-general on 1 September 1866 and then held command of a division of the Bengal army until 1890. He then returned to England, and was appointed quartermaster-general to the forces at the Horse Guards on 1 October 1890. On 29 April 1891 he was made a temporary lieutenant-general and on 15 June 1892 was awarded a good-service pension. While on leave of absence from his duties at the War Office, Baker died of dropsy at the Hotel de France, Pau, France, on 9 February 1893, after a brief illness. He was buried on 18 February in Bishop's Tawton churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 1142


Baker, Valentine (1827-1887), army officer, was born on 1 April 1827 at Enfield, the third son of Samuel Baker (died 1862), later of Lypiatt Park, Stroud, Gloucestershire, and his first wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Dobson of Enfield. The family's wealth had been established by the first Valentine Baker, a privateer during the American War of Independence and owner of sugar plantations in Jamaica and Mauritius. Samuel Baker inherited the plantations and was also a successful businessman, shipowner, director of the Great Western Railway, and chairman of the Gloucester Bank. He was unusual in his regard for education, and his close-knit family of seven surviving children attended local schools, including the College School, Gloucester, were tutored at home, and studied abroad. 
Baker was intended for the army, with a commission purchased in the 10th hussars. He went first in 1848 to Ceylon, where his eldest brother, the explorer Samuel White Baker (1821-1893), had purchased land, intending, with family and settlers, to create an English colony, at the same time indulging the brothers' passion for big-game hunting. In 1848 Baker joined, as ensign, the Ceylon rifles, and in April 1851 went to India to join the 10th hussars. 
In 1852 Baker transferred to the 12th lancers in order to participate in the Basuto War in South Africa, distinguishing himself by his gallantry in action at the Berea in December 1852. Promoted lieutenant without purchase in July 1853, he served in India. He was still with the 12th lancers when the regiment was sent to the Crimea, reaching Balaklava in April 1855, and was present at the battle of Chernaya and the fall of Sevastopol. His active service showed him faults of the British cavalry which he later tried to reform. 
In 1856, when the 12th lancers returned to India, Baker rejoined the 10th hussars, an expensive regiment with the highest social position in the cavalry of the line, as captain (by purchase). He obtained his majority (by purchase) in 1859 and, taking command of the regiment in 1860, remained as its colonel (by purchase, full colonel 1865) until 1873. As a peace-time soldier Baker established his reputation as a brilliant cavalry officer, a perfectionist devoted to his troops, and a theorist. In 1858 he produced 'The British Cavalry', an extension of Lewis Nolan's work: his practical recommendations on equipment, uniform, and stud farms were later in part adopted. In 1860 he wrote 'Our National Defences', expounding his conviction that France's aggressive preparations were directed at Britain and proposing defence changes including linked battalions and a 'national guard'. In 1869 he set out proposals in 'Army Reform', recommending changes in regimental administration, and submitted comments to the royal commission on military education, condemning the 'cramming' system. As background to his studies he travelled in Europe, inspecting military establishments, and was present as an observer during the Austro-Prussian and Franco-Prussian wars. In his writing Baker expressed himself clearly and incisively, 'always jolting the establishment, questioning the status quo or challenging the fashionable' (Anglesey, 3.117). 
As colonel of the 10th hussars Baker made his regiment smart, efficient, and dynamic, and won the devotion of his officers and men. He was prepared to make changes and experiment, and he had the gift of communicating his ideas and enthusiasms. He was the first to experiment with railway transport of troops (July 1860), and his regiment was among the first to learn the new system of signalling. 
In 1863, when the prince of Wales (later Edward VII) became colonel-in-chief, Baker had additional support for his innovations, and the relationship between the two developed into friendship. From 1863 to 1867, while the 10th hussars were stationed in Ireland, Baker was able, at relative distance from the War Office, to work on various reforms, including his new 'non-pivot drill'. The 10th was used in support of the civil power and against the Fenians. During the 1867 Fenian uprising Baker commanded the Thurles flying column, for which he was commended by the commander-in-chief, Ireland. 
Back in England regimental highlights were ceremonial occasions, with the prince and the colonel leading the parades and the regiment presenting its disciplined best and its superior horses (Baker's policy was to invest in blood horses with staying power). When the 10th hussars were posted to India at the end of 1872, Baker resigned. 
The years of his command were also successful for Baker personally. On 13 December 1865 he married Fanny (died 1885), only child of Frank Wormald of Potterton Hall, Aberford, Yorkshire; they had two daughters. His friendship with the prince of Wales led to membership of the Marlborough Club, London, a social centre for the prince's friends. He became a friend of Frederick Burnaby (1842-1885) of the Royal Horse Guards, and won the approval of the duke of Cambridge, the commander-in-chief of the British army. 
In April 1873, while awaiting a new appointment, Baker set out with two military companions on a journey to northern Persia, Turkestan, and the borders of Afghanistan. It was a private expedition, a grand hunting party, but also an exploratory venture prompted by Russian advances through central Asia. 
Baker kept a daily journal in which, as well as sporting descriptions, he reported on political discussions and military possibilities. The journey was full of incident and endurance: Baker fell seriously ill, and suffered frustration because his expedition lacked official approval. In his detailed account, published in 1876 as 'Clouds in the East', he provided an evaluation of Russian advances towards India, criticized British foreign policy, urged military preparedness and a 'bolder policy' against Russia in Asia, and proposed a nine-point plan of action (the basis of his lecture to the Royal United Service Institution in May 1874). 
In September 1874 Valentine Baker was appointed assistant quartermaster-general at Aldershot, with his first major responsibility the organization of a grand army review to take place in August 1875. It was a period of consolidation in his career: he was expected to be an established general by the 1880s. Instead an incident took place on a train and Baker's career in the British army was ended. 
On 17 June 1875 Baker travelled to London with an appointment to dine with the duke of Cambridge. In a first-class compartment he talked with a young lady, Miss Dickinson, the sister of a Royal Engineers officer, and, it was alleged, tried to rape her. He was arrested; evidence against him was given by two gentlemen in the next compartment in addition to the detailed account of Miss Dickinson. There was public outcry against him, much moral indignation, and crowds gathered at the trial, which began on 30 July at Croydon assizes. The judge, Mr Justice Brett, spoke of the incident as 'a sudden outbreak of wickedness' and hoped that at some future time Baker might redeem himself 'by some brilliant service' ('The Times', 3 Aug 1875, 10). On 2 August he was acquitted of attempted rape, convicted on the lesser charge of indecent assault, fined $500, and sentenced to a year's imprisonment. 
Baker was cashiered, 'Her Majesty having no further occasion for his services' ('Annual Register', 1875, 55). This was the queen's decision. She thought his brother Samuel Baker unprincipled, and was convinced that Valentine was like him, and a disgrace to the British army. Baker's wife, family, and friends, including the prince of Wales, stood by him. They, and his regiment, and most of the army believed, and continued to believe, that there had been mitigating circumstances, evidence not revealed, and that it had not been a fair trial. 
On release from prison Baker left for Constantinople in September 1876, taking up an appointment, through the intervention of the prince, with the Turkish government. He was to organize a new system of civil gendarmerie, and was to advise the Turkish army on strengthening the fortifications around Constantinople. 
War between Russia and Turkey broke out in April 1877, and in August Baker took up a command as general available for special services (henceforth he was known as Baker Pasha) and set out for the front at Shumla in Bulgaria. With him at his camp were his gendarmerie officers and an assortment of doctors, newspaper correspondents, MPs, and army officers come to observe the war. Among these was Herbert Kitchener, who was to become a friend and champion of Baker. Also there arrived unexpectedly Fred Burnaby. 
The Russian armies crossed the Danube, but the Turkish armies stopped their advance. It was not until the fortress of Plevna fell on 10 December 1877 that the Russians began to cross the mountains. Baker commanded the centre division of the army at Kamarli, and, recognizing the importance of the pass of Tashkesan, he made an offer to the Turkish commander, guaranteeing that he would hold it to the last. This his division did, in a battle that lasted more than ten hours against vastly superior Russian forces. No reinforcements came, and the losses were severe. Just before nightfall another Russian attack was repulsed, and Baker's troops knew the day was won. That rear-guard action allowed the Turkish army to make an organized retreat: there was a telegram from the sultan and Baker was promoted lieutenant-general. 
Baker, with Burnaby as his companion and support, joined the main body of the army in its retreat across Bulgaria. He was consulted by the Turkish army about defences for Constantinople, and asked to take on the command of the existing fortifications. Before he could take up the new post, the Turkish government had yielded to Russian demands in the treaty of San Stefano, and Baker, disgusted at the humiliation that would now be served upon the army -- and his opinion of and love for his Turkish soldiers were great -- asked for leave of absence. 
Baker was acclaimed by the British public as a hero. The newspapers were enthusiastic in describing his military achievements, and Tashkesan was applauded as one of the most brilliant rear-guard actions of all time. He was re-elected to the Marlborough Club in March 1878 (and in 1881 to the Army and Navy Club). His 'War in Bulgaria' (2 vols., 1879) revealed the enthusiastic soldier and the disappointed general, and his disillusionment with the Turkish high command; but it argued for continued support of Turkey against Russian advances on India. From the war he drew military lessons for Britain. Like others, he emphasized the lethality of rifle firepower and the necessity of entrenching, loose formations, and flank attacks, but claimed that cavalry could still be effective in battle. 
Baker stayed on in Turkey with a new army position. His standing was high with the Turkish government and he was in favour with the sultan. His major tasks were to carry out army reforms; by 1879 his plans were sufficiently advanced for him to include chapters on the reorganization of the Turkish army in 'War in Bulgaria'. 
In 1882 came an invitation from the khedive to organize and command a new Egyptian army. As a consequence of the British occupation of Egypt, Lord Dufferin, ambassador at Constantinople, had been authorized to draw up plans for a reformed Egyptian administration. High priority was given to a new army under the command of a British general with British officers in all supporting ranks. 
Baker, consulting Dufferin, was assured that his appointment would be supported by the British cabinet. By October 1882 he was in Cairo with his plans for the army and his list of British officers willing to serve under him approved by the khedive. Two months later he was relieved of his post: the queen would not accept his appointment. The cabinet denied that it had given its approval, claiming that it was not possible for British officers to serve under a general who was not himself a serving British general. Baker was offered a command, as inspector-general, of a new gendarmerie and police force, a post to which the queen had no objections. Baker accepted, handing over his army plans and list to Sir Evelyn Wood. 
In the new force Baker planned to use semi-military mounted troops in rural Egypt and civilian police in the towns; he was able to choose as officers a number of those who had served with him in Turkey. Administratively, the gendarmerie became the responsibility of the ministry of the interior. The calibre of the recruited men was low, but in mid-1883, when cholera swept Cairo, the new service showed its value in manning the cordons. Administrative difficulties followed with the British cabinet's appointment of Clifford Lloyd to undertake reforms in the ministry. Lloyd, with little knowledge of Egypt, took exception to Baker's gendarmerie, and by the end of 1883 had decided upon its abolition. 
The British gave no support to the Egyptian government in its actions in the Sudan, but interfered. In February 1883 the khedive, on Baker's recommendation, appointed General Williams Hicks Pasha to retrain the army and overcome the Mahdist rebels. Hicks was assured of the support of a Sudan committee, with Baker as its executive officer. But the British objected to the committee and obstructed communications between Baker (ministry of interior) and Hicks (ministry of war). Hicks was not informed of the administrative changes, and became increasingly isolated. In November 1883 his army was annihilated by Mahdist forces and another Egyptian army was defeated. Military action was required immediately to relieve garrisons in eastern Sudan. The British government refused to allow the new Egyptian army to go to the Sudan (because its officers were also serving British officers), nor would it send the British army of occupation. The only force available was the gendarmerie, and the khedive made a personal appeal to Baker. By December 1883 the gendarmerie, unwilling, ill-prepared, undisciplined, was on its way. 
At Suakin on the Red Sea, Baker tried to carry out the contradictory instructions received from the khedive and Sir Evelyn Baring, the British consul-general -- to pacify the country, but not to embark on military action -- while training his troops. The promised support from Cairo -- ships, supplies, more troops -- was delayed. The Sudanese reinforcements arrived without their promised leader, Zobehr Pasha, because of British objections to his background as a slave dealer. When the telegraph was installed, an official message arrived that the Egyptian government, under pressure from the British, was abandoning all activities in the Sudan. Baker and his force were left isolated. On 4 February 1884, with nearly 4000 men, he marched out of Trinkitat to cross the desert to relieve the garrison at Tokar: accompanying him was his friend Burnaby, who had arrived in response to a telegram from Baker's wife. The Mahdist rebels were waiting, Baker's force was attacked and panicked: more than 2300 men were killed at al-Teb, many speared in the back. Among those who died were gendarmerie officers who had been with Baker in Bulgaria. 
Rear-Admiral Sir William Hewett, stationed with his five ships in Suakin harbour, took over. The remnants of Baker's force were shipped back to Cairo, the officers to find that their posts had been abolished. There was consternation in London, and on 14 February the British government agreed to immediate military action. Major-General Sir Gerald Graham was in Suakin by 22 February, commanding a British force which included a troopship with men of the 10th hussars (who welcomed Baker enthusiastically). At the second battle of al-Teb on 29 February the Mahdists were defeated. Baker, acting as chief intelligence officer, was severely wounded in the face, and received special commendation in Graham's dispatches. Baker's friends and the public appealed once more for his reinstatement: again the queen refused. 
Lloyd resigned in May 1884, his reforms were set aside, and Baker began rebuilding his force. Still believing in the need for semi-military troops, he concentrated on the gendarmerie, allowing the traditional policing system to remain. In January 1885 Baker, sharing in the public grief over the death of Gordon at Khartoum, also suffered personal losses. Burnaby was killed at Abu Klea. Baker's elder daughter, Hermione, died, aged eighteen, later that month, and his wife, Fanny, in February, both from typhoid: their deaths 'seemed to have crushed his spirit' ('Annual Register', 1887, 161). He stayed on in Cairo, continuing as inspector-general of the gendarmerie. 
In June 1887, the year of her jubilee, the queen wrote to the prince of Wales proposing that Baker be reinstated. There was no immediate announcement, instead administrative delays. Following an attack of fever, on 17 November 1887 Baker died of a heart attack aboard the steam-launch 'Vigilant' on the Sweetwater Canal at Tell al-Kebir. A telegram from the War Office gave instructions from the duke of Cambridge that he was to be buried with full military honours. A union flag was draped on his coffin and on 19 November the procession set out for the English cemetery in Cairo from the house of Sir Frederick Stephenson, commander of the British army in Egypt, who spoke of Baker as the bravest soldier England had ever had. Sir Evelyn Baring wrote to the prime minister about Baker with warmth and understanding, and also to Samuel Baker of his close friendship with Baker; Lord Salisbury, in responding to Baring, was equally generous. 

'The Times' obituary commented, 'his career... might have been among the most brilliant in our service'; and wrote of 'the error which deprived his country of his services', and 'the splendid atonement which he sought to make' ('The Times', 18 Nov 1887, 7). A memorial plaque in honour of 'Lieutenant General Valentine Baker Pasha' was erected in the Anglican cathedral, Cairo, by the British army. 
Baker was strongly built, high-coloured, and walrus-moustached, with piercing dark eyes. He was an exceptional soldier, 'one of the most remarkable cavalrymen of the age' (Anglesey, 3.116), and he had once been a member of the social circle around the prince of Wales. But he was essentially a quiet, serious man, courageous in action and in word, a companion to his fellow officers, generous to his men, considerate to those of different race and religion; private, more interested in family than society, he was without bravado. He was liked and held in high respect by his peers, by Sir Evelyn Baring, Sir Frederick Stephenson, Admiral Hewett, and General Graham. He also enjoyed the continuing loyal regard of the officers and men of the 10th hussars and the long-standing friendship of their colonel-in-chief, the prince of Wales. If Baker had been responsible for the incident on the train, and many believed otherwise, it had been an aberration. 


@@@@@


doc= 1143


Baker, William (1668-1732), bishop of Norwich, was born on 20 December 1668 at Ilton, Somerset, the second, but first surviving, son of William Baker, vicar of Ilton (died 1708), and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Baker ('fl'. 1666-1683). He was educated first at Crewkerne School, and entered Wadham College, Oxford, in 1686. Baker is said to have 'lived freely in his youth and spoilt a good natural constitution' ('Diaries of Thomas Wilson', 83). He was made fellow of Wadham in 1693, and was granted his DD in 1707 despite an attempt, possibly by Thomas Hearne, to block the degree ('Remarks', 2.26). In 1719 he was elected warden of Wadham College; the election caused a stir, with stories of bribery and the spectacular contrition, and then madness, of John Leaves, the fellow whose vote turned the election. 
Baker was successively rector of St Ebbe's in Oxford, Padworth in Berkshire, and, from 1712 to 1715, Bladon in Oxfordshire -- all three in the Oxford diocese. In 1715 he was collated to the archdeaconry of Oxford; during the same year he was made rector of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, an incumbency which he held until his death. In September 1715 Baker had become a chaplain-in-ordinary to George I; he was deprived of a journey with the king to Hanover in 1722, but was made bishop of Bangor in 1723, and translated to Norwich in 1727. During his brief tenure of the see of Bangor he managed to make his only brother, Nicholas, treasurer of the church there; and his two nephews, John Baker and William Baker, were provided for by being made joint registrars of the diocese of Norwich. 
Four of Baker's sermons were published, all demonstrating his strong whig principles, for which he earned the opprobrium of several tories. Dr William King included Baker in his list of whig churchmen 'who preach up Comprehension, Moderation... Occasional Conformity, Resistance... and all the detestable doctrines of Forty-one' (King, 'Works', 2.217); the earl of Oxford, in 1732, thought him 'a most worthless wretch' ('Portland MSS', 6.156). Thomas Hearne, his erstwhile Oxford opponent, although allowing that he was 'a very personable man', and had been a 'great Tutor' at Wadham College, called him a 'stinking Whigg', and 'a man of but little learning' who, 'tho' a great drinker, was grown so miserably covetous and sordid at the last, as not to allow himself hardly necessaries' ('Remarks', 7.11; 11.137, 139). Baker died, unmarried, at Bath on 4 December 1732 and was buried in the abbey there. 


@@@@@


doc= 1144


Baker, William (bap. 1742, d. 1785), printer and classical scholar, was baptized on 5 April 1742 at St Mary, Reading, the son of William Baker, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Cox. His father had hoped for a career in the church for him, encouraged in this by Dr Robert Bolton, dean of Carlisle, who had virtually assured the young William a university place. When Bolton was unable to fulfil his promise, Baker was apprenticed to Joseph Kippax, printer of Cullum Street, London. He was not only diligent in Kippax's employ, often working overtime, but he also used his free hours to good purpose, buying books and studying. He eventually made himself proficient in Greek and Latin, as well as in Italian and French, and attained some knowledge of Hebrew. He tended to overt-exert himself, however, and before he was twenty-one he suffered a severe illness. While there is no sale catalogue of his library, there is evidence in his two major publications that he acquired a respectable library of classical and other works. When Kippax died, Baker took over the business, later moving to Ingram Court, Fenchurch Street, in the City of London and forming a partnership with John William Galabin. 
Baker's 'Peregrinations of the Mind' (1770) is a series of twenty-three essays on such various topics as war, the stage, matrimony, in defence of theatrical humour. Each is headed by a motto from Greek, Latin, and English authors; Baker translated the classical mottoes, including the originals in an appendix. There are also many footnotes in various languages. In 1783 Baker printed his 'Theses Graecae et Latinae selectae', a compendium of his notes compiled over years of reading the works of classical writers. He made many friends among antiquaries and scholars of his day, including Oliver Goldsmith, Dr Edmund Barker, James Merrick, Hugh Farmer, and Cesar de Missy. 
Baker again suffered from his tendency to over-exert himself, this time from walking, in December 1784. Following a nine-month illness he died in London of an enlargement of the omentum on 29 September 1785. 
William Baker was buried in the vault of St Dionis Backchurch, Lime Street and Fenchurch Street, London. A Latin inscription to his memory was placed on a family tomb in St Mary Church, Reading. His library became the property of the physician and philanthropist Dr J. C. Lettsom (1744-1815). 


@@@@@


doc= 1145


Baker, Sir William Erskine (1808-1881), army officer and engineer, was the fourth son of Captain Joseph Baker RN, and was born on 29 November 1808 at Leith. He was educated at Ludlow and at Addiscombe College (1825-6), and after attending an extended engineering course while a cadet he went out to India as a lieutenant in the Bengal Engineers in 1828. On 29 June 1837 he married, at Karnal, Frances Gertrude, third daughter of Major-General A. Duncan; she survived her husband. 
Baker was promoted captain in 1840, and saw service in the First Anglo-Sikh War. He led one of the attacking columns to the entrenchments at the battle of Sobraon, for which he was thanked in the dispatch and promoted major. He was afterwards almost exclusively employed in the public works department, and was successively superintendent of the Delhi canals, superintendent of canals and forests in Sind, director of the Ganges Canal project, consulting engineer to the government of India for railways, and secretary to the government of India in the public works department. His services as a civil engineer were considerable, and he was widely regarded as the greatest authority of his time on irrigation. His military promotion continued during his civil employment, and he became lieutenant-colonel in 1854 and colonel in 1857. 
In 1858 Baker returned to England, and was appointed military secretary to the India Office. But his expertise was rather that of an engineer than a soldier, and in 1861 he became a member of the Council of India, and as such was chief adviser to the home government on Indian civil engineering. He was promoted major-general in 1865, colonel-commandant of the Royal (formerly Bengal) Engineers in 1871, and lieutenant-general in 1874; he was made a KCB in 1870. Retiring from public life in 1875, he was appointed general in 1877, and died at his home at Castle Banwell, Somerset, on 16 December 1881. Sir William Erskine Baker's work in Sind was memorable; the great irrigation works which he carried out there remained as a monument to his energy and organizational skill. 


@@@@@


doc= 1146


Bakewell, Robert (1725-1795), stock breeder and farmer, was born at Dishley Grange, Dishley (otherwise Dixley), near Loughborough, Leicestershire, on 23 May 1725. His father, also a farmer, had been born at the same place and rented a farm there of 440 acres. About 1755 Robert Bakewell, having qualified himself for experiments in husbandry and cattle breeding by visiting farms in the west of England and other parts of the country, took charge of the farm on the failure of his father's health; he succeeded to the entire management of it on his father's death in 1760. 
As a stock breeder Bakewell aimed at obtaining a better breed of sheep and cattle, and he succeeded in producing the new Leicester breed of sheep -- small-boned, barrel-shaped animals which fattened rapidly and were highly profitable, having a high proportion of meat to the less valuable parts of the carcass. Bakewell also produced the Dishley cattle, called the new Leicestershire longhorn, 'a small, clean-boned, round, short-carcased, kindly-looking cattle, inclined to be fat' (Culley, 26); and he produced a breed of black horses, remarkable for their strength in harness on the farm, and for their utility in the army. He was the first to carry on the trade of hiring out rams and bulls on a large scale, and he established a club, the Dishley Society, for the express object of ensuring purity of breed. By 1770 his rams fetched 25 guineas, and a few years later he was making $3000 a year by their hire, deriving in one year from one particular ram, known as Two-pounder, as much as 1200 guineas. Many of the present humane notions regarding animals were anticipated by Bakewell, his stock being treated with marked kindness; even his bulls were remarkable for their obedience and docility. 
In Bakewell's experiments on feeding and housing stock he was as bold as in breeding. He stood first in the kingdom 'as an improver of grass-land by watering' (Marshall, 284 ff.); he flooded his meadows, making a canal of a mile and a quarter in length, and was able by means of irrigation to cut grass four times a year. By means of double floors to his stalls, he collected farm refuse and diluted it for liquid manure. On these accounts Bakewell received many distinguished visitors. All were shown the boats in which he carried some of his crops; his wharf for these boats; his plan of conveying his turnips about the farm by water; his teams of cows instead of oxen; his own design of plough; and his collection of animal skeletons, and carcasses (in pickle), for testing where breeds varied in bone and flesh. 
Bakewell's achievements as a pioneer of selective breeding were not quite so extraordinary as has been supposed. For centuries attempts had been made to improve stock by crossing it with animals that had the desired characteristics, and before Bakewell the emphasis in sheep breeding had already moved towards a concern with the carcass. Another midland breeder, Joseph Allom, had already made some progress, and in Bakewell's time there were a score of well-known breeders in the midlands alone who were engaged in the improvement of sheep. Similarly, Bakewell's experiments with cattle were based on Lancashires; this breed had already been improved by Webster of Canley, near Coventry. 
Bakewell's fame owed something to his farm and his horses and pigs; he received publicity from two of the leading agricultural writers of the day, Arthur Young and William Marshall, and he had an extensive correspondence and travelled widely, visiting other leading breeders and farmers. He was as lavish with his hospitality to visitors as he was niggardly in explaining his methods. (It is generally believed that the new Leicester sheep were derived from a cross between the Lincoln and Ryeland breeds.) 
The advantages of Bakewell's sheep were partially offset by an inferior fleece and a propensity to put on fat if not slaughtered at two years old. Consequently their mutton was 'too fat for genteel tables' and not inviting 'to weak appetites', being better suited to the needs of working people (Culley, 108). Further, the new breed was not prolific, and was unsuited to exposed terrain. Bakewell's new longhorn cattle were even more defective, putting on masses of fat but failing to yield the good milk and exhibit the fecundity of the original stock. They became obsolete within a generation, after Bakewell's death, being superseded by Charles Colling's Durham shorthorns. Even in his own county, Bakewell's sheep gave way to Lincoln and Leicester cross-breeds, which had an even greater aptitude for early fattening and less of the undesirable characteristics of the new Leicesters. However, although it disappeared as a separate breed, the new Leicester did play a major part in the improvement of British and overseas breeds of longwool sheep. Bakewell helped to lay the foundations of an important industry producing pedigree stock for home and overseas markets, and his principle of breeding 'in and in' had an early influence in the development of the ideas of Charles Darwin. 
In appearance, Bakewell resembled the popular idea of the English yeoman: 'a tall, broad-shouldered, stout man of brown-red complexion, clad in a brown coat, scarlet waistcoat, leather breeches and top-boots' (Prothero, 184). He died at home, unmarried, on 1 October 1795, aged seventy, and was buried at Dishley. His nephew succeeded to his farm, which maintained its reputation for some years. 


@@@@@


doc= 1147


Bakewell, Robert (1767-1843), geologist, was born on 10 March 1767 in Nottingham, the youngest son of Robert Bakewell (1729-1768), a Quaker wool-stapler, and his wife, Mary (1740-1811), daughter of George Mason, farmer and Quaker preacher of Kirkbymoorside, Yorkshire, and later America. He was distantly related to Robert Bakewell (1725-1795), the noted farmer and stockbreeder. Following his father's early death Bakewell was sent to the school for well-to-do Friends at Hartshill, Warwickshire, where he proved to be a precocious child, constructing telescopes and writing his first paper, on water spouts, which was published in 1786. By 1789 Bakewell had moved to Wakefield as a wool-stapler. The following year, on 24 September, he married Apphia (died 1820), daughter of Thomas Simpson. The Simpsons were Unitarian and Bakewell had joined this church by September 1791. The couple had six children, the last baptized in 1800. 
Bakewell's activities as wool-stapler were interspersed with travel. His interest in natural history was revealed by a visit to north Wales about 1801. From 1801 Bakewell, dependent on foreign trade, was also highly active in the national peace movement, corresponding with the whig politician Samuel Whitbread (1764-1815) in 1807. The following year Bakewell's first book, 'Observations on the Influence of Soil and Climate upon Wool', was published. However, in July 1810, unable to meet his creditors at a time of national financial difficulty, Bakewell assigned all his estates to them and fled to London, where he became a geological consultant, building on his knowledge of soils, charging 'one hundred pounds for any time not exceeding one month and twenty pounds for travelling expenses' (Banks MSS). His first advertisement for the services of Robert Bakewell & Sons, in the 'Mineralogical and Statistical Survey of Estates', was issued by August 1810. Bakewell was elected annual subscriber to the Royal Institution late the same year -- clearly he was in search of patrons. In 1811 he published descriptions of the cobalt mine on Alderley Edge and on the application of mineralogical and chemical science to the selection of building stone. In the autumn of that year his first known geological consulting took him to Shropshire and Radnorshire, and the following year he was in Charnwood Forest, acting as consultant to the earl of Moira. 
In 1811 Bakewell began to give public lectures on geology throughout Britain, with courses in Derby, Liverpool, and Manchester in 1811; London in 1812; Newcastle, Leeds, and London in 1813; Exeter and Bath in 1815; and Cornwall, Cheltenham, and Gloucester in 1816. His last were in Bristol and London in 1817. Probably the first such lectures to be given throughout Britain, they particularly directed the attention of landed proprietors to the neglected mineral treasures of their estates, as well as offering Bakewell chances to make field observations all over Britain. Those on the geology of Manchester were published in 1814, on Northumberland and Durham in 1815 (amid charges of plagiarism), and on the south coast in 1816. 
Lecturing soon revealed to Bakewell the need for an introductory textbook on geology and inspired his 'An Introduction to Geology', for which he is best remembered. It was first published in June 1813, partly at his own expense. In the early 1900s the historian of the Geological Society recorded that Bakewell's was 'undoubtedly the best of the early text-books' (H. B. Woodward, 'History of the Geological Society of London', 1907, 84). It went through five English editions and three American. The first edition already distinguished bedding from slaty cleavage and correctly identified the feeder origin of the basalt on Titterstone Clee Hill. 

'Introduction' was motivated by the need to use geology in the practical exploration of the valuable mineral treasures of the British Isles, but it deprecated the excessive foreign influence on British geology, which many other working geologists also felt was too dominant. Bakewell noted how 'the term 'well educated Geognost'... denotes a perfect disciple of Werner, who has lost the use of his own eyes by constantly looking through the eyes of his master' and called Werner's theory of mineral veins 'demonstrably repugnant to facts'. Such views were not well received by the Wernerian-dominated Geological Society and Bakewell was forced to decline membership about 1813, the year in which he also unsuccessfully applied for the post of professor of mineralogy to the Dublin Society. 
John Farey met Bakewell in May 1812 and they engaged in stimulating discussions, both before and after the publication of Bakewell's first edition. Farey advised Bakewell how the book could be improved and the second edition contained additional notes on the work of William Smith (1769-1839) and Farey. It was this edition, also translated into German, which inspired Charles Lyell to take his first interest in geology. Adam Sedgwick also regarded himself as a pupil, because of the influence Bakewell's book had on him. 
In 1819 Bakewell contributed to Abraham Rees's influential 'Cyclopaedia', on both wool and geology. Bakewell's popularizing attempt at 'An Introduction to Mineralogy' appeared the same year. This was sufficiently successful for an unknown rival to issue a volume with the same title in 1829 under the carefully chosen pseudonym of J. R. Bakewell. In 1820 Bakewell produced his mocking, and highly political, 'Geological Primer in Verse', which for many years was wrongly credited to John Scafe. The 'Primer' caused a new rift with members of the Geological Society, who found it 'an offence of such overwhelming magnitude that there are no purifying waters in Oxford or London to efface it' (Bakewell to Sedgwick, 10 Dec 1830, Sedgwick MSS). 
Bakewell's first wife had died in March 1820 and on 31 August that year he married Esther ('c'.1770-1851), daughter of Dr Henry Hinckley ('c'.1724-1779) of Guy's Hospital, former treasurer of the Royal College of Physicians. The marriage brought Bakewell financial independence and late in 1820 the couple set off on a long tour to the Tarentaise and to Switzerland. Bakewell's two-volume 'Travels in the Tarentaise... 1820 [to] 1822' appeared in 1823. Because of his battles with the Geological Society there were few reviews. He considered the 'Literary Gazette''s review particularly unfair; it might have contributed to his now abandoning geology for three or four years. The work contained an early description in English of the volcanic geology of the Auvergne and insights into the ages of alpine rocks based on fossils. 
However, Bakewell had never been totally convinced of the importance of dating rocks from fossils, and wrote in 1834 how 'the importance attached to [fossil] shells is a ridiculous fallacy' (Bakewell to Mantell, 7 Dec 1834, Mantell MSS). 
In 1825 the Bakewells settled in a cottage on Downshire Hill, Hampstead, Middlesex. In 1828 Bakewell issued the third edition of his textbook which was soon taken up by Benjamin Silliman (1779-1864) at Yale as his course text; a first American edition appeared in 1829. Eight hundred copies of the second American edition were sold in New England in the spring of 1835 and Silliman noted that the book was 'conspicuous for attractiveness,... of a style generally vigorous and correct, often eloquent and beautiful and of an independence of spirit' (4th edn, 1833, preface). In 1833 Bakewell resumed occasional geological lecturing. He also wrote the sections on geology for J. R. Macculloch's 'Statistical Account of the British Empire' (1837). 
Bakewell, who could be caustic in his criticisms, was long a victim of gout. He died on 15 August 1843 at home in Hampstead and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. His geological collections were sold at auction in May 1844. His wife's 'earnest wish [was] that there should not be any Memoir or Obituary of him in any of the Periodicals... since there were no circumstances connected with his early years... of sufficient interest to be brought before the public' (Esther Bakewell to Mantell, 16 Aug 1843, Mantell MSS). She must have feared Bakewell's early radical politics and financial problems might be revealed. As a result the only notice that appeared was that of Silliman in America, unaware of her embargo. 
Bakewell's son Robert (1792-1875) moved in 1828 to America to teach drawing at Yale. His youngest son, Frederick Collier (1800-1869), after a career as a newspaper proprietor, became a scientific writer and inventor. His most important invention was the facsimile machine patented in 1848. 


@@@@@


doc= 1148


Balam, Richard (fl. 1653), mathematician, is known only as the author of 'Algebra, or, The Doctrine of Composing, Inferring, and Resolving an Equation' (1653). There seems to be nothing original in this work but a multitude of terms which have perished with their inventor. 


@@@@@


doc= 1149


Balatine, Alan (supp. fl. 1520-1560), supposed historian, appears in Thomas Dempster's 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Scotorum' as one of the distinguished writers of the Scots. According to Dempster, Balatine was born in Scotland but spent most of his life as a writer and teacher in Germany, where he died some time after 1560. Dempster claims that Balatine was the author of at least three works, 'De astrolabio', 'De terra mensura', and 'Chronicon universalis'. The last of these may have been used as a source by Edward Hall in his 'Chronicle' of 1542, as he lists one 'Balantyne' among his 'Englishe Writers' (Hall, 4), 'Englishe' referring to the language of the text rather than the nationality of the writer. However, it is probable that this Balantyne is in fact John Bellenden, whose translation of Hector Boece's 'Scotorum historia' was printed about 1540, and which seems to have been widely available in England. Other writers offer slightly different interpretations: John Pits, in his 'Relationum historicarum de rebus Anglicis' (1619) claims Balatine (without a first name) as English, while Thomas Tanner ('Bibliotheca Britannico-Hibernica', 1748) simply repeats what his predecessors have said. There is, therefore, no conclusive proof that Balatine had an existence independent of that of John Bellenden, though it is possible that his works, which would give some proof, simply have not survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 1150


Balcanquhall, Walter (1548/9-1616), Church of Scotland minister, was associated with the place name of Balcanquhal in the parish of Strathmiglo, Fife. Although Archbishop Patrick Adamson of St Andrews accused him in 1584 of 'small educatioun in learning' (Calderwood, 4.84), Balcanquhall was educated at St Andrews University, where he matriculated at St Leonard's College in 1566 and graduated in 1569. By 1570 he had entered the ministry of the reformed church in the subordinate capacity of exhorter at Auchtertool in Fife. Thereafter he served as minister in 1571 at Bothans and Barro in Lothian before moving to Edinburgh. On Whit Sunday 1574 he entered St Giles's as minister in Edinburgh, and along with his colleagues James Lawson and John Durie became an enthusiastic supporter of the presbyterian cause within the church. 
With the downfall of the earl of Morton in 1578 and the growing ascendancy of Esme Stewart, amid heightened fears of a popish plot and of French influence at court, Balcanquhall was summoned before the privy council in December 1580 to answer for his sermon condemning the influx of Roman Catholics to Edinburgh and French courtiers who 'polluted' the king's ear. He attended Morton before his execution on 2 June 1581 and offended the king by criticizing Stewart's activities, for which he was called before the privy council in 1581. He then declined the council's jurisdiction in matters spiritual, arguing that the general assembly was the appropriate body 'to whom the judgement of his doctrine sould apperteane' (Calderwood, 3.584). The assembly, for its part, found nothing in his sermon 'that conteinit either errour, slander or just offence, bot solid, good and true doctrine' (Thomson, 'Acts', 2.543). Balcanquhall also opposed the crown's appointment of Robert Montgomery, minister of Stirling, to the archbishopric of Glasgow, and in 1582, despite threats of violence, he intimated from the pulpit of Edinburgh Montgomery's excommunication for accepting the archbishopric in defiance of the general assembly's wishes. 
On 15 May 1584 James Stewart, earl of Arran, became chancellor at the head of an anti-presbyterian regime. Balcanquhall was outspoken in his condemnation of the 'black acts', issued that month, which asserted the king's supremacy over the church, reaffirmed the role of bishops, proscribed presbyteries, and prohibited meetings of other church courts without the king's express consent. At that point, too, he used the pulpit of Edinburgh 'to sound mightelie in the praise' of Andrew Melville, who had escaped prosecution for opposing the 'black acts' by fleeing to England ('Autobiography and Diary of... Melvill', 145). He also preached against 'godlesse start-ups' (Calderwood, 4.20), and before long he and Lawson were obliged to seek safety in England. From Berwick they wrote to their congregation of Edinburgh in June 1584 condemning Arran's hostility to the church: 'Ye see the whole discipline violentlie plucked out of the hands of them to whome Christ Jesus has committed the spirituall government, and givin into the hands of them who have their calling in the world of men, and not of God; Assembleis discharged and excommunicatioun made null by them who have no power to bind and loose. (Calderwood, 4.74)' Balcanquhall was married to Margaret Marjoribanks, daughter of an Edinburgh merchant. During his absence in England his wife, who had remained in Edinburgh together with Lawson's wife, conducted a spirited defence of the presbyterian exiles and launched a scathing attack on Adamson as archbishop. 
Having arrived in London by 23 June, with other presbyterian exiles, Balcanquhall had meetings with Sir Francis Walsingham and 'talked with the godly and zealous brethren' there ('CSP Scot.', '1584-5', no. 195). He also attended Lawson's funeral in London in October 1584 and was a witness to his testament. While in London he preached several sermons until prevented from doing so again. In January 1585 he was summoned before Bishop John Aylmer of London, who explained that a command for the exiled Scots ministers to cease preaching had been issued on the privy council's initiative. With the fall of Arran's government in November 1585, however, following the palace revolution effected by the leaders of the Ruthven raid, now returned from exile, Balcanquhall journeyed home in the company of Andrew Melville and resumed his ministry in Edinburgh. He preached before the king in St Giles's in January 1586, claiming that ministers had as great authority as bishops, but James rebuked him, undertaking to 'prove there sould be bishops and spirituall magistrats endued with authoritie over the ministrie' (Calderwood, 4.491). Balcanquhall was appointed to attend the coronation of Queen Anne in 1590, but in 1591 he irritated the king by defending Knox's reputation, and in 1592 James was again offended by one of his sermons. Balcanquhall continued to preach against Arran, who was received at court in 1592, by recounting 'what mischeefe he had done before' and how Lennox had been 'the cheefe worker of his bringing in' (Calderwood, 5.187). After the riot in Edinburgh in December 1596 Balcanquhall was denounced for not compearing before the privy council, but he escaped imprisonment by fleeing to Yorkshire and in a joint letter with Robert Bruce maintained his innocence. 
With the division of Edinburgh into separate parishes, in 1598 Balcanquhall was appointed minister of Trinity Church for the north-east quarter of the burgh. In 1600 he again incurred the king's wrath for declining to acknowledge James's version of the Gowrie conspiracy and was ordered to be translated from Edinburgh; however, he re-entered his ministry there on the king's birthday (19 June 1601). In 1606 he protested at the harsh treatment accorded those convicted of treason for holding a general assembly at Aberdeen in defiance of the king's wishes. He also condemned the assembly's decision in 1610 to acquiesce in the king's revival of episcopacy. By 19 July 1616 Balcanquhall had ceased preaching, and he died on 4 August following, in his sixty-eighth year. He was buried the following day. He had three sons: Walter Balcanquhall, dean first of Rochester and then of Durham; Robert, minister of Tranent; and Samuel; and six daughters: Katherine, Rachel, Sarah, Margaret, Libra, and Anna. 


@@@@@


doc= 1151


Balcanquhall, Walter (c.1586-1645), dean of Rochester, was born in Edinburgh, one of three sons of Walter Balcanquhall (1548/9-1616), Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Margaret Marjoribanks. He was educated at Edinburgh University, graduating MA on 27 July 1609. Admitted to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1610, he became a fellow the following year and proceeded BD in 1616. Now a convinced episcopalian, he was instituted to a series of livings, becoming vicar of Harston in 1615 and of Waterbeach, Cambridgeshire, in 1617. He was appointed a chaplain to the king, and on 16 December 1617 was made master of the Savoy Hospital in the Strand, but early the following year he gave up this post (becoming instead a clerk of the closet) in order to represent the Church of Scotland at the Synod of Dort. In his lively letters home, preserved in the 'Golden Remains' of John Hales, Balcanquhall endorsed the synod's condemnation of the remonstrants, but distanced himself from militant counter-remonstrants like Gomarus and their doctrines of supralapsarianism and limited atonement. 
In 1621 Balcanquhall was restored as master of the Savoy and proceeded DD. He married at Bishopsbourne on 21 September 1624 Elizabeth, daughter of Anthony Aucher and widow of Sir William Hamilton. In March 1625 he became dean of Rochester and the same year vicar of Goudhurst, Kent. He acted as one of George Heriot's executors, compiling the statutes for Heriot's Hospital in Edinburgh in 1627. Having become rector of Kingstone, Kent, in 1632 he also acquired a living at Adisham, 'the house whairof' according to the marquess of Hamilton, 'hee built himselfe from the ground, and wch he hath made the best parsonage house in Kent' ('Letters... Baillie', 1.478). In 'The Honour of Christian Churches' (1633), a sermon preached before Charles I, he denounced puritans 'who think that all religion consisteth in preaching and hearing of sermons', and defended the Laudian beautification of English churches and worship. 
Balcanquhall's sympathy for the Laudian agenda won him a key role as an intelligence gatherer for the king during the Scottish crisis of the late 1630s. He used his Scottish connections to acquire information about the activities of the covenanters from informants (or 'busie fleas', as Baillie called them) such as William Wilkie, regent at Glasgow University. The marquess of Hamilton told Laud that 'his Matie hath no chaplain can doe him lyke service, especially in the point of intelligence; for he hath gotten a great hand with that part of the Covenanting clergie, whom he hath made resent the tyrannie of some of the rest of the ministrie, and especially of the laitie and lay elders, even to a verie high discontentment, I hope ere long to an open breach; by these men he cometh to knowe all the secrets of that partie, wch is of singular wse to his Maties service and me. ('Letters... Baillie', 1.478-9)' Balcanquhall advised the king on the perils and advantages of allowing the covenanters to hold a general assembly, and he was an observer at the Glasgow assembly in November and December 1638, speaking in defence of the bishops. He was commissioned by the king to write a historical narrative of the Scottish crisis. 'A Large Declaration' was published in 1639 under the king's name, though Baillie believed it was written 'at Canterburie's direction' and penned by Balcanquhall with help from the bishop of Ross and the archbishop of St Andrews. Baillie confessed that 'this booke put us to the extreame lyne of desperation' since it showed that Charles had no regard for the covenanters' grievances ('Letters... Baillie', 1.208-9). Baillie confessed, 'We have been much mistaken with that man: we esteemed him ever a Dordracenist, and opposed to Canterburie in that cause; bot now we see he hes made the king in his Manifesto print as much for Arminians as the heart of Canterburie could wish. ('Letters... Baillie', 1.140)' In recognition of his services to the monarch Balcanquhall was appointed dean of Durham, and installed on 14 May 1639. In 1640 he became vicar of Boxley, Kent. The covenanters denounced him in 'Ane Information', and at the end of the year Baillie reported from London that many Englishmen thought Balcanquhall 'a vile man' ('Letters... Baillie', 1.286). In 1641 the Scottish parliament condemned him as an incendiary. Soon after the civil war began he was deprived of his mastership of the Savoy by the English parliamentarians; by 1644 he had been sequestered and had fled to Oxford. According to Anthony Wood, he 'did afterwards shift from place to place for security. At length flying for the safety of his life to Chirk Castle in Denbighshire' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.384), where he died during a cold winter on Christmas day 1645. He was buried in the parish church at Chirk, and some years later a monument was erected there in his honour by Sir Thomas Middleton of Chirk Castle. His widow, Elizabeth, had by 1650 become Lady Hammond. 


